In an otherwise Identical version, the handwritten comments, "Excellent WTC," "Excellent EC," "Good—MW," "Would be improved by cutting out description of house near end," and the information given below appear on the top of page 7036.
All names have been changed.
Date of first writing:
Name of person interviewed: Address:
Occupation:
Name of writer:
Revisers:
Approximate number of words:
January 5, 1939
Lonnie Williams (white)
Route #1, Cary, N. C.
Printer Mary A. Hicks
Edwin Massengill & W. J. Sadler 4,700
Lonnie Williams
Cary, N. C.
Route #1
January 5. 1939
M. A. H.
TEE ARTIS SIMPSON FAMILY
Phoebe Simpson is known in her neighborhood as "the woman who knows how to manage a husband." She is ten years older than her husband, Artis, and was never pretty, yet she has held him for eighteen years. Neighbors say he has had passing fancies for several women but his wife cured him of his infatuations.
Artis Simpson is a printer at Hardy and Talton. His salary varies from $25 a week in summer to $50 and $65 In winter and in spring when college yearbooks and graduation invitations are printed. They own a forty-five-acre farm with a six-room house on it. They still owe $200 on the $500 Plymouth they bought last summer, but they pay $20 a month on that. Before they got the Plymouth they had a red Chevrolet coach which they bought for $250 and their old Pontiac. A '29 Ford was traded for the Pontiac. Artis always drives as fast as his automobile will run and he hauls fertilizer and feed for his stock on the car.
He has wrecked four automobiles and each time his wife suffered broken bones. She had several cuts each time, once a broken arm, once several broken ribs, and the last time a broken collarbone. He never was hurt except for a small cut on his hand.
Artis is about five feet ten inches tall and is heavily built.
He has wavy, black hair and dark brown eyes. He looks young for his thirty-seven years. He is always neat and clean. As a rule he is quiet, but when he does talk he has something of interest to say.
Phoebe is tall and rawboned. Her bobbed brown hair is heavily streaked with gray and she wears two large bobby pins to keep it from flying in her face. She is clean but never neat and her clothes are seldom becoming. She wears red, yellow, and orange, which accentuate her yellow wrinkled skin and brown Oriental eyes. She wears tennis shoes and. sox which slip down in her shoes. Her voice is fretful.
Artis' sister declares, "Phoebe is a freak, has always been, and always will be. How a man like Artis can love her and live with her is more than I can see. She has made him a good wife, though, and he seems to be perfectly satisfied with her. She looks like his grandmother, though, and she don't seem to care. When he takes her out she looks like a flop. She keeps him, though, there's no doubt about it."
Phoebe likes to brag on her success in keeping her young husband. As she gave her formula she appeared quite gleeful.
"I manage the house and the farm and he gives me an allowance.
He manages his job, his friends, and his car on a certain amount, and we don't try to 'tend to each other's business. That is one good rule. When I married him he drank pretty bad. Well, I just up and told him to drink all he wanted to but to bring it home and drink it after work hours. I let him know to start with that drinking on the job and on the road wouldn't go so good with me. He never has got drunk off from home but once. I know if I fussed at him he'd drink it all the time.
"Women never has troubled me. I've seen two or three making eyes at Artis, but instead of gitting mad and saying things about them to him I just praised them and invited them to come see us often. I broke up two affairs like that. There was a pretty young woman used to live close to us and she worked in town. She asked us to let her pay part of the gas bill and let her ride back and forth with Artis. We told her she could ride, but we wouldn't let her buy any gas. I saw pretty quick that she was in love with him and once I found lipstick on his mouth. I ain't mentioned it to him to this day but I did take to asking her to go with us everywhere. When she won't going somewhere with us she was at our house until they got sick and tired of each other. I knowed all the time that she was a pore sport and I proved it to Artis when we took her with us to Morehead City one vacation. I saw that a storm was coming up and I knowed that there was going to be a big rain. All the same I wanted to go out in a open boat. Artis couldn't understand it but him and Gladys went with me.
Must as I expected, it poured rain and we was all soaked in a few minutes. It was over a hour before we could git back to our hotel and during that hour Artis and Gladys fell out for good. I knowed they would. If there's one thing that makes Artis angry it's to git wet. Gladys was the same way and I laughed and joked while they plain fussed. I'm not good looking and so it didn't matter about me but it made all the difference in her looks. Her finger wave was out and her hair was stringy. The paint and powder was streaked on her face and she showed her mean, whiny disposition. After her and Artis had a few words I knowed that he liked the way I took it and that he was still my man. "Her voice was triumphant.
"I was raised in Johnston County on a farm. There was five of us younguns  and we all knowed what it was to work hard. Papa was a tenant farmer and him nor Mammy neither one had any learning. All they'd ever knowed was hard work. They didn't believe in education and they was superstitious, but they was good neighbors and they never repeated bad tales on nobody.
"I went to school for four years before Mammy died, then I had to take her place at home. I was the oldest and I had a hard time but the others didn't git no more education than I did.
"Papa died when I was sixteen, but my brother John, fourteen, took charge of the farm and we went on in pretty much the same way. Sally, the sister next to me, was fourteen when she got married.
I was seventeen and that same year I married Edgar Barstow, a farmer that lived in our neighborhood. I knowed he was a drunkard but he said he'd quit for me.
"He quit for about two weeks after the preacher married us in our shabby old house. I'd moved over to his farm and Fanny, my twelve-year-old sister, kept house for Brother John. Edgar got drunk several times before I said much to him and he didn't offer to hit me. We'd been married four months and I found out that I was going to have a baby. He didn't like younguns and he was mad about it so when he got drunk  the first time after he knowed it he beat me.
"I lost that one and I like to of died, but he was so sorry that he done it I had to forgive him. I'd made up my mind to leave him, but I thought that he was sorry so I stayed on.
"The next time he beat me I was six months gone. He knocked me down and stomped on my stomach. I lost thatone, too, and I never did git over it even when he cried and begged me to forgive him. He slapped me any time after that, drunk or sober, and finally I left him and went home to John. John was glad I come home and that fall we had enough money to git my divorce.
"I stayed at home and worked like a slave until I was twenty-eight years old; then I married Artis. My sister, Fanny, had died with consumption a year before that and the doctor told me that I might expect to have it, too, because it killed Mammy and Papa and because I nussed Fanny when she had it.
"I told Artis that but he laughed at me and said he wanted to marry me anyhow. I told him that he was too young to know what he was doing and that when I was old and gray he'd still be young. He said that that didn't make no difference and that he knowed what he wanted, so I married him. I told him before I married him, and since, too, that when he found somebody he'd rather have than me to tell me and I'd git out of his way and not say a word." She smiled proudly.
"I ain't seen no sign of him wanting nobody else yit.
"Artis was raised in Raleigh and that's where I first saw him. I was staying a week at my aunt's a few doors down the street from him, I saw him pass but I thought that I was old enough to be his mammy, so I didn't pay no attention to him. He come over to see how my aunt was one night and after that he come every night. I went back home in two weeks and the first I thought of him thinking about me was the night before I left when he said that it was a shame that I had to work so hard.
"He come down home to see me twice before I come back to Raleigh.
I stayed a week and he took me back to Raleigh. I stayed a week and he took me back home on his old Ford. He asked me to marry him that day and I turned him down, but after he kept on wanting me to marry him I finally did.
"We got married in Smithfield one day in July and we moved to two furnished rooms a few blocks from his folks. I loved Artis from the first time I ever saw him but I didn't care much about his folks. There was just two of the children, Artis and Annie. I didn't like Annie because she told me to start with that I was too old for Artis and that another woman was shore to git him away from me. She had a right good education, too, and she tried to put on airs with me.
She married a automobile salesman a few years after that and he shore does run with other women. I ain't got no use for neither one of them.
"Artis' mother has got the sharpest tongue you ever heard and she likes to talk and make fun of folks just like Annie does. His daddy has always been a sot drunkard and they all three thought that Artis was made out of money.
"Artis was working at another printing company when we married near 'bout twenty years ago and he made a straight $25 a week. We had pretty near what we wanted and before we'd been married a year we had paid for a living room suite, a bedroom suite, and furniture for the kitchen. He near 'bout had the Ford paid for when we got married.
"I had always lived in the country and around folks that won't always making fun and I wanted to go to the farm worse than anything I ever saw. We'd been married a little over a year when we paid a down payment on a farm on the Fayetteville Road and moved to it. I was some happy then.
"I fanned that year with hiring a little help and Artis helping when he was off from work. We made good that year and got along fine but Artis got to talking about babies and I found out that he wanted a baby worse than anything. I told him that we would have one but another year went by and still I wasn't going to have one. Artis said one night that there was something wrong with one of us to be married three years and not have a baby so we went to the doctor.
"I'll never forget that day as long as I live. The doctor found out that it was me and he told both of us that I wouldn't never have no babies on account of the miscarriages I had had. Artis told me not to worry, to forget it, and that he loved me any how, but I saw myself losing him to some woman that could have babies for him. I cried and cried.
"Finally Artis took me to another doctor and I stayed in the hospital two weeks for treatment. We paid out $50 for that but after another year we give up hope. I could still see Artis gitting him another woman and I worried so much I got sick.
"Sally and her husband had four children then and they just couldn't feed them and clothe them hardly at all. We went down to her house one Sunday and saw her little boy, Albert, out in the yard barefooted and half-naked. We was mighty sorry for him. I was joking when I told Sally to give him to us, but she said she would and it won't said no more about that day. I kept thinking about it and I talked it over with Artis. I could tell he didn't care so much about it but he told me to go ahead and take Albert if I wanted to. He took me after him on Sunday and Sally give up all claim to him. Later we legally adopted him.
"On Monday Artis bought the little feller a whole passel of clothes, but he got sick and we thought he was going to die in spite of all. He was three years old when we got him and for the next three years he was sick most of the time.
"At first Artis didn't care much about him but after awhile he loved him like he was our own and he stopped talking babies to me.
"We finished paying for the farm, then, like fools, we sold it and moved to town. We done that mostly so that Albert would be near a good school. He started when he was six; he's sixteen now and just in the eighth grade. He give me  and the teacher both a lot of trouble but she didn't treat him right. She whipped him when he didn't need it and fussed with him all the time. Once I got my shotgun and went to the school to see that she didn't whip my youngun. She never did hit him another lick.
"Albert was so scary that the big boys picked on him all the time. I finally got out Artis' razor strop and sneaked up on thembeating him. I thrashed several of them and then I whipped him for not fighting them. He fought from then on and I didn't have no more trouble like that.
"The year Albert started to school we got Mary. We had talked about gitting a girl but we hadn't made no plans. One Sunday when we was in Johnston County we heard about a young girl dying and leaving a baby girl over in Smithfield. The girl was young and didn't know better, and the baby's daddy was a doctor. He wanted her I reckon because she was young and pretty and I reckon she loved him. Anyhow she died when the child was borned and the county had it to adopt out. We knowed it had good blood so we wanted it.
"We adopted her when she was nine days old and she hadn't had a bath. She was still all gummed up and she didn't have on nothing but a flour sack diaper and band. She was wrapped in a old dirty blanket when we took her home. Annie had a baby and she give me some of its clothes until we got her some more.
"She was sick when we got her and we thought we'd lose her but she got strong and well after two or three months.
"I was weak and run down and Artis took me to the doctor. He thought I had consumption and the thought like to of killed me but after I took a gallon or so of cod liver oil I was all right.
"We bought this place six years ago from the Federal Land Bank. We finished paying for it last year. A person might think it was easy but it won't. We had a right smart of doctor bills what with the babies being so sick, me being so weak, and having so many broke bones. We paid all them bills as we went but Artis' daddy got sick and about that time his mammy had a bad operation. Artis paid the bill. His sister got in debt several times and he paid her out. His daddy had his appendix took out. Artis paid for that, and then he had his gallstones took out and that set ub back $200.
"Five years ago the old man got so sick he had to quit work and Artis kept them up until his mammy got on with the WPA. Yes sir, we've had a hard time. We ain't had much except enough to eat, a car, and a home. We ain't had none to throw away. We did buy a $300 anile two years ago and last summer a $50 second-handed piano. Our furniture is all paid for.
"Our grocery hill runs from $5 to $6 a week and we pay as we buy. Artis is worse than a old maid about budgets and buying bargains. I don't know a thing about diets but we cook meat, vegetables and sweets. We raise our own pork but we buy fresh meat two or three times a week. We have our own chickens, eggs, butter, milk, vegetables, meal and enough meat to run us through the winter. I make our own preserves and pickles, too, and I can vegetables to last through the winter. I dry fruit and beans and peas, too. I reckon we eat the right things, plenty of hot food and coffee for me and Artis, and milk for the kids.
"Up until the last three years I ain't had much trouble with the younguns. I still ain't had none with Mary but Albert has near bout run me crazy. His body was grown when he was fourteen but his mind won't morethan eight years old. I didn't pay so much attention to it until I caught him in the garage fixing to rape a neighbor's little eight-year-old girl. I caught him after that doing something to Mary that I never heard of before.
"I was all broke up about it when Artis come home and I hadn't even had the heart to ask neither one of the younguns any questions. When Artis got there I told him about It and he talked to Mary for a long time. She said that Albert had been doing that for two or three months. Artis talked to Albert and he said that he was afraid that he'd hurt her if he done what he wanted to so he done it that way.
"We took him to Doctor Doherty and he told us that he was going to be a homosexualist unless we made him stop it. He said that most people like that got it from habit and won't borned that way. He told us to watch him dost.
"We watched him after that and wouldn't let him go nowhere without somebody going along with him. Right after we found out that he was doing all them things the state man come and told Artis that if he'd pay for a bam of corn Albert burnt he wouldn't do nothing about it. Artis made him prove that Albert was over at the barn the day it burnt, then he paid for the corn. He didn't whip Albert; he just talked to him.
"Mr. Longest lived clost to us and he was building a log house. He near'bout had it finished when it caught on fire. It was lucky that it was found and put out before it done much damage. We didn't know until later that Albert wasseen over there just before the fire was found.
"The woods burnt up and another house in the neighborhood got on fire and then people begun to talk that Albert was always seen around the places before the fires was started or before they was found.
I didn't think my boy was guilty at first and I talked to him about the lies folks was telling on him. Suddenly I knowed from the way he looked that it was the truth, that he did start all the fires.
We watched him then closter than ever.
"Sometime after that I caught him on top of a twelve-year-old girl in our garage. I quarreled then and she said that her and Albert had been doing that for two years. I knowed she was about old enough for something to happen and so I went to her mammy and told her about it. She kept the gal at home and I kept Albert at home after that.
"I know that I am a moral woman even if I ain't such a good Christian. I don't cuss, I don't steal or lie, or gossip, or hate anybody. I've been dipping snuff all my life but lately I've gone to smoking. I've always liked a dram; Artis keeps it in the ice box all the time so I take a drink when I want one. I ain't never got drunk, though, and I ain't aiming to.
"Me and Artis both belongs to the Lutheran Church. We go just once in awhile but we both believe in Cod and our church. We try to live as Christian as we can. We give $5 to the Community Chest and help our neighbors but we don't never forgit that charity begins at home. We've got a heap of bills and we have to help Artis' folks out every once in awhile. The children needs so much, too, going to school.
"We hope our younguns will git a good education. Albert's been wanting to quit school for a long time but we won't hear to it. Mary is a bright child and I believe she'll go to college but I'm afraid Albert won't git no education more than the eighth. He's dumb and slow and not interested in nothing. It's funny how me and Artis both love him the best. We've got to keep our eyes on him for the next two years and if he gits so we can't manage him we'll have to send him to a reform school. They won't even want him there because he will practice his bad habit on the other boys and the officials knows it. I'd rather see him dead than there but if he has to go to protect homes and children of the neighborhood against him it can't be helped.
"We hate not to let him go out by hisself but we're scared to do it. We do carry him to the movies once a week and riding on Sunday. We hired a girl for $2 a week to stay with us so's he'd have somebody to go along with. She is twenty-five years old but he's crazy about her. She ain't what she ought to be but I reckon she won't let him do it no way but the natural way. I caught him In the bed with her theother morning and he looked like he was doing natural. I don'tlike to keep such a woman but I know that he will learn with her. Artis is disgusted with her but I say if she can save my boy I'll thank her.
"Me and Artis both votes the Democrat ticket and we ain't never been told who to vote for and we vote like we please. We don't even tell each other who to vote for. I ain't got much use for the President but Artis swears by him. If I ever vote for Josiah Bailey again, though, it'll be on the Republican ticket. He shore has kicked the New Deal harder than any Republican I know of. Me and Artis both keeps up with politics. We read newspapers and magazines on politics and we enjoy it.
"When we bought this house it wasn't painted but we painted it with two coats of heavy white paint inside and out. It just had three rooms then but we've added two to it. We set in here although it's at the back of the house but it's more convenient and comfortable."
The room is comfortable with its two cheap settees, battery radio, table, chairs and sewing machine. The black tin heater throws out a welcome warmth and the Congoleum rug matches the soft blue curtains.
The two front rooms are bedrooms, although the piano sits in one of them. Besides the piano, the room has two beds, a table and a chifforobe. The hall has only a small writing desk. Mrs. Simpson's bedroom has one brown wooden bed, a dresser, a table, a wardrobe and some chairs. The room adjoining the kitchen is tiny and there is room for only one bed, a dresser and a chair.
The kitchen was arranged for convenience and contains a big wood range used in cold weather and an oil stove for cooking in the summer.
A big kitchen cabinet and an old-fashioned safe sit conveniently near the stove. A big green ice box is used all year. The long table sits in the center of the floor end the places are ready for the evening meal. White curtains hung at the window and the rug was spotless.
The whole house was scrupulously clean and tidy.
Gertrude, the hired girl, a blonde buxom woman with thick sensual lips, was preparing supper. She  turned vacant eyes on Phoebe and asked dully, "What time you reckon Mr. Simpson will come?"
"There ain't no telling," Phoebe answered.
"Over here's the shed room," she told me, "but it ain't used for nothing but junk. I don't reckon you want to see our groceries, horse collars, and feedstuff."
Artis' car came around the curve on two wheels and stopped with a screeching of brakes at the back door. He brought a paper bag and a can of kerosene which he placed under the kitchen sink.
Phoebe kissed him affectionately, then went on, "Artis built this sink for me and piped water from the well. It shore does help, especially about baths. Artis and the children bathe every day but I don't bathe but twice a week. They all have to go out in the public, I don't."
She turned to Artis, "Tell about your early life and all, Daddy, I can't tell that so good."
Artis sank down on the settee and said quietly, "There really isn't much to tell. I've lived all my life in Raleigh. I was born and raised on my father's lot on Ashland Avenue. Papa was a sot drunkard from the time I could remember. Mama said he'd always been. He was a printer and he made pretty good money but he throwed away a lot on whiskey and women, too. Mama used to have a sweet disposition but Papa soured her. Many's the time I have gone with her upstreet to drag him home. She had pride and it hurt her like the devil to go after him.
"We had a-plenty to live on with his salary and Mama sewing for folks. She really was an expert seamstress and she made every stitch of my clothes until I went to work. I finished high school when I was sixteen and went on as an apprentice at Hardy and Talton. In two years I was making $25 a week and then I married Phoebe.
"We've been happy with our farm and our children, in spite of everything.
"Papa lost his printer's job and he learned to be a good mechanic. Until about seven years ago he worked at that, then he got sick. Since then he's just rested and drank, drank and rested. Mama supports him on her $U2 a month WPA job.
"I reckon Phoebe told you that we have been having a little trouble with Albert." Just then Gertrude passed the door and he shuddered. "I wish you would let her go. I'll never know a minute's peace as long as she's here."
He changed the subject hurriedly, "We don't raise so much here but we are happy. We made two bales of cotton, a hundred bushels of corn and fifty bushels of peas here last year. We don't aim to make so much profit but we mean to live happy."
Phoebe left the room to put supper on the table.
In answer to a question about Phoebe knowing how to manage a husband he smiled. "Well, I'll tell you of an instance. She broke her arm last spring and of course I babied her a lot. After the arm got better I'm afraid I neglected her a bit. One evening I came home and found her lying in the yard. I toted her in and she swore her hip was broken. I wanted to call the doctor but she said she wouldn't let him see her.
"I hired a woman to stay with her and a few days later I had the doctor. He said he didn't think it was broken and told me to bring her to his office. He remarked something about the leg not being bruised or swollen.
"She refused to have a X-ray made but declared she couldn't walk so I got her a rolling chair. She sat in it for about three weeks and said that  she couldn't walk a step. I was worried so I went by the doctor's office one evening on my way home. He told me that it was put-on, that she won't hurt a bit and that he doubted if she had fell.
"He advised me what to do and when I went home I kicked the rolling chair as hard as I could. She would have struck the house but she put out the foot that was supposed to be broken and caught. She called me a beast and a lot of other stuff, then, she jumped up and ran into her room and slammed the door. Weeks later she told me that it was only to make me love her. I told her it was a good way to stop me from loving her."
Phoebe came to announce supper. "What was you telling about, Artis?"
Artis laughed, "Only telling about your love charms, Mother."
Excellent
The Artis Simpson Family — Printer
Unusual family — wife ten years older than husband -- manage -- him and keeps him with rare skill — former husband's brutality prevents child-bearing -- adopted two -- one undeveloped mentally he is unnatural sexually -- family owns forty-five acre farm -- six room house.
Features -- A woman unusual marital acumen in relating self to husband and a rather crude but sound method of curing boy's homosexuality.
Names changed.