June 12, 1939
Mrs. Della Benfield (white)
Newton, N. C.
On relief
Ethel Deal, writer
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Joe Benfield	Tom Laney
Statesville	Amity
Newton	Whitesboro
Miss Bell	Miss Feeny
North Wilkesboro	Belleville
Mrs. Bynum	Mrs. Hinkley
Iron Station	Kehoe Station
Naomia	Nasbeth
Mrs. Elmore	Mrs. Woodruff
Mr. Thonnton	Mr. Barber
Alvie Dancey	Pinkie Blue
Roaring River	Rocky Falls
Gordon Mill	Gray's Mills
Della Benfield	Beulah Laney
Edith Church	Sarah Castles
Luthie Miller	hannah Murfee
"I was born fifty-two years ago and in all my life I ain't had more than twelve months schooling but I can read print by spellin' it out. My mother was awful poor. There was three children and my father was dead so me and my brother had to help make the livin' and we had no time to go to school.
"We went out to work by the day. The farmers around there raised tobacco and corn. Me and my brother picked tobacco worms and pulled fodder and the farmers paid us fifteen cents a day for our work. We turned it over to our mother to help feed the family.
"I married Tom Laney when I was twenty years old and we moved on a rented farm. The man who owned it would stake us to so much at the store to get our rations. After we had took up the amount, say $25, we could get no more that year. My sister lived with me then. Me and her dug sassafras roots and cherry bark to help make the livin'. After it was dried we carried it into town and sold it for three cents a pound at a herb store.
"I ain't never joined no church, but sometimes we went to preachin' in the country. I hold to the Baptist, though, but I can't pay the preacher anything as I don't have no money to give. After we had lived on the farm a few years my Tom got to wantin' to go to the cotton mill. He had heard tales of how he could make a dollar a day at the mills. We moved to Amity and he went to work in the mills. He soon found a dollar a day in town didn’t go far, as by that time we had five children. But Tom was a good provider, and worker and we got along. But we always moved around a lot. Ten years ago we moved to Whitesboro. My husband worked for awhile at the old cotton mill but finally he got laid off. He was not much well nohow and I don’t think he cared much, and he never could seem to get another job. Three of the children had got married. Five was dead and three at home. Things went from bad to worse. We had to go on the Welfare to live.
"One day we had nothin’ to eat, I told Tom he must go tell Miss Feeny who was the Welfare officer, to give us somethin’. Miss Feeny was out of sorts and told Tom if he couldn’t keep up his family for him to get out and do something for hisself and she would help the family. That was seven years ago. Our baby girl was three years old at the time Tom left and had never walked a step.
"He went to Belleville and got him a job in the mill runnin’ frames. Rented him a small house and batched. After he left, my oldest boy at home got him a job. He was only sixteen years old and not strong and couldn’t hold the job. Miss Feeny wanted him to go to the C. C. Camps. He was stubborn and refused to go so she kept at me to make him go. Finally he run away and went to his daddy at Belleville. My husband at first would send the children a little money and write me a card or short letter but now he don't write or send 'em nothin'.
"Along about this time I heard of a woman, a Mrs. Hinkley at Kehoe Station who could cure sick people of any ailment. My little girl still couldn't walk and I had no money to hire a way to go. The Welfare just gives me four dollars a month and some commodities, and four dollars don't go far with three to feed and house rent and wood. The boy who had run away had come back. My son who was married paid my house rent after the owner was goin' to set us out in the Street.
"As I said, though, I wanted to take my little girl, Nasbeth, to Mrs. Hinkley to get cured so she could walk. Then a neighbor, Mrs. Woodruff, who got to takin' fits, decided to go to see her. She said I might go along. We went on Sunday. There was an awful crowd there to be cured. It was like at the doctor's-- the first come got to see her first. After hours of waitin' she come to us.
"She took us out to a little house with a window in it. She stood beside the window, which was up. A pear tree growed outside and the limbs come up to the window. Mrs. Hinkley took Nasbeth and rubbed her all over and then rubbed the pear tree. She told me not to give bar no medicine or not to let her have anything that would ferment and make wine in her stomach. I was to bring her back in three weeks and I must bring her three times to be cured. I didn’t have any money to pay her but she don’t charge nobody nothin' only what you want to give.
"I went with Mrs. Woodruff three times and my child was cured and could walk. Poor old Mrs. Woodruff was never cured. She died a few years later. You have to have faith, to be cured by a faith healer.
"Hundreds of people goes to be cured by Mrs. Hinkley. She can take off cancers or any kind of growths. One doctor heard of her and come all the way from New York to be cured of heart trouble. This doctor mailed her a check for $500 after he had gone home hut she sent it back.
"Nasbeth has never went to school yet as she is not strong, and what worries me is how I am to get books and things she needs when she can go. One great blessin’ is I don’t ever have to have the doctor. Mr. Barber who owns the drugstore right over there always knows what to give me when we are sick.
“I take a couple of washings a week and I make quilts for people. It takes me two days to tack a comfort and I get one dollar for the work. At Christmas times the church gives Nasbeth a treat and the P.T.A. sends her a box of toys. It’s awful nice them to do that specially as we don’t belong to no church or pay nothin'. Then there is the Legionnaires, and the Auxilliary that sends us a casket for Christmas dinner. We get potatoes, corn, tomatoes, a four pound roast, and other things.
"I'm awful thankful people is good to us on account of my children. My house is so shabby, as one dollar a week is all my son can afford to pay for rent. He has a family of his own and don’t make much. My boy left home again and went back with his daddy but he don’t like it up there. He says it's not decent the way his daddy acts. Tom wanted him to stay and drive a truck for the farm he’s stayin’ at now, "Maybe this letter will give you some idea of why my husband quit writing to me and sendin’ the children any money. I was suspicious of somethin’, though, before I got the letter. Tom has not wrote me now in three years, neither has he been at home. The boy had told me things, so I decided I would go up and visit him. We went up on Sad’day evenin’ to stay over Sunday. When night come my husband left home and went over to some people that lived on the farm and spent the night. People by the name of Blue. I am told that he now lives with them people and supports the man and his wife same as if it was his own family. I got this letter from Blue's wife's sister several years ago:
October 19, 1935
Rocky Falls
Gray's Mills
Miss Beulah Laney
I will drop you a few lines to let you hear from me. Well this is what I have to tell you. I want you to get Tom Laney from fartheny Blues. People is talking about him and Pinkie. She goes to the mill at night and stays with him. I want you to slip up on them. Ask Sarah Castles how people is talking. If I could see you I could tell you more, this from hannah Murfee to Mis laney I am Pinkies sister.
"I haven't heard from Tom since I was up there and he promised me a cow but I never got it. My son left home again this spring and went up there. The reason he left this time was because Mis Sigmon, the Welfare woman, sent a woman and her little girl here for me to keep. Mis Sigmon had no place for her to go till she could find a place. I couldn't hardly say I wouldn't keep her when she gives me four dollars a month. She also gives us some dresses and clothes. My boy said the woman was a bad character and he would not stay at home if the woman stayed here. So he puts out and goes to Rocky Falls to his daddy. After eight weeks Miss Sigmon found a place for the woman and her child and my boy come back. He sure was mad at his daddy, said he went with that woman every where she went. It seems Tom has bought some land, a car and a truck. He works in the mill at night and is payin' for them. And to hear my boy tell it, the old man Blue lies on his back and lets Tom do the work. One day he said he asked Blue when Tom and Blue's wife drove off in the car, if he was a dam fool. The only answer he got was a big laugh.
"It would be nice if my boy would go to the C.C.Camps and I could draw some money and if Tom could take us to live on a farm where we could have a cow and some chickens and a big garden. I like to can fruit and vegetables. My garden here is awful small and a car to ride in would be just grand.
"If I could only work in the sewin' room again I could make a dollar a day, then I could buy everything we need. Miss Sigmon said I could not work. Tom's fifty-eight years old now. Maybe sometime when he gets older be will come back and live with the children and me. I think I will take Nasbeth and start goin' to Sunday School. Maybe it will show people that I do appreciate what-all they are tryin' to do. There's so many things that people are tryin' to do now to help people like me. I try to listen and take in all they say. Its hard to explain that I don't have anything to do with. The teacher who was teaching people how to can a few years ago wanted the cannin' done cold-packed in jars. I had nothin' to can in but a old dishpan. The lady showed me how to make a canner out of a big winnie can with a lid, but its so much trouble that I rather can in my dishpan. I never lost a jar in my life. When I can stuff it don't spoil. I put a teaspoonful of fruit powders to the jar. I have canned apples in a milk crock and tied a cloth over the top and they saved.”
