Date of first writing: February 21, 1939.
Name of person interviewed: Mary Abbott
Address: Danville, Va.
Occupational status: Spinner at Cotton Mill.
Name of writer: Pearl Morrissett
Revised by Ann Heaton
Mary Abbott worked only eight hours at the mill last week--the 3:30- 11:30 p.m. shift on Monday--and the $2,22 she got for that didn't help such with even the bare necessities of life she is used to. She is worried about work the mill being slack and having to take help from her two daughters who are married to working-men and who are little better off than she is.
Mary lives in one of the row of small frame houses act on flats along the river front not far from the huge Fairfield Mills in Danville, Virginia. On the raw February afternoon that I went there the neighborhood was overhung with soft coal smoke from low chimneys and the narrow deserted-looking streets were bleak and grimy. Puddles of dirty water from yesterday's rain stood in the gutters, uneven pavements showed broken patches where the cheap concrete had graveled away, steps were missing from vacant houses and their window frames marked yawning black holes with only jagged edges left of the panes that had made good targets for rock-throwers.
As I made my way up the rickety steps, the front door was opened slowly by Mary herself, a small gray agoing women whose sharp dark eyes gave her sallow face a curiously bird-like expression. Her hands below the frayed ouffs of her sweater were bony and work-worn, and between the thin skirt that huag limp above her ankles and her badly-soiled white canvas sneakers cheap stockings were wrinkled in spirals. At first Mary regarded me timidly, but when I asked her if I might come and talk with her for a little while, her face lighted up pleasantly. "I reckon I can talk with you if you want, but I can't buy anything. I been settin' by the far an' you can come in there where it's warm."
As she turned to lead me into the house, her thin hands smoothed nervously at the skirt of her dark cotton dress and she took on the embarrassed air of the fastidious housewife who feels that her home is not looking its best as unexpected callers appear. The room into which I followed Mary looked bare and cheerless in the gray light of the winter afternoon. There were a high-topped brass bed, small double-decked wicker table, a matching settee, its worn cushions sagged flat, a few battered chairs, and two wooden rockers facing a small cast iron stove that stood well out from the wall. On the table top near the window a glass lamp, half-filled with oil, rose above a pile of moving picture magazines, some miniature china animals from the dine store, and a small empty gold-fish bowl and from out-out rotogravure prints pinned to the wall above Clark Cable and Dick Powell grinned with high-powered allure. On the tablet's lower shelf a cheap Bible, its black initation leather cover worn to a mottled gray with much handling, lay on what looked like a pile of Sunday-school leaflets. The cracked paper on the walls and ceiling near the stove was dark with coal smoke and the fibre base of the worn linoleum rug showed through in bare ridges where it crossed the uneven floor boards. Feeble color came from green cotton tie-back window curtains and a worn green rayon spread stretched to cover the flat mattress on the bed.
The only person in the room when we entered was a thin dejected-looking man of about fifty, who sat stooped over on a rough-finished wooden bench behind the stove. He wore shapeless overalls topped by a shabby coat ragged at the cuffs and around the pockets, and his badly worn shoes showed gaps where uppers joined the thin soles. He did not as we came into room and showed no interest in the visit of a stranger.
"I don't rightly know if it was me you'd come to see," said my hostess, looking at me apprehensively. "My name's Mary Abbott. Seems like I seen you before some'eres."
When I told her my name, she seemed to be more at case and urged me to take the rocker near the stove.
"You set in close to the far," she bunted. "It's mighty cold to be out aroun' today. It got cold last night and looks like we might be getting' snow. We been havin' good weather this winter though, and I reckon 'taint right to be complainin'. But it takes coal to keep fare goin' and that's what bothers me. Work's been too slack this winter for me to be buyin' much. Then sacks (of each) don't last long when it gets cold."
A long iron poker lay on the floor in front of the stove, and as she picked it up to stir the fire Mary appeared to be pondering something. Then without raising her eyes to look at the man sitting behind the stove she quickly:
"That's John Abbott."
For the first time the man raised sullen bloodshot eyes in my direction, then let his gase wander idly past Hary and back to contemplation of the stove.
The fire stirred and social amenities complied with, Mary eat down, crossed bony knees beneath her skimpy skrit and looked uncertainly at me, somehow as if she feared to hear what I was going to say.
When I explained that my errand was only to learn something about the life of a mill worker, a great load seemed to be lifted from her thin shoulders. She straightened up in her chair, put up a hand to push back the stray hairs that kept straggling down over her cars and smiled brightly at me as if at a friend. Her open mouth revealed that her few surviving teeth were black, and I noticed for the first time that a snuff stick protruded from the corner of her mouth.
"I reckon I ought to know as well's anybody about folks that works in the mill. I been workin' off and on right here at Fairfield for near thirty years. You won't fin' many roun' here that's been workin' long's I have. No, ma'am, I didn't start workin' here in Danville. It was a long time ago when I went first to mill to work. That was down in North Carolina state--place called Concord. I was jist a youngun then--wa'nt but seven year old when I want... I know it's funny to you, but them times younguns went to the mill learnin' soon's the boss'd take 'em on.
"I'm past 47 now. I was born in Guilford County, North Carilina in eighteen an' ninety-two. Pa's name was Sam Smith, and Ma was called Mariah. Ma had three girls, and I was the littlest, Ma'd had a boy, but he died when he was jist little. One o' my sisters was named Mariah for Ma and the other was Rose. We'd never owned our own place and Pa hired out aroun' on the farms and sometimes he'd work at be sawmill or getting' out wood for haulin'. We had a good garden patch and raised some corn for meal. Pa'd never make more'n a dollar or a dollar an' a quarter a day when he worked. Sometimes he'd get his dinner when he was helpin' at thrashin', and sometimes he'd bring home a piece o' meat from butcharin', but we had a mighty hard pull. So when word come through that they was a big mill goin' to be put up at Concord and they was a-hirin' a lot o' folks to work, Pa said he was a-goin' down and see about it. Ma said if he was goin' we might's wall all go along, so we got ready our stuff in the wagon, hitched up the ol' mule and started off. I mind well us a-goin'. I set between Mariah and Rose on the feather ticks on top o' the load, and when the wagon'd hit one of 'em mud ruts in the roads or go over a bump we'd have to hold on tight to keep from fallin' off. It seemed a long ways getting' there-took us most o' the day with havin' to stop to give Ol' Jeff, the mule, a rest ever' once and 'n a while. He was getting' ol', Pa said, and bein's he figgered maybe he'd have to sell him to get us a house to live in in Concord he didn't want for him to be all winded.
"After we got to where they was a-buildin' the mill Pa went all aroun' tryin' to fin' a place for us to live in 'thout sellin' Jeff an' after he give up he steadied a long time 'fore he led Jeff down to the place the man'd said he'd buy him. An' when he come back where we was waitin' an' had the money Ma oried some. Pa said 's long 's he kep' Jeff we'd have us a way to get back to farmin', but now it looked like we'd have to stay on at the mill.
"After we got set up in a house, Pa an' Mariah, an' Rose went to the mill hirin' place to see about getting' on, and when it started up, they got called right off. Ev'ybody aroun' was crasy about goin' to the mill make money and I kep' at Pa about learnin' and not long after he got the boss to take me on.
"No'm, I never got no schoolin'. They wasn't nothin' them days to make folks send their younguns to schools and no law like they got now to keep 'em from workin' in the mill. All the folks that was there at the mill was poor like we was and wanted to earn money, and I never knowed any o' the younguns goin' to school. If they was a school aroun' there anywheres, it must 'a' been a ways off. Even some o' the bosses didn't know how to read and do writin'. Pa could put his name down good, but he could'nt figger any. Only time I seem what a school's like inside was when Rose and Hasel was goin' when they was little, and when I'd be home from the mill, I'd go to see they made it home safe. Then I seen the treacher and how they done things and I seen how it might 'a' been easy for me to learn if I'd went when I was little. What I miss most is I can't read in the Bilble. But Rose and Hasel's allus been real good to set down and read it to me when I want. Sometimes now I get Dot to try and read for me. It's a comfort just to hear some one a-readin' o' it even if thry's somethings I don't know about. I like to be goin' to church Sundays too. Pa and Ma always claimed the Baptists, but since I been here I been goin' to the church right down here a ways. It's called the Holiness Church.
"Workin' hours at the mill in them times was different then then they is now. They didn't have no unions till long after I'd been workin' and no eight hours shifts. I'd go along with Pa at six o'clock in the ovenin' and work till six o'clock in the mornin', and for them twelve hours I got ten cents every night I worked. In the winter it was dark when we'd be goin' and dark yet when we'd get home and I mind yet how Pa used to take hold my hand. Pa was good to us. I was a little mite then. I mind long after I was worklin' how I slep' in the cradle Pa'd made when we was livin' in the country. The big walnut tree right beside the house blowed down one night when they was a storm, and he out it up and took come to make me a cradle. When I'd get home from worklin' at the mill I'd fall right over in that cradle and go to sleep 'fore Ma'd get me to cat anything. I often thought since 'bout that cradle, and I wish we'd kep' it.
"When I first worked I wa'n't near big enough to reach up to the frame, and they had a box for me to stan' on to make it and I pushed the box along as I worked. I took on right quick to learn, and before long I could spin right up with some of the big ones. The boss told Pa I was peart, and when folks come visitin' at the mill he'd bring them to see the youngun that could spin good.
"Pa never'd took rightly to workin' in the mill an' after Ha'd tell how when he was on nights an' tryin' to sleep in the day he fretted like and she allus blaned that for him takin' sick, like he did an' dyin'. After he was dead, I'd hear Ma a-sayin' how when he was sick an' spring'd come she'd pull his bed over to the window an' prop him up, an' even if they wasn't no way to see the county there, he'd talk to Ma about what they'd be doin' now if they was on the farm an' things like that.
"After Mariah and Rose got married and Pa was took sick it was a good thing I was earnin'. Pa laid sick near to five years 'fore he died. I was makin' right good then--seven and sometimes eight or nine dollars a week--and Ma and me could make it with that and what Mariah and Rose'd do to hop'. They was raishin' families o' their own then and their mon didn't make much more'n I did in the mill. Pa had insurance, but that didn't more'n bury him.
"After Pa died Ma didn't want to be livin' in Concord. Mariah and Rose had moved away to a new mill that opened up near Durham, and she got lonesome. I was sixteen by that time, but I was growed and could spin fine. I heard they was work here in Danville, and when me and Ma come I didn't have no trouble getting' on at Fairfield. They was runnin' full time then, and we was getting' on all right. But I got to goin' around' with John Abbott, and him and me got into our heads to get married. I wa'n't but seventeen, and I'd no right sense 'bout what I was doin'. John was a good worker in them days though, and he was there in the mill where I was and I thought he'd always be like that. You can't tell young folks anything' they's set to get married, you know that. But John didn't keep on at the mill. He'd been raised up on the farm, and he knowed about totacco curin' and when a man here in Danville wanted him to go along up to a place in Can'da where they was goin' to try growin' tobacco, he left the mill and was a-goin'. When he told me he was goin', I left my job and went too."
Mary was enthusiastic about her happy times in Canada.
"You never been up to Can'da! Not many has; it's a long ways off from here. It's a fine place, though, and them's the best folks up there you ever seen. They raised a sight o' stuff on the farm where we was, and they was so good-given' us all kinds of fruits and vegetables and never lettin' us pay a cont for anything. We lived fine. I was young then, and when I'd get through my work at the house, I'd put on a pair of John's overaralls and go on out to the field and work alongside the men. It's a good country but the tobacco didn't do good account it's bein' cold, and after awhile we got we got homesick and come on back. Some o' my friends from up there done been down here to see me since I come back. I want to go to Can'dn sometime again on a visit.
"Soon's I got back I went to workin' at the mill and I been a-workin' there most ever since, but the times I had to stay home when the children was born. I never stayed home long after though. I'd pay one of the women aroun' to take care of 'em for me. I was makin' good then--$18 and $20 a week sometimes--and I could do it. John had took to drinkin' after we got back from Can'da and spendin' his money for whiskey, and I had to keep the house goin'.
"After drink got a holt on him, he never was much good, and he got mean to me and the girls. I've took a lot from him. One night when he come home drunk, he pushed the cupper table over--dishes and all that we was eatin'-onto the floor. I grabbed for the lamp, and when he soon me holdin' it, he twisted it away from me and pushed me into the corner. He kep't me there a-holdin' the lamp right over my head, and when he got tard a-holdin' it he let it fall, and smash on the floor. The oil caught far, and the house might a' burnt down if the neighbors hadn't come when they heard us soreamin'. And there was the younguns a-lookin' at him!. All such and more we had to put up with from him. 'Twan't only whiskey done it but dope too.
"Then the time that Hazel was took down with the dipthery, and when the doctor come he said it looked bad. I want to the Lord for he'p, and it set me to thinkin' 'bout John and me never bein' Christians and not bein' fittin' to raise a child right, and now maybe He was goin' to take her away. It brought to min' how John'd been carryin' on and maybe this would change him to livin' right. But he never changed for any good and me and him's separated long ago. We aint been livin' together, and I aint goin' ever to take from him what I done took if it cost me my life. He's here now 'cause when he got turned loose from the City Farm the other night he come here, and Dot and Hazel went to beggin' me to let him stay. But he's got to go soon's he finds a place."
Mary's thin face was a flinty mask and her voice hard as she conveyed her feelings to John through her talk to the caller. His attitude was curiously detached as though present at something with which he had no concern. His empty gaze continued to rest idly on the stove and only occasionally he raised dull eyes in Mary's direction as she rambled on with a recital apparently familiar to him but completely uninteresting.
The front door opened and a frail-looking, fair-haired little girl wearing a cheap-looking blue coat, a knitted cap, and carrying schoolbooks came in. Mary got up to help take off her coat and to put the books on the end of the bed.
"This is Dot, "she said. "She's my youngest."
Dot looked at me timidly and sidled over to stand beside her father and take hold of his fingers. Thin arms and legs and a pale face told of undernourishment, but she was bright looking and had a pleasing expression.
"She's been goin' to school right along," said Mary, "but she's delicate like. They's lots of things that she ought to eat that I can't get for her. I can't get her to eat any breakfast hardly at all, and when I ain't got things to fix for her to take for lunch, I keep her at home. The teacher don't like me to that, either. When I had the money, I'd give her a piece to take along to buy something warm, but I can't do that now, an' I can't see her goin' off hungry.
"Yes, I got three girls. I had four children countin' the boy that died when he was only about four years old. He jist never done well--couldn't seem to get over bein' weak like. I was worklin' right along, and I got a good woman to look after him, but it looked like it was the Lord's it was the Lord's will for him to go.
"Rose, that's my oldest girl, is livin' right down the street here apiece. She's twenty-eight and she's been married since she was sixteen. Seems like a long time ago now that she was married. She's had six children, but two of 'em died. It 'pears sorrowful when little things is took away, but with times hard like they been it aint easy to raise up a family. I look to put my trust in the Lord about what comes on us. There's nothin' anyways folks kin do about death a-comin'. I mind Ma sayin' she'd put her trust in the Lord when Pa was took and how it was her comfort. We're took away when He feels like it's best and I never let myself to worry over then younguns bein' took up to Heaven. An' now that I ain't had much work Rose's had to be hepin' me some, and it looks a blessin' she ain't got more mouths to food. Hazel, my second girl, is livin' here with me. She's gone to the movin' pitcher this evenin'-she can get in for a dine in the day. She got married last summer. Ain't now but goin' on 16, but you know how it it. She got her noticn set on getting' married and looked like I couldn't do nothin' with her about it. So I give'd my word fer it if they'd go right on stayin' here yet awhile. The young fellow she got married to works in a garage, but he ain't on steady. A girl that's only fifteen is too young to set up for herself it looks to me and Hazel cleans up here when I'm at the mill, and I like her to be here so's to be lockin' after Dot when I'm gone, too. If she wa'n't here, Dot'd have to stay at some neighbor's till I come home. That's near to midnight, and I've had enough o' draggin' younguns out o' bed and getting' then home after they been asleep. By that time too I'm all bard out.
"No, I never let none o' my girls go to the mill to work. I done the carnin', and I was used to workin'. When they was growin' up, I showed them how to keep house and do the cooklin'. Then too I minded I'd never got no schoolin', and I aimed to see that they'd go some. They got along good too when they went.
"When I was a-workin' and times was good when the war was goin' on, I'd draw about $20 or $21 a waek on full time. I've allus liked best to spin-I could do it better'n the other jobs I tried, looks like I'd been cut out for a spinner 'cause I'd gone to learnin' it when I first went to the mill. When I was young, I'd never mind standin' up, and I guess I used to it, but now I'm getting' old, my laige an' back aches me bad at times an' my eyes gets to waterin' so bad I can't hardly see. Not much you can set down at in the mill anyhow. We allus had us plenty to eat when I was worklin' steady--oranges and apples and things that was good-and when the girls was goin' to school, hardly a week went by without I got somethin' pretty for them, and they looked as good as anybody. Things shore is different now. Last week I only worked one shift-from half-past three in the afternoon till half-past eleven at night. For that I got $2.22. That was on Monday and every day after I'd go on back, but they said they wasn't any work. I'm worrisome when I aint workin'. I allus tell them here my nerves ain't settled right when I ain't standin' there spinnin'."
Here John pulled himself up from the bench and went out quietly. He seemed only a shadow as he slipped out, leaving the door open behind him. Soon a black and white cat came in and stretched itself beside the stove.
"That's Hasel's cat and it'll eat candy," Dot said to impress the stranger.
There was a loud knook at the front door. Mary took a precautionary peep from the window. Then from the door I could hear her voice, bitter and a bit defiant.
"I can't pay you any today. I'm not getting' much time at the mill right now, and I hain't got the money to do with. You know when I get the money, I allus pay what I owe. You'll have to come back next week, that's all. Maybe I can pay some then." Returning from the door Mary volunteered an explanation.
"I been lookin' out for come of John's loafin' friends to be a-comin' around now that he's got out. They better not be comin' here; I had enough o' that. That there was the man for the insurance. It's worrisome when you ain't got the money to pay with."
Dot took advantages of the break in grown-up conversation to ask her mother's permission to go out to play.
"Now you look out when you're crossin' the street and don't got run over," Mary counseled, and she got up and watched from the door to see that her child crossed safely. As she returned from the door Mary seemed to relax after the interruptions. She is tirred at the fire absently and sat down in the rooker, one hand turning the snuff stick in her mouth slowly. Her thoughts had gone back to her childhood in North Carolina.
"It's funny how you can mind little things when you get to thinkin' 'bout back when you was a youngun. I can mind about how Ma'd do our cookin' in the big fireplace in the kitchen. Folks now don't know about how things was done in them times. We never had us a reg'lar kind o' stove till we moved to Concord, and I often heard Ma say how she'd ruther cook in the fireplace any time. She's tell 'bout how the iron pote'd hang right over the far and them big skillets with laigs that'd make pone and biscuit good as any you ever et. The red-hot ashes'd be put right on top o' the lid and biscuit'd brown better'n in a stove. In the country we never had no lamp uther, but only a lightwood torch. I expect you ain't ever seen a lightwood torch. It was jist a piece o' dry pitch pine set in a bucket or a tin cup and it give'd a good bright light for all we'd need."
"Work's been slack for a long time now at the mill, but I wasn't getting' full time even when they was runnin' steady. I can turn out as much as most any spinner in the mill, but what's wrong is I joined the union when they was organisin' around;, and then when they went out to strike I went along. Maybe I shouldn't done it, but I was in that big parade they had marohin' up Main Street right past where Mr. McNeil lived-he was the big man at the mill--and on out to the meetin' at Hallou Park. The bosses was standin' right there on the sidewalks lookin' to see was a-marchin', and I reckon they seen me, That was in 1930 or '31. They was a sight o' trouble aroun' here. I reckon you mind about all them things that went on--soldiers with guns marchin' up and down the street and standin' around the mill and stoppin' them that looked like strikers. I was afraid to go out anywheres. At first the strike was goin' fine. The big man o' the unions come from far off near ev'y night was speakin' at meetin's and sayin' all we was to do was to stan' together and the mill'd have to give in. I'd not been getting' but twelve and sometimes thirteen dollars a week, and it was mighty hard pullin' to pay rent and get stuff to eat and some things to wear, an' we was tel' how the union'd get us fine money. They was a lot workin' at the mill that didn't go out on strike--even some that said they'd go--and when things got bad that winter we lost out. We never got a thing by strinkin'. The union given us some food, but what I minded was that everyone got agin us just like we shouldn't 'a' asked the mill to pay us more for workin'. Then after 'while things got to goin' agin the ones that been a-leadin' us to strike. Some got arrested and put in jail, and the papers got sayin' the big union men wasn't Americans and they'd come from New York and places away up in the North and that the mills was owned by folke'd been raised here in Danville and lived here and we goin' agin the ones that was a-he'pin' poor people to make a livin'. It's hard when folks got set agin' you.
"Well, after a long time the whole thing was done, and they got goin' back to the mill, but I was never called to go. It said in the papers that the mill wasn't goin' to make no difference if you'd been strinkin', an' I kep' on goin' down and goin' down and waitin' around', but even when they got to puttin' on younguns to learn they'd never called my name.
"That went on for the longest time and things was shore lookin' bad for us. I was way behind in my rent, and one day after I'd been waitin' aroun' at the mill and didn't get on I made up my mind I'd go out to see the head man at his office. It was all o' three miles out there an' my shoes was gone, too, and when I got there they said he was too busy to see anybody. But after I'd walked that whole ways, I was goin' to see what I could do. So I set down there at the gate and waited till evenin' an' he come out to go home. Then I spoke up and told him about how long I'd worked and now it looked like they was keepin' me off because I was one o' the strikers. He jist stood for a long time 'thout sayin' nothin' and then he said he'd see if they was anything they could do. So I kep' on goin' down, and one day called out my name and put me on. I done purty good, then for a while, but work's been mighty slack a long time now and last week I got only that one shift. I can't see how I'm goin' to get along. But these times when you aint got no schoolin' you aint a chance to get different jobs, and I reckon I'll keep goin' to the mill's longs's I last out."
Mary pays $8 a month to live in the little four-room house that is owned by an affiliate of the mill company. She makes no complaint of the lack of electric lights, a bathroom, or that the water has to be carried from the one hydrant that supplies the row of six houses, or that the rickety toilet is at the far end of the back yard littered with piles of rubbish and rubbish and coal ashes. She likes the light from oil lamps--"they make all the light we need." Oil is cheaper anyhow. And as for the other things she cannot mise the comforts she has never known. But Mary, sealous student of the Bible and attendant at her church, does complain of the moral tone of the neighborhood and thinks that living so near the river is unhealthy. "I've done told my children they wasn't to have nothing to do with this drinkin' and cursin' crowd that's aroun' here. It don't suit me none to be livin' here, but it's the best I can do the way things is right now. But when work picks up at the mill agin, I aim to get me a place the other side o' the river back up on the hill over there. I know some folks that's livin' there, and they're good plain church folks. Then, too Hasel an' Dot's been right puny since we been here-always havin' sore throats or colds or somethin'. I'd like to live away from the river. I feel the damp arown' here.
"I been hearin' how Mr. Roosevelt's doin' for ones that hain't got work an' them that's getting' too ol'. Mebbe you know 'bout that. They been sayin' you got to be more'n sixty-five to got it. That'd be a long time to go yet for me. I don't look to be getting' things like that though. I kin do a good day's work as any when they give it to me. I'd a little saved up. 'Twan't much an' it didn't go fur when work got slack. But I kep' my insurance. That won't be more'n what'll bury me, but I don't want to have that on Rose an' Hazel. They got enough to do."
As I rose to leave, Mary went to the front door and looked anxiousely up and down the street. "I don't see Dot, but maybe she's went in to Rose's. It's about time Hazel was comin' too.
"I'd be pleased if you come again. It rests me to talks some. You can allus tell which is my house by this here green mailbox. Hasel got it, and I think it looks mighty purty out here. The others aroun' is so gray lookin'."
As I offered my hope that she would get work soon, Mary's face lighted up.
"You know I been hearin' somethin' about the mill goin' to nell out to Ford. He's the big man that makes all then automobiles. Don't reckon there is any truth in it though-just talk."
MARY ABBOTT
Page 1 -- Opening paragraph sets stage for mill tragedy. Out on two counts: editorial comment and anticipating the subject's own story.
Page 1 -- Story that begins with description of the worse side to the exclusion of the more cheerful aspects of the subject's surroundings suggests that the writer has preconceived ideas. The effect is created chiefly from selection of adjectives. For examples:
raw February afternoon
cheap concrete
sallow face
cheap stockings
bare and cheerless room
a cheap Bible, its imitation leather cover
worn cushions
cover worn to mottled gray
the worn linoleum rug
a worn green rayon spread
the flat mattress (comic effect)
thin dejected-looking man
shapeless overalls, shabby ragged coat
badly worn shoes
bony knees beneath her skimpy skirt (too x-ray)
a cheap-looking blue coat
pale face told of undernourishment (editorial)
Page 12 -- "and now as a worn-out woman of 47 who is known at the mill as a striker."
If this woman is known as a striker let her tell it, Delete writer's comments.
Page 14 -- Paragraph in 3rd person. Any significant material should be incorporated in main body of story. Delete such comment as "Mary does complain of the moral tone of neighborhood," or incorporate as 1st person statement.
Ending is weak. Much more effective ending might be gained if material could be rearranged in order that paragraph on page 14, ending "I reckon I'll keep goin' to the mill's long's I last out," might be -final paragraph.
__Final estimate and comment _
This is an excellent mill story in the main essentials. The beginning and ending, however, are somewhat weak. Let Mary tell the entire story, employing a minimum of descriptive material and no editorial comment. Suggest some of the material in latter part of story be shifted. For example, paragraph beginning "It's funny how you can mind little things, "etc., reminiscences of childhood, might be shifted to first part of story.
