Chung Tai-pan (Chinese)
310 Whitaker St.
Savannah, Georgia
January 20, 1939
G. C. S.
LAUNDRYMAN
I saw him on the street that first day I arrived in the town, an elderly Cantonese, taller and darker than most of his race. In spite of quiet western-tailored suit, impeccable linen, modish accessories, the walk he had was suggestively Chinese, a graceful swing of slender shoulders, a certain strange, precise way of setting down his feet. Though I was born and brought up in America, I felt like bowing low. I felt like addressing him in the tongue, which I had never learned, of his ancestors and mine.
He was strolling with a fair-faced girl child. The sun glinted her soft pale hair. She clung to his hand skipping and chattering.
"That is his granddaughter," remarked the friend who was with me.
"Nonsense. Impossible. She's white."
"It’s true though. He has a little blonde grandson too, with skin like milk and blue almond eyes. You see, his three oldest children all married Americans."
"And what is he, a merchant?"
"Oh, no, he's a laundryman."
Out of this conversation came my self-introduction to Chung Tai-pan on the street, my self-invitation to visit him, for we young American Chinese feel no formality at greeting older members of our race in this country. I felt an obsession to know more of this descendant of our ancient people, to probe into secret thoughts behind that tranquil exterior. Thus on a winter morning in his place of business I awaited his presence.
It was not such a Chinese laundry as I remembered from years past. There was no odor of ginger mingled with soap, no dusty god upon a cluttered shelf. There was no wizened Oriental curling stiff collars with a flat hand iron.
Steam hissed up in a room crowded with shining metal machinery. In this cloudy atmosphere a crew of Negro women dexterously handled mangles, complicated rollers, electric irons. I recalled from childhood a small laundry so quiet that, as the two workers labored, they blended their voices in song to the accompaniment of an old-fashioned shirt-ironer. But I knew that these women would never sing at work in this room. They would not be able to adjust their machine-bound movements to the tempo of harmonies. Even if they could, their voices would be lost in the sibilant roar of the steam.
The young Chinese girl perched on a high stool behind the counter had given me a delighted welcome and we chatted while she continued her occupation of making ink by running a familiar stick of lampblack and pine oil around and around the sides of a little bowl of water. Her slightly tilted eyes smiled in her smooth oval face as she took out a stack of pink paper about six inches square. I knew from old that she was about to make laundry tickets.
"Papa must've forgotten to come out," she said. "You just go on back there. He knows you're coming. I can't leave here because of customers, but the women'll show you. Straight on back."
"Straight on back" was a vague direction which I took past the Negro workers, through a wide rear door, and into a room cement-floored, vast, loud with the turmoil of machinery.
There was another sound, plaintive and thin. Against the slapping of power belts and the flowing of tap water it rose and fell, a monotonous chant, a human voice pitched in a key so high that it was like wind heard above a storm. I soon found its source. Chung Tai-pan was stirring a tub of starch. With a pole he made whirlpools in the thick blue liquid, end as his long brown fingers worked, he was singing in Chinese.
"Boss happy dis mornin'," giggled a buxom Negro woman to me, as she passed with a basket of wet clothes. "He ain't seed yuh. Yuh better go on back dere, maum."
But Chung Tai-pan had seen me. Smiling, he nodded recognition, rinsed his hands at a faucet, died them carefully, and came down the long floor to meet me. Chinese black slippers made his gait more charascteristic than ever, but his expression was not at all bland like that of some Asiatics; it was open, animated. He wore blue work trousers, a plaid wool lumber jacket.
"So you come," he cried in greeting. Sun through the large windows shoved a face curiously unlined beneath thick hair that was almost white. "We go upstair. Not hear good downstair."
We went upstairs the back way. A long dark hall stretched before us with a blank wall on one side and closed doors on the other. Far at the end a small side window let in light through white sash curtains. Opposite was a door through which we entered a small parlor. Sounds under the somewhat sagging floor indicated that we were above the laundry.
"Sit down," said Chung Tai-pan. "I call my wife. She not go out muchee, but she likee visitors."
While he was gone I looked about. The parlor and dining room, joined by a wide rectangular opening that made them almost one, contained a miscellaneous assortment of modern American furniture with Chinese accessories here and there. Only four ornaments adorned the fading, white-papered walls, a large gilt-framed mirror between the ecru-curtained front windows, a long yellow silk hanging delicately embroidered in little Chinese landscapes, a pair of small Mexican birdpictures in brilliant colors, and a copy of The Blue Boy. A radio, an old upright piano, and a cabinet phonograph spoke of music. Upon investigation I found on the piano Sonata Pathetique, a volume entitled Masterpieces of Piano Music, several swing numbers, all neatly stacked as though not in present use, and on the phonograph a portfolio of records inscribed with Chinese characters. A tall red lacquered cabinet held books. In a comer on the rather dusty floor stood a twelve-inch plaster Venus de Milo, while on a table sat a brooding soapstone figure of Tsao, the Sage of Antiquity. Five-bearded, sternvisaged, in one hand he held the inevitable inscribed tablet.
"You likee?" Chung Tai-pan had reentered the room. He was extraordinarily pleased that I was familiar with the legendary Eight Old Ones and remarked that I ought to begin the study of the Chinese language at once. "My wife come out soon," he continued. "Do sit down."
"I hope I'm not keeping you from your work," I said relaxing on the large, shabby, overstuffed sofa. In front of me was a little table with cloisonne smoking accessories. Beneath its glass top lay a red silk circle embroidered with gold threads.
"No, I not work muchee now. I retire. Just show others how work. You know, I be seventy year old last April."
I was astonished. He looked under sixty, and he laughed when I told him so.
"Yes, I look young. Always work hard, not eat too muchee, not worry too muchee. If you worry about trouble you better go die.
"I used be very pretty when I a boy in China," he told me, dropping cigar ashes on the rug. "My face very smooth, my clothes very nice. All my sisters love me because I was baby boy, and all makee silk coats and embroidery my pants. I ought to be spoiled but I was good. They all cry hard when I come to America. Then I only nineteen year old.
"My fodder have lotsum children, five boy, two girl. He have two wife, but first wife die before he takee second wife. He not believe in two wife at samee time. Trouble at home, he used say, more bad than trouble in business."
"What was his business, ah bok?" Now and then I remembered to address him with this age-old courtesy of youth to one who has attained "honorable years."
"Not have business. He have school in Canton, boys' school. China not have girls’ school then you know. We have big rice farm, too, back in clan village. Pretty little house you ever see any of it. Wait, I show you."
He went to the buffet drawer in the dining room, returned with paper and pencil and began to draw. "See? Straight little house, one moon window here, roof turned up on corners, flower tree in front. Inside house you lookee out moon window can see river, tree, boat likee pretty picture in round frame. All around have big fields. You know, I always likee have farm myself. I likee smell earth, makee things grow. But here farming not pay. The earth too poor. Once I have farm and restaurant but not can work both, so both bust up. That time I almost go back to China."
"Your parents certainly would have been glad to see you, wouldn’t they?"
"Yes, they want me to come home. My fodder said I very smart ought to be teacher likee he do.
"When I small boy, I go his school. We stay in Canton and go home to rice farm once a week sleepee all night. Ride on muddy road in slow oxcart, leave city wall behind, see green country with mulberry tree, peach tree, billy goat, man walking barefoot in field. Then my fodder and me be very happy and singee together.
"One time when we pasee little temple I say, 'Fodder, other day I go up in sacred house and touches altar gods. They nothing but stone. How they can see what people do or can hear prayers? I don’t believe it no more.'
“My fodder smile and say, ’My son, wise man not believe in stone image but he got sense enough to know common people be wild if they not scared of altar gods. So he pretense like he believes.'
"When I older, I go big school, study classics. You not can write Chinese style, can you? Teachers say I write more beautiful than any of other student. Hold rabbit-hair brush pen, makee word picture fast down side of paper. You know what? To this day Chinese in United States all know my writing. I be secretary of big national Chinese convention three time because I know so many Chinese character, old style and new style."
Chung Tai-pan knocked the ashes from his dead cigar, relit, smoked for a second.
"In school we have to learn many poem and I still remember maybe hundred poem by heart. You know, if a man study poem, his spirit not can ever be evil. We always have to makee up poem, too, and my poem always one of three best in school. If I stay in China maybe I makee plenty poem but I come here, marry, have six children, work hard, got no time. My fodder too mad but say more better for me to be in America alive than have old emperor cut off my head.
"You see," explained Chung Tai-pan, while I sat fascinated watching the gestures of his work-worn but fine hands, "my brain too hot in China. All young men in South China not likee Manchu government. We have meeting all time, talkee about makee republic, get plenty mad same as firecracker going off. If emperor find out, he chop off our heads. Old men tell us, 'Not time yet for revolution. Wait ten, fifteen, maybe twenty year. You young boys go out of China and work hard raise money in Europe, United States, South America. Plenty Chinese there make big money. We need money for revolution. Not need no chop-off-head corpse.' So I come to America. I think I stay little while then go back, but I not see China yet to this day. My fodder, my mudder die with we far off here. Some day I go home to burn incense on their grave."
He smiled gently. "Honor the fodder and thy mudder that thy days may be long upon land which Lord Sod giveth thee," he quoted, slowly pronouncing each word with the greatest care.
"So you know the Bible too, ah bok?"
"I ought to know Bible. I be in Independent Presbyterian Sunday School ever since I settle in this town forty-five year ago. Have many Chinese men here then, no women. Every Sunday we used go Bible class, sing, learn scripture, learn praying. Very pretty stories in Bible and much wisdom," commented Chung Tai-pan. "Jesus talk likee Confucius. Jesus say 'Do unto others as you would have them do unto you', and Confucius say, 'Not do unto others what you not have them do unto you.' When I first come here and they tell me of Jesus, I try to tellee them of Confucius, but teacher say, 'No, not worship heathen god. It is sin.' "She not know," he twinkled, "that Confucius is not considered God, only great teacher same as Jesus. I love teaching of Jesus: 'If you have two coat, givee one to your brudder.' More beautiful, more wiser than any other teaching in this world.
"My teacher very rich old lady. She wantee me go mission college, study be missionary so can go home teachee Jesus to my people. She say, 'I pay all expense, Tai-pan. You smart boy. Not waste talent. Must go college.' But I not can do," said Chung Tai-pan earnestly. "I come here helpee revolution in China."
"Tell me more of your first coming to this country. Did you like the United States?"
"Oh my, yes! 'Frisco was wonderful place but I not stay there long. I join Chinese Free Masons, then I go Los Angeles, Sacreminto, all kindee places raise money send back to China. In Sacreminto, Masons pawn building for $80,000; in other city pawn building for $70,000. No true Chinese man likee Manchu emperor. Then I go New York where my brudder have merchant business and I nearly freeze to death; so he put me on train go South to our old brudder. That was funny 'sperience," and he looked amused as he once more lit the cigar. "I was slim young boy with Chinese clothes, Chinese shoe. I have queu, long to my waist, and I not speak English. My brudder say, 'Tai-pan, when you get in South, have old brudder cutee your hair American style, buy American clothes.' So I come on train all in Chinese things. People smile at me and I smile back, for I know they think I look funny. They ask me questions, try talkee me, but I not can say nothing but 'Savannah, Savannah.' Ain't that funny, eh?"
When we stopped laughing Chung Tai-pan crossed his legs and remarked that Savannah around 1890 had been to his eyes one of the prettiest of the American cities he had seen.
"It was quiet," he told me, "and it have park everywhere, green tree, not-too-tall house. It warm and soft likee Canton. One day I walk down to Bay Street, see big river and island, ships anchored; smell low earth, just likee Canton smell. I say to minside, 'Am I at home in Canton on Pearl River?' I makee up my mind stay in Savannah when not travel in work for overthrow Manchu government. I be here ever since.
"Before I open business I go to Havana, Mexico, New Orleans, Tampa, all about, tell Chinese of need for money at home. Raise plenty money, for nobody want foreign emperor on Dragon Throne. Then I come to Savannah. I want to open farm makee living, but my old brudder say to me that restaurant business is more better for makee money. Old brudder know how to cook fine Chinese dish. My fodder teachee him. He not know nothing else but farming, and farming bad in Savannah; so he work in restaurant, makee good pay, not want his own business.
"'I not can work for nobody else,' I tell my brudder. No man can order me what I must do.'
"'Suit yourself, hot head,' he tell me, 'but you see.'
"I do see," ruefully said Chung Tai-pan. "I have farm and restaurant and go broke, for I not know how to cook muchee; have to pay cook workee for me. So clansmen givee me Job in laundry business, and he makee so muchee profit I save my money and open laundry. Hire two color’ woman, work hard myself, and not charge muchee likee steam laundry. I makee good money, send some home to my fodder and mudder, send some for help revolution in China, throw away plenty on myself. Play dominoes and American poker game and dressee up. I always likee good clothes," he explained. "In China, I not buy no-fit-clothes-ready-made; in America I not like store suit. I spend plenty money for man dressmaker makee my clothes. They look better, wear more better. Chinese friends used say, 'Look at Tai-pan, dressee up in foreign country. Fool, what it matter how you look here except in Sunday School?'
"'I got to look decent,' I reply. 'I representee my country it no matter where I go.' Then some of them dressee more better, not go out on street with pajama coat and bamboo hat. I takee out citizenship papers, for I know I will be here long time before revolution come. Some of them takes out papers follow me.
"If I not be dress decent," Chung earnestly expounded, “I not catchee good wife. Maybe catchee country girl ain' got no sense, thick shull. But my wife very pretty, very smart. When we marry I start go back home but ray fodder say, 'No, revolution not coming yet; stay there, makee money.' So I stay ten more year, and revolution come. All Chinese in America work likee dog, send money. Some go home helpee fight, but Sun Yat Sen say not need man power, got plenty soldier, only need money; so I stay here. We nearly worry to death; not have radio likee now to hear quick news.
"When news come at last that China is republic and Sun Yat Sen is president, all Chinese in this country go wild. But under big celebration I be sad, for my fodder and my mudder be dead. I cry like anything, for now I can go home, but my parents not be able to see my children. By that time we have two boy, one girl. Anudder girl come; my wife say, 'Come on, we go to China educate children Chinese style.' I say yes, for I know I have good education and get high job with Sun Yat Sen government. Then I sell out good business, packee up trunks, maybe takee ten, twelve months get ready for go.
We almost ready, my wife say,
'"How longer it takee we go to China?'
"'Maybe two more months we land at Hongkong,' I tell her.
"'Then we not can go, for next baby would be born on boat.'
"Well, I never try to go home since that time," said Chung Tai-pan.
"Six children come fast; I got to work hard to makee living. But," he added, "Some day I go back see muchee change, see all my niece and nephew, when youngest son get through Georgia Tech College. He study for be engineer, maybe will go home to China, help build new China."
There was a wistful look in Chung Tai-pan's eyes, and he sighed and stared at the floor a moment, then arose abruptly.
"I show you picture," he said and, going again to the buffet, returned with a card-board box filled with snapshots and photographs. First he proffered me a kodak picture of a tall, smiling young man in riding clothes.
"Youngest son," he informed me briefly. "He makee muchee picture himself, study camera science, knowhow to develop." Chung Tai-pan's eyes brightened at an inner thought which he immediately shared. "A helluva engineer," was his comment.
I had picked up an old portrait of a very lovely looking girl in high-necked, old fashioned, shirt-waist frock with tiny bows in her black hair.
"My wife," proudly said Chung Tai-pan.
"But -- but she isn't full Chinese?" I asked astonished, marking the straight high nose and broad forehead, the long-lashed dark eyes set straight in the head.
"Oh, no. Her fodder was Cantonese and her mudder Spanish American. When they die her fodder old cousin raise her up. She born in California, come from there to exposition in Atlanta when she sixteen years old. I go up from Savannah to exposition all dressee up, plenty money in pocket, and when I see her, she so pretty I many her. She slim little thing, got waist likee chopstick and she ain't got on no paint, but her cheeks are red; bright eye likee pigeon eye. She say she likee me because I be good-looking. My old mudder mad when I come back to Savannah with not-full-Chinese girl.
"'What our fodder say?' he ask me, but when he see my wife he likee her too. She awful good to him. Last year he die, bachelor eighty-sic' year old, my only last brudder, and she nurse him till all is over. This his picture. And here my oldest son and here my second son when they small and here they picture now. I sendee pictures of wife and boys home to my parents and they so happy see little boys in Chinese clothes."
As I was studying the steady-eyed serious countenance of Chung Tai-pan's first born and the slim, spiritual looking face of the second boy, the door opened and Mrs. Chung appeared in a blue, flowered smock, smiling in welcome. Her hair was still partly black, her skin youthful with a visible dab of powder on one cheek. She looked exactly like the girl in the portrait, only a little plumper, a little older. I thought of Chung Tai-pan's recipe for youth: "Always work hard, not eat too muchee, not worry too muchee."
Mrs. Chung asked all the questions that her husband would have asked earlier had she been present: what district in China my people came from, where I was born and when, where I was educated, how many children my father had, what was his business, etc. etc. This excitement over, we all sat down, Mrs. Chung on a straight dining chair from which her small feet barely touched the floor.
"I was looking at your son's pictures, Mrs. Chung." I told her. "They seem to be fine boys."
"They are fine "boys," she admitted. "If it wasn't for them, I don’t know what we would have done to raise all the other children."
"Yes, we one time have tough going in laundry business," Chung Tai-pan agreed. "Steam laundry get "bigger, cheaper, takee all "business from small laundry. I not care much, for I be here so long still got plenty old customers. But lotsum Chinese laundries close up, men leave Savannah can't pay license. I very sad see old friends go but I not can help. Then depression come ten year ago. Customer say very sorry but must go to big laundry get work done by pound, not by piece. Many people fixee own laundry at home. My business get so poor I worry hard. Second son, oldest daughter both out of high school but not have money for college; sometime not have money for pay hands. I say to oldest boy, 'We got to msybe closee up,' but oldest boy say, 'No papa, we be steam laundry too.' Only we ain't got capital to buy steam equip'. We have devil of time two, three year before CWA and FERA help business pick up. Then NRA nearly bust up whole thing, but we manage, for people on relief become good customer."
"Roosevelt is a wonderful man," put in Mrs. Chung.
"Yes, he a good man just likee Dr. Sun. He likee see people eat, not lie down likee dog in gutter and look at big limousine pass by. You know I be a true democrat," he confided to me leaning forward. "I likee all be equal, but long time come before that happen. Me and my son-in-law both believe in equal."
"When business began to pick up," said Mrs. Chung, ignoring her husband's politics, "we started to buy steam equipment."
"Steam boiler, two mangle, two presser, two shirtee machine, two everything. Cost plenty," went on Chung Tai-pan. "But today we not do so bad likee we do in depression. Used hire five, six color' woman; now hire ten color' woman, one color' man. Oldest son know what he talkee about, got good head for business.
"Not be for that two boy," he continued, "I have very hard time. One year I be very sick, not can stand on my feet. Business would lie down just likee me, but my wife work hard, oldest son go out on delivery wagon handle all outside business, second son stay inside help his mudder."
"I used to be scared everytime that little eleven year old boy went out with that horse and wagon," recalled Mrs. Chung. "That was before we had a truck. He worked in the day, took care of two horses, and studied at night with a private teacher. His brother, Sang, didn't have to stop school, but they both worked hard and we hung on to the business until their father could take hold again."
"They not stop working since that time," said the father. "They know I not strong and business poor and all profit from delivery wagon go if I have to pay high delivery-man-wages. They keepee on help me to this day. Oldest boy be manager now."
"People are always telling me what a good boy our oldest son is," interposed Mrs. Chung. "A good boy, they say, so quiet and honest. He goes to church every Sunday of his life and he's the president of the young Chinese club here."
"Second son be musician, study vibraphone and drum, now in fine orchestra," Chung Tai-pan informed me.
"Some people say he's the best drum player in the city," the mother proudly asserted.
"Don't bragee you children, old lady," chided her husband smilingly. "She think her children be the smartest in the world," he informed me with an expression that showed ha entirely agreed with her.
"They are smart too, the whole six of them, even ray baby, Lin-tui, downstairs that the rest of you are always calling so dumb. Maybe she can’t add up figures like the oldest boy or he a musician like Sang, or write poetry like Kam, or make designs like Li-soon, or smell up the house with chemicals like Chen, but she can make cakes better than any of them."
"And can tellee name every mo'on picture star in Hollywood," added Chung Tai-pan with merry eyes and a grave face," and every tune on radio."
"Here’s our oldest daughter and her family." Not at all perturbed Mrs. Chung was handing me a snapshot. It showed a marsh creek and a row boat, and in the boat were five individuals, a dark haired young American man, a Chinese girl with face enshadowed, a roguisheyed little boy of ten, the fair little girl I had seen with Chung Tai-pan, and a small black dog.
"They’d rather go fishing than anything else unless it's stay home and read, read, read, write, write, write all the time. They live on a WPA salary. They ought to open a business, but they don’t seem to care about business. Only about changing the world. Always my son-in-law talks about uplifting the condition of the masses, writes about it, maybe even dreams about it. And he's got my daughter to thinking the samw way he does."
"You son-in-law hare good idea," sternly spoke up the man who had fought to overthrow an ancient dynasty. "I likee a man with liver, not scared of anything. And you daughter makee better poem with new idea. Ain’t big American magazines buy her poem now?"
"What did you think of her marrying an American?" I could not help but ask the question.
"Oh, I plenty mad at first. I wantee she marry Chinese diplomat who ask for her when she fourteen year old, say he wait she finish school. She look likee my mudder except my mudder not hare moon face, and in school she very bright, makee English poems win prize, likee I do when I go to school. But when she run off marry this boy, I bow my head. Young people in America got to fall in love. He teacher's son, must have plenty courage to marry Chinese girl. Then I think maybe good thing to mixee up all races, makee better world.
Chung Tai-pan paused a moment then looked up whimsically. "I talk likee that when Kam marry so she not think I mad with her. Then what you think? Both son takes me for serious. Both son bring home American daughter-in-law!"
“Here they are." Mrs. Chung produced two photographs. One was of a wind-blown little blonde girl with determined chin, the other of a taller, more dignified blonde girl who was posed with two most interesting children. The little girl was of olive complexion with long dark curls framing a face much like her mother's. The little boy had unusually fair skin and even in the gray tones of the photograph it was evident that his eyes were blue, but his features were as Chinese as his young father's, even to the angle of the eyes.
"This is our second daughter, the only one you haven't seen a picture of," said Mrs. Chung. "She’s at Chicago University working for her AB degree, and now there's nobody at home to play the piano for me."
I looked at the pictured face. It was almost a counterpart of Mrs. Chung's.
"How pretty she is," I exclaimed. "Maybe she will marry a diplomat."
Chung Tai-pan broke into hearty laughter. "You know one thing? If I ever getee Chinese son-in-law I drop dead. And if I already be dead, I open my eyes in grave."
"Dozens have asked for Li-moon but she says she'll never marry," Mrs. Chung told me. "She was one of the best-liked student kindergarten teachers here, and she'll probably go on teaching. Either that or do designing, because she's very artistic. They had her design the costumes for the junior college play last year. It was "The Emperor's New Clothes" and had thirty-two costumes, all different."
"Maybe she not teach," soberly Chung Tai-pan mused. "You know, not many jobs in South for teacher, and plenty American girl wait in line. She ought to go to China where they need lotsum teacher speak English. Maybe she go," he added hopefully. "Then I go with her, see China again in my old age.
"I get more lonesome for China now than used be. I used have good time in Savannah, be president of Chinese Free Masons for twenty year; we have fine club rooms, play dominoes. On Chinese New Year all go visiting, givee big dinners. When first baby boy born in a family have birth party after one month. You come from Chinese family so you know how they do. My oldest son have biggest birth party this town ever see. Getee more than thousand dollar in presents, even from New York cousin and friend. Free Masons in California send red paper greeting and gifts.
"Whenever anybody die we used have big funeral, and every spring-time in Third Moon we used go to cemetery have memorial feast. Man, woman, boy, girl, all go. Put roast chicken and rice on grave, burn joss, have big time. Many Americans come look-see.
"'Why you putee food on grave?" American friend ask me laughing. 'Dead man not can eat.'
"'Why you putee flower on grave?' I answer quick. 'Dead man not can smellee.'
"Every few year we used dig up Chinese bones sendee home to relatives. Undertaker pack bones in little metal box, freight very cheap. I forgot now how muchee. Every time one go, I say 'Goodby, old friend. Tellee China hello for me.' Then one by one, one by one, Chinese man close business here and go away. Some go north, some West, some go home. Only forty-five Chinese here now for keepee me company. Oh, I likee go home, stay one month."
At this moment noisy feet ran swiftly up the front hall stairway, high heels clicked up to the door and Lin-tui stood there beaming.
"The cakes have come, papa. The cakes have come."
"Tell the boy to bring them in here," said her mother.
A few seconds later I was watching Chung Tai-pan open two huge packages marked "Fragile."
"I can't hardly wait, Mama, they smellee so sweet. Ain't it be a shame," he grinned at me," a man got to send one thousan' mile for gettee something he likee eat? We give tea party for Chinese club Sunday so have to order Chinese cake from New York."
Mrs. Chung was pressing on me a waxed package from the first box. "Eat some," she invited, "and take the rest home."
They were cookies made of ground almonds, delicious. I had always been fond of this particular delicacy.
"Did you know these cakes nearly two thousand year old?" asked Chung Tai-pan. "Old emperor of Chin dynasty, same likee dictator today, build Great Wall, run out all philosophers, and eat almond cakes."
"Oh, you mean Shih Huang Ti," I nodded, glad to display my learning.
Chung Tai-pan laughed approval. "I see you study history. Good. Here, you likee this kind cake too?"
"This kind" was that always to me unpalatable concoction of meat, peanuts, and various mysterious ingredients heavily odorous of peanut oil and enclosed in a sort of half-cooked dough. I hastily returned to the almond cakes with a sympathetic smile from Mrs. Chung.
"Used be I have vegetable garden and raise food I likee." My host talked between bites. "I love farm so much, not can have farm, so plantee balsam apple, Chinese squash, cabbage, green, in our back yard. Every Sunday after church workee in my little garden. Now I not have yard, not have good fresh things what I likee. Who can eat bitter American green, turnip, cabbage just likee hay? Chinese cabbage sweet. When I go back home I bet I eatee all what I likee."
"Don't you ever have any Chinese dishes?" I asked.
"Yes, cookee American food Chinese style. But not same thing cookee Chinese food Chinese style. Sometime Fernandina cousin, send shark fins and turtle from his big farm; send green too. Sometime I order dry groceries, canned good from New York. But I not have dried beetle for twenty-five year, no dried beetle, no nothing what I likee. Sometime I be homesick to walkee in rice field, go out to ocean in junk boat catchee Chinese devil fish."
"Well, why don't you sell the laundry and go back to China?" tartly asked his wife. It was apparent that she was jealous of dried beetles and devil fish.
"How can I do it? I workee hard all my long life makee business for my wife and children. When I die my children not starve, not askee no man for nothing. They independent. No, I not sell business. Business not belong to me by myself no more.
"I likee independent," he remarked to me. "One time biggest steam laundry in town offer me job as foreman. 'Look,' they tell me, 'your business almost bankrupt. You have six children. Come on. We pay you two hundred dollar a month.' But I say, 'No, I be my own boss. Two hundred dollar ain't nothing. More better starve and be free.' Beside, "he added, "you workee for other man he kickee you out when you get old; you workee for yourself nobody can't kickee you out."
"That is, if you're lucky," Mrs. Chung amended." But look at the small laundry that failed here; and look at poor old Buk Hop sitting in that little hole over there and sometimes can't even rake up a few dollars for that one woman's wages. Didn't you have to pay his license for him? Not everybody is lucky like you."
"Because I have two good son for helpee me," Chung Tai-pan smiled, wickedly anticipating her next remark. "But that's all right, old lady. Soon Chen finish college and me and my baby boy go back to China, leavee you here with two good son." One eyebrow lifted teasingly.
"He has been going back to China for fifty years," smiled Mrs. Chung. "He never would buy any property here because he was always expecting to go back to the place his father left him. Last year he had a letter from a nephew saying, 'Dear Uncle,' -- only it was written in Chinese -- ’Dear Uncle, You have been gone fifty years and I have been living on your land at least twenty years. Why don't you give it to me? You are not coming home.' My husband was very angry, I can tell you, because," here she twinkled, "he expects to live on that land when he goes home. Now that the war is there, he thinks about it more than before."
The mention of war set Chung Tai-pan off like a match to Chinese fireworks. For ten minutes he damned Japan, painted pictures of the sufferings of people in bombarded areas, threw violent expletives at certain traitors in Chinest politics. From a table he produced pamphlets, newspapers, magazines, propaganda in both Chinese and English, giving views of prominent internationalists on the Sino-Japanese situation end illustrated with actual photographs taken on the grim scene of conflict. He knew every maneuver the two armies had made in the past week; he foresaw the eventual victory of Japan, for the present along the coastal front, but prophesied the ultimate sweeping triumph of China.
"You wait," he declared passionately. "Ten year, fifteen year, maybe twenty. China not lie down under foreign power. Last year when I makee speech to woman's Episcopal Church club, I say China will win some day. Now I say so again. You young people know it. I be gene when time come. But China die before he be slave. I never worry about Chinese future. In my lifetime I see China dragon rise up from long sleep, try walkee, get push down again. Next time dragon getee up, he will stay up."
It was the revolutionist, the patriot, the follower of Sun Yat Sen speaking. But suddenly Chung Tai-pan smiled and grew quiet. "I talkee too muchee. How can I kickee if I not he in China today helpee fight Japan? I have long, happy life, more better than many man got. Good wife, good children all living, plenty grandchildren, good health, good name in foreign country, enough money for suit me. What more I want? Old-time poet, Po Chü-i, say, 'Drink from gourd and not ask more.'"
"What a wonderful experience this is," I thought, "sitting in a flat above a laundry."
On a Sunday morning I saw Chung Tai-pan again. A friend had invited me to visit the Independent Presbyterian Church, and as we entered the historic temple, the congregation was just rising to sing the Doxology. In the high-backed rear pew, immaculate in his dark tailored suit, stood the old Chinese laundryman sharing a hymn book with his daughter's two children. As I tiptoed up the aisle his voice rose with the organ:
"Praise God from whom all blessing flow.
Praise him all creature here below."
Excellent
Laundryman (Chung Tai-Pan) -- Ga.
Laundry owner and employer -- raised in China -- revolutionary temper -- emigrated for health. -- employment varied -- finally settled Savannah -- reared and educated five children -- ardent American friend Rooseveltion -- homesick to visit China -- prophesies her ultimate victory -- Man loves independence.
Features -- A good citizen.
Names changed.
