A. B. Way, Jr.
301-2 Empire Building, <text not clear>
Alabama
Wilson L. Heflin.
Editorial Department
PEOPLE CALL ME A LOAN SHARK
The man said his name was Way, so I handed my card of introduction through the iron grill. He looked at it and up quickly at me and said angrily, "You're the tenth person that goddam employment agency has sent here today. How in the hell do they expect me to do any work or make any money?"
"I don't like it a damn bit better than you, brother," I said. "They send me to nearly ten places too so I can get a job. Act secretive as thieves when I come back without one. Hell, I guess they're trying to make money and you're trying to and so am I."
He liked that and got off his temper and told me to come in and see him the next day.
In the morning he took me into a small conference room. He stuck out his left hand. "Sorry to offer my left. See, my right hand's bunged up. Door slammed on it. You think I've been in a fight, maybe? No. Lots of people think things like that about loan sharks. Surprised I call myself one? I got a sense of humor."
The sun was shining on his large, near-bald head, so he moved his chair. His arms were large and hairy, and his sleeves half-rolled to the elbow.
He asked me some questions about what I had done. I told him I'd been teaching high school a year, and had once worked in a filling station.
"What in God's name makes you want a job like this? You won't like it. Not like teaching brats."
I tried to tell him that I liked people. All kinds were in classrooms and you had to handle them. All kinds wanted to borrow money. You had to handle them too.
"You're damn right. But it's not like disciplining kids. Here you have to psychoanalyze people." He pointed through the cracked door and his voice lowered to a confiding tone. "See that nigger girl coming to the counter. How much money would you let her have? You don't know. I do. I can tell you how much she's going to ask for. Fifteen dollars. Any good money man can tell that's too much to lend her. If you're good at this job, like my man out there, you can talk her into borrowing half that much and make her think for sure that's the amount she wants. Sound simple? Easier with niggers, of course. They scare easy. White people come scared too, lots of the time. But they're proud. Some think it's a shame to come to a place like this. A former rich man--I won't tell you his name--"
There was a knock and a swarthy heavy-set man stuck his head into the room. One of his arms was in a sling. A side of his face was partially covered with adhesive tape. Mr. Way got up and excused himself. Outside he and the man talked in an undertone for a while, and then they came back in together.
"This is Mr. Charn, collector, Mr. Heflin. See, I remember your name. Have to remember names in this business. Mr. Charn was in an auto accident last week. Fellow in here yesterday tried to guy him. Said he'd been beat up trying to collect a loan. People say funny things about a business like mine. Makes me laugh. Charn looks like he could put up a pretty good fight, eh?"
Mr. Charn didn't have much to say. Soon he wandered off into another part of the office.
"Charn's a damn good collector. Not like those two sorry bastards I fired last week. Damn, bungling, lead-heads. I go off to Gadsden to open up a new branch there, and leave the business here with them. Only time I ever slipped up judging people. Came back here and found my books all messed up, and good customers complaining to me. I gave those cruds their walking papers right off. That's why I'm getting a new man. Have to watch people these days."
His keen, almost colorless blue eyes looked beyond me into the outer room. He got up. "Know that man at the counter? It's just as well. He was big business but he's hard up now and so he comes to me. I'll be back in a few minutes. In a hurry?"
He came back after awhile. "He believed he wanted a thousand, but he decided he was best able to pay back five hundred. Surprised at such sums? Well, let me tell you, don't let newspapers throw you off about petty doings in the loan business. It's all right. Else I wouldn't have been at it eighteen years. I look all right and healthy, don't I?
"Have to be a keen handler of people in this work. Man just in here calls me 'Way' in this office. I passed him yesterday on the street and we didn't even see each other. Why? Think I want to embarrass one of my best customers? He'd mind someone seeing him speak to a'loan shark.' Me, I don't give a damn what they think about me.
"Some people think they can kid me talking about interest rates. I say outright, 'Thirty percent's good enough for me.' That gets 'em. They don't have a comeback. Think thirty-percent's outrageous. I smile and look serious at the same time. They can't figure whether I'm kidding. I'm cagy. You're wondering how much I charge, too? Won't tell you that unless I hire you, son, and I haven't made up my mind."
I asked him about the typing requirement I'd been told about at the employment office.
"Just for filling out forms mostly. That cluck over at the typewriter don't work regular. He's doing some letters I had to write to clean up the mess those bastards left my place in. I'm gonna let him go tomorrow. We write some collection letters when we can't get the money otherwise. Got a good collection system. Rarely ever go to court. We don't like to do that. Judges have crazy ideas about our work, too.
"If I give you the job, you'll work around the office for about six months. If you're any good, I'll put you on the road collecting. You're strong looking enough. Can't tell whether I'm kidding, eh?
"You've gotta be sure of yourself in here. Make a slip and I'll have to kick you the hell out. Run on a close margin sometimes. Gotta judge people exactly right. It's a good game too. Me on the inside and after a guy on the outside I've never seen before. And I have to size him up, make him happy about the amount I decide to let him have--he thinks he's deciding--and make him want to come back when he needs money again.
"Like a kind of contest, this work. Sure I hawe a sort of advantage. But I have to win and make the loser still like it. That about evens things. One reason why I get such a kick out of my work."
He was saying that business was slack that morning, when a very bedraggled individual came to the counter. He was dirty and unshaved and seemed utterly destitute. He looked like a peddler of cheap razor blades, the secretive person who tries to sell bum contraceptives to high school kids. I ventured the opinion that this man would get no money if I were behind the counter.
"That's where you're wrong," Mr. Way said. "Said you have to know people backwards and forwards. That gay has one of the best begging lines in the city. Brings in plenty of money. May be hard up for the moment, but he always pays on time. Excuse me, I want to talk to him."
Mr. Way came back in a few minutes. "He couldn't afford not to pay up. Might get him in trouble. He knows I keep up with him like I do lots of people here in town. That's part of the work, too. You see how friendly I acted to him? Think he'd be treated that way in one of your marble-front banks? Not by a hell of a shot. One reason why he comes to see me.
"I used to be a runner for a bank when I was a kid. Maybe that's why I got into this business. Me running around with all that money in a dirty little cloth sack and the bank paying me forty-five bucks a month.
Made my mouth water sometimes. I couldn't see any future in banking. Maybe I would get to be a teller and sit behind a grill and stamp checks and make deposits with money that wasn't mine. A hell of a life I say. No kick, no contest. 'Good morning, Mrs. Brown. Is a five and five ones all right?' Hell!"
I asked him if he ever had trouble with customers.
"Oh, hell yes. Some real bums pester me. Not like that fellow we were talking about. Nicely dressed guys. The kind that look to most people like good bets. Save to investigate that kind thoroughly. They wouldn't pay if you beat 'em. No intention to. One guy like that keeps coming in. I'd like to bust him one." He looked at his sore hand. "But I don't. I handle him nice as mud. Don't want to cause trouble and hurt my business."
He looked at the yellow-gold watch on his wrist. "Hell-fire! Ten o'clock and I got work to do on the outside. Maybe I haven't been wasting my time. See, I got you sold on this business. That's the way I do my customers. I can tell by the way you look. You were dubious when you came in. Weren't you?
He got up and moved his chair back in the sunlight.
"I'm not quite sure you've sold me yet, though. Got to talk to some more applicants. Leave your phone number and address with that boy at the typewriter. If I decide to hire you, I'll give you a ring,"
He extended his left hand again, and went off to talk in a low tone with Mr. Charn.
7/18/39
S.J.
