Approximately 3,100 words
21 A
TITLE:
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT LIFE HISTORY
I LIKE TO FARM
Date of First Writing	December 6, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Conyers Elliott Frasier (Negro)
Fictitious Name	Ed Jones (not need)
Street Address	Rt. 4, Arthurtown
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Teacher - Preacher - Farmer
Name of Writer	L. E. Cogburn
Name of Reviser	State Office
Conyers Elliott Frasier is a small Negro, little more than five feet tall, weighing around one hundred thirty-five pounds, and of unmixed African blood. His home, a one-story frame house in Arthurtown, a Negro settlement four miles southeast of Columbia, is conspicuously the best among the dingy one-story dwellings of the community. The house stands about twenty feet from the road and extends lengthwise to the rear. The space behind is used for a chicken yard, wood pile, and for parking a wagon, a truck, old plows, and harrows. On the left are a stock lot and stables.
Frasier was at his wood pile splitting wood the morning of our interview. In response to my greeting, he peered at me intently a moment and answered, "Good morning, sir. Yes, let's go into the house where it's warmer. If you can get a story out of my life, you're welcome to it."
"Yes, we have a roomy place here, about a half acre. Awfully messy looking. Can't farm and run a wood business without a litter, though. The house needs painting. I plan to paint it outside and inside this spring or summer."
We entered the house from the small rear porch. At the left end of the porch was the bath room. First on the right of the six-foot hallway, extending through the house, was the kitchen. It was lighted by two windows, and the floor was covered with linoleum. Between the windows was a new- looking wood range for cooking. Near the window was a new-style kitchen cabinet. Another cabinet in the corner served as a cupboard. A cook table stood near the stove.
The dining room, entered from the kitchen, was lighted by one window and furnished with a dining table, buffet, and chairs. The living room was lighted by two windows and warmed by a heater. Linoleum covered the floor. On the wall was the full length portrait of a tall and healthy looking young mulatto in the uniform of the United States Army. "That is the picture of my wife's first husband," Frasier explained.
A bedroom across the hall was lighted by two windows and heated by an open fireplace. The furniture - bed, wardrobe, dresser, washstand, and three chairs - looked comparatively new, and the bed was neatly spread. Another bedroom adjoined it. This was heated by an open fireplace and furnished with two beds, a dresser, washstand, and chairs.
Two long rolls of linoleum standing in the hall called forth Frasier's comment: "Something new for Christmas. You must have seen that some of the floors need new covering. The walls need new paper and paint. Expect to paint the house inside and out soon. We do such things as we can."
Seated in the living room, Frasier began his story. full name is Conyers Elliott Frasier. Forty-seven years ago, I was born on a farm of twenty-five acres, owned by my father, in Clarendon County. There were ten children, making twelve to sit at the table at meal times. By my father's management and with the help of all large enough to work, we had enough food and clothes to make us comfortable. My father died when I was in the fifth grade, and my mother had a hard time bringing up her family, for she had to struggle against ill health.
"Then, too, after the crops were gathered she kept me in school four months in the year. The first great event in my life was when I made a speech at the school closing. The principal of the colored school at Manning heard me make that speech. And when the exercises had come to a close, he told my mother he liked my speech, and asked her to let him take me to his school. She hesitated. He told her that it would cost her nothing, for he could give me work around his home and school, feeding and milking cows, cutting wood, and the like.
"She finally gave her consent, and I lived in Professor Baumgardner's home for four years, till I finished the tenth grade. The summer afterwards, I stood the teacher's examination and the school board awarded me a teacher's certificate. This started me on my career as teacher, right at my old home. I taught there for two years, three months in the year at twenty dollars a month, and saved fifty dollars, a mint of money for me in those days.
"But I never lost my interest in farming. Each vacation I would work on the farm with my brothers, helping make my own living expanses.
"A while after I left school, Professor Baumgardner began teaching at Allen University in Columbia. I felt the need of a college education. Once more the professor came to my aid. I went to Allen and again lived in the home of my old friend while I was taking the Normal Course. In addition to the fifty dollars that I had saved from teaching, I went through with the help of what I was able to earn as butler and general servant boy.
"With this training I now felt that I could do a better job as teacher, and I wanted to teach the school I had taught before, near my home. I was disappointed. Some of the people had become jealous of me. Ten miles away, down at Sandy Bottom, I taught for two years. I was paid twenty-five dollars a month, four months in the year, but had to board myself out of that.
"When I went home for vacation, my mother had to be carried to the hospital. This cost me fifty dollars to get her in and, later, thirty more. I was glad that I had the money to help her, but it took more than half of my savings. I struggled on anyhow.
"It was at this time I was called to the ministry. Preparation for this would mean three years more at college. Some told me I would never make it.
"Back to Allen I went, and once more Professor Baumgardner took me into his home to live. They found a church of eight members for me, six miles out in the country. Every Friday afternoon I would walk out there and stay until Sunday, visiting and working among my members and preaching at the regular services on Sunday. They gave me one and two dollars a week. But it wasn't long before the church began to grow. We remodeled the building and soon the membership increased to forty. Then they began to pay me three and four dollars a week. With this and the three dollars a week I earned by carrying 'The State', a newspaper, I paid my expenses and finished this course.
"I liked the college so well I went back and took the four year's college course. New I roomed on the campus, paying all my expenses except tuition, and continued carrying papers to help myself along. One summer I worked as helper to carpenters in building Camp Jackson. This paid me well, and I saved a nice sum to help with next year's expenses. My church was now paying four and five dollars a week.
"After I received my A. B. degree, the people at Jenkinsville heard about me and came down and employed me as principal of their graded school. We had a modem school building, fully equipped with desks, blackboards, charts, and so forth. This being a much larger school than I had taught in before, having four assistant teachers, I was a little dubious; but the children all loved me and I had no trouble with the management. I taught here three years, eight months in the year, at sixty-five dollars a month. At this same time I was pastor of two churches, which paid me thirty dollars a month.
"The next conference assigned me to the Chapin Circuit, including the church at Chapin and at Little Mountain. They found out that I was a teacher and employed me to teach the Little Mountain school. My work continued here in this way four years, the maximum time allowed a preacher on a charge.
"Then I was sent to Arthurtown Circuit, a distance of only about twenty- five miles. I began to study about being nearly forty years old, and the idea of living alone in bachelor quarters the rest of my life made me think seriously. You know, when you come to face old age without a companion or anybody to share your troubles with you, things don't look so bright.
"There was a young widow living near the parsonage and she was lonesome too. She had two children and they began to sit on my lap and then to love me like their own daddy. That made Roxanna kind to me. And before long I told her I thought we could make each other happier, and she thought so, too. One thing I liked about her, she was interested in home life, and didn't want an automobile to run around in all the time. She was a graduate of Benedict College and had a good job as principal of the school. I thought if we could combine our salaries it would be that much better for us both. So the fall after I moved here, Roxanna and I had the knot tied, and I moved to her home.
"After I married a member of my church, there was some jealousy shown by some of the women of the congregation. So much so that I thought it best to ask the Conference to send me to another work. knowing that I have a home here, the Conference has been good to me in giving me work not more than thirty- five or forty miles away. The next move was to a Circuit in Newberry County. I needed a car to go and come, so I bought a little one.
"At present I have two churches, in Willowgrove Circuit, Sumter County, about thirty-five miles from here. I don't have an automobile now and have to use the bus or train.
"When I come to this charge in 1930, my health was at a low ebb. I had been doing the work of two men. Either is a man's job, preaching or teaching. Thinking that working out in the open would benefit my health, I bought twelve acres of land near here and worked a little farm in addition to my church work.
"For several years now I have been renting around twenty acres, besides working the twelve that I own. I have two good plug mules, and an ox to help out with the plowing. I do a great deal of the work myself, but I hire two hands at a dollar a day to do the most of it. This year I planted fifteen acres of cotton and fifteen in com, and made five bales of cotton and two hundred bushels of com. Dropped on cotton on account of the boll weevil.
"The Bible says, 'There is a time to sow and a time to harvest;' therefore, I plant all during the year. The year 'round I have a vegetable garden. I broadcast peas in the com as I lay it by, and sow peas after the oats.
"I was called to preach, but I like to farm on account of my health. I was born and raised in the country and prefer it. My motto is 'to build up broken down churches and to work for the salvation of souls.' I try to put in practice what I preach. I value my morals. My moral character, I value that. A man can be a good moralist and not be religious, but he will have to be a good moralist before he can be religious.
"I like amusements; any fair and decent game, such as baseball, football, and horse-racing, when there is no betting. I don't believe in card playing and dancing, and that kind of stuff.
"'Lay by' season is when we farmers have the best time. That comes around the Fourth of July, for a few weeks when the work slacks up after we have quit working the crops. We go a-fishing, have picnics, attend 'big meetings,' (revival services at the church at least once a day for a week or more), and walk over the farm and eat watermelons and peaches.
"We usually pick a place on the river for a picnic. The night before, some of the men who are good at catching fish go ahead and catch the fish and have them ready for the picnic the next day. Every family carries a basket of dinner, fried chicken, cakes, pies, and other things; and when the fish are fried, we all put our dinner on tablecloths spread on the ground and eat together. This is a happy time for all. The young folks play games; some stroll down 'lovers' lane,' making plans for the future; the older ones sit around and enjoy being with old friends, laughing and talking of their lives when they were young. There should be play time as well as work time. Then I believe we would be healthier and enjoy life more.
"Since I have been working on the farm my health has improved. I've spent very little for medicine and doctor's bills. I get wholesome and fresh food, such as vegetables, sweet milk and pure water, sunshine and fresh air, and plenty of exercise. motto is, 'Early to bed and early to rise.' I like to be on the farm on time. When the sun rises, I rise with it, and sometimes before.
"Every summer at Benedict and at Alien, we have a lecture on health protection, 'specially on tuberculosis or consumption. This disease is more common among the colored race. We can stand the heat but not the cold; the white man's blood is thicker. Our ancestors came from the hot climate of Africa, and, therefore, as a race, we can't stand the cold.
"I don't deal in politics, but vote regularly. Some people will come to you and try to get you to vote their way, but I vote for who I want to."
"You hear those hogs?" Frasier said as we left the house. "They are fixing their beds for cold "weather. Watch out for cold weather when you see that. Would you like to see them?"
Laurien, the little daughter of about twelve, trailed behind us as we -walked to the pig pen.
"If the weather gets much colder it will be a fine time to kill one for Christmas. I may kill that big fat one."
Immediately Laurien answered, "No, Sar, that's my pet. You ain't goin' to kill hog!"