James Hubert Woodside
1609 Arthur Avenue
January 1939
E. C.
Names changed
AND THEN I'D TRAVEL
Hubert Woodside pushed the tools on the long work bench aside, eased himself down. He propped between his knees the stick that helped him walk. He was short and stockily built His new blue overalls made his deep set eyes look more blue than gray. His iron gray hair was combed smoothly close to his head.
"My notion of a good life'd be having a little cash on hand once in a While to take a trip," he said. "I've worked for my living since I was a kid. Worked like a dog. Good Lord, I'm past sixty years old. I was born down there in Dekalb County and haven't been out of the state but twice in my life."
The small storeroom was cluttered with rolls of wiring cord, planks, shelves of tools, and other equipment necessary for the maintenance of the large office building.
"I never did get a chance at much schooling. There were ten of us. Ma and Pa did well to find clothes and food for us. Well, we moved up here to Nashville from the country and by the time I was fourteen I'd got a job. When I was a little past twenty I married Molly. At that time I had a part time carpenter's Job making dollar and half a day. It looked like big money to us. Didn't look so big, though, when the babies began to come along every other year. I tell you, it got to be hard going. I've tried to give my kids all the schooling I could, for it's a sight easier to get Jobs if you have it. So I stayed pretty busy with carpentering, jumping from one place to the other and all over town.
'Well, folks seemed to like the work I did. One man I'd done a lot of work for heard about a place open up at the Primm Lumber Company. A steady Job, too. So he gave me a send-off with the head man, that let me walk right in to the job. But Lord! It was hard work and long hours! But I got the only two trips I ever had in my life while I was working for that company. The only thing I'm sorry about was that Molly wasn't here to know about them. She'd passed over Yonder. I used to always be talking about places I was going to take her when we Saved up a little extra. She couldn't gone with me. though. Both of them was work trips.
"Primm sent me up to Cincinnati on a Job the year she died. Then they sent me out to Bardsville, Oklahoma, during the oil boom on a big building contract about five years later. I use to do any sort of building there was to be done. I'm too dizzy headed for the climbing jobs now. Well, there's right smart of hammering and nailing and sawing about keeping up a big building like this. My hand ain't going to get out for good. You see from the things about this shop knowing carpentering's part of the Job. You've got to be some sort of an electrician, too. Well, you catch on to things like that when you're building things.
"Working up on a ladder didn't bother me none when I took those two trips. It didn't matter if I had to go it on a ten hour stretch. The company let me go because they knew I wasn't going to lay down on the job. I sure worked like the hobbling devil up there in Cincinnati that time. Molly hadn't been dead long then. Working day and night I'd get so dogged tired that I'd sleep when I got the chance instead of thinking about how on earth I was going to get along without her.
"See, I had to look after the kids and everything. I tell you, it's a hell of job for a man to bring up a bunch of kids without a good wife. You'd think that being up there in Cincinnati out of sight of it I'd gotten around to some fun. But no, I didn't. Just worked like a dog four months on the stretch. And every penny I was getting was needed at home before I'd get my wages.
"Well, the kids were bigger when the company sent me to Oklahoma. I had more fun out there working than I'd ever had in my life. It's the one place in the world I've been where everybody had money to throw at the birds. Lord, that Osage Reservation was booming when I was there. The government had taken charge of things. They'd given every one of the Indians past fifteen a pocket full of oil money. Those Indians would come right up there at Osage and spend it like nobody's business. See them in rags one Saturday. Next Saturday driving a big car. Come easy go easy.
"So I got in on the fun with the rest of them. The government wasn't Shoving any oil money my way but I was getting my part of what the rest ot the crowd had. I got me a pretty little trick of an Indian girl. She really had the herbs, too. Money, I mean. And was she crazy about her sweet papa! They always go for white men, those Indian girls. It makes my mouth water to think about those things she'd fix me to eat. She'd owned the biggest restaurant in Bardsville and was making good money. She'd spent every cent of on me if I'd Just let her.
"When I headed back for Tennessee she had it in her head to come with me. Dog if I know what I'd done with her here in Nashville. She was clean and a good cook and a housekeeper. Didn't drink and smoke and run around. I guess she'd made a white man a good wife. But not me. I'd had a hot thing on my hands to explain to Gracie! Gracie's my oldest girl that's. looked after me and the kids. since my wife died.
"Just a minute."
He got up from the bench to answer a knock on the shop door. Leaning on his stick, he walked slowly and with effort. A Negro delivery boy carried a large corrugated paper box to the far corner of the shop and placed it where Woodside pointed.
"Got me seventy-fives this time?'" Woodside asked, as he Signed the tickets.
"Yas suh."
"Well, that's right. You got to have least a seventy-five watt bulb to carry center lights. The boss says I've used more sense about buying supplies than any man he's had. I've had this Job five years. Had it since I had to give up straight carpentering."
Woodside closed the door after the delivery boy. He frowned as he made his way back to the bench.
"I don't know I've been down till I try to get around, "he said. "It's all right as long as I keep going, but when I set down I start stiffening up. I had this stroke last September. I was down flat for four months in bed. Just got rid of my crutches last week. Well. I guess it's a case of good coming from evil. You know I haven't had a fit since that stroke hit me. Not a one. And I've had epileptic fits for more than forty years. I'd fall on the ground and kick and groan and carry on.
"I bet it'd be good for me in the shape I'm in to go to California. All that sunshine they have out there the year around ought fix me Up. That's one place I've always had in my head to get to. You know, orange tree, everywhere and a flock of pretty movie girls and that big Rose Bowl. I'd rather go there than. any place in the world. That's my notion of a good life, having a little cash on hand to get a trip once in a while. Yes, I sure would travel if I had money. And California would be the first place I'd go. But it's. no use talking about miracles. I've never had that much ahead and never will. And I doubt if Gracie'd let me go if I had the cash.
"Gracie's the only one of the children not married. Gracie and the Baby. Gracie never has been strong. The rest of mine were, except when something hit them that would take anybody off. I've had nine children and Seven are living and two's dead. I lost two boys with the pneumonia. You say pneumonia to me and I Just give up before you get it out. Buried my wife, my mother-in-law, and an eighteen year old boy within sixteen months. Pneumonia took the very last one of them.
"I've been sick a plenty in my life. Indigestion and fits, mostly. The fits don't hurt none, but you feel week as a kitten when you come out of one. I've had one or two deep colds. Gracie said they'd gone straight to pneumonia if she hadn't been there to keep mustard plasters stuck all over me. Well, she's always there when I need her. We live to ourselves now that the rest of the children are married off. Don't have nothing fine, but what we've got is paid for. I got a house out there on Arthur Avenue with three bedrooms, a living room, dining room, and kitchen. Me and Gracie live all over it. She don't care if she has to clean up that sitting room every morning. And you could cut the pipe smoke in there most every night. Me and my son-in-law and the man across the street play pitch most every night. Gracie don't care how much we smoke or if we get the whole room pulled to pieces. She Just don't care.
"She's a good cook, too -- just like her mother. Not a thing in the world she don't know about fixing something good to eat. She fixes things that don't make me sick too. And she's got a business head on her, too. I just turn over the money to her. She guys the groceries and pays the bills. She can make my twelve dollars last a week and leave something over for doctors bills and such.
"I've worked here for five years looking after this building and I've got paid for three hundred and sixty-five days of every one of them, whether I was on the Job or not. They paid me for the four weeks I was out with that stroke just like I was on the job. They didn't give the place to nobody else like some would've, done. My boss is the best friend me and Gracie ever had in the world. I guess it there was more like him there wouldn't be no use for all this relief and WPA stuff. From what I hear most of them on there is too trifling to hold a regular job, don't matter who the boss is.
"One thing that gets Gracie is for folks to call me a janitor. She' e got a lot of pride and she says maintenance man sounds a heap better. I like to have died laughing one day when I heard her talking to a neighbor. The way she had it, I near about owned this building. Yes. She's got a lot of pride. I know it just about killed her when she found out about Baby. She didn't say a word to me. Just swoll up like a toad. I hated that and I guess I ought to be ashamed of myself. A men of my age. But I'm as crazy about that little kid as child I've got. Not every man of my age has a good looking woman like that loving him.
"She's a grass widow. She's. got two other children of her own. I didn't fool her. She knew I didn't plan on marrying her. For one thing. she'd lose what she gets from the government for those two kids if I did. If I did. Twenty dollars a month for the two of them is what she gets. Twelve for the oldest girl and eight for the youngest. She don't get a cent for my baby. I don't see the difference. He's hers, too. But I manage to get his clothes and help out some on the grocery bill. It worries me to think: of what I d happen to them if I got too bad off to work. Gracie wouldn't give them a penny of my sick benefit.
"Baby's about three years old now. He's the cutest little boy you ever set two eyes on and he's crazy about me. Comes running to meet me just shouting -- 'Hi Daddy!' 'I see my Daddy!' Lets of mornings I tell Gracie I've got to get to work too early for her to give me breakfast. I go by and eat with: Baby's mother.
"I wish you'd see the breakfast she fixes up for the two of us. Fried chicken, hot biscuit and blackberry jam, and hot coffee. Gives me the nicest lunch all wrapped up to carry to work with me.
"You know if Gracie ever got in her head to go off on a visit or something -- and I had a little cash ahead, I'd like to go off on a trip somewhere. Just me and that little boy. Good Lord. wouldn't he have a picnic playing on some sea shore place like out in California? Some day I may do that if I run into a winfall somehow. It's a comfort to think, about. anyhow."
Very Good
And Then I'd Travel, Janitor
Farm reared -- into carpentering early -- married in early twenties -- then to lumber company -- worked on two long trips -- wife died - he was both parents -- had Indian paramour, Oklahoma -- epileptic, plus stroke -- all children married but one -- she carries household -- he looks after a building -- he says, janitor, she says "maintenance man." Subject maintains another woman -- has child -- likes irregular life.
Feature: Love of travel - ungratified
Names changed.