The Tom Alsobrook Family
400 South Randolph Street
Cowikee Mill Village
Eufaula, Alabama
FIFTY-TWO YEARS IN THE COTTON MILL
By Gertha Couric
His hair is almost the color of the cotton that furnishes his livelihood. He is seventy-two and is thin and stooped. Because he works now where he worked at twenty, Tom Alsobrook represents the past and the present of the cotton textile industry in Alabama.
"I moved to Eufaula with my mother fifty-two years ago," he says. She worked in the mill a little while, then died. I buried her here."
It was the old Eufaula Cotton Mill when he began work. Captain Tullis was president. According to Mr. Alsobrook, the old mill must have been a haphazard affair.
"Donald Comer bought the property in 1908," he said. "Old machinery was torn down and new pat in. I helped wear the new out, then personally, took a sledge hammer and beat the skeletons so that they could be thrown out the window. New machinery was again put in, and now it's about wore out.
"I started as a 'sweeper' at fifty cents a day. I been assistant overseer and overseer in the 'carding' department. Right now, I work the 'fly frames'. Annie Lou -- that's my old lady -- works with me. I work extra Saturday and Sunday 'watching'". We each make thirty cents an hour for a forty-hour week, working eight hours a day. Ain't no-body like us makes under twelve dollars a week or more'n sixteen dollars a week. 'Course, when we have to stay home sick, we lose the time.
The Alsobrook home is surrounded with a wall of neatly trimmed hedge. The yard has a variety of flowers.
"I love to work outdoors," Mr. Alsobrook says. "Soon's I get home -- I get off at two -- I start diggin' 'round in the yard whether it needs it or not."
The house is painted yellow with white trimmings. Five rooms -- two bedrooms, a dining room, and bathroom -- have plain furnishings, with oak predominating. All are neat and clean. An organ is in the corner of a bedroom. There are no electric facilities. Kerosene lamps are used for lighting. The house is heated by wood in open fireplaces.
"We bought this place through the mill," says Mr. Alsobrook. "Paid for it ten dollars a month, just like rent. It took us eight years, but it's been paid for several years now.
"A lot of folks here own their homes. The mill loans the money at 5%, and payments are ten dollars a month, but lots pay back twice that fast. In case anybody has to skip a few payments, that's all right with the mill. Ain't no-body had their home taken from them yet.
"That ain't all either. The mill loans money for college educations, no security or nothin'. Most young folks, like the assistant superintendent, Cleveland Adams, come back to work in the mill. He borrowed a thousand dollars and took a four-year course in textile engineerin' at Auburn. Tyson Smith, assistant secretary at the mill, is another one that the mill owners helped to get a college education. The band boys, who learn to play under the teacher here at the mill, earn their way through college by playin' in the college band."
A wood house stands at the rear of the Alsobrook home, with wood already cut and piled in for the winter. Nearby is a Fall garden with a small flock of chickens hovering dangerously close. Mr. Alsobrook halted the tour in this vicinity in order to shoo them away, and mutter:
"Dang 'em. They eat the vegetables and we eat the chickens. Reckon it makes us about even though, don't it? Yep, I reckon its about as broad as its long. But I get tired of chicken sometimes and bring home a steak for supper to go with the biscuits and cold vegetables. Our vegetables are always cooked ahead. When Annie Lou comes home at two, she cooks whatever she wants out of the garden, peas, beans, collards, turnip greens, white or sweet potatoes-- just whatever is handiest -- and then heats them over the next day at twelve when we come home for dinner.
"Mostly for breakfast we have fried white meat, eggs, hoeoake, and coffee, because we have to be at work by six and naturally have to hurry.
"That's one thing I'm gettin' just a little too old for, that hurry, hurry, hurry! I think maybe if I can sell the house, I'll buy a place in the country and take my time for awhile. Then, I could stay outdoors as much as I wanted; dig around a lot; and raise me a few chickens. I been thinkin'
'bout that every since my bones started achin' nights, but somehow, I ain't got around to it yet.
"Might be that I just hate to leave Cowikee. Its a pretty good place, mighty pretty. My place is pretty. I'd hate to have somebody rent it after I left that wouldn't keep the hedge and flowers pretty. I cut that hedge every other day."
Mr. Alsobrook and Annie Lou Freeman ware married in 1912. It is his second marriage.
"I first married Minnie Lee Price, soon after my mother died, but Minnie Lee died too, leaving two little boys. I had been moved away a little while when Minnie died, but I brought her here for burial.
"Then a wagon run over one of my little boys, Thomas Neville, and killed him. My other little boy, Earnest, died from a bone infection about 1922. Dr. Britt cut off his leg trying to save him, but it was too late. He was a pretty boy."
Mrs. Alsobrook, the former Annie Lou Freeman, is sixty- three, tall and thin, with streaks of gray running through hair that is courageously trying to retain its blackness. She has worked beside her husband for twenty-two years.
"I been cotton millin' since I was nine," she says. "I started as a 'spooler hand' for fifty cents a day. Ma and us kids had to keep body and soul together somehow. She used to sit up nights makin' quilts, than cook breakfast at five o'clock so us kids could be working at six. She'd have sent us to school if she could. Ma said the reason us 'younguns started workin' so young was mostly to keep warm; and then, too, she always knowed where we was at.
"It ain't that way now, though," continues Mrs.Alsobrook. "Mothers ain't got that worry. Thar's a kindergarten and nursery for the babies and a public school for the bigger younguns. Eatin' ain't no worry, because at the school, them that ain't able to buy their lunch get it free -- with milk, too.
"Than, after school is out, all them younguns light a shuck for that pretty playground over yonder that the company provides. They stay out of their mothers' way and off the streets too.
"But pshaw," says Mrs. Alsobrook, "them younguns ain't the only ones that have fun. Us old folks have our pleasures too. Lots of nights I set and gossip with my friends and listen to the free band concerts all at the same time."
"Yeah," puts in Mr. Alsobrook, "and I ease over to the Community house about that time and read. I'm beginning to realize more'n ever what it means to be educated. I never got but five years schooling, but it comes in mighty handy when I want to sit and rest and find out what's happening in other places."
"Lots of times, though," says Mrs. Alsobrook, "I stay home and can. I put up a lot of stuff durin' the summer. Me and Tom have always tried to save what we could. We have a little bank account. We figure on usin' that if we move out in the country. Our expenses are low. Taxes and insurance come first. We figure we'll save some on taxes if we take a farm."
"But I'll have to come back every once in awhile to vote," says Mr. Alsobrook. "Us Democrats have to stick together. The old lady is a Democrat too, but she don't vote. I ain't got no use for woman votin'."
So there they are, the Alsobrooks. They have spent their lives in cotton mills, and are now ready to rest. But the lure of life-long friends, with whom they have been in daily contact, the beauty and convenience of a well appointed village, and the sharp contrast between present and past working conditions, combine to make their choice of whether to remain in Cowikee and be in "the run of things," or to move to the comparative isolation of the country, a difficult decision.
"I'd hate to have somebody rent our house after I left that wouldn't keep the hedge and flowers pretty. I cut that hedge every other day."
"But pshaw! Them younguns ain't the only ones that have fun. Us old folks have our pleasures too."
10/13/38
S.B.J
