Lee Eupens Florida <text not clear>
221 East Ashley<text not clear>
W. P. A. <text not clear> Records
Lillian Stedman.
Mr. Bigelow, is a real Floridan by birth and environment but it to be necessary to give a little information on some of his forefathers verify this claim.
The name Bigelow is a very old one, its origin is readily traces able to one John Bigelow who is reported to have immigrated to America about 1636, He is a descendent of one Richard, Lord of <text not clear>, Cheshire England who lived about the beginning of the 13th century.
Mr. Bigelow's grandfather was the grandson of Paul Bigelow, who served as a minute man at the Battle of Lexington, March 19, 1775.
It is also learned that the Bigelows are one of the very oldest families of Florida, Mr. Bigelow states that the records show in the Duval County Court Courthouse that his grandfather was one of the first voters in this county THE State Library also has a record of his voting the year of 1831.
The tract of land which became known as Floral Bluff was established by his paternal grandfather Robert Bigelow and the family had in their possession until the fire of 1901 the original Spanish land nal uncle Francis Richard II, and there was no element of purchase whatever described on this grant.
Lee Eugene Richard Bigelow was born December 2nd, 1872 at Okolona, near Floral Bluff of the St. Johns River and spent the greater <text not clear> of his boyhood at his father's home with the exception of the <text not clear> he lived with his uncle at Lake City after his mother's death.
Mr. Bigelow received his early education at home with his sisters Mary Tallulah and Anna Eugenia Bigelow under the tutelage of a governess, later he attended the common schools of Duval County.
His father was well respected and a public-spirited man and was often chosen as a county delegate to both state End Congressional district nominating conventions by the Democrats of Duval County No men stood higher in the estimation of his fell of citizens, his word was his bond and was given end accepted as such, to his family he was kind and generous a loving father and husband. He instilled in his children the highest attributes of character and so it is L. E. R. Bigelow feels the pride of that certain aristocracy that is inborn for many generations. Mr. Bigelow says," the Bigelows have no apologies to offer for their records. We are proud of the blood in our veins, we might truly be called aristocrats not because of the wealth, rank or fame, but for the sincerity of purpose in doing what we felt was right regardless to the opinions of others."
Mr. Bigelow had one year at the Florida State Agricultural College At Lake City, and had aspirations for further training but his father's health began to fail so it was necessary that he return the farm and relieve his father of the responsibilities. He took ever all his father's business and worked on the farm. He says, "I used to get up at 5 o'clock and do all the chores on the farm and then <text not clear> a mile and a half across the river to Jacksonville to save the street car fare to my work which was helping a plumber which was by the way the first job I ever had sway from my home, after my father's death which occurred in 1693 I secured steady work in Jacksonville and continued out this until until the big freeze in 1894 when I went to New Jesery and spent eighteen months employed in the bakery business I returned to Jacksonville and entered the U.S. Post Office here shorts before the Spanish-American War of 1898. I served twelve years on the government service, rising to the position of Chief Clerk of the local post office. During this period I was first married to Miss Birdie <text not clear> Tompsom <text not clear> of Lake City.
We disloved <text not clear> this marriage four years after our marriage by mutual agreement and reflected no discredit to either of us. Several years later I met and married Alys <text not clear>erner Porter, a widow in Sept. 1903 this marriage has been blessed with mutual understanding and cooperation, my wife is ambitious and proud of her home she has done mush toward keeping the family together, we have contributed everthing to the home and the <text not clear>maintenance of it my wife has been a most important factor in the success of this home as she is a tolerant person.
We have had in our house ever since their birth the grandsons of my wife's. They are 16 and 18 years of age both are in high school, one will graduate next June, and the other one will graduate <text not clear> year after that. They call me grand pop and I think as much on them as if they were really my own grandsons. During neither one of my marriages was there any issue, and I have been fortunate to have these youngsters in my home, I get much pleasure from their viewpoints. Neither one of these boys have been able to determine what vocations they will choose, although the older of the two thinks that he will make a study of forestry, and I think that he will do well at this. Still, he is the one to say, He does not at this time think he wants to go to college and, later if he seems to think that it will benefit, him we will send him.
"I am a great believer in trying to follow your natural bent for I think that is where you will find more success. All my life I have liked history and research work, so, I have found a great deal of pleasure on this last work of mine, although I have followed several other lines I followed the racing game and also was chief clerk to the state and county tax assessor and also was connected with the City of Jacksonville water department for ten years end have been engaged in general clerical work, real estate the educationnial facilities are much better today, out there is a lost element in the foundational part of the school program today because there seems decking the ability to convey to the purpil the importance of remembering what he has gone over. This has been made very clear to me in the observation of the two nephews that I have reared, both of whom are now in high school.
"I think there are a great many more girls and boys that attend college than show a real aptitude for a higher education and therefore the money could be spent to a much better advantage if they putting that time and what effort to do put into it in a practical course of business or begin they<text not clear> contact in the business world earlier. I also believe in vocational guidance. <text not clear> If the pupil, can discern what he is best fitted for and follow that lime, he is more than apt to be at least a small success.
I also think that the younger generation should be taught the value of the home, too many today think less of a home than an automobile, wherefore, they begin to less the true appreciation of the home which should be their price and joy. I am convinced that there <text not clear>any people today driving automobiles that would be better off without them. In some cases the automobile is a necessity and then it is well to consider the need of one above the home; but, generally, the car and the telephone are a luxury.
I used to have a car for my own pleasure; but now, the only car in the family is an old jallopy that belongs to the boys, I used to have a telephone, too, but I do not now, because I try to <text not clear> my income. I work in the Historical Research department <text not clear> Progress Administration, and it is necessary to eli<text not clear> some of the luxuries of other days when I made a better salary. I've always brought that the salaries could have been higher and the period of employment limited, thereby forcing the individual to live below his income, so that he would save something for the time when he would no longer have a job. This would teach his thrift that he would probably never in this wide world learn otherwise. That is the idea in the C. C. C. camps and is intented to be a help toward placing the boy in better circumstances than he was before entering the camp. Another thing that would help the country today would be to force the farms to be self-sustaining; and those that are fortunate enough to own e farm make their own food and sustain the farm from the farm.
When I was boy every farm was a sustenance farm and every meal consisted of food grown on that farm.
It is not the amount of money that a person makes, its the difference between the Income and the outgo of it. There is also too much encouragement for the people to live above their incomes. Too much persuasion to borrow money by the smooth talking advertisers. They talk like they are giving you the money, all that you have to do is to go down and get the money. They almost make you think they are giving the money away. They only mention the legal interest and that almost in a whisper which really amonts to 40% per annum. Every legislature they have people there to defend this racket and it continues.
I've always voted a democratic ticket. My father was a democrat. And if there is a man worthy of my vote in my party I vote for him but I will not support the other party even if there is not a man in my party that gets its, I will not be any part of support to any party but my own party.
I am not conscious of religion in my politics, Although I am an Episcopalian realize that the denomination is only one of many routes to the common destination. The churches are a creation of man. For many years I have been s member of the St. Johns Episcopal Church, I was baptized when quite a small child but was not confirmed until a few veers ago. I believe that one should embrace some church and contribute to it support in the way end the amount that he feels he is able to, end that systematically. I have attended the church regularly for many years at least once on Sunday. I do not hold any office for I had my fill of office-holding when I was in the old Jacksonville Rifle club, I was president, vice-president end secretary and treasurer. In fact, I held every office over and over again for many years. So I do not want to hold any office any where.
I realize that I era getting to the age in life when I can not take any chances with my health; so, I'm temperate in all that I do. My amusements used to consist of fishing, hunting and boating, I was raised on the river and found many pleasures on the river. I used to sit for hours on the river bank and watch the boats end ships go by. I got to where I knew ell the boats by name. I had an old pair of field glasses and spent many an idle hour on the shore watching the ships. I used to row e great deal too. But the strenuous exercise is too much for me. Any way, it isn't wise. I inherit longevity from both sides of my family, I have smoked almost incessantly since I was twenty one and I drink considerable coffee too; and, I can truthfully say that I don't think that either one has hurt me. I have never been a prohibitionist either, but I believe in true temperance. Now just the other day, one day last week, carried home to my wife <text not clear> of whiskey and told her to put it up in the closet and when she wasn't feeling good or was e little chilly to take some; it would do her more good than harm #. I've got an old friend that will soon be somewhere between her 70s and 80s, and I'm gonna give her a bottle of brandy or a bottle of whiskey for a birthday present. I will find out which one she prefers. You know these old people are dropping off every day or so, and its better to have done something for them the to wish that you had. I try to do what little things I can for my friends as I go along. Its so much better than having the regrets of net doing it.
Now just this morning, not to throw en y bouquets at myself, I went by and give a girl a quarter to ride to work. I knew that she had<text not clear> money to spend for herself and that she had a bad cough and cold and shouldn't be out in the rain a getting wet; so, I told her to ride to work, and I'm glad I did that Even if the sun did come out end it cleared up, there was no motive in the world except to do something for this girl that I thought would help her.
Another peculiar thing about me is that I never look at a corpse, no matter how good a friend they have been of mine; because I like to remember them as I knew them as we talked last. I really believe in giving the flowers while we live and not wait till its too late to show how we feel.
I was chief clerk at the post office when the big fire of May and 1001 and I had many dramatic experiences that day. The fire about 11'oclock and continued 'till about 10 that night. He had to strip all the awnings from the postoffice and then decided to haul all the mail of value to the union depot. The postoffice did not burn, and we had to haul it all back again the next day.
I borrowed a bicycle to run around on that day. I had so much to see after. I moved my family away out on east Bay Street, and at back and forth to and from the postoffice to the house. At last, when I saw the back of my house in flames, I had started out the front and saw am old desk of my fathers and a new $60.00 sewing machine that my wife had just bought, I wanted to save them if possible; so, as I looked around frantically I saw also a large hem that had not been opened as the groceries had just been delivered that morning, I also a spied the old baby carriage, one of these large old-timy ones with large springs and wheels, I threw the ham in the carriage and lifted the top off the desk and placed it on the carriage and put the machine on top of that. I then placed the balance of the desk on the carriage somehow. I would push the carriage awhile, and go back and get the bicycle and ride to the carriage and then push the carriage, and so on, until I finally found a dray. The fire was fast following me. The wind was blowing from all directions that day, and it was a wind, too. The houses had those old shingles that were all dried out and the in wind full of the fiber and cotton flames from that factory where it caught. The fire department was greatly hampered because the fires were in all directions. Sometimes, the fire departments would be hemmed up. Before they knew it, the fire spread so rapidly. The experiences of that day will never be forgotten, and no one can ever tell it all as he saw it that day. It was too impressive and touching. Some of the people were overcome with confusion and excitement; but, as it was a daytime fire, most everyone had plenty of time to be warned and make some plans.
I also remember the yellow fever epidemic too; and, let me tell you, that everything that was called yellow fever was by no means yellow fever. But the doctors were not to blame. Many doctors came here that had never seen yellow fever; and, as a precautionary method, they treated them all for yellow fever, even if it was dengue, malaria, scarlet or bilious fever. It was all classified as yellow fever. If every case had been the real yellow fever, we would have had more fatalities than we did.
The greater part of this interview was made at the office but upon visiting the home and meeting Mrs. Bigelow it was then I saw deeply into the life of this man.
I instinctively knew be for I crossed the street or even glanced at the number of the house that this was Mr. Bigelow home. Mr. Bigelow has impressed me as one that loves the sentiment of the east and things pertaining to it, So it was when I saw this once beautiful old <text not clear> that was badly in need of paint and the old shrubbery and the old waver oak standing as a sentinel, there was no question in my nine <text not clear> having found the address Mrs. Bigelow answered my rep after waiting some time and seemed <text not clear> have been expecting me for she said, Mr. Bigelow told me you were <text not clear>come right in, land let me turn off my iron I been froning<text not clear> Mrs. Bigelow continued specking to me as she went into the <text not clear> I washed my hair this morning and I had to do it up before <text not clear> door to you. As she returned she so said," I guess you want to see family pictures. Mr. Bigelow told me to show them to you. Already noticed the enlargements hanging on the wall in a most prominent piece. "The picture to the left is Mr. Bigelow's uncle Alexander Graham Bigelow, he used to own this place, end the smaller picture in the middle is picture of his mother, and the other one is Elizabeth Ann, the wife of Robert <text not clear>gelow the founder of Floral Bluff. Apparently Mrs. Bigelow shares equally the pride of her husband's forefathers. The pictures were very clear and were handsomely framed in <text not clear>carved oak at least 3 inches wide. They hung directly in a row end were opposite the mantle, over which were the heads of two down.
The furniture was all old and badly worn, and there <text not clear> a perceptible <text not clear> of it. This was quite noticeable, for the rooms are very large and the ceilings high. A striking feature of this home was that the floors are all of a beautiful, (or would be beautiful if properly cared for) golden oak with the borders inlaid with an interesting design of darker oak. I remarked that they were indeed beautiful, and Mrs. Bigelow <text not clear> Yes, they would be attractive if they could only be sanded again and looked out for as they used to be; but, we can't do anything about the place on the, present income we have. This place is a part of the Bigelow estate that is held in litigation since Alexander Graham Bigelow died.
I asked if they used all the ten rooms of the house for the <text not clear>end was told that they did not ever consider renting #5 any <text not clear> "The family is used to having a-plenty of room for <text not clear> and wouldn't know how to get along with other people in the house.
<text not clear>do all my own work in keeping, this house, except I send out the laundry to the wet wash end then I iron then myself; and this is a mighty herd house to keep clean too, with all these big rooms together the dust, I have to get lunch, too, for the boys and Mr. Bigelow all usually come in about 12:15 My daughter, the mother the boys works for the school cafeterias and doesn't come home for her lunch."
"Mr. Bigelow has been a father to the boys, although there is a relation whatsoever; for their mother is my daughter by a former marriage. The boys call him grandpop, and I'm sure that they love him, just like a father. They have a battle of wits at every meal.
They usually try to trick him up on something. He has never discovered that they are trying to do it, and goes on in detail giving information that they die not really expect to get; and it is the boys that are tricked every time. They were born right here in this house and know no other home or father. It's a blessing for, the boys and for Mr. Bigelow, as he had any children by marriages.
<text not clear> about <text not clear>weighs about 115 lbs <text not clear>tired and worn <text not clear> say from the/says work. This <text not clear>etime before noon. Her shoulders ore stooped, and she wears heavy glasses that by no means enhance her appearance. She apparently has lost some of the personal pride in the hard work she has to do in keening this large house.
I told her that Mr. Bigelow had paid her a lovely compliment the I knew she would appreciate, She appeared somewhat surprised and <text not clear>to have me tell her, I told her that he had said that she had been an important factor in keening the family together and that she had been a good housewife end had been an inspiration to him in all that he had been able to accomplish.
As I related the conversation that brought out praise for his life, she appeared so much surprised that I am forced to suspect that it was the first really nice thing that he has said of her in perhaps a long time that she has been privileged to hear. I felt happy for this opportunity to brighten her day; for she said, "Well I real glad to hear that and I'll remember that as I do my work."
Mrs. Bigelow then offer to show me the home in which the family <text not clear>. Although the architecture is commanding and speaks of grand<text not clear> wealth of the days gone by there is much evidence that it is now well in the past, and that time has brought hardships along with the <text not clear>of the elements on the once lovely home.
The music room, although it has two pianos in it, is now called the scout room; for it is here that the boys entertain their friends and hold scout meetings. As we travel from room to room, I am convinced the weary look in her eyes and the stooped shoulders are not deceptive.
This home would easily remind one of an old book store or curie shop, for there is a wealth of both throughout the entire house. The windows are bare except for shades that are now badly worn.
