North Carolina                    Greek Study
Douglas Carter                    Asheville, N.C.
"I learned the English language because I didn't like to wash dishes," said Joe Drosinis. "That was the only way I could get a better job. My brother was a clerk in the office of - what do you say? - oh, the public utility company. That's it: the public utility company. He said to me, 'Joe, if you learn English, I'll get you a good job.' I asked him, 'How long does it take to learn English?' 'About six months,' he said. 'You are a smart boy; you ought to learn it in six months.' So I had to wash dishes for six months more; but I learned it in six months, like he said.
"I got some books, and a dictionary, and I got all the English newspapers and magazines I could find, and I would look up each word in the dictionary. My brother helped me with the verbs. He said the three most important verbs in English are 'I do,' 'I have,' and 'I am.' He said, 'That's the foundation for learning English.' So I started with those three verbs. It wasn't easy, either. Of course I had been through school in Greece - grammar school - and I knew something about verbs, and nouns, and so on, but that six months was the hardest I ever spent in my life.
"After I got started, my brother borrowed a typewriter, and I learned typing. He said, 'Joe, you've got to learn typing if you want a good job.' So I learned the touch system. I learned it good, too. It's been a long time now since I've typed, but I'll bet it would come back to me quick if I had to use a typewriter again.
"My people lived in Laconia Department - that's something like a state over here - near Sparta, the capital. My father had a farm, and that's why I didn't know how to do anything but wash dishes when I got to Egypt. I had never done anything but farm work. I could plow, and hoe, and so on, but that's all I knew how to do, so my brother got me a job washing dishes. You don't have to learn how to do that; you just have to be careful. If you break a dish, they take it out of your pay, so I didn't break any.
"When my father died, my mother went to live with her brother, and took my sister with her. So I went to Egypt to Alexandria - to be with my older brother. I didn't like my uncle, and I didn't want to live in his house, so I told my mother I wanted to go to Alexandria, and she gave me the money. I was 17 years old, and I had never been away from home before. Oh, I had been to Sparta, of course, but not very far away from home. My mother is still living with my uncle."
Joe is 31 now, and very handsome. He works in a wine and beer store. His jet black hair is always well trimmed and neatly brushed, and his black eyes sparkle with intelligence. His about 5 feet, 6 inches, and weighs close to 170. His suits are well chosen, conservative, and neatly pressed. He usually wears white shirts, and his neckties are never loud. Somehow, his shoes always appear to be quite new. In general, he gives an impression of neatness, cleanliness, and culture. He is quiet and polite in manner, and very friendly. He continued:
"I never had any money before I left Greece; I didn't have any use for it. I had all I wanted right there at home. Money didn't mean a thing to me. My father was very good to us, and he was always bringing little things to us from Sparta. Those little things were all we wanted. You see? We were happy there. I didn't mind working on the farm; I liked it. We lived what you call the simple life, and we were contented. I didn't have any ambition then. Hard work kept my mind occupied, and the few pleasures we had were enough for me. I was very homesick for about a year in Alexandria, but then I began to be ambitious. (Said with a big grin.)
"I wanted good clothes, and more money, and I was tired of washing dishes. But look at me now! (He was washing glasses) My business failed - perhaps I should say I failed in business - but I'll get another start sometime, and I won't fail again. I just got a little bit too ambitious, that's all; but I'll tell you about that. I was talking about Alexandria.
"Did you ever see a louse that gets down under your skin? It isn't really a louse, but it looks like one. I don't remember what they call them over there. You wouldn't hardly believe it - I didn't believe it when they told me about it - but this little louse bored down in your skin and lays eggs, and you don't know it until the eggs hatch. Then you have a slight swelling, and it begins to itch, and you have to go to someone who knows how to cut all that stuff out. It's painful, too - in fact, it hurts like hell! I had plenty of 'em. There wasn't any way to help it that I could find out. Every three or four months I would get some of those things, and have to have 'em cut out. That's one reason I left Egypt and went to the Sudan - the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. They told me those lice wouldn't get on you down there, and they didn't.
"Well, after I learned English and typing, I was ready for my brother to get me a good job, but he couldn't find a place for me. I was disgusted. You see, I could read and write English, but I couldn't speak it. I just couldn't pronounce the words. I knew the words, but I couldn't say 'em, and I couldn't understand 'em when they were said to me. I could talk English a little bit with another Greek, but I couldn't talk with an Englishman or American; so nobody would hire me.
"Then one day I saw a notice that the government would give an examination for a typist. I went to the examination, and there were about 50 Greek boys there - that is, most of them were Greek boys - and they only wanted one typist. Those other boys had been to English school, too, and they could all speak English - good. But I was lucky: it didn't seem to make much difference whether you could talk in English or not; they wanted somebody who could type good. Everybody was given something to copy, and we all started. Some of those boys couldn't type at all; they used just one finger, or two, like this (indicating), and they would stop and hunt for a letter (laughter).
"The man who gave the examination was going around the room looking over your shoulder at your work, and soon he came to me. He said, 'What's your name?' I could understand that, so I told him. Then he said something else that I couldn't understand, and started out. The other boys stopped typing and began to get up, but I just sat there, trying to figure out what it was he said. He stopped at the door and looked back at me, and said something else I couldn't understand. I turned to the boy nearest me, and said in Greek, 'What did he say?' The boy said, 'He told you to follow him. He's giving you the job. He said you'll do.' (More laughter.)
"So that was my first good job. But what about that: I got the job over 50 other boys, and couldn't even understand the man when he gave it to me! I gradually learned how to speak English, though, and understand it, but my accent is not so good yet. It worries me. What's the matter with my accent? I try hard, but sometimes I have to say a word three or four times before it sounds right.
"All my work was copying: I sat there at the typewriter and copied things all day long. It got tiresome, but I was making good money, and I was learning things fast. I had enough money to buy good clothes and good food, and I could go down to the beach and have a good time. All kinds of people went to that beach - people from all over the world -and I had the best time of my life there.
"After a time, I began to look around for a better job, and I got one with, a bank, By that time I had learned to speak a little French and a little Arabic, and it helped me a lot. I didn't go around any Italians, much, and didn't get a chance to learn their language, but in Egypt you are all right if you can speak Greek, English, French, and Arabic. The Greeks didn't associate with the natives - socially, I mean - but you were always coming in contact with them, and you couldn't keep from learning a little bit of their language.
"My brother and I had an apartment together - he wasn't married - but he is 10 years older than I am, and I never did go around with him very much. He had his friends, and I had mine, I went with Greeks, some French people, and some English people, mostly. Everybody was very friendly, and I got along fine, but when I got a chance to go to the Sudan, I grabbed it quick. For one thing, I got a better salary, and I began to save my money. I was at Khartoum, where the Blue Nile and the White Nile come together. I liked it all right in the Sudan, but I had more fun in Alexandria.
"Later, they offered me a job as manager of a branch bank in Ethiopia, and I would get more pay, so I took it. I went there by boat on the Blue Nile, and I wouldn't have thought that a boat could go so slow. Of course, we were going upstream, and we stopped at every little town, but you won't believe it when I tell you it took a month to go from Khartoum to Ethiopia. It did, though.
"I didn't like it there, and I began to think about going somewhere else. I had some friends in America, and soon I made up my mind to take a long vacation and go to New York. I had saved a lot of money, but I decided to save some more, so I stayed in Ethiopia more than a year.
"There was an American church mission there, and while I was there they sent a new doctor to the hospital. I don't know what church it was - I've forgotten - but all their stuff came from Philadelphia. Do you know? Philadelphia seemed to be their headquarters. Anyhow, by that time I thought I could speak English pretty good, but when I met that doctor he talked to me through his nose, like this (imitating; then laughter). I said to myself, 'Do I know how to speak English, or not?' I couldn't understand anything he said! But before I left I got to where I could talk to him all right. He sure did carve up those natives, though. He was no surgeon, and I'm not sure that he was even a doctor. As far as I could tell, everybody died that went in that hospital after he got there, Maybe he was just experimenting. The bank was right across the street from the hospital, and the yells and screams of the natives in there just about got my goat. Then they wanted everybody to be vaccinated for something, and that doctor was doing it, but I said, 'No! He'll never touch me. I'm not ready to die yet.' So one of the nurses vaccinated me.
"When I got ready to take my vacation I met up with an Englishman and his wife who were going in my direction, and later we joined an Italian and his wife. The five of us traveled together, sharing expenses equally. We went by boat to Khartoum, then by train to Alexandria, where we took a ship to Syria. We went through Asia Minor, visited the islands, and then to Athens. I didn't go by my old home, and I haven't seen it since I left. I don't suppose I'll ever go back, now. From Athens we went to Italy: Rome, Naples, Milan, Genoa; then through Switzerland and Franco to England, where the party broke up.
"France was the dirtiest country I ever saw. Switzerland and Italy were clean and neat, but Franco was terrible. I certainly was surprised. I had a different notion of the country entirely. I don't ever want to go back there.
"From England I sailed to New York, and visited my friends there. One of them was coming to Asheville on business, and I came with him. I liked it here, and I've been here ever since. There was a nice little cafe business for sale, and my friend and I bought it. We did all right for awhile; business was good. I never did like the idea of selling liquor, though - bootlegging - but it seemed like everyone else was doing it, so we did, too. I'm not selling any now, however. The cops got a little too tough when the ABC-store election came up. I think they want the election to carry, and they have tried to dry up the town so that people who want liquor will vote for the stores. They raided this place four times in one week. They arrested me once; twice they didn't find anything, and the other time they arrested my boss. They fined me $50 and the costs, and my boss had to pay $350. That settled us for a while; we decided to quit until after the election. I don't know what we'll do then. We might go back to selling it, and we might not. Some of the places are selling it right on, though.
"But I didn't tell you about the cafe, did I? Well, we got a little too ambitious, like I said a while ago; or rather I did. It was all my fault. I wanted to buy new fixtures and equipment, and remodel the place, inside and out. My partner talked against it, but I had my way in the end, and it broke us. We put all the money we had into it, and still owed a lot on the new stuff we bought. We just couldn't keep up the payments, that's all, and the company had a receiver appointed. They took back all the new stuff, and sold out the business. Another Greek bought it. He put in some second-hand stuff, and he's doing fairly well, it seems. I've been working here ever since. I don't make much, but I'm getting my debts paid, and before long I'll be able to save a little.
"I married an American girl, you know. She was a waitress in the cafe. I don't know how it happened, exactly; we just fell in love, I guess. I don't have any children yet, but there's one on the way. It'll be here in about four months, I think. That will run my expenses up, and I might have to start selling liquor again whether I want to or not. I've got to have enough money to take care of that baby!
"We live in west Asheville, in a rented house, but someday I intend to build or buy a home. Now that I'm married, with a baby coming, I've given up any thought of going back to Egypt. My wife's people are here, and-she likes Asheville, so this is my home - permanently. I've got a lot of friends here, and everything suits me fine, except I'm not making enough money. I'm going to do something about that, though.
"My hours here are so long that we don't get a chance to go out very much together, but my wife is always flying around to some party, or tea, or something. She does enough running around for both of us. I don't care much for it, anyhow. I don't even belong to a lodge. Most of the Greeks here belong to Ahepa - you know what that is, don't you? - or one of the American lodges, but I haven't got time to fool with anything like that, Sometimes I go visiting with my wife - usually to see some of her American friends - but it's not very often. All of her friends are very nice, though, and I like them. They treat me just as though I were American, myself.
