Lucille B. Edwards
Frances L. Harriss
NICKOLAS AND TASSIE COSTELLO
Nickolas Costello was born in Galaxidion, near the Gulf of Corinth, in 1865. When he was twenty-two years old he married, and in 1900 the son, Tassie, was born. In 1906 the family decided to come to America. They stopped in Philadelphia for ten days, then proceeded to Wilmington because Nickolas had heard that it was a nice seaport town. He was very fond of the sea.
The Costellos opened a store on South Front Street, carrying a line of fresh fruits, home-made taffy, and peanut candy.
Business expanded rapidly and Nickolas installed a soda fountain. Here he made a good deal of money.
Tassie was six when his parents came to America. He was placed in school almost immediately, and his teacher was very nice to him. She helped him to get along well with the other children of the school, especially the first year. The next year he became involved in a few fights. All in all, he made friends at school and also made high marks in his studies.
Tassie's father moved his store to another location, and Tassie had to change schools. His father became worried about his business and decided that he needed Tassie there to help him so that his wife might have more time with the little girls at home. So Tassie worked in the day and attended a night school. All this time he liked American girls and had already made up his mind when a boy to someday marry an American girl.
As Tassie approached manhood, about nineteen, his father was having difficulties with his business. Tassie began to look about for some idea that would help him. The elder Costello spoke and understood English very poorly, and people would go in and get things and tell him to charge it. He could remember their faces but not their names.
One day Tassie saw a picture of a tramp coming out of the sea, only to find that his clothes had been carried away. There was an empty barrel lying nearby, so the tramp picked it up, kicked the bottom out of it, and wore it about him.
This gave Tassie an idea. From that idea he started a dry cleaning establishment which he called the Barrel Laundry. His customers grew in numbers and before long he had enough to think about building a home.
In 1927 Tassie married Beulah Bennett, an American, of Masonboro Sound. They have two little girls, and they had a happy home for several years. Mrs. Tassie Costello was a designer and for several years managed one of the most up-to-date shops in Wilmington. All was well until two years ago when she was stricken with a hemorrhage in the shop. An examination revealed advanced tuberculosis. She grew worse, so Tassie took her to the State Sanatorium.
Tassie is very active in local politics and gives his views freely as those of a Democrat. He is the only foreign-born Greek selected to serve on committees for community drives.
Nickolas lost his buisnesssome years ago. He spends a good part of his time trying to get the people whose faces he recognizes to pay him something on account. The remainder of the time he helps his son in the laundry.
