Federal Writers' Project
Room 36, Federal Building
Greensboro, North Carolina
December 30, 1938
Mrs. Lelia Waye (white)
2 Church Street
Pomona, N. C.
Textile worker, widow
Katherine Palmer, writer
reviser
LILY WADE
The bleak mill houses stood in dejected rows on either side of the red clay road. Finally I found the address which I sought. The house was green and white, with paint peeling from the sides. Torn dirty shades were drawn far down at each small window. Two white sweaters were drying on newspapers in a swing on the porch. A black and tan dog of uncertain ancestry greeted me gloomily.
There was no answer to my repeated knocking. "Perhaps Lily Wade is still over at the mill", I thought. I sat down on the broken steps to await her return. There was a rusty pump in the yard. A large iron tub held a dead rose bush. Some geraniums struggled bravely in Maxwell House Coffee cans.
Mill people passed up and down the road in front of the house. Most of them were dressed in overalls and rough shoes. One handsome young worker eyed me inquiringly as he went by on his way from the corner store. He had a jug of milk in one hand.
As I sat waiting, a number of curious children gathered around me. They were like a company of small friendly monkeys.
"Do you think Mrs. Wade will be back soon?" I asked hopefully of a brown-eyed little boy.
The child displayed a Christmas watch which did not run. "Mrs. Wade gets off sometimes and don't know whether anybody comes to see her or not. She likes to visit", he said. He offered to go to the corner store to look for her and left whistling.
Games claimed the attention of the other children and I was deserted. Many things passed through my mind as I sat there alone. I thought of the humility and meekness of the poor. I wished that they might inherit the earth a little sooner for their sakes.
The dead leaves rustled in the oak trees overhead. Rows of dingy clothes flapped on a line. The poverty stricken scene before me made me ashamed even of my three year old warm coat and beret.
An old unpainted wooden building stood at the corner. It was a former school, now closed and filled with lumber. The Baptist Church was a few doors down the road. A train passed on the track a block away.
A florid man came in the gate and tried to sell me the Greensboro Daily News. Presently my small friend returned and said that there was no sign of Lily Wade at the store.
"The folks next door might tell you where she's at," he told me.
Acting upon his suggestion, I left Mrs. Wade's porch and entered the neighbor's yard. A heady eyed old woman came to the torn screen door. She was very friendly. I asked for Mrs. Wade.
"Like as not she's down to Nellie Gaither's," she told me, and indicated a yellow house across the railroad track. "She visits to Nellie's a lot now she's not working regular. I seen her washing this morning early so I know she aren't to the mill."
Thanking her I started in the direction of the Gaither house. An odor of burning cedar filled the air. The brick building of the Terra Cotta plant loomed in the distance. Two fat ducks saddled slowly in front of me. As I passed the grocery store a group of young mill boys laughed shrilly.
I climbed the rickety steps of the Gaither house. A large white cat lay dozing on the porch. Lily wade opened the door for me.
She was wearing a dress of cheap blue and brown silk, a blue sweater, and black strapped slippers with brown rayon stockings. She wore a red belt. Mrs. Wade had a gentle expression but her's was not a weak face. She had brown eyes, grey hair, and was of less than medium height. Her false teeth made her look more than her forty seven years. I liked her direct gaze as she greeted me.
The Gaither house seemed to be the social center of the little community. There were four rooms. We entered a cold dark hall. A half opened door led into a bedroom which was unbearably hot. Six women and three children were crowded into the small space. Mrs. Otter, the Baptist minister's wife sat on the black iron bed in the corner. She was a large blond young women with glasses.
The group was clustered eagerly around Nellie Gaither. She was a thin gaunt women, soon to be admitted to the Duke Clinic for observation. Nellie said her "side was always sore."
A wood stove stood in the center of the room. Two scarred gilt coal scuttles were on the hearth. The room was cluttered with countless useless objects dear to the hearts of simple people. There was a radio which blared "This is the Plaza Grill Room". A large framed sign was propped on a table. Its silver letters announced "You Are A Stranger Here But Once". Two white china swans with furled wings were at either end of the mantle piece. Striped linoleum covered the floor. A weak electric light bulb cast a flickering glow over the pale faces in the room. Several calendars graced the cracked walls. Two of them had pictures of fat sleeping babies snugly wrapped, and the other scene was of a ship in full sail putting out to sea. Copies of The Country Home and Household Magazine lay on the grass green bed-spread.
I sat down in a rocking chair by the fire. Everyone was polite, and I felt that I was welcome. The women looked at one another self-consciously.
"Isn't it nice to sit and talk with friends?" I asked casually. "You must have a great many pleasant times together. Do you enjoy the Greensboro movies, or maybe you like to play cards occasionally after supper."
Upon hearing this luckless suggestion, the minister's wife rose alertly from her corner. She poked the coals and regarded me for a moment out of blue near-sighted eyes.
"The Christians around here don't play cards or go to shows."
"Our fun here is church work, and visiting the old and sick," Lily put in hastily. "I guess we spend most of our time just helping others", she added piously, glancing at Mrs. Otter who nodded agreement.
"I declare that is so in this world", Mrs. Otter said appeased. She sank heavily on the bed.
My trip to the Carolina the night before now made me feel very wicked indeed, and I remembered my last bridge game. At least I had gotten badly beaten and had enjoyed no sinful victory.
Perhaps Lily thought I seemed a trifle subdued, for bravely meeting Mrs. Otter's placid eye she now said, "The young folks does have school class socials and candy parties, Ethel. I have two twins, fourteen years each, name of Jack and Maude and they gees some". She glanced at me.
"Where are they now?" I asked, glad enough of a change of subject.
"To school", Mrs. Wade answered.
"The Duke team sure put up a good fight yesterday," a fat young woman with unkempt hair said shyly.
We all agree. There was silence as everyone pictured to themselves the shiny Rose Bowl, the cheering mobs, and the amazing sun which was "shining out there good as summer."
It was hard to address all my remarks directly to Lily Wade with so many other people in the room.
"How do you feel about politics out here?" I inquired. "Are most of you Democrats?"
"There's some of one and some of another," Lily nodded vaguely at me. "I guess my vote don't mean much, anyway."
Try as I would I could get no further details on this subject from any of the women in the room. I could not decide whether their behavior was deliberate or whether mere ignorance prompted it.
"Is this your home, or did you come here from a distance?" I inquired of Lily.
"I come here from near Bonlee about fourteen years ago," she answered, "come straight to this mill and have lingered on. Mr. Wade died several years ago and left me with the two children to see to. If it hadn't of been for Miss Crater, I just couldn't have made it to save my life."
Miss Crater is the welfare worker whose office is in Greensboro. She had spoken well of Mrs. Wade and had told me that the unfortunate woman's struggle had been a desperate one.
"Just now times here at the mill are terrible bad", Lily continued, "we are working less than five and a half days a week now. There's been no work at all this week."
She told me that when she was not able to get steady work she received twenty dollars a month through a charitable organization. This was due to the efforts of Miss Crater who was "one wonderful lady".
"When we have full time work, the hours are from seven in the morning until three-thirty with thirty minutes for lunch", Mrs. Wade went on, "we used to have to work ten long hours. For a full forty hour week I get twenty dollars. We work on "stretch-out". That is, an allotted amount of work, so many pieces and cuts a day." She paused and swung a neighbor's baby on her knee.
I recalled whet Jonathan Daniels had said about the stretch-out system in his A Southerner Discovers The South. "Men and women angrily shout "Stretch-out!" and stretch-out exists. But the worst stretch-out is that which workers, paid on a piece basis, put upon themselves. No foreman could drive them so fast. No system could spread their work so far. But in thirst for things they can drive themselves like mechanisms of flesh and blood at full speed all day long."
"Which department are you in?" I asked next.
"I am in the weaving room", Lily told me. She attempted to explain the complicated process of spinning thread. "There's all kinds of work being done. We sort colors and dye cottons too. The finishing room is an interesting place. We have woolen cloth, seersucker for men's suits and window certain materiel. Our overseer is a mighty good man name of Bennett. He's been over us for twelve years. Some folks is tacky enough to look down on us mill people," she added suddenly.
"Industrial workers sounds much nicer", I suggested.
There was a good spirit among these people. Their attitude toward one another and toward their employers was one of loyalty and kindness. They all assured me that "God would help the hard bad times pretty soon if we all hope for the best."
We sat quietly for a while. The women rocked and looked at me with friendly incurious eyes.
Incredible as it seemed, not one person in the room knew who owned the mill in which they had been employed for so many years. They "just didn't rightly recall who the rightful owner was." Their "dealings was with Mr. Bennett."
When I told them who owned the mill in which they had spent most of their lives, a chorus of familiar phrases filled the room. "Well I declare!" "Is that right?" "Honey, I declare," and "Is that the truth in this world?"
One of the children in the room began to cry in a piercing key. "Poor baby", the mother whispered beginning to hum softly. "The doctor said to quit giving him pork."
At this turn in the conversation Lily Wade leaned forward in her chair.
"The doctor come from near Bonlee like me and the sun never set on a better Christain man."
"I declare, that's right," Ethel Otter nodded approval.
"When I was taken bed off, and the children was real small," Lily hurried on, "he came out and said, 'Mrs. Wade, just wrap them children up. I'm ataking them to stay a day with my wife. She's got young children too, and won't mind seeing to two more.' Just said it sudden after he'd tested my blood some. Well, I bundled them up, and slept most all day in peace.
"Not that I don't love to have them twins at home," she added hastily for my benefit. "But the doctor sure is more thoughtful than most."
I looked through the window into the little yard where a few frost-bitten blades of grass grew stiffly.
"I suppose you are too busy with your work in the mill to do much in the gardening line", I said to Mrs. Wade.
"Honey, we are sure busy, but we find time to raise and put up right smart of green beans, beets, tomatoes and corn. We buy fine large peaches from the trucks passing through from the sand hill peach sections. Last year I canned three dozen jars of big yellow ones."
The door opened suddenly and a young mill girl came in.
"Hey, Effie", everyone smiled indulgently. She was slender and quite pretty with fair skin and hazel eyes. Her hair was bobbed and she wore a cheap black satin dress of the latest style. Giggling, the girl flung herself into the nearest chair.
"Aren't Effie modern though?" Lily asked me proudly. "Lordy, if her grandmother had lived to see her with her short dress and hair all gone. I mind how the old lady used to tell about sitting with her beaux with her dresses touching the floor."
"Isn't it the truth?" Mrs. Otter put in primly.
It was now nearly dusk. The women began to collect their coats and respective children.
"Guess it's about time you was shet of us all", Lily turned to Mrs. Gaither.
"No, you all stay a while longer", Nellie answered pleasantly, but her face looked drawn and tired.
Lily took me by the arm and we went together to the door.
"Maybe I better stay and start Nellie's supper, or I'd walk a piece with you; Nellie don't feel good at all", she told me outside.
We shook hands. I lingered a moment at the steps.
"If you want to go through the mill, Mr. Bennett would be glad to have you any time," Lily added. "Be careful walking. That mud's slick. The sleet made it so."
Gingerly I made my way to the Greensboro bus line. Men stood in groups smoking and talking together. A large red truck loaded with winter collards was parked in front of the store.
I did not see the innumerable automobiles so frequently mentioned as owned by mill workers. Only a few battered ones of antiquated date stood at the curb. Nor did I get the impression of a caravan of workers who were apt to be "on the move" at any moment. I felt rather, that these people whom I had just seen were as permanent as the earth, that they were bound by poverty, circumstances, and habit to the stark little houses and streets forever.
