June 6th.1940
Compiled from more visits to
Emiline Wilson.
Well after my baby got to the woman in New York, a Mrs power -- mind you no s on her name...It was power , not powers.. The woman was very particler about that, both. Emmy and Mrs Power liked each other right away. Mrs Power had rheumatism bad.. well they call that a new fangled name now. Art-thritis one had it so bad she couldn’t walk -- had to be lifted in and out of bad.. course Emma didn’t do that -- she had a trained nurse with her all the time-- first thimg she had Emmy do was to read to her -- I guess she saw how swart Emmy was right off -- Emmy liked to read too -- "she learned that from having to stay in door. so much down here.. Well things Were different up there -- You been to New York? -- well you know how it is up there.. they don’t stop to look at you to seewhether you is black or white. -- Mrs Power said she wanted to keep the promies she made to let Emmy go too colored school, out when she saw how white Emmy really was she said it would be foolish to do that.. Emmy said she wanted to try it any way and she did --she started in a colored school, but after one year, Mrs power went to her place up in Conneckicuk and then rode made Emmy go to a white school. Emmy sure did learn and passed all her grades -- She want to High School and all the time Mrs Power was getting to like Emmy more and more -- Emmy liked her and things was so nice for Emmy that she sort of took chares of Mrs Power and after a while she began making Mrs power believe in herself and forst thing you know Mrs power was up on crutches and helping herself. Emmy sure was en-- en-- you know what I mean- when you is happyabout something -- enthused? -- Yeh thats it -- Emmy was enthused about it -- she used to write me almost every day about how Mrs Power was doing -- till Igot to sort of knowing Mrs Power too -- The doctors said that Emmy did more for her than all the medicine they could give her. Well first thing I know Emmy was finished with High school -- graduated and with honors too -- Mrs Power wanted to send Emmy to college -- The best of collages too -- for girls but Emmy said she didn't want to do that -- she didn't tell Mrs Power why. CEPT that she said it would mean that she would have to leave her to go to college and she didn't want to do that, well Mrs power moved back to New York and let Emmy take a business course -- stenographer and clerking work -- Emmy wrote me why she didn't want to go to college and -- well I guess I kin tell you, but promise you want toll anybody about it -- cause I don't want you to think that Emmy thought hersllr better -than white girls -- Member all the tins I told you that Emmy wasn't eshased of being colored and wanted to live that way -- well Emmy wrote and told me she was ashamed of the way the girls carried on at her High School -- She said I would understand -- but I guess I'm old fashioned and it took me a long time to believe that white girls would do the things Emmy said they would do..They didn't do those things in my tine -- white or black -- she said that the girls around her ago all they talked about was going out with boys -- mostly in automobile parties and carrying on -- drinking with the boys -- and hugging and kissing them -- Emmy said she went out once or twice with them and all the boys wanted to do was to carry on.. she said that all the girls would talk about was Ser -- course dont misunderstand aw -- I dont mean all the girls in the school but cost of the crowd that Emmy know.. Emmy said they pestered the life out of her.. Wouldn’t take No for an answer – I mean the boys – Of course you know how pretty Emmy is and she’s got a fine figure too – well the lest time she went out with the girls she told them that she wasn’t for carrying on the way they do – One of the girls told her oh don’t worry about your date this time – He’s a nice boy – well Emmy wont and this boy got nasty when she wouldn’t do what he wented her to do and he got rough with Emmy and tore her clothes and tried to assault her.. Emmy fought him back and had a hard time of it – but Emmy was a samrt girl – she used her nead and tricrat hat boy – She promised if he’d behave she would de what he wanted and they started to go in town and Emmy tricked the boy into getting out of the car and then nick as a riash she used to drive Mrs power’s car and she knew how – well Emmy went home and she didn’t tell Mrs power about it – but she never went out with boys again – She told one of the girls what happened and where the boy could get his car and what do you suppose the girl told her?.. Well sir she said – Maybe I shouldn’t tell you – Well this is just what Emmy said and Emmy wouldn’t lie to me – first place Emmy herself wouldn’t think of saying a thing like that.. She said the girl said – hat the Hell are you doing saving it for the worms.. Emmy couldn’t believe the girl – She said to her – But aint you afraid to do things like that – Take such chances – suppose something should happen to you – suppose you want get into trouble if your friendly with the drug clerk at the drug store.. Can you believe anything like that?—young girls too – Not more than 13 or 17 – well Emmy wanted to whit school but she was afraid that if she told Mrs power the reason that Mrs power might have started something at the school and as she only had a few months to go to graduate, she kept quiet, but she never went out again with any boys in that crowd – She said that the very girl who bold her not to be afraid had to leave school cause she was pregnant -- and other girls left school too and she knows it was because they was all in trouble. Its hard to believe that such things go on today -- but it’s the truth mister or Emmy wouldn’t say it. -- Well Emmy came to New York and after a course in a business school, she was ready to get a job but she told Mrs power that she wasn’t going to work for any white men -- Mrs power like Emmy so that she convinced Emmy to work for a white man -- she said that Emmy could n’t work for a negro and live with her and she didn’t want Emmy to leave her – Well Emmy did it – but she had to wait all her jobs for the same reason – All the men were after her for dates – she had her taste of boys I guess and she would n’t go out with any of them. She said theyall just wanted the same thing – Finally she made up her mind that she’d get a job with a negro – she met a young feller in Harlem – she said she went to a dance up there one night after she had left her job when the man got too fresh and met this negro. He was a lawyer and was almost white too.. Emmy said in Harlem you can dance with white or colored so she told this man she was colored and he took her in his office and she’s been with him mow for almost three years – He wanted to marry Emmy but Emmy said No – I dont intend to bring any children in the world and let them go through what my papa and mammy and me wont through – You know Emmy got all Mrs power’s business for this young lawyer and He handled it fine – course Emmy I guess know all about Mrs power’s business affairs and that helped.. Course she left Mrs power but she saw her all the time – every day – She rented an apartment in Harlem – a small place and is very happy. She goes out with this lwayer often – guess maybe they’re in love – but she just want marry him. Course you know Mister that in New York you don’t have separate cars for colored and white or anything like that and Emmy says there are so many people up there that they don’t pay any attention to your color – she says she can go to white place and colored places with this lawyer, cause no one lin tell whether they are white or black – She comes down here twice every year to see me – She keeps wanting to take me back with her bit I guess I’ve learnt to – Eevn if they dont know whether she is white or black up there they certainly would know if I lived with her and that would make it just as hard for her as down here.. Course Emmy says she don’t care whether folks – Her boss knows and she is colored an doesn’t care whether folks knows it or not – but look now – If I went up there I bet her Boss couldn’t go around with her and me and I must know it wouldn’t work out – Mrs power I forgot to tell you died and left Emmy $1000 and some stocks – Emmy gives me anything I wants for the house and all the money I need to live very comfortable. The money she put in the bank and she saves money too besides – She comes down here twice every year and stays two or three weeks..She don’t live with me – cause I don’t want her too – would be trouble – Now wouldn’t it – well you saw herand you tracked her – course I aint saying your intentions wasn’t good – I believe they is or I wouldn’t be talking to you about all this – She rents a room way up town and lives in a white place – she comes down here and spends all her days with me – It works out all right and no body bothers her.
PRIDE OF HERITAGE……
She takes a sent in the white section coming to Canol Street and then sho site in the colored section til she got down here… She gets off three or four blocks up or down before she hits this street.. When she leaves Lare its usually dark she comes again the next day.. And loume tell you Sister when she’s vistiting here the wagons from the stores bring to all sorts of things for the house—she don’t ask me what I wants – she just bouys them and has them delivered – She knows I wouldn’t let her buy me all those things—but they is nice aint they?.. Look at that nice radio and my store and ice box.. and Igot nice clothes too – And lenne tell you one thing she never does forget every time she comes and that is her Daddys grave – she just has it rilled with flowers all to time she is here and even when she goes back she wires flowers for his grave on his birthday and the day he died… I tell her I always does that but she says Don’t make no difference—she wants to remember her Daddy herself – She know what killed him Mister. Its sure been hard on boy but after all she’s got everything she wants – she’s got money in the bank – she gives me more than I need with all the latest gadgets thrown in and – will she couldn’t have done all that if she hadn’t been with Mrs Foxer—she would staid here and God knows what would have happened. And after all its our religion… If its hadn’t been for that country preacher and God working together that coupled never would have had that accident. Emmy goes to church regularly—A nogro church too – and whats more she never fell for that Father Divine to there – oh they tries to get her to join his creed or whatever you call it – but not Emay – Emay says they know she’s got a little money saved and that’s what they is ofter – No No Mister I don’t believe I could let you meet Emay – I don’t lie her but I wouldn’t tell her anything about my telling you all I told you – course she’s come back now and I don’t know whenshe ‘ll come down again – wont be till next winter, but I wouldn’t tell Emay about you and remember your promise too Mister, not to toll anybody where we lives and not to put this story in any papers… Woll it wouldn’t do you a good anyhow, couse I don’t take anychances of anything ever hurting Emay and I don’t stay in one neighborhood long. After Emay comes down twice no moves, so you couldn’t find us no how. Sure you can come around some more but I guess I’ve told you all there is except one thing I forgot – Emay sends money regularly to that church and that nogro preacher in the country and to my sister and her children too and not only money but presents from New York – I am proud and I thank God for her, even if he did take away my old man.
