September 25, 1939
Charlotte Greek Study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
TOM CONDUS
(Church Janitor)
Tom Condus is the American name of a small white-haired Greek, whoso sunny smile and amiable disposition marks him as a man who has cultivated the habit of getting the most fun possible out of life This estimate of Tom is borne out by the following story of his life:
"I was born near Macedonia, Greece in 1880. My parents were poor: my father being a goat herder. When I was old enough I went to school for three years and then went to work with my father helping with the goats.
"When I was about 16 years old I got a small herd of my own I kept my goats in the hills in summer and drove them down into the valleys in the winter where it was warmer As my herd got larger I sold the milk which was used for making choose, and the money I gave to my father.
"In 1904 when I was twenty four years old I had six hundred goats, so I got married My wife helped no taka care of my hard and in 1905 I decided to come to America, as I had heard it was a wonderful country I went from Athens to Naples Italy in a small boat.
Sailing from there to Beston, Mass in a large boat. We were twenty days crossing the ocean. I had a good time on the boat, plenty of wine and not sick.
"I was in Boston about a week and then I went to Lowell, Mass I got a Job in a cotton mill working on a drawing framo at is a week, I worked there for a month and then got a Job in a cotton mill at Buffolk. I worked in the picker.
room for $7 a week After working there about a month the dust and dirt made me sick and I quit I than got work: it a shoe factory in Lowell, Mass I did not like the work, it was too hard, so after a month I left.
"I went to Manchester, W. H., there I got work at the Amoskeag Mill scrubbing floors a in the weave room. I wanted to learn to weave, so all my spare time I helped the weavers. After about four weeks scrubbing floors the boss put me in the weave room to learn. I worked two months with no pay and then I started weaving, getting $8 a weak for running a set of eight looms. I worked on this Job a year. Then went back to lowell and got work in a woolen mill weaving blankets. I worked there about three months."
At this point Tom said "I could always get work, but never stayed long in one place."
"After leaving Lowell I went back to Manchester, N. H to the Amoskeag Mill working as a weaver about two and a half years.
"In 1908 I went home to Greece on the same boat that I came to America on, I paid $24.00 for my ticket and had $200.00 in my pocket.
"I was in Greece for a year with my family and friends and had a good time.
"In 1909 I returned to America, going again to Lowell. Mass., where I had many friends I went to work in a cotton mill, weaving, and stayed there a year.
"In 1910 my cousin who lived in San Francisco, Cal., where he had a large shoe shining parlor, wrote to me telling me what a fine piece it was, so I went out there and worked with him for two years.
"In 1912 he sold out his business and went back to Greece to fight in the Balkan War, I stayed in San Francisco about three months after he left, working in a cigar factory, I did not like the work so I quit.
"Late in 1912 I went back to Lowell, Mass., getting work in the weave room at e cotton mill and worked there for two years. In 1914 I went to Manchester, N.H., where I worked for four years as a weaver at $20. A week. I got tired of Manchester, so went to mill at New Bedford, Mass., where I worked two years.
"In 1920 I went to a mill at jewitt City, Conn., where I ran twenty looms making $50 to $60 some weeks. I worked there four years.
"I had saved a little money so in 1924 I went out to San Francisco, Gal. again and opened a small shoe shining place of my own I liked it there, good weather, pretty parks, plenty places to rich and nice people After I was there a big labor fight started and the big fellows run all the little fellows out of business and I lost of my money.
"I left San Francisco going to a little place, In southern California, named Hamilton. I worked in a sugar factory there for three or four months and had enough money to come back Rost.
"I had heard that there were many cotton mills in the south so went to Spartanburg, S. C, The first day I was in Spartanburg I went to the sparten Mill. I asked a men in the mill,' There the boss? 'At dinner' he  said I asked how much weavers made and he said$30 to $33. I told him that would not pay pay board and buy oigaretts and left. I went to the Railroad Station and asked the ticket man what the fare was to Utics, N. Y., he  told me $32.00 I did not have that much money so I went to work in a little mill outside of Spartenburg where I worked a month*
"When I left South Carolina I came to Charlotte,  went to work at Highland Park Mill and worked there for 12 or 13 years. About a year ago the boss let me out saying I was getting too old I told him O.K, by me.
" I now take care of the Greek Church, get $4. a week and a nice room in the church which is a good Job for an old man.
"No, I never was naturalized. I took out my first papers in New Hampshire in 1918. I was going to join the Army but was not accepted so I never took out my other papers.
l am not like other Greeks I never saved my money when I was young I wanted a good time, plenty of wine, lots of girls and everything; that is why I am a poor man."