Approximately 3.750 words
80 C
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
LAZARUS, MARY and MARTHA
Date of First Writing	December 28, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Rev. Andrew Hartley (white) (Baptist Preacher)
Fictitious Name	Mr. Drew Yardley
Street Address	108 Sumter Street
Place	Columbia, S.C.
Occupation	Preacher
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
"That was Taylor on the 'phone, Annie," Reverend Drew Yardley told his sister. "I told him definitely that I could not take the car right now anyway. We still owe $100 on the frigidaire. And we gave so much to charity before Christmas that I can't see my way clear for a new car now." And the "Bishop," as this brother is called, seated himself near the glowing coal fire.
"Well, Drew, folks don't never miss what they ain't had, and we won't know the difference a hundred years from now. Besides, I bet my old hat folks wouldner knowed us ridin' in a brand new car. An' we ain't none of us got any new clothes to match up with a new car; so it's just as well for us to keep goin' in the old one.
"That old green car's preached more funerals than any ten automobiles in Columbia put together," Miss Annie continued. "It's a shame the way it's went ahead of all those fine hearses. It's looked right disgraceful going along with the finest automobiles in the city. And it's hauled more people to the hospital! Course, sometimes they was too sick to go in it, and we'd have to get an ambulance. But you'd always see that old green car come chug-aloog-ing right behind the fine ambulance. It carried one woman from the Columbia Hospital, not long ago, twenty-four miles in the country. We made a bed for her and put her on the back seat, and I nursed her head in my lap all the way. She wan't able to hire an automobile, you know."
"You'll please excuse me for a few minutes. Leroy wants to see me on business," Mr. Yardley said, as he left the room, followed by a nicely- dressed young man who had just come in.
"People call me Martha?" Miss Annie exclaimed as conversation was resumed. "Never knowed nothin' 'bout 'em calling me that. Don't fit me at all. I'm too mean for anything like that." After a pause, "I reckon I just as well start telling you about our folks till Drew comes back. Our grandfather and our grandmother come from England. You remember that time when so many immigrants come over here straight from England? Well, they come with 'em. I reckon that's the reason we're so mean - got so much English blood in us. Folks tell me them English people's the meanest people in the world. Anyway, as I was fixing to tell you, my grandparents come from there and settled near Batesburg, just one mile in the country. They owned their farm, but I don't know whether the King give it to 'em or not. All I know is my father inherited it.
"My mother was a Dutchman, I reckon you'd call her. She was born and partly raised in Georgia. But after her mother died, she come over here to live with a couple what didn't have no children. They lived about seven or eight miles from my grandfather's home, and my father fell in love with my mother the first time he ever seen her. And it wasn't long till they got married. There was ten of us children, but they're all gone now but just us three. Our father died with cancer when he was sixty years old, and my mother was an invalid for ten years. I tell you we younguns had to rough and tough it. We had plenty of children and nothin' else. I was just four years old when my father died and left five little children.
"I never got no education hardly at all. I went to Batesburg to school some and to old Tom Branch School, out in the country. I'm tellin' you, we was raised from hand to mouth. If I coulder got a good education, I wouldn't been 'round here. I woulder been in the foreign fields. All my life, since I've been big enough to know anything, I've wanted to be a foreign missionary. Yes, ma'am, I shore woulder went across the water. South America was where I wanted to go, but I woulder been glad to go anywhere. Course, they wouldn't let me go with no more education than I've got.
"And then I ain't never been very strong, either. Couldn't never work in the mill on account of my health. I used to do right smart of field work,' one time in my life. I look well and strong, but I ain't. It's been my lungs. They were awful bad. I used to spit up a whole pint of blood at one time, but I ain't had no hemorrhage now in twenty-six or twenty- seven years. Doctor X-rayed 'em not long ago, and he says there's very little the matter now- Just a scar that's all healed over now, you know. But of course, that scar could break right easy, and I'll always have to be careful.
"I can't drink no milk hardly and can't eat no cheese and no fish and no stuff like pottage ham. We just get one quart of milk every day for all of us, it's so expensive. We like vegetables for dinner, except my brother won't sit at the table if there's onions on it. And ain't they good, cut up with cucumbers, to eat with beans?"
"Well, Annie," said Mr. Yardley, returning to the room, "LeRoy came over to tell me the members of my church have made up some money and will make a down payment of $128 on a new car. Then I think I can take care of the other payments out of my salary of $1,500. I use my car for other people's needs, and I think the money will come somehow. The old Ford's plumb worn out. But the car man will give me $100 on it, and that's as good as giving it to me, for he can't sell it for a thing in. the world. And then they will give me $100 as a gift, LeRoy says, and I know one of the firm is a good strong Methodist, too. They said they appreciate the fact that I use my car, without pay, for everybody who needs it.
"How will I feel riding in a new car? That's what somebody else done asked me. And I told 'em just like I felt in the old green Ford, only I'll have a trunk behind this one. And I can lay a paper down and pack up more rations and old clothes and old shoes and everything in that trunk. In the old car, I had to pile 'em all up on the back seat."
"I reckon," Mr. Yardley added humbly, "we've bought more shoes than any dozen people in Columbia, put together and paid more insurance premiums and doctor's bills and drug bills and every other sort of bills. We've bought more rations, clothes, shoes, and school books. My sakes alive, we've bought 'em. Why, oftentimes I've given the last dollar I possessed, but done it for the good of people who were in need and, I think, for the glory of God.
"Results in their lives? Why, they're so helpless with their needs, I don't ever think about the results to them, but of what it means to me. I can't think of anything except the joy I get out of doing it.
"My life's a riddle, even to me. Why I'm not in a gutter somewhere now I can't explain. My father died when I was ten years old. He had cancer. He'd run to one doctor to another till he run up a debt of $1,000. Finally, all our property was sold for debt, and we were turned out. We went to sharecrop with a neighbor. Cotton brought only five cents that year; but I made ten bales. And we had corn, peas, potatoes, and meat enough to do us. We stayed there three years. Then we moved several times. Finally, I overseed for Dr. Crosson, the same man I had farmed with once before. I was going on to tell you I hadn't been to school since I was ten years old, but I had learned to read and write and figure fairly good. I had to keep all the books and business straight and attend to a lumber mill, a corn mill, a cotton gin and a 36-acre farm. With a salary of $50 a month, I made more money than I ever made in my life. I had a sharecrop besides. My sisters were both able to work then, and that year we cleared $400.
"The next year, my mother was an invalid all year and Sister Annie was ill, too. The doctor came to the house 135 times during that year. We lived in Leesville, but just before Christmas we moved to the mill in Batesburg, and in February my mother died. I got a job in the mill inspecting and grading cloth at 90 cents a day, and Corrie, that's my other sister, got 85 cents for tacking and labeling it. We stayed there three years, and before we left we were getting $1.25 and $1.00 a day.
"We heard we could make more in Columbia, so we moved here. After we worked at Granby for six weeks, we all went down with measles. For a long time I did not recover enough to work in the mill again. So we went back to Leesville to farm with Smith again. Then the next year we went back to Batesburg to another mill job, because Corrie could get a job, too.
"I'd always felt like I'd like to preach, but there were so many hindrances, sickness in the family, a lack of education, and so many other problems that I put it off from time to time. The mill church at Batesburg urged me to enter the ministry, and I did. I preached at that church two or three times a month during 1911, and studied every other night with private teachers for two years. But because of friction in the mill work we moved back to Columbia, and in 1915 I was invited to preach at the Broadway Baptist Church. There were only twelve people to hear me. At the second service, the crowd increased to twenty-five or thirty. Then they called me to be their pastor. There were eight members, and they offered me a salary of only eight dollars a month. This organization was an experiment, and it had seemingly failed. Finally, with the help of the mill company and the state mission board, they raised the salary to $85. After one year, South Side Baptist Church agreed to pay $50 if Broadway would pay $50, and I divided my time, giving half to South Side as assistant pastor. The church was then self-sustaining.
"In these twenty-three years that I've been here as pastor, the membership has grown from 8 to 409. At least 1,000 people have come into the church, mostly by baptism. I can tell you, things have improved a lot in these years, too. Then few homes had a fitten chair to sit in. Now these same people have far better furniture than their preacher. They have electric or gas ranges, frigidaires and everything up-to-date.
"The morals are 100 per cent better, too. They were at a low ebb when I came here. Awful conditions existed here. I guess I preached fifty funerals in homes where no preacher would go. When I'd hear of sorrow, I'd just go to the home and say, 'This experience is too sacred for you to run off to the cemetary without any ceremony at all, and I'm glad to do anything for you that I can.' And then I'd have a service and we'd follow the 'black wagon' in the old green car to the burial. I know I've conducted at least 500 funerals since I've been here. Education and culture get much more attention now.
"I felt so keenly my lack of an education that, the first year I was in Columbia, I began a course at the University of South Carolina and a theological course at the Presbyterian Seminary. I kept it up for three years. It brought out things that never could have been revealed to me without some education. I didn't get a diploma, but I did get a credit slip for work I had done. My language is far from perfect, but I know when I 'break', and I just go right ahead as if I hadn't made any error.
"I am sometimes asked what the requirements for a good preacher are, according to my way of thinking, and I mention these four things: Common sense, good case of religion, all education complete, and the ability to mingle with people and to serve them acceptably. Tact, I sometimes say, is the ability to take a deadly sting out of a deadly stinger and not get stung.
"I think my sermons out and then I pray 'em out. Positive preaching is what people need. I try to tell them what they should do, rather than what they should not do.
"What do I do for recreation? I don't have any, unless you call work play. Never had a vacation in my life. I go to the Southern Baptist Convention and to the State conventions, and that's all I ever do outside of my work. I don't reckon I've been on Main Street twenty-three times after dark in the twenty-three years I've been in Columbia.
"We stay pretty close 'round home, unless we're called out to work. I would like to have seen President Roosevelt when he was here. I was given a reserved seat and went up in my car, but it began to rain so hard I just came back home. I think Roosevelt's intentions are good, but I think he has put wrong men at the head of many things. Then I think he didn't give the Lord the real consideration he ought to have given Him. I'm old-timey enough to think a man who is leading a great nation like the United States ought to stay mighty close to God."
"Go with Brother?" Miss Annie asked. "Lord, no. When he goes off, I have to stay here to 'tend the church. No, ma'am, I don't never preach. But I've rung the bell and built the fires and took care of the church and yards ever since we've been here. Yes, honey, I get eight dollars a month for it, but I never see any of it. We put all our money together in this family.
"I'm about to forget to tell you about our other sister, Corrie," Rev. Yardley said. "She is fifty-eight years old and her health is poor. There's as much difference in hers and Annie's dispositions as there is in day and night. Corrie takes care of our home and doesn't care much about making new friends, although she loves her old friends and is very loyal. She'd do anything in the world for either of us. Annie is more pleasant to deal with and is on the go all the time - to church, to homes where there's sickness and need, carrying children to clinics, and begging wood and coal, clothes, and something to eat for the needy. I know we're the terriblest "beggars of all folks in the world. Nobody ever has begged like we have for other folks."
"I do want to tell you about a little boy we helped sometime ago," Miss Annie said. "His mother was a grass widow with five children and no way to support them. The baby one was a boy and an invalid. His legs was crossed and he couldn't walk a step. He'd go pushing himself around, sitting on his folded legs. I carried him to specialists, I know, twenty-five or thirty times. Finally, when he was four years old, I carried him to Dr. Barden. I thought he could help him. But, honey, he never done him one speck of good. I studied and studied 'bout that thing, and when Drew come home, I said to him, 'Drew, suppose we carry Marvin to Dr. Brent, the chiropractor." 'Well,' he says, 'carry him if you want to, but it ain't going to do any good.'
"Corrie had eczema and we was taking her to the chiropractor. He was helping her, but she had seventy-five adjustments before she got over it. Yes, sir, we paid him $79 for them. So one day when we was taking her to the doctor, I went by and got Marvin. When he got through with Corrie, I said, 'Doctor Brent, do you ever take any charity work?' 'Yes, sometimes,' he says like that. 'Well, I've got a little boy out here in the car that can't walk, and I want you to try to help the little fellow if you will.' Don't you know he just give him four adjustments, and that child was walking good as anybody. His ma and all of us shore was tickled about it. He's eight years old and in school now, and his teacher says he's got a good mind, too.
"We had a Christmas tree for the children in Sunday School the night before Christmas. The mill company gives us fifteen cents for each child. That gave us $60, and we bought fruits and candy and nuts and raisins and filled a bag for every child. We filled 400, and I think there are only four left over there now. The mill company does lots of such things, but they are not extreme in their liberty."
"Say, why don't you shut that door and come on in out of that cold night air?" A harsh voice called from the next room. "Don't you know night air ain't good for anybody? I can't sleep till you all get quiet."
"Honey, don't you mind my sister," Miss Annie whispered. She don't mean a bit o' harm by being like that. There's something the matter with her. She ain't right bright. You understand."