6, 1931
Mc. Cane
A FUNERAL SERVICE BY BROTHER GRESHAM (MARIAH JACKSON)
"It is a source of great satisfaction to <text not clear> to have this privilege of standing here and having a few words to say about Sister Jackson. I said great privilege, and it is, I have preached other funerals that were not so. If I live as long as Sister Jackson, and lead so useful a life, I will be ready to go. I met her when I come here with Sister Alexander. She was so good and jolly and served her God.
A year later, I found here sitting on her porch, she remembered me and I found her so sweet and good, pleasant at all times, never nothing but goodness. She told me about her children, churches, and medical services.
And her children should be happy to have such a Mother, the community should feel blest; because she leaved in it. We could talk and talk, and never say enough, and all that is necessary, is for us to try to live and serve as she did. I was in Macon when I got the telegram, telling o her death, and I thought there must be some mistake but I found it only too true. As I remembered that smile of hers, these words came to me. 'Come all you faithful Christians from the Parable of the Vineyards.
Matthew 20-8
1. "For the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that is a householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.
2. "And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
3. "And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the market place.
4. "And said unto them, 'Go ye also into the vineyard,' and whatsoever is right I will give you, and they went their way.
5. "Again he went out about the sixth hour and ninth hour, and did likewise.
6. "And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, 'why stand ye here all the day Idle?'
7. "They say unto him, because no man hath hired us. He said unto them go ye also into the vineyard; and whatever is right, that shall ye receive.
8. "So when eve was come, the Lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last to the first.
And when the Lord gave that invitation to work in His vineyard, Sister Jackson, heard it, when she was a girl she heard our Master say, come work in ray vineyard, and I will pay you for your hire.
Sister Jackson is not old enough to have lived in slavery, but she lived near enough to it to know how it was, slave all the time, and most of the time the pay was not good, but her Master has paid her well at last. The other day Sister Jackson heard that same old sweet voice, saying come on in, your work on earth is done, put down your shovel and tools.
By their fruits shall he know them. He will inspect every kind of fruit, and what kind does your fruit show? Will it be like Sister Jackson and will he say, well done thou good and faithful servant to you?
Sister Jackson is with her Lord and Master today, and he has paid her well. She was never too tired to go when there was something that she could do; wait on the sick, give a cup of water to the one suffering, bathing a burning brow, rubbing away the pain, for she loved her master and it was a pleasure to serve him in any way that come to hand. Because she has already promised to serve him, when she went to work in his vineyard until death, and faithful has she done her work, even to death.
You can tell about Christ and what he means to you, but are you labours in his vineyard sitting down making excuses, or are you serving as you should, to expect that reward in the morning to come?
I do not know all this family, but I wonder if they are trying to emulate the life of your Mother, this good and faithful servant of her Master, hearing all her good talking and seeing her life as she lived it, there is no other way for them, but to follow in her footsteps. She has answered her Master's call, and has her reward, a Crown of Life, a Life that has no ending, life with the Master above in His Glory. A Joyful life that never ends.
Haven't you started out some morning full of Joy, and happiness, and it seemed like there was nothing in our way to stop us, just full of joy, could hear the Angels singing songs of praise from Heaven. Then before you know it, the devil is right there tempting, and trying to lead you off the straight and right way. But this joyful life will be one without any handicaps in our way. But when I get to feeling so good and happy, I get afraid, because that is right when Satan is sure to step in your way.
But when this life is over, and handicaps all gone, I can love God himself. John tells us that God himself will wipe all tears away. A man, maybe the President of the United States, may do something for us, even the Mayor of our town, also we have problems, that some of our good white folks will help us with, and they has done that many times, but when you go to see them you knock on the 'BACK DOOR; yes that is right, but when Angels call, God comes himself.
I can just imagine Sister Jackson in Heaven. See our Master as he stands watching for her. He calls the Angels, tells them to get the chariot out and ready, he met her himself, with wide open arms. I can see her as she asked for Jesus. Our Master says 'Why does you want to see him for? He is right there, with wide open arms to receive you. As he says, I was hungry, and you fed me, I was lonely and you come to see me, I was sick and in prison, and you visited and helped me. Come, Mariah, Blessed of mine, inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.
I can imagine her in that kingdom, she didn't live in places like that here. Maybe her house needed a little paint, and there might have been cracks in the floors, she may have had hard times, and trouble, but Bless the Lord; She is at her home now. And I can hear her say, 'Where is that tree of life, the Bible tells us about, that has leaves on it that will heal and cure the sick and bring them back to health? And I want to bathe in that sea of life, but I wants most to see my Lord and Master. Yes Lord.
"Maybe she is thinking of Christmas now in Glory, with a tree of life all decorated and beautiful, but she won't forget us, her children need never think that, for she will be watching and looking, well be coming back when they get burdened. Yes, Lord, they will feel her presence, when they need her, because even in her Heavenly Home, she won't forget the ones that she has left.
"A great worker in this church all these years, she come until she couldn't but her heart was with us then. Yes, Lord, that it was. May Ebenezer, praise God, that it has one more Angel in Heaven, and you children rejoice, that your Mother is out of her pain and suffering, and give praise that she stayed with you so long. Mine left me years ago, if she had been spared to me, I might have done better. Let us pray: Father we thank thee for the good Sister that lived among us. We pray that we maybe inspired to more willing service, to strive to do more work, serve in love instead of hate. Bless this family, may they always follow the way their Mother opened up for them. Bless us all and inspire us to help each other, as we are all pilgrims on the journey to the graveyard, we know not who will be next. Bless and guide us all the way. We ask it in Thy blessed name. Amen."
The casket was opened, and I was invited to see Mariah before the others started their march. They were playing a slow and very soft march. Mariah looked very peaceful, as if she had only fallen asleep, dressed in white, the casket was a light shade of lavender, and the casket spray of flowers were lavender and white.
As I returned to my seat, the friends on the right side of the church marched slowly by the casket, as the forsaken softly repeated: 'The Lord has given. The Lord has taken away. Blessed be the name of the Lord.' After all the friends had marched by to see Mariah, and were all back in their seats, I thought they were going to close the casket, but they let the side of it down, and it was slowly rolled around to each one of her children, that they might see and touch her for the last time. As this was done, the pastor, read this: 'Forasmuch as it hath pleased almighty God, in his wise Providence to take out of the world the soul of the departed sister, we therefore commit her body to the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dusts: looking for the general resurrection in the last day, and the life of the world to come, through our Lord Jesus Christ: at whose second coming in glorious majesty to judge the world, the earth and the sea shall give up their dead; and the corruptible bodies of those who sleep in Him shall be changed and made like unto his own glorious body; according to the mighty where by he is able to subdue all things unto himself.
"I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me white from Henceforth blessed are the dead who die In the Lord: evenso saith the Spirit: For they rest from their labours.'
As the casket was placed again before the altar and was closed up, the pastor gave the benediction:
May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the communion of the Holy Spirit abide with us, always. Amen."
As the flower <text not clear> took their place at the casket, the song Nothing Between was started and as they sang this, the casket was slowly rolled out of the church followed by the family and friends. Marian, had answered that last call.
Why the colored folks roll the casket around in the church I asked Mrs. Davis's cook, way her people's custom of rolling the casket around for the people to look at the corpse, instead of letting the people go to the casket to look at it.
She replied, Lord Missy, don't you know dat us niggers hain't got no sence a tall, I'se <text not clear> ashamed of dem I is. But it am dis a way, dem fool niggers git 'round dat coffin, and git to takin on, and fust thing dat de undi taker knows, dem nigger dons tuck an' turned dat coffin over and he has to git 'em all up, an' some times de dead niggers am all of the de live ones. Dey jus' cut up so bad, dat dey done stoped dem frum gittin' up atall, hit's am so much easier to roll dat coffin 'round, dan hit is to pull dem nigger all out er frum under de corpse, dats why dey rolls hit 'round, jus' cause us nigger hain' got no since atall. occupied by the family, and standing by the casket she began:
McCune
Dec. 9-39
