Date of First Version:	Feb. 27, 1939
Family interviewed:	Mr. and Mrs. Early Dull
Occupation:	Tenant Farmers.
Address:	Yadkinville, Yadkin Co.
Writer:	Clalee Dunnagan
Revisor:	Claude V. Dunnagan
“Pore People Lean’t Get <text not clear>
"It's a long way to Tipperary,
It's a long way to go;
It's a long way to Tipperary,
To the sweetest girl I know.....
"Yes, that's the song they used to sing back during the war", Nellie Wilson said as she pushed a lock of gray hair from her eyes. "Early was singing it that day I first saw him when he'd come home from France and the people around town was giving a big celebration for the soldiers that'd been across. I guess I met him sort of like you see in the moving pictures. I was standing on the corner with two more girls that day, listening to the band and watching the parade go by. After the parade broke up the soldiers just walked around singing and laughing. Some of 'em met their girl friends and went over to the lemonade stand. We were standing in front of a fence near a peach orchard and one of the girls with me was trying to reach across the fence and get a big peach that was hanging near the round. About that time three soldiers came down the street. One of 'em stopped and said, 'May I get you a peach?' He jumped across the fence and got four peaches. He gave one to each one of the girls and when he came to me, he said, 'Sweets for the sweet', and handed me two.
"I guess I didn't know what to say when he did that, 'cause my face got awful red and hot.
"I never saw Early again till about six months later, when I went to a masquerade party at one of the neighbors' houses. I danced with him a long time before I knew who he was…..he kept coming back and saying 'This is my dance'. Finally, toward the end of the party, he pulled off his mask and said, 'Remember the peaches?'
"That's how I met Early, I guess, right after the war. It seems like he just picked me out and kept after me till we finally got married. Early'd been working in a coal mine in West Virginia, but as soon as we got married, he came back to North Carolina and we began farming on a rented place here in Yadkin County. Mother gave us some furniture when we started off, so we didn't have to buy much.
"Little Katy Lee was born in '23, and the same year, Early quit farming because prices were so low he couldn't make anything and went to doing carpenter work. Frances, she's at school now. ...she was born in 1926. That was the year Early came back to the farm because house-building was slow. It wasn't any better, though, on the farm. You see, most of our land is on the river bottom and it seems like every year the water gets up and ruins the corn. It did that year and we didn't have hardly anything when the crops was sold, except what little we got out of the tobacco, and that almost eat up with worms "I recollect when Peggy, my fifth baby, was born. It was one awful cold winter morning. I started having pains before daylight and told Early to go for the doctor. He jumped out of bed and hurried out to start the car. In a minute he was back in the house, putting on another overcoat. The car wouldn't start....the motor had roze....and he started out on foot to get the doctor. Mother was there and she went into the kitchen to fix some Coffee and heat some water. Before she came back into the bed room, the baby was already born. The doctor got there 'bout an hour later. He just charged half price for the call.
"We've had a hard time of it, but I reckon we get along 'bout as good as any of the renters around here. We couldn't hardly live on what we get out of the farm, 'cause we have to give so much to the landlord. You see, we only get one-third of the corn and a half of the tobacco we raise, so we don't have much left after we settle up with the owner. Last year, me and the children and mother strung tobacco sacks and made $57.00 all together. You see, the company at Winston pays us a dollar and forty cents for stringin' a bag of sacks…..nine thousand of 'em, so it keeps a body purty busy stringin’ up a whole bag. We did that in the summer when we wasn't busy suckerin' or curin’ tobacco. It wasn't much…..what we made…..but when you ain't gettin' anything for farmin’, it's good to have a chance to get hold of some cash money. And the crops wasn't so bad this year as they’ve been a bein'. We cured three barns of tobacco and got a purty good stand of corn...the river didn't rise very high this spring so the corn wasn't hurt much. Mother spends a lot of her time piecin' quilts an' sewin'. She's pieced a quilt for every one of the grandchildren, an' she's workin' on one for herself, now.
“We go to church whenever we can, but it seems like there's always so much to do on Sundays we can't hardly take time off. We're members of the Quaker church, but most of the time we go to the Baptist church 'cause it's nearer. I reckon we're 'bout as religious an' Godfearin' as any 'o the pore renters.
"We got an old car, but we don't use it much 'cause it costs so much to run it. Sometimes we go visit friends on Sunday afternoons when the weather's good, but most of the time we just sit an' listen to the radio when we ain't workin'. String music's what we like best an' we listen to all the family programs like Ma Perkins and Uncle Ezra 'cause it seems like they got troubles just like ours.
“We aim to fix up the livin' room some so the girls can have visitors. They're 'most grown now an' it's 'bout time they was gettin' married off.
"It just seems like us pore people can't get nowhere, no matter how hard we work. Things cost so much an' crops don't bring nothin', a body just can't hardly get enough to live on. I reckon pore folks was meant to suffer on earth, just like the Good Book says. We've suffered a awful lot an' worked hard, but we always been honest and kind and generous to other folks like the preacher says to be, 'cause it's the only way to be saved….just keep up faith an' believe the Bible.
“I guess I've 'bout lived my life as far's this world goes. I've got nothin' to look forward to 'cept my children. I aim for them to have more'n I had. I guess I'd 'most die if I thought they had to go through with what I did. Me an' Early has worked awful hard and kept faith with the teachin's of the Bible, but it seems like we never got nothin’ but sufferin' an’ misery. I don't never lose hope, though, 'cause I know the Lord'll provide somehow."
