November, 1938
The Riviera Conchs
(Sectional descriptions)
Riviera, Florida
(Emigrants from Bahamas; fisherfolk; white-Negro mixed ancestry)
Veronica Huss and Stetson Kennedyt writers.
THE RIVIERA CONCHS
Bordering U. S. Highway No. 1, north of the West Palm Beach city limits, is Riviera, a bare fishing village on the tan dunes of the western shore of Lake Worth. The town is treeless except for a few Australian pines planted by the villagers, and is almost devoid of shrubbery.
Scattered stores, open-faced souvenir stands, tourist camps, jock joints, filling stations, and a post office, line the Federal Highway where it passes through the town, forming the main street. Side streets begin in the scrublands of the nearby Everglades and end on the lake front, with its array of fish houses, wharves, boat sheds, and net racks. At this point Lake worth is linked by Palm Beach Inlet with the Atlantic Ocean.
The majority of Riviera's population of 811 are known as "Conchs" who, like the Conchs of the Florida Keys, emigrated from the Bahama Islands. Of the different versions accounting for the origin of the name, the most commonly accepted one is that, when these people first landed in the Bahamas, their diet was principally the meat of the conch, a shellfish. The name is now applied to all natives of the Bahamas, both whites and Negroes.
The Riviera group migrated from the Bahama Islands some twenty years ago, and settled on Singer's Island in Lake Worth opposite Riviera. They remained there until they were driven away during an early Florida land boom. Residence was then taken up in Riviera, where they still live.
Many of them are still subjects of Great Britain, or the "Crown Land" as they call it, and retain a patriotic feeling for the mother country. The inability to read and write has prevented many of them from becoming United States citizens. Some have not applied for citizenship because the need has not arisen. The hope of obtaining work on WPA or securing direct relief caused a few to take out citizenship papers, and a growing desire to participate in local politics has led some of the younger generation to become naturalized.
Of Anglo-Saxon stock, the white Bahamen settlers were immigrants from the British Isles, principally England. A considerable number of them intermarried with Negroes, perhaps because of the Small number of white people living in the outlying islands of the Bahamas. This miscegenation resulted in the existing racial group of Riviera. Although the majority are Anglo-Saxon in appearance, with fair hair and blue eyes, some of them give evidence of Negroid characteristics. Occasionally in a single family one child will appear Anglo-Saxon, another Negro. Listed as white people in the records of the Palm Beach County Board of Social Welfare, immigration records list those with Negroid features as Africans, while citizenship applications classify them as West Indians. All of the children attend white schools.
Although they live among white Americans in Riviera, the adult Conchs are almost completely segregated as far as social relations are concerned, due to the prejudice of their white neighbors. A number of white American parents have refused to allow their children to attend the Riviera public school where the Conchs predominate. Made sensitive by their segregation, many Conchs are quick to deny a mixed racial origin. Prejudice, which permits them to be neither Negro nor white, forces them into isolation.
Fishing, their main occupation, lasts from early fall throughout the winter. Kingfish and bluefish comprise the greater part of the catches. Although some of the Conchs own rowboats for fishing in Lake Worth, the majority of them rent power boats for sea fishing. The fish companies maintaining power boats for rental purposes also rent nets and sell fuel; nets are rented separately and must be paid for whenever sharks tear them to shreds. Fishermen are compelled to sell their catches to the companies from which they rent boats. This arrangement makes it possible for the company to pay low prices for the fish, and then resell them at considerably higher prices. Moreover, the constant fluctuation of prices seldom favors the Conch fishermen. When rental fees and the wages of the "striker" or first mate are paid, there is little left for the "captain."
Handicraft work by women of the community helps to supplement the meager family incomes. Hats, purses, rugs, table mats, and baskets are woven from coconut fronds. Coconuts are carved into faces, baskets and lamps, and flowers are made of shells and fishscales. The flowers are covered with varicolored cellophane or dyed to the desired hue. These articles are also imported from the Bahamas each year, brought in on the crawfish boats by visiting relatives or friends. The only marked difference between local handicraft and the imported work is the variety of material used in construction. Imported articles are made of hemp, raffia, and fronds of the Bahaman "silver thatch" palm, which is much stronger than the coconut fronds used by the Riviera Conchs.
The handicraft of the Conchs want largely unnoticed until the establishment several years ago of a "Community Club," sponsored by wealthy Palm Beach society women. Under the direction of a professional social worker, the club meets at least one afternoon each week, and the women are urged to construct articles at home during spare hours. Sponsors of the club find ready sale for the articles among friends and tourists.
The club house, a small one-story frame building, in addition to its use as a workshop, is used also as an auditorium and dance hall. Unfinished on the inside, the bare rafters are strung with brightly colored streamers of crepe paper. Large pine benches and work tables are scattered about, and a small stage in the rear of the auditorium is surrounded by advertisements solicited from various merchants in Riviera and West Palm Beach. Here the Conch women find their only social contact outside the church. In drab, long sleeved dresses, cotton stockings and plain shoes, they gather together on "meetin afternoon" and" piddle" about the big room" Many of them keep on their woven straw hats. Gossiping tongues fly along with nimble fingers, and children and dogs frolic about; the noise is appalling and everyone seems happy.
In one corner of the hall is a large table laden with handicraft articles. Each article is tagged with the owner's name and price, and left on the table to await a buyer. Some of the women gather about the table to discuss the work and inspect that of their neighbors, A variety of methods is introduced in this manner, giving each woman a chance to improve her work.
Those not engaged in the construction of handicraft articles may stitch quilt blocks, either by hand or on the one sewing machine. These blocks are passed about the room in cardboard boxes. Material for the quilts is supplied by interested persons in the vicinity of the Palm Beaches.
An unusual method of disposition of the quilts is employed by club members. A meeting is called when a quilt is finished, and the names of the neediest persons in the community are written on slips of paper and placed in a box. The person whose name is drawn receives the quilt.
Permitted to select officers from their own ranks, the women are made to feel that the club is not entirely dominated by outsiders. They elect custodians of supplies, and leaders of social activities. On afternoons of their meetings, this arrangement enables them to begin work before the arrival of the social worker and her assistant. When the social worker arrives, the women cluster about, telling of their latest accomplishments and hoping for a word of praise and encouragement.
Although non-denominational, the club invites ministers from West Palm Beach to lead devotionals and give short addresses. The Methodist and Episcopal faiths are the denominations usually represented.
Conch women attending these meetings frequently find it difficult to remain silent during the religious talks. They piece quilts as they listen and endeavor to shush impish children who disrupt services by laughing or crying. Some of the women whisper among themselves, with little thought for the embarrassment of the minister who is sometimes forced to out his talk short.
No membership dues are required, although some supplies are acquired through small collections and benefit dances at the club hall.
During the summer months, when the fishing season is over, a few of the men obtain odd Jobs, but most of them depend on the WPA and local charitable organizations for aid. The majority are ineligible for WPA work, but they do receive Government surplus commodities. Faced with such conditions as these, they maintain that living conditions in America are far superior to those existing in the Bahama Islands.
The average Conch house in Riviera is an unpainted frame shack. Equipped with sagging doors, patched windows, and an occasional pine stump for a door-stoop, they are surrounded by sandy yards. Many of these yards are shaded by mango trees, under which are wooden benches. These spots serve as neighborhood gathering places. Grass and shrubbery are generally unkempt, and recently painted homes are infrequent.
The houses are overcrowded, and It is comparatively common for two related families to live together. Each residence has an odor of too close living in small quarters. Almost every house is equipped with electric lights and a kerosene stove, though there are few heating facilities in evidence.
Outhouses are generally present. Bathing is accomplished in tin wash tubs, and water is drawn from hand pumps in the back yards.
Newspapers are seldom read, books are scarce, and magazines are of the love, romance, and detective varieties. Radios, owned by a considerable number of families, receive almost continuous attention. A few families possess automobiles, usually old models.
Rooms in the meagerly furnished houses are decorated with handicraft articles, pictures cut from magazines and pasted on the walls, and an abundance of family photographs.
Several families possess odd pieces of antique furniture. Sleeping quarters have iron beds with thin cotton mattresses, and old bureaus and dressers with cracked mirrors or broken legs. Clothing is hung on the mils or behind curtained corners.
The most frequent ailments among the Conchs are hookworms, head colds, pneumonia, syphilis, bad teeth, and weak eyes. The county health nurse states that: "The Conchs are very susceptible to colds and pneumonia because of their low vitality, a result of their deficient diet. If milk, fresh meat, vegetables and cod liver oil were available to them this condition would rapidly disappear. However, the Conchs are more sturdy than the average white person, perhaps because of their vigorous outdoor lives. Apparently inbreeding, caused by social prejudice, has benefited them thus far. Many of them are unusually strong, intelligent, end handsome."
The Salvation Army is providing 31 quarts of milk daily to undernourished children, and the Red Cross also furnishes milk to a number of families where there are badly undernourished children and sick persons. During the 1937-38 school term, a wealthy Palm Beach society woman provided a fund for free lunches to be served at the Riviera school. These lunches had a pronounced effect in improving the health and scholarship records of the children.
Until recent years the Riviera Conchs seldom sought professional medical aid. Belief in the Holiness religion prevented them from accepting sooner, as well as general ignorance and superstition. Partty due to an almost complete absence of doctors and education in the Bahama Islands. Midwives still attend confinements, unless the situation gets beyond control. Home remedies are still used in many homes. "O-beah," West Indian voodooism, was also employed in many instances, and it is said occasionally to make its appearance among these people today. Doctors attend the majority of them now and many go to the West Palm Beach hospital for medical and surgical attention.
Their diet consists mainly of fish and grits. Other foods are not unknown, but the Riviera Conch prefers his "grits and grunts" (a small fish). They remark that preference is given this food because they cannot afford others, but laughingly add that if they could afford others they would still eat grits and grunts because they like then. Some of the older generation will not eat any meat other than fish.
Formal education among the elders is practically unknown, and many of them are illiterate. Those who can read and write have learned since coming to the United States.
The average schooling received by members of the younger generation is through the ninth grade, although many drop out around the sixth grade. Few finish the twelfth grade. Because of the low income gleaned from fishing they must leave school to aid in the support of their families. Other reasons are lack of interest on the part of parents as well as the child.
The adult Conchs are highly individualistic, perhaps as a result of the almost complete lack of restraint in the Bahamas. This individualism is also apparent in the children, and their rebellion against authority tends to disrupt school classes. The principal of the Riviera school believes that the attitude of the Conch children, aggravated by the support of their parents, is an important factor in retarding their scholastic progress. In his opinion, the Conch children represent a range of intelligence common to public schools.
Adult education classes conducted by the Works Progress Administration were begun in the fall of 1936 and continued for about ten months. Classes were held once each week, and salesmanship, citizenship, English, popular science, recreation, and crafts were taught. The teacher of the class gave the following opinion: "The Conch people were Intelligent, progressive, eager to learn, and conscientious about their work and attendance. The entire group was very talented in handicraft work. The training received at the WPA classes has helped a number of the younger members to obtain jobs as bell boys, night clerks, salesmen, etc. The Conchs were very appreciative for the opportunities offered them by the classes, and often presented me with such gifts as fish, papayas, limes, and handicraft articles."
The Conchs attend the Pentecostal Church of God, Carl L. White, pastor. An interviewer found Reverend White at his home, strumming a guitar and singing a hill-billy tune. He is tall, dark, and about 30 years of age. Hospitable and easy to talk to, he told how he had completed the fourth grade in school, and left his home in the mountains of South Carolina to follow his father through Georgia, Alabama, and Florida.
Both he and his father worked in sawmills. He learned to preach by attending a Church of God Bible Conference at Winona, Florida.
"The Pentecostal Church of God will have nothing to do with the works of Satan," explained Reverend White."We strictly forbids dancing, frolicking, face paint, rouge, lipstick, bobbed hair, too much jewelry, loud clothes, men and women bathing together on public beaches, imbibing alcoholic liquors, attending movies, shorts on women, all forms of gambling, belonging to any secret order or club, etc. Anyone charged with breaking any of these laws is summoned before a church council and given a chance to defend themselves and their actions; also to repent and be saved.
"My congregation numbers about 48," to continued. "They prefers my church to their traditional Episcopal Faith because of the better benefits and moral values derived. The Conchs is God fearing, pious, conscientious, deeply religious, honest, and sincere.
"Them that has, gives. When the blues is running they give handsome contributions to the church--from $1 to $5. There is one man who does not attend services and who is not a member, but he gives contributions in lieu of his sins. The Conchs are like a bunch of children seeking guidance in a strong hand; they trust practically everybody. They have been betrayed and gypped right and left by the fish dealers, which accounts for their impoverished condition. Someday them fish dealers will pay for their sins in the Great Hereafter."
