Pa Carnes
Mountain Farmer
Pigeon Forge, Tennessee
D. N.
LIVED TOO LONG
"Once I was always so hard at work that I didn't have much time to talk. It's different now. I like to talk. It helps to pass the days away.
"Sometimes I wish I was young again. I wouldn't go gala vanting about the country like the young boys do hereabouts. I know it's hard to git work, but it seems to me that the young generations don't like to stick to a job these days. They just throw their money away when they git it. But on behalf of them. they's a big difference between now and when I was a young man. Then a man could hope to buy his own farm. Now a young man's got no hope at all of gitting a farm of his own by his own hard work. What he can make from wages will never buy him a farm. Maybe after all is said and done, we can't blame the young men from spending their money without aim. Sometimes I just can't figger out what this weary old world is coming to.
"Yes, it was different when I was a young man coming up. Oh, money was hard to git. We had to work long hours for it, so we appreciated it when we got it. But land was cheap then and most young men could git up enough. money to buy a farm if they just worked hard enough.
"Now, I was born in North Caroling, in Old Madison County, on a little farm that had been in the family for many a generation, and away back in the mountains. I was a come-after child, born three months after my father was killed at the Battle of Gettysburg. Just before he died he had his chum, another soldier from his home district, promise to take care of my mother when he got back home. What the soldiers in the Confederate War called a chum was the same as what the soldiers in the World War meant by their buddy.
"Anyhow, my father's chum got back home after the surrender. He come to see my mother. I had just been weaned a few months, and it wasn't long before my father's chum kept his promise to take care of my mother. He married her himself. He always told it around in the neighborhood how he had kept his promise. He was as proud of that as he was of his record in the war. He was a good step-father, but he was stricter on me than he was on his own boys and girls. He sent me to school whenever there was a chance. But it seems like they wasn't any too many chances. As soon as I was big enough to work, I had to do all sorts of jobs on the farm. I hoed corn when I was eight. I cut wood when I was ten. When I was thirteen I begun to plow. I worked in the tobacco field and tobacco barn as far back as I can remember. I don't know how young I was when I begun to help my mother by toting water from the spring. I couldn't have been over five. Children hereabouts of that age do that now.
"So my schooling didn't amount to much. But I suppose it was as good as any of the other boys in the district got in those times. I learned to read real well by the time I quit school. I could always figger fine. I could figger better than the last teacher I had. I only learned to write good enough so that other folks could read it. I don't think I would have done any better in life, or made more money if I had had more learning. I had enough for a farmer and they wasn't no chance to be a doctor or a lawyer. Guess I had enough education to run a store, but I didn't never have a chance to run a store, though I've always kind of wished I could have, somehow.
"Well, by the time I was sixteen I was doing a man's work. I easy got a job at a sawmill. Made seventy-five cents a day. It was a small mill according to what they have these days, but we thought it was a great big mill, and it was owned by a big lumber company that owned thousands of acres of mountain land. Pretty soon I was working in the woods with the teams hauling logs to the mills. By the time I was nineteen I was a boss man in the woods. The other boys did not stick at their work regular like I did and I soon knowed more than they did. The Yankee superintendent took a fancy to me. I guess because his people had killed my father in the war he thought he was due me something that was not due to the other Madison County boy's working with me. He sure was a kind man and a good man. He tried to get up a Sunday School class at the mill. The boys never was interested much and he finally give that up. But during the week days he could sure drive hard and I tell you we had to work to make our money. The no-count boys was caught pretty soon. They never could git a job at the mill again. They was too many others who wanted to work for wages. The superintendent could pick his men.
"So the superintendent took a liking to me. He found out I could figger right well and he taught me how to figger lumber. I hadn't learned how to do that at school. That man could handle figgers faster than any school teacher I ever saw. He was a fine one to estimate standing timber. He teached me how to do that. One thing, though -- he couldn't tell the different sorts of trees any better than I could. He learned that he could not tell them as well, for he was raised in the northern country, which didn't have near the different kinds of trees our mountains has. I was raised up in the mountains and can tell at sight any tree that grows in the Smokies, and how they're different from any other trees. By the time I was twenty-one I was estimating for the company. They sent me traveling all around and inspecting timber they was on a trade for. I got two dollars and a half a day. It was big money in them days. I had already saved nigh two hundred dollars. So after working a few months, I picked out Ella -- the finest girl in that part of the country -- and we married. We lived at her pa's home for a while until I could git a home of my own.
"Well, I picked out a farm of two hundred acres with five acres of bottom land along a creek. They wanted a thousand dollars for it. It took me just two years to pay that money out of my wages. I was doing fine. My own boughten land, a pretty little wife, and me only twenty-three. So I quit my timber job. I cleared and fenced a field and built us a log cabin and we moved in and got down to work. The children started coming along. Pretty regular, once a year, Ella would make me a daddy again. I worked hard. They wasn't much in the way of recreation for us. All I can remember in that way is setting on the front step along about after dark and listening to my dogs off on the ridge running a fox. I was too tired to run with them. Just set and listened, and it was a mighty pretty sound.
"Yes, it was hard work, but times was good and I felt I was gitting ahead.
"I farmed for many years. Busy all the time. The months and the years just slipped me by and I didn't hardly notice them. In the winter months, when they wasn't much to do at home, I would estimate timber for wages again. I had hard luck as a farmer in one way. All my first five children was girls. It was a long time before the boys come and grew up big enough to help me.
"We had fourteen children in all. Ten is still living and all married but the youngest boy. My oldest daughter died when she was eighteen from typhoid fever. The fever run all through the family but she was the only one that died. Then I lost a boy when he was twenty-two and already married. He died of consumption, the only one in-my family that ever bad any signs of that disease. He got pneumonia fever when he was working in a coal mine up at Caryville. Soon after gitting well of that, he got the consumption. He went pretty fast. One of his sisters was working in Knoxville. She went up to see him and seeing how bad off he was she had him brought home here. We did all we could for him but he died within three months after gitting back home. The doctors hereabouts have told me that this boy didn't git the right treatment when he had the pneumonia, or he wouldn't got the consumption afterwards. They' say that when a person is about well of the pneumonia, the doctor should draw the puss off the lungs by sticking needles through the ribs into the lungs. My boy had the coal company's doctor and he didn't drain his lungs. The company doctor didn't know his business, if the doctors around here are right. If my boy had had a good doctor, I believe he would be living today. All his five brothers is living and in good health. It seems to me that a coal mining company ought to have men at the head of it who have sense enough to hire a good company doctor.
"The only other two children we lost was the twins. They died five days after they was born. I don't believe we would have lost them if we could have got to a doctor. I could see that they was weakly as soon as they was born. We didn't know what to do for them. We just used the home remedies for sick babies. Guess we done something wrong. They was only one doctor in that end of Madison County then, and the snow in the mountains was awful deep when the twins come. I sent for the doctor. He didn't git my word until three days later. Seems he was away from home with the sick, and by the time he was found. three days had passed. It took him two days more to git to us after he got the word. The babies was dead and put under by that time. Sometimes I think what the twins would have been like if they was spared. But it's not good for a man to study too much about those things. I try to keep from it.
"I tried to do the best for my children as they was growing up. They got all the schooling they was in the neighborhood. But most of them got no better schooling than I got. The schools was just about the same as when I was a boy. I made all my children, boys and girls, learn to work and do useful tasks as soon as they was big enough. I never let their work keep them from school when the schools was running. We all sort of doted on our youngest daughter. She'd come along between the boys. She's the third youngest child. She got the best education of any of the children. She got a diploma from Murphy Collegiate Institute at Sevierville. When she finished, one of her sisters, who was working in Knoxville, put her through a business college. She got a Job at seventy-five dollars a month as a stenographer in Knoxville. But she didn't work much more than six months before she married a town boy.
"It was along about the time our ninth young one was born that I got dissatisfied. I thought I could make better if I left North Caroliny and come to Tennessee. I'd done some of my timber work in Tennessee and I knew I could git land cheaper over here. I sold my farm for three thousand dollars in cash and we said farewell to Madison County.
"The roads across the mountains in 1897 was just terrible. We come in three big wagons loaded down with farm tools and furniture and provisions and children. We come through the Smokies along the French Broad River through Hot Springs and Newport and we rested a while at Knoxville. When we felt like it, we went on to Sevierville and up the Little Pigeon River to Emert's Cove. We'd traveled a long but we'd been doubling around on our tracks. We come to rest in Emert's Cove just thirty-five miles crow's flight across the mountains from where we'd started from in Madison County.
"I soon found a farm with a house and barn already on it that suited me. The owner was willing to sell for cash. They was some pretty good land already cleared and I soon had my crop in. I bought about five hundred acres of land in this trade and it cost twenty-five hundred dollars, or about five dollars an acre. It was what I'd paid for my smaller North Caroliny place. I had to pay that much for it because it was a small place. The big lumber companies buying large tracts was gitting their lands for two dollars an acre and less. All they wanted was the timber. Of course they bought much rougher land than would be good for farming. But when these big companies sold their uncut acreage to the National Park they wanted thirty dollars an acre. Their lands may have been worth that much for a park, but a farmer in the mountains can't pay more than five dollars an acre because his lands washes out so.
"In this mountain country cleared land for a crop washes and leaches out no matter what you do to stop it. Yes, I know all about running the plow across the slope and not up and down. The furrow across a slope on a level helps to hold the water back. I hear that some city folks say that we mountain farmers are so ignorant that we plow up and down a hill and that this causes the top soil to wash away. Not a bit of truth in that! I never plowed my land that way. Never heard of anybody else doing it that way. Them that thinks we plow that way are pure down fools. They ought to know that a horse can't pull a plow up hill and a man can't hold a plow going down hill.
"We mountain farmers know all about terracing land to stop it washing. But it takes a team to throw up terraces and ain't many farmers up here owns more than one head of stock. Another trouble is that the land is so steep that you can't hardly control a team to throw up a terrace. Because most of the land in a cove is steep, one horse walks higher than his mate in throwing up ground for a terrace. The horses don't pull together, the harness gits broken, and a man trying to terrace soon spends a day at it and gits nowhere. No. terracing just ain't worth a penny on a mountain farm. The soil of the coves is rich, but loose and leaches badly. New ground will produce ninety bushel of corn an acre the second year. But even with the best kind of farming, doing all we can to save the top soil, it gradually washes away and that ninety bushel is made no more. Crop gits less and less each year. In ten to twenty years so much top soil is gone that it don't pay to work it. What a man has to do then is to clear a new cove. So I bought five hundred acres when I first come to Tennessee so that I'd have plenty of new land to clear later on.
"Up in Emert's Cove I bought a grist mill that would grind five bushels of meal an hour. I farmed and run my mill. Did it for about five years. The children could help me lots on the farm and because the mill was right close by to my house, I could go to it and grind whenever a turn of corn was brought.
"I made money from the mill. Then Ella made me sell it. The trouble was I fell into temptation at the mill. Many of my customers was moonshiners that made good pure liquor with some of their meal. It was the only way they could git any real cash money in those days. Them moonshiners give me plenty of liquor. I had drunk liquor like most mountain boys since I was a youngster. I could drink it or let it alone. I could drink and still go right on with my work. But at the mill I drank too steady and it begun to tell on me. So Ella made me sell out, and talked me into moving out the neighborhood to git away from the crowd I had been drinking with. Besides, they was no schools up there and my children was growing up in ignorance.
"So I sold out and bought this home and farm down here. It was about a mile and a quarter from Pigeon Forge where they had a school that run pretty regular, a grist mill, blacksmith shop, stores, and a Baptist church. Yes, we're Baptists but I never paid much attention to religion. I don't understand much of the Bible when I read it, so I leave that to the women folks and the preachers. They claim they know all about it. Ella reads the Bible when I read the newspaper. She taught the children about religion. Of course, I've got no objection to religion. I really like a good sermon. But they's few preachers that can preach a real good sermon -- at least hereabouts.
"Well, this was a good farm when I bought it. This frame house, the first one I ever lived in in all my life, was already here. They's about three acres of good bottom land along the creek, but the rest is all mountain land. I bought three hundred acres but sold off part of it little by little until now I own less than two hundred acres. We've had to do here just as we did in Emert's Cove -- clear out fresh land when the old got wore out and had to be turned into pasture or back to new growth of timber.
"For many years we got along fine. I made a good living on the farm. During the winter I estimated timber. Wages rose and I got as much as five dollars a day for inspecting timber. I made trips into Kentucky, West Virginia, and all around in East Tennessee. My children got grown. They married off and left home. My winter work inspecting timber gradually fell off because most of the virgin timber had all been bought by the big lumber companies. In fact about the time I moved here most of the buying was by one company from another. They gradually quit trading altogether as they cut the timber out. Then I give all my time to farming. Winter meant no rest. I had to keep clearing land to take the place of what was wore out. Clearing land is hard work. Plowing is bard work. But I never minded work. I've Worked from the time I was just a little boy.
"Well, I've farmed on this land the best I knowed how until it is about to give out just as I am about to give out. Ten year ago I cleared the last cove that was fitten to clear. I don't think a young man could make a living on it now. I don't make near the corn I used to make on the same ground. I can't make enough to feed a horse all the year and have corn for bread too. I swap work with neighbors to git my land plowed. If I had a horse it wouldn't help me much. I'm too old and shaky to plow these days. I'm gitting right deaf too. I can't stand the cold like I used to. Even five year ago I could work in the open with the cold at zero and not feel it. But the doctors say my circulation is bad now and my hands and feet git too cold in the open when they's frost on the ground. I can still read all right with glasses but I can't walk up the hills easy like I used to. The doctor says my heart is too weak for hard work any longer. Once I could lift a two hundred pound hog and swing it. Now I can barely tote a turn of corn to the mill down at the forge. Even five year ago I would take a bushel at a turn. Now I can't tote but little more than a peck.
"Ella has give out too. She's seventy and was all right until that cancer in the breast hit her. Our doctor here told us what was wrong. But he couldn't do a thing about it. She had to go to the cancer clinic in Knoxville. The clinic doctors told her the cancer come from nursing too many children, and that they would have to cut it out right away.
"Now, what seems funny to me is that God would put a cancer on a good mother because she brought too many children in the world, if the clinic doctors are right. We don't think we had too many children. We love every one of them just like he was the only one. I guess if we could live our lives all over again, knowing what we know now, we would have just as many children. What I read in the papers about the city folks having birth control seems plumb sinful to me. Don't the Bible say that man should multiply and replenish the earth?
"When this cancer trouble come up, I borrowed two hundred dollars on this farm, the first mortgage I ever give on any of my land, and all the money was spent on Ella. The doctors at Knoxville said the operation was a success. We hope Ella is all right now. But they had to cut so much flesh away and so high up on her right arm that she'll never be able to work her garden any more. We had to give the cow up because neither one of us could milk her. You know butter and milk is half the living on a farm. They take the place of meat when the cured meat runs out, and in the last few years I didn't make enough corn to keep enough hogs to give us all the meat and lard we need. About all the money we can git these days comes from Ella's chickens and eggs and from my tobacco. But I only make enough tobacco to pay the taxes. The chickens and eggs buy our salt, sugar, soda, soap, and coffee. This house needs repainting and a new roof. I can't git up the money to buy the materials. If I was younger I could split enough boards to put on a new root, but I can't do that work now. We're not making enough on the farm to live on now and we can't work any longer. So I guess we will have to sell out. The only reason I can git sixteen hundred dollars for the place is that a Sevierville man wants it to build up a tourist camp here. It's off the main highway so the tourists would be free from the noise and the dust.
"None of our children is in a place where they can help us. They've got children of their own. lots of them, and not yet grown. And their first duty is to their own children. Besides, all of them are poor. None of them except the youngest daughter had much of an education, and a man has to be educated to make money these days. A man can't make more than a bare living on a farm. And the wages a man gits from public works, such as building roads, in the coal mines, and at the lumber mills, ain't much more than enough to keep body and soul together.
"Mountain farmers haven't got no future -- none at all. Most of the land is give out, and they ain't no more new land. Even the bottom land along the rivers and creeks in Sevier County is gitting poorer and poorer every year, no matter how much care is taken to keep the soil up. There's Mr. Butler on the river near the forge with two hundred acres of bottom land. He's always had enough money to farm well. He rotates his crops, uses fertilizers, and his land don't wash away like these steep hillsides do. He's always tried to take care of his land. Up to ten years ago he always made fifteen bushel of wheat an acre or more, but for the last ten years the wheat has dropped to twelve bushel or less. All the land in Sevier County is gitting poorer and poorer each year.
"The farms can't keep up the big families like they used to. Not near so many folks can live on the farms and work the land and make a living as a generation ago. The young folks have got nothing to look for ahead on a farm now as I did when I was a young man. Plenty of land then. We thought the price of five dollars an acre was high, but we didn't appreciate what we was gitting according to prices now.
"When these farms wear out, I guess the National Park or the National Forests will take them over and let the timber grow back. The old folks will die about the time their land is give out, just as mine has wore out. The young folks will have to live on wages from the public works or go to Knoxville and git jobs in the mills. It may all be for the best. I don't known and can't seem to figger it out.
"I've lived a long time and I've worked hard, and I don't worry none about the future of the country. Now, I think the country ought to take care of Ella and me until we're gone. I would give this farm to the State of Tennessee. if they would let me and Ella live in this house as long as we live and give us enough pension money to buy the things we have to eat and Wear that we can't raise. It wouldn't be much money, less than the thirty dollars a month they is talking about. And the State wouldn't have to pay that long. We are both plum wore out and about done.
"They's old age pensions in the state and seems like me and Ella ought to git one. But they tell me in the court house in Sevierville that Ella and me is what they call ineligible for the old age pension. I don't know. Maybe it's because we own this worn out farm. The man at the county court talked mighty fast so I never could git no clear notion of what he meant. Them politicians sure is mighty glib talkers. You think they's told you all you want to know. Then you study it out and you find they ain't told you a thing. Just a lot of high sounding talk.
"Nothing comes out the way it looks like it ought. Life don't work like a job of work. You study out how to do a job and do it. It works pretty much like you thought it would. But when it comes to living, they's not any way you can plan it and have it go according.
"I don't know. I guess, though, that when all is said, our troubles is just because we've lived too long.