August, 8, 1939
James Adams ("Odd-job" Negro )
721 Myers St.
Charlotte, N. C.
Cora L. Bennett, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
James Adams	John Eaves
Mary Adams	Lily Eaves
"I was born ’way down South, raised myself, mostly; lived with an uncle who beat me so much I ran away when I was a kid. He would bring me back and put me to work. Finally, when I got up some size, I joined the circus.
"I traveled a lot then and learned somethin’, too. I first worked at cleaning up the midway, and then they gave me a part on the stage. I had to do an African Dance. They’d paint my lips and mess my face up wid paint, and give me a shot in the arm to make me lively. I didn’t like the stage much; quit and drifted around here and there. I ’cided to get married and here I is.
"Me and my wife manage to live somehow on jist about six dollars a week. I pick up little odd jobs cutting peoples’ hedges and grass and cleanin’ up the yards when I kin. I been doin’ this work for about a year now. You see I was on the N. Y. A. work when it fuist started but I got sick ans staid laid up for some time with pneumonia. I has done some W.P.A. work hut not lately. Roosevelt's been a backbone to many a poor man and he's hope me out. If I could vote I'd sho vote for him to be president again.
"We've got three children but ain't none of them here with us. The two oldest ones left home and went to work for themselves. The youngest one is down home with my wife's mamma. We jist have three rooms here and the rent is two dollars and a half a week; so you see we don't have much left to live on. Then the other day Lily, she done the craziest thing I ever heard tell of. She sold our mattress to somebody 'cause she said she couldn't sleep at night. She said somebody done come in here and put something in the mattress. She's always getting up some crazy fool talk.
”She's not as bad as she used to be though. She used run me crazy talkin' bout somebody puttin spells on her. She believes in them things. Once she and some woman up here had a fuss and she claimed the woman put something in her water one day. Her tongue swole up and she came home with it hanging out her mouth. She got real sick but wouldn’t let me get no doctor ’ cause she said it weren’t no need. She jist lay there and thought she was gonna die. Her mamma come up here and took her back south with her.
"She said she knowed a man down there who could cure her. I wasn’t much in favor of all that but I had to do something. They went to this man, he gave her something and she got better. He asked her if she really wanted to she could have that same spell turned right back on the woman who put it on her. She said she gonna git even with that woman so she paid the man to turn it back on her.
"I don’t know nuthin’ ’bout all dem goings on she talks about. Ain’t never had no spell on me as I know anything about. I ain’t scared ’bout nuthin’ lak that nohow. Some folks go or about ghosts. I do know I saw something in my life. That was when I was living with my Uncle.
One night I went out in the yard and saw something that looked lak a hog with no head, I saw it change into a dog and then jist fade into nuthin'. It scared me some hut I jist went on back in the house and told my Uncle. He didn't believe me much but dat very next night he saw a man standing at that same corner of the house and he didn't have no head neither. They believed me then."
John Eaves picked up his tools put them in the crude wheelbarrow and trundled them away to another job.
