Beaufort, North Carolina
November 21, 1938
L. R (Leonard Report)
ALTON POE, DAIRYMAN
This Alton Poe's story, told one night as we rode along US 70 from Durham in the Piedmont almost to the highway's end in the seaside county of Carteret.
"We were slipping down this valley trying to come up on a German machine-gun nest. They'd got in at the bottom of the valley and put in a concrete nest with places to shoot through and all. I'd called for volunteers -- I'd always call on a man to volunteer rather'n tell him to do something like that -- and a fellow from Alabama and one from New York were with me. It was two o'clock and in broad daylight when we left out; we had our rifles and some hand grenades. We got to it the next morning but the Germans had left it."
The sharpboned, regular facial features shine in the light of approaching cars as he hunches forward so his words will carry to us on the front seat of the Ford. Wording a twenty-year remembered image of three young Americans creeping down an obscure valley in France.
"We landed in Liverpool -- that's in England. We stayed there in England a week. The first night we slept on a hill above the town, on the ground. When we got off the boat there were these women selling oranges. They all sold them three for an American quarter except one old woman who sold hers four for a quarter, and one of the other women jumped on her for selling cheaper than the and such a hairpulling you never saw. We walked up that hill with our packs and I bet those brickbats had been in that street two hundred years; in them army shoes every time you'd take two steps you'd slide back three. All the girls walked alongside us up the hill and helped us with our packs. I had one who walked with me. Course she talked funny like the rest of the English people but I could understand most of what she said. Man, it took a guard every eight feet that night to keep us in that camp and them out."
And the destiny that took him back to the land of his people, to a speech now half strange. Told in slow talk, long "i"s diphthongized into "oi"s, speech trait of some English county, continued along the "oilands" off the North Carolina coast and on the mainland.
"There were nine of us on this outpost. It was just a ditch, kneedeep full of water, out past the front lines. The Germans had stole ten men off it. We sneaked out there one Monday and stayed till Saturday. We couldn't sleep except to doze off sometimes against the side of the hole. We couldn't have a fire, and the rubber hip boots I had on froze twice. If you wanted to smoke you had to throw a blanket over your head and smoke under that. They sent us a snack twice a day by a runner. We just had our rifles; there was another bunch in a hole five hundred yards away with a machine gun and a one pounder. There was a sergeant in charge and I was corporal. I got sick on Friday and it got so bad Saturday I was going in with the runner but when he came out he said we were to come on back. I thought we'd all get a rest then and I'd get to the doctor. But when we got back the captain lined us all up and said, 'Boys, we're going over the top right away. Give 'em hell!' Those were his exact words, 'Give 'em hell!' I was feeling awful bad but I didn't want to ask off then and get called a slacker, so. I bucked up and threw a couple extra ammunition belts across my shoulders and went on over with the rest of them. I was still wearing the hip boots -- I didn't have a chance to change. We had a big fire that night and I put my feet to it and I haven't felt that fire yet. I didn't get to put on dry socks but once out in that hole. That's where this burning in my bones started, in that hole. It was on the ninth or the tenth -- it was the ninth -- of November, 1918 we made that attack."
The war still touches Alton Poe. "Our captain was twenty-six years old and from Little Washington. They were shelling us right tight. I was five foot from him when he was killed. That was the shell that shell-shocked me."
We stop at a filling station for gas. We buy icecream sticks and pass one to him. He refuses politely, finally takes it. Since morning he has had a candy bar. The examination at Duke Hospital had cost seven dollars and a half; he had paid it. It left him one cent. "I hadn't expected it would be so much. I would've liked to have helped with the gas.
"I was in the second draft. I was the oldest boy, the only one old enough to go. I got in in September, 1917, and they sent me to Columbia, South Carolina to camp. From there they sent us on to New Jersey and we left right away from New York. I was a good soldier. I worked at soldiering just like I would work at making a crop. It came easy to me; I caught on to the drills quick and I could bring up that rifle so you'd hear it snap a hundred yards off; that's what they liked. I guess if I'd had any learning I'd have come back a lieutenant. They made me a corporal -- well, they made me a corporal twice; once in this country and then there were too many so I was put back down to a private, and when we got to France they made me a corporal again. I was a sharpshooter and on the rifle team. We'd go and shoot against other teams. Some of the New York boys never did learn to shoot worth anything but the Alabamas and North Carolinas were generally good shots. The Tennessee boys were awful good shots."
Through the neon-bright towns, Smithfield, Goldsboro, Kinston, and New Bern; across the counties of Lenoir, Johnston, Craven, and Wake; twice crossing the Neuse; and through the Croatan National Forest. And as we approached his home county of Carteret Alton Poe told us of his life there.
He had been one of a large family; his people had lived in Carteret as long as he knew about. His great grandfather had somehow skipped the Civil War but he was still remembered. He had been a powerful man, the most powerful man in the county. He hadn't known his own strength. Alton Poe's father was a powerful man and he himself when he went to war at twenty-one had had strength in his six foot frame.
He had never lived more than a mile from the farm where he was born. He had never been out of the State except for the twenty-one months in South Carolina, New Jersey, and Europe twenty years ago. One more month he spent, two years later, in a government hospital in Asheville. He had come of voting age without schooling, without being able to read, or write. "I learned enough in training camp to write home and ask how they were and tell them how I was, and to make out the letters they wrote me. But sometimes I'd have to get the boys in the squad to read the orders for me."
When the war was over he came home. He could have gone on into Germany with the army and learned some kind of trade, perhaps have become an "engineer, " which he used to think he might have liked. But, he says, "I guess I'd gone back to farming anyhow, I love it so much."
In 1921 he married a neighborhood girl and "lived in the swamp" near by for four years. After that he rented a place and started dairying. In 1929 or 1930 he bought his own dairy. He built up his herd and bottled and delivered milk in Morehead City. Three years ago he sold his dairy and herd. At that time he had sixty-seven acres, eighteen head of cattle, and was making money, but he had two other small places and lacked about $200.00 a year of being able to pay out. The dairy needed a new barn and his other buildings were in bad shape. So he sold -- "or gave away"--the dairy and herd for $1,400.00. With the money he built a house on one of the other places. Here he still lives.
After getting rid of his herd he farmed a year and then went back again to dairying. A feed company with whom he trades loaned him money to buy his present herd. He no longer bottles and delivers but sells to a creamery. It's been tough going. The cows he bought are not comparable to the herd he had built up and sold. Of the sixteen head he now has, ten are giving milk, something more than twenty gallons a day. Sixteen of the old herd gave a total of sixty to sixty-five gallons a day. He finds it costs forty cents a day to feed a cow, and, at the present price of milk, that leaves him eight cents a gallon to cover all other expenses, including hauling the milk to the creamery in his old half-ton Chevvy pickup. "You can't make it."
On his old farm he had help but now he has only his wife and his boy. The boy, fourteen, they adopted when he was eighteen months old, after they realized they were not going to have any children. He gave the child his own name. When the boy was five or six a neighbor told him that they were not his real parents and he came home crying. They soothed him and talked him out of believing it and he forgot about it. They had intended to tell him when he got big enough to understand and then, if he wanted, to help him find his real mother. When he was ten or eleven another neighbor told him and this time he was old enough to understand. Alton Poe doesn't know just how much difference the discovery has made to him but they love him as much as if he were their own. He is in the eighth grade, of pretty good size, and a great help about the place. He wants to quit school but Poe is trying to get him to stay on and finish. "I tell him to get an education and get on with the government. It's his only chance."
Alton Poe has never been to Pinehurst and he has only a general idea as to whereabout in the State it is. But he intends to go there soon. There, he thinks, lies his own chance -- in the shape of Ayrshire cows. A herd of Ayrshires, he believes, will make him a living where his present herd of mixed breed won't.
To learn at first hand about this relatively rare breed has been difficult but he has studied it out and things they may mean the difference between a paying and a losing herd. He is willing to pioneer. He had an Ayrshire bull in the herd he sold. "He was the prettiest thing you ever set eyes on; all white except for a red ear and a red spot on the face. When he shed he was like silk." He had bought him for seventy dollars in June and had sold the herd in September; consequently he never had a chance to see what kind of cows the half-Ayrshire calves made. Sometime soon he is going to Pinehurst to find out how much some Ayrshire heifers and cows will cost. What to use for money puzzles him.
At forty-two Alton Poe has his land, house, cows, enough hogs to have ham for breakfast (but he owes a bill and must soon take some into town to sell), raises cabbage, potatoes, peanuts for the hogs, and some cotton. None of these crops made him any money this year. He finds the twenty-five or thirty dollars a year taxes on his place a formidable amount. He once belonged to the American Legion "but dropped out to save the three dollars a year dues.
At one tine he started to put in for aid from the government for his disabilities from the war but he never did and he doesn't get anything. Physically, he says, he's not much good any more. He is regularly troubled by the burning in his bones and the shell-shock. He is not bitter, not easily aroused; he is a simple man, keen enough, with a love of his family, his land, and his animals. He thinks he sees his salvation and will one day travel up the State to find out about the longhorn cattle from Scotland. Given a fair living for his wife and his son and himself he would be satisfied. On one point is quietly resolute; he's not going over again. If anything comes up and he should be needed he will do what he can, but he will never go across again.
We ride on and come into Carteret. This is country he knows and he points out places and talks of hunting. The war ruined him with a shotgun, he overshoots. We turn off the highway and onto a sandy road. He shows us where his brother is buried. After a while we come to his place and let him off. Backing the car around the headlights catch him a moment walking down the sandy lane.