James Willie
2319 Felicity.St.
Interviewed 7/20/39
Submitted 7/27/39
JBMES WILLIS, THE SUGAR CANE MAN
"I can cut cane and do anything anybody else does, but I aint goin. never cut no cane cause they don't pay nothin’ and there aint no fun to be had in the. country. The country is as cold as ice. I'm a city man, and I lak mah city fun."
A long, tall, sloo-foot, black man is talking, and he means what he says. His name is James Willis. He lives with a yallar woman who makes her money "shaking herself."Her name is Sadie Brown, and it is an appropriate name for the things she does. James, Jim for short, explains it this way: "There never was, and will always be, a woman whose name was Sadie who wasn't smart. Thats why I brought her from the country. We came down the river in a tow boat, a water mellon boat, seven yars ago. We didn't do no talkin'. I jest told Sadie to go her way and make her. money, she went. Then I told her to bring her money home to me, and she did. Thats what I calls a woman wid temperment."
Sadie and Jim live in one room in a flat on Melpomene Street, in the heart of Negro frivolity, where they shoot dice in the daytime and figure ways to get money at night. Their roam, is very ordinary. In fact, it is characteristic of the people of the neighborhood. The roam is dirty and forlorn. There it one bed in the roam, also a stove, dresser, two chairs and an armour, which used to house Jim's fine clothes. course, Jim's doesn't have any fine clothes now, they're in the Security Loan Office on South Rampart Street. "I had to pawn ‘em What else was I going to do?" Jim says with a wink in his right eye.
It wasn't necessary to trick Jim into telling his life history. He willingly told it with pride.
“My life history aint much, it aint long, and it aint excitin’ but its my life history, and here it goes:
"I was born right in Plaquemine, right back of a field as wide open as a hen's ass. My pa's name was Jim, lak mine's, and my ma's name was Emma. Both of 'em worked on the farm. They did everything, and anything the boss wanted 'era to do. Ma and pa couldn't figure, so they took whatever the man on the farm gave 'em. The folks said that pa worked himself a house. Yeah, in other words Pa made enough money to git him a house, but he never did git it. The folks? Who was they? They was my cousin, thats who. And they worked right along wid my pa and my ma. You know, thats what got me in bad wid plantation people. They make promises, but they don't never keep 'em.
"Cose, the man says that pa drank all his money, and owed him his life when he died. I don't know about all that. And there is a lot of things I don't know about but I do know that pa was gipped. Say, I members the day when pa and ma went out and sold twelve dollars worth of 'tatoes to fix the roof on our house. The boss told 'em that if they wanted a roof on top of their house they would have tomake some extra money to pay for it. So, pa got him some 'tatoes and went to sellin’ 'em. The boss. Who was he? His name was Link Wilcox. The boss took all the money. Told pa that he was goin’ to fix up everything, but he never did. Thats what pa told my ma. I don't know. Pa drank so damn much you didn't know how to figure on him. I knows, but I don't think he'd tell a damn lie about anything, I don't.
"School? Yeah, I went to, school. I went to school in the church back of the shell house. We had an old preacher teachin' us,' but he was funny. Say, that preacher spent all his time playin' wid the young boys pinna. He’d grab mine and I'd let him keep it. Where did this go on? It went on in the back of the church, thats where.
He used to say it wasn't right to do nothin' lak that in the church. I didn't give a damn where he grabbed me, as long as he grabbed me. And jest between you me I liked the way he grabbed me. Cose, I don't go fo' that now, cause I can't, cause Can't. Sadie is too stuff:
“Anyway, I didn't git much education. Went to the third grade. That was enough fo' me. I had had enough from that preacher, and there wasn't nobody else around. I Aint seen nobody around to teach me nothin’ Man, listen, I was born to be smart. I know how to live, and I know how to make money, jest lak you see me. I aint nobody's fool, even if my head do look lak a butter bean.
"What I did when I left school? I did this. I went into the field and shucked me some corn and stuff. I made lil money but it wasn't the kind of money I wanted to make. I kept my eyes -wide open. I wasn't only eighteen then. I kept bummin' around the smart boys. Used to watch 'em collect money from the wimmen. And man, I aint tellin' you no word of lie, I tried and tried to git me a yallar woman, but you know I couldn't git a one. Man, yallar wimmens was sho hard to git fo’ a ugly man lak me. I aint got a yallar women till I was twenty-five yars old. And Lawd today, how I got that one I don't really know: But I got her, and that is all I'm thinkin’ about. Say, people in the country don't go fo’ black womans in the country, they is too. many of ‘em But, they aint too many good lookin’ yallar wimmens. I always did say let the white mens make 'em, we’ll take ‘em from there on, yes indeed!
"How I made out in the country? I made out alright. Cose, I aint had no plenty money, and I had to be satisfied wid small time stuff. Why did I git marry? Man, didn’t I jest finished tellin’ you that I couldn’t git what I wanted, and I sho wasn’t foolin’ wid what I didn't want. I keep tellin' you I aint no fool, didn't I. What I thinks? Man, I don't thinks when it comes down to facts. I'm one man who KNOWS thats what goin’ to happen is goin’ to happen. The day is set: And when your day is set there aiat notfhin’ you can do about it, thats all. What they calls that? Predestynation? That what I b’leives in. Say, man when I was in the country a friend of mine went swimmin' when everybody he knew asked him not to do it. What was that? He had to die that way, didn't he? I b'leives he did.
"Why did I leave the country? Well, I tell you. I jest left cause I couldn't make no headway in the country. Sho, I shucked cane too. Cut from one up to two down. In other words, from Sun up to Moon down. Made one fifty a day, but I aint goin’ try again, cause fo' the furst point, the people drives you. I knows cause they used to drive me plenty. I was always right in line, but the boss man wasn't never satisfied. Seems lak he was always pushin' fo' more. The mens in the lead rows was too god fo' the others, and you jest couldn't make things go. I tried and tried but I jest couldn't make things go, that was all. And when my pa and ma died I got this gal, and gave up. Left the country on a water melon boat. None of us, me neither the gal had twenty-fice cents betwix us. I always did hyar that you didn't need no money in N'Awleens. And that was right till the depression. Well, when that came it was a different story. It got stuff, and times got hard, but we made it O.K. Where Sadie got the money from I don't know. It wasn't my business. Thats what wrong wid people. They meddle too much in the other fellow's bisness. I aint goin' to do it, me.
“How I net Sadie? Well, I'll tell you how it happened. I tricked her. I hate to say it but I tricked her. You see, here's what happened. I told her that my ma had left me plenty money and I -wanted to take a trip on a water melon boat wid a shine gal who had dim blue eyes. Sadie said jest lak this? "I'm yo' gal if you is goin' to N'Awleens to spend yo’ money.' There it was. I was htebigest liar in the world, and I knew it. I gives Sadie the jive, then I commence layin' it on her. I outdid myself cause I had a yallar woman. She laked my stuff, and took it wid all she had. I gave and she took. We jumped on the boat. I gives her a few bucks, and she falls fo’ the ‘g’. We clicks right on the boat. I let her give the captain a lil bit, and he feeds us. He gives Sadie a few bucks, and I takes it away from her. We did alright. We lands in N'Awleens on a landslide. We gits a house on our jive, and I lays the landloard. Sadie lays the grocer at the corner of our house and we gits along fine.
"When I finds that we was doin' alright, and by the way, Sadie had done got the truth and agrees wid me. I'll tell you how. sho did that. She says I know her life and I let her lives it. So, she begins to lak me plenty. Man, we clicks. Then I gets a job workin' on a ice truck. I. keeps the job till depression ruins everything. Then I gits on the W.P.A and everything goes fine. Sadie takes her vacation. She don't fool around no more. You know, Sadie can cook, so she gits herself a job cookin' fo. some white people in Rosa Park, or some whar. We does fine then fo' true, cause Sadie brings home the food, Man, them fiddles was sho good:
"Well, I’m still on the W.P.A. They tells me that I'm goin' to be out. Then, maybe Sadie will git her job back again, I don't know. Sadie has gotten to be such a big aristocratic lady, you know. Sometimes I asked her if she is crazy, or sumpin'. I speaks up to Sadie jest lak a lady wants to be spoken too, cause, cose, I aint tellin' her this, but Sadie is gittin' sweeter in her old days, And when a woman gits sweeter in her old days thats sumpin’
"We is livin. alright. What? Can Sadie have a baby? No indeed: Say man, Sadie done throwed way mo’ babies then yo' ma done wipe roaches out the house. And that aint no word of lie. I keep te.llin’ that fool that she is taking a chance wid her life, but she don't pay me no mind. She says she don't want no baby, and thats that, thats all. Man, what you' goin’ do when a woman won't listen. I wish she was hyar now. Maybe she would tell you the reason, she sho won't tell me.
"I’m goin' make it, regardless, I'm one black nigger who sho don't worry. No indeed! Say man, don't you know that a man's life is lak a rabbitt’s. He’s got to run lak hell when things go wrong. If Sadie and me ever mess up I’m sho goin’ to run lak hell!"
A tinge of deceit was running from Jim's veins, he smiled broadly and continued: “My boy, I been around wimmens a long time, and I been around work a long time. It don't pay much to pay any attention to neither one. Thats why I aint payin' no attention to nothin' hyar and nothin' I see. Sho, I done seen happenin' right on my job, but I figues they aint no need of me payin'nno atention to it. Its goin' to happen anyway, aint it, What I does about it I aint goin' to do no good. My boss is always tellin’ me that I don't worry about myself and nothin' else, and I don't neither. I figues its goin’ to happen anyhow. Jest lak I see Sadie doin' things, but do you reckon I'm goin' to fuss about it, No indeed. I aint goin' to out off my nose to spite my face. I aint nobody's fool. Sadie is restin' now, but when I lose my job she's goin' to unrest. Didn't I say she was workin' at furst. Sho, but I means that she aint doin' no funny bisness. Hat I know. Oh, I got a way of knowin’ alright.
"Sho, I feels that education is alright. Everybody needs it. Its alright fo' them who wants it. But I don't care nothin' much fo' it. You see, I got my mind on matters of another matter. I works fo' mine, and when you works fo' it, and can git work its a horse wid a different tail. Thats the way I figures it. One thing, I aint goin' to worry.
"You can out thisndown. I'm one ex-cane cutter who is goin to be one ex-cane cutter. You can put me down as James Willis, the sugar cane man. If I wants to cut it I sho can, and that aint no word of lie neither."
