Athens, Georgia
363 E. Hancock Avenue
Mrs. Texie Gordon (white)
Miss Grace McCune, writer
Mrs. Sarah H. Hall, reviser
THE BOARDING HOUSE OPERATOR
Mrs. Brittain's large, two-story house is painted brown and trimmed in yellow. A sign on the front of the house reads:
"ROOMS AND MEALS
Very Reasonable."
This boarding house is near the business part of town, and is conveniently located for business people and university students. At the time of my visit the small yard was freshly spaded and a few flowers showed the effects of recent transplanting.
A slender, black-haired girl answered my knock on the door. "May I speak with the manager of the boarding house?" I inquired. "That's mother," she replied. "She's in town right now, but she will be back in a few minutes. Won't you come in and wait for her?"
We went through a narrow hall, and I glanced up the long stairway to the second floor, as we passed on our to the dining room. She placed a rocking chair near the heater, and asked if I would have a seat there, for it was rather cool out, and she was sure I must be chilled. She excused herself, saying that she had to order some things from the store that the cook needed to finish dinner.
The large room was clean and attractive. Its walls were light cream in color, and the woodwork and doors were painted to resemble oak. Crisply fresh curtains were draped over cream colored window shades at the three large windows, A linoleum square of dark brown and green was on the floor and a few pictures decorated the walls. The long dining table, covered with a clean white cloth, extended almost across the room, and in the center of it was a vase of artificial sweet peas of surprisingly natural appearance. Other furniture included a large buffet, a china closet, a frigidaire, and a radio. Besides the chairs placed around the dining table, there were four large rocking chairs in this room. A folded card table leaning against the china closet, and a chinese checker board on the buffet were evidence that the dining room is also used as a living room part of the time.
A small fox terrier entered and at once came to see if it knew me. As I patted the dog's head, a large black cat came and jumped in my lap, and wanted a share of the caresses. The cook came in to get some dishes, and seeing the cat and dog, laughed, "Lawsy Missy," she said, "you done been 'dopted in dis fambly, 'cause dat black cat sho don't make friends wid everybody dat come here."
Mrs. Brittain came in, and her daughter explained that I had been waiting for some time to see her. Handing her daughter some packages and telling her to take them to the cook at once, she turned to me and said, "Just let me get off my coat and hat, and I'll be right back." When she returned, I saw a tall, dark-haired woman of good figure and medium weight, dressed in a dark crepe frock. Her long hair was dressed in the very latest style, with two braids encircling her head.
I explained the purpose of my visit, and she laughed heartily. "Well, after sixteen years of running a boarding house, I still have plenty of problems to face, and everybody else that is in this kind of work has them. But I've been able to make a living and make ends meet, so I guess I've done pretty well.
"I was reared on a farm and lived there until long after my husband died. As I owned our home and my son was large enough to help me manage the farm, we lived there until he married, then I moved to town, for I didn't see how I could run a farm by myself. My oldest daughter was married and my other two girls were too small to help. I had my mother to take care of too and, like every-one else, I came to town.
"I did practical nursing the first year after I left the farm. I was busy all the time but of course I didn't earn anything near as much as a graduate nurse. I did make $15 a week and hoard, and with that I was able to support my mother and two girls. I don't know if you know anything about nursing, but it's hard work.
"I had to be away from home all the time, day and night, and I hated to leave mother and the children by themselves, especially at night, for mother was old and her health was very bad. After thinking about everything that I knew how to do, I realized that I was better at cooking than anything else, and that is when I thought of a boarding house.
"Still I didn't really know anything about keeping boarders, and to get a little experience I worked seven months for a woman who ran a large boarding house. When it was time to think of starting my children to school again, I rented a large house and started to taking boarders. I guess I was lucky for I soon had a house full, but even at that it was a hard pull for I had gone to some expense in getting more furniture and linens that I had to have.
"After getting it started and running very nicely, I got a good cook, and then I went back to nursing. I worked for one of the doctors here for a long time. Of course it wasn't regular --- mostly just his maternity cases. In this way I was able to keep going until I had paid up all my bills. Yes, it was hard, but I have always been used to work, and I'd rather work hard any day than sit down and wait for someone else to do for me.
"I stayed there in that place for a little over a year, and then I rented a larger house a little nearer in. town. I was really making good there, and I stayed for about two years in that location. I had a full house all the time, as well as a number of outsiders who took their meals with me.
"But even boarding houses are like any other kind of business. Someone is always trying to outdo you; there's plenty of competition. This was true in my case. My rent was $30 a month --- rent wasn't as high then as it is now. A woman just below me on the same street was running a boarding house too. She was always wanting to know how I managed so well, and how could I keep my boarders so long, for hers were just coming or going all the time. I told her that I did most of my own work and that my children helped when they were out of school. We didn't pay out everything we took in to servants, and our personal work and attention helped to keep satisfied boarders.
"Even at that, she wasn't satisfied, and told the man I was renting from that she would give him $15 a month more than I was paying. He came to me and told me of her offer, and said that I could stay on if I wanted to pay the extra money. I didn't feel able to do that, so I told him I'd just move and she could have the house. I rented this house and have been here ever since.
"The other woman moved in and took part of my boarders, for I didn't have room for all of them here. It never pays to try to undermine anyone, for in a very short time she was almost without any boarders at all. My old ones that I left with her had all gone away. Many of them got rooms near enough to enable them to continue taking their meals with me. It looked like bad luck hit that poor old woman who got the house from me. I was really sorry for her, for she just kept going from bad to worse, and. a few years ago she was so up against it that she drank poison and died before they could get her to the hospital.
"But, let me tell you one thing, I do not have any drinking in my house, not if I know it. I have had plenty of them to think they could get by with their liquor in my house, but they soon find out that I mean business, for they have to get out and if they don't get out when I tell them to, then I show them that I can have them put out. I have had very little trouble, for in all my sixteen years, the law has only been in my house three times.
"One of those times I had to call the police to get a man. I didn't know what was wrong with him, but the officers knew him and they said he was a dope fiend. We thought he was crazy and all of us were afraid of him. That's the only time I've ever had anyone like him, and I hope that I won't ever have a dope addict to contend with again.
"One of the greatest problems in this kind of work is keeping dependable help, for this is such hard work. They may have some afternoons off, but how they do hate to come early in the mornings. Host of my boarders are working people, and they want breakfast served not later than seven o'clock. My day's work starts around five-thirty to six in the morning. I usually get the break-fast started before the cook gets here, but she's pretty good and it's never much after six when she arrives.
"We have dinner from twelve to two, for we have a good many students for meals and most of them get here by two o'clock. When they can’t the cook fixes their plates and puts them in the warming closet on the big old wood-burning range. She is off every afternoon until time to start supper. The best proof that she is smart and a good cook is the fact that my boarders all like her and are always giving her something.
"I got sick about four years ago and was in the hospital for some time after a major operation. I had to let my boarders all go then, for it was a long time before I was able to look after the house. I really started hack long before I should have because they begged so hard for me to come back.
They said they would just do any way, for it was just like home here. They are all very nice to me.
"Oh, yes, I've lost money many, many times, and in large amounts too.
When I've tried to help some of them out, especially if they were out of work, sometimes they have slipped out owing me a month's board, and some have beat me out of more than that. But for everyone that does that way, I usually find someone else that is a good honest payer.
"When a certain plant near here opened up again after it had been closed for awhile, the man that came here to run it made arrangements with me for his meals. Well, I never got a cent for them. But I was not the only one he caught, for he used the firm's money, gave the help bad checks, and owed everyone in town that had let him have anything on credit. Yes, he got out of it some way I never could understand how. The factory help finally got their money from the owners, but none of the rest of us were so lucky, for he had nothing for us to get it out of.
"Everyone is not like that. Only last Sunday I had four girls in for lunch. I knew the girls, for they eat here quite often. I was busy when they went out and one of the girls put a bill in my pocket as she went out, saying that she was paying for all of them. It was some time before I had time to check up, and then I found that she had gave me a $5 bill instead of the $1 they owed me. I called her and told her of the mistake. She had missed the bill but didn't know where she had lost it. She sure did thank me and said, 'but if you hadn't called I would never have known how I lost it, for I was sure I gave you a $1 bill.'
"I have some hoarders that have been with me for seven and eight years, and there are other people that have just been having meals here for that long. I don't see much difference in now and when I first started out with a hoarding house I mean in the expenses of it some things are higher; rent for one thing. Of course, groceries go on and down all along; meats are the same way. I don't have a garden, hut I get fresh vegetables all the time, mostly from the farmers when I can for, having lived on a farm, I know how hard it is for a farmer to get cash for produce.
"I also get a good deal of my meat from farmers. I like it, for I was used to growing my own meats at home, and these purchases help me as much as they do them. I get food cheaper and they get the money for things they need. Many of these farmers that I trade with send their children to me when they enter school here. You know I appreciate that, for it makes me think they have confidence in me and I try not to betray that trust.
"I have different rates for my boarders. My daily rate for board is $1, but the weekly rate is $6. By the month it is $25 for men, $20 for women and students. Meals are 25¢ each, and you know I make good on those meals. She other houses around here say they do not see how I can clear any profit the way I feed, but I do.
"Yes, it's hard work. You come in contact with all classes of people, both good and bad, but when I get some rough ones in, I get them out again. I ask all my boarders to respect my house as they would their own homes. What class of people had I rather have? Well, I think the working class suits me the best; they are more considerate, I guess it's because they have to work and know how I work too, and then the students that I have are very quiet. My boarders are all congenial, and every night they play cards and checkers. Some just sit around and play the radio, or read and study.
“I keep fires in the dining room and living room for them, but if they have fire in their rooms they furnish that themselves. I have plenty of hot water all the time. There is one bathroom upstairs and another downstairs.
"I try to make them all feel at home. They all like to tease me and play jokes on me, but it's all done in the friendliest manner. However, if someone gets the best of me, the others don’t like it a bit, but they’ll tease me themselves right on. For instance, not long ago, just at lunch time when most of them were here, a very nice looking middle-aged man, who said he was a Methodist preacher, came here with a young man that he said was his son. He said they were going to be in town for a few days and wanted a room and meals. I happened to have a vacant room that I showed him. He liked it and said they'd take it. Well, they had lunch, came hack for supper and were so friendly and nice that everyone liked 'em. After sitting around and talking for awhile they said they were tired and were going to their room. That was the last we saw of them, for instead of going to their room they left. Oh, yes, the boys sure did tease me about that. You see I am a Methodist too, and they told me that if that had been a Baptist preacher he'd have paid for his meals." She laughed and continued: "I told them that if they had been Baptists they would have at least slept part of the night, instead of leaving a good bed like that.
"Now, I'll have to stop and help my cook get dinner on the table, for these boys of mine are always hungry. I want you to stay and try one of my lunches." I thanked her and said if she didn't mind I would like to very much.
The boarders began coming in, and everyone was friendly and had something to say to each other. Several girls who work in the stores came together and discussed their work and the picture they were going to see that evening. A group of students was talking about tests they had had during the morning. Some thought they made passing marks; others were not so sure. Discussing the questions and what they had answered, one of them said, "Well, I sure have flunked that test if you all are right." They all laughed and told him to do better on the afternoon test.
A smiling youth came in and said, "Well folks, the music man's in town." Everyone looked at Mrs. Brittain and laughed. I wondered what the joke was.
Just as fast as one group finished eating, the table was reset for the next, and they didn't stop coming until about two o'clock. Plates were fixed for two students who had not been able to come sooner. Several trays had been sent out, and still there was plenty to eat, almost anything that one could ask for, even two kinds of dessert. Never before had I bought such a lunch for as little as 25¢.
The noon meal was almost over when a well-groomed old man came in. He was greeted affectionately by them all. "Am I too late for lunch?" he inquired. Mrs. Brittain told him she was sure they could find some food for him. He then wanted to know about a room. That matter was arranged too when one of the boys said, "Put him in the room with me. We'll be all right." The old man said, "That's all right with me, for that boy has been needing a spanking for some time and now I'll have a good chance to see that he gets it."
After they had all departed, Mrs. Brittain's daughter laughed and said, "That's the music man. We all like him. He tunes pianos for the music houses and teaches music. We tease mother because he is a widower and really wants to get married. He seems to like us, for he stays with us every time he's in town."
Mrs. Brittain seemed much amused. "Well," she began. "from what a man told me the other night, I'll never be able to marry again." Asked for an explanation, she continued, "I think I told you that I don't allow drinking here. A new man had only been here a few days, and, while he knew my rules on that matter, he thought he would get by with it. I didn't hear him when he came in Beastly drunk and went to his room very late one night, but after he reached his room he stumbled over the chairs and tables and then fell out of Bed. I heard the Boys laughing, so I got up and went upstairs. I told the drunkard he would have to get out.
"'I'm not going out of this room,' he defied me, 'You'll get your things and get out right now or I'll have you put out,' I told him, so he finally left. When he got to the door he looked at me and resentfully said, 'It ain't no wonder you're a widow. I don't see how your husband lived as long as eighteen years if he had to stay with you.' I informed him that if my husband had ever been in his condition he wouldn't have lived that long.
"I have had a good many Boarders to leave without paying and some have sent the money back to me. One man left that way some time ago. He had been out of work and owed me over a hundred dollars. He got work in another place, and he sends me money every week. I like to help people that way if I think they are the sort that really appreciate it.
"I don't clear so much net profit, but I do make a living and don't owe anybody. Yes, I have had some awful large Bills to pay I thought I would never get through paying doctors and hospital Bills, I lost my mother, and I had to pay all the Bills connected with her last illness and funeral, But the Lord has been with me for they are paid. I sent my daughter to Atlanta for a business course. That cost me over $300 for school and hoard. My other daughter is married, and there's just the two of us at home now.
"In spite of all ray heavy expenses, I still don't have too little to divide with others. Hot so long ago there was a family near here that was in awful poor circumstances. The little boy got his arm broke, and they were really up against it. I carried them a box of groceries, and when I saw just how badly in need they were I went around to all the neighbors. We all together got them the things they really needed, food and clothes as well as coal and wood. I even gave away my daughter's best coat I just couldn't help it-A woman came here and asked for something to eat. It was cold and raining. I gave her something to eat and the coat. Yes, my daughter raved, said I would give away my head, and it wasn't a week until she gave her other coat to a girl that didn't have one. I had to buy her another coat, but I'm glad that she can think of other people too.
"I have had a hard time. Although we have never been without the things we really needed, I just can't refuse to help others when they need it. Some of them around here say, 'I just don't see how you give so much,' especially when I bought two old women a pair of shoes, and, to tell the truth, I had to have one pair of them charged. Anyway I paid for them, and helped two boys out in the country get up some clothes so that they could go to school.
"Then there was the old blind man. He needed an operation on his eyes. The doctors told him that if he could get a place to stay, they would treat his eyes and then operate and not charge him anything. The poor old man didn't have anything to pay for board and room and nobody else would take him, so I did. He stayed here ten weeks, but I didn't miss the little he ate. When he got ready to go the hospital my boarders and I got up the clothes he needed. Now the old man can see how to walk by himself and doesn't need anyone to wait on him. No, I didn’t lose anything by taking care of him. The boarders were awfully nice to him and looked after him at night, and I wish you could see how happy that old man is! He comes to see us occasionally, and we feel well paid for what little we were able to do.
"I don't feel like I have lost anything in helping people. The Lord has been good to me. I've worked, yes, but He keeps me able to work and has looked after me so far and I still have confidence in Him. I know He will still help me if I do what He wants me to do as best I can.
"There is a cotton buyer who takes his meals here. Last week I said something about buying some cotton to fix over some quilts. When he came in to lunch the next day, he brought me a large box of cotton. When I asked how much it was he wouldn't let me pay for it. 'Why couldn't someone do you a favor one time?' he asked, and added, 'for you are always doing something for someone else.'
"Last Christmas there was a family in this neighborhood with five children in it. The father was out of work. They had no cash, very little to eat, and no prospects of Santa Claus making a visit there. I fixed a box for each of the children. One of my neighbors said, 'Mrs. Brittain how in the world can you give away so much? I can hardly meet my bills. I don't know why it is, I just can't keep any boarders, and those that are here don't pay half of the time.'
"But this neighbor of mine doesn't take an interest in her work. She won't fix for her boarders like I do. She'll get out for her bridge and other pleasures and let her work go undone. I don't know which is right, she or I, but I just can't find time for much pleasure on the outside. I go to church. Sometimes, when I am so tired out at night, I go to a show. That helps, and I do enjoy visiting, but it is mighty seldom that I have the time for that. I'm busy from the time I get up in the morning until I go to bed at night. I do all my sewing, and that takes quite a bit of time.
"I’ve managed to give all of my children a fair education. The two oldest girls married young before they finished school, and one of them is now doing the very same thing I'm doing. She lost her husband and she is here in town running a boarding house to try to get her boy and girl through the university."
As we were talking one of her neighbors came in, and from the conversation she was also taking in boarders. I wondered as I listened how the woman that I board with judges me; if I am rated as a good boarder or one of the kind that is so much trouble and expects too much for the money. It was my first time to listen to their side of the story and I enjoyed it.
The visitor said: "Mrs. Brittain, I never hear you complain about your boarders and I don’t see why. Mine are never satisfied. I can't cook a thing to please 'em, and they are threatening every time they come in to get ’em another place to stay. I just get so mad I don't know what to do. Why, they can use more towels and the laundry bill is tremendous. I just can't stand it. You know, they even want me to keep a fire in the living room at night just so they won't have to buy any coal themselves. It's outrageous, they grumble about everything."
Turning to me she said, "Young lady, did you ever have to put up with running a boarding housed" "No," I replied, "I'm just one of the boarders." Mrs. Brittain laughed and said, "Well, suppose you tell us just what kind of a boarder you are. Do you pay your board without grumbling? Are you hard to please? Does it take a lot of towels for you?"
Looking at the merry twinkle in her eyes, I knew why she was asking all these questions, and I answered in the same spirit, "Well, since I hoard with a policeman's family I am afraid not to pay, hut as for being a good hoarder I am afraid to say. As to eating, the trouble there is they think I should eat more than I do, and they are always after me about that. Many extra things are fixed for me to tempt my appetite, and I am grateful to my land-lady."
Mrs. Brittain laughed again, and said, "Well, I should think then that you rate as a good hoarder."
The woman didn’t discuss her hoarders any more, and she didn't stay very long after that. When she was gone, Mrs. Brittain said, "I shouldn't have asked you those questions, hut I'm a pretty good judge of people and you answered just as I wanted you to. She really is hard on her hoarders. Yet, we do have to put up with a lot of things to keep hoarders satisfied."
"Just a few weeks ago, a man came in here one night for supper and a place to sleep, and he just had 50¢. didn't have an extra bed, but he wanted to know if I couldn't fix him a cot in the hall or somewhere else. It was cold and raining, and I felt sorry for him. I gave him his supper and fixed a cot in the hall upstairs for him. The boys laughed at me and told me I was too easy. They were right that time, for he slipped out the next morning with about eight dollars worth of clothes stolen from the boys. Yes, he got away and I made the things good, for it was my fault that he was here. The boys didn't want me to pay for the things. They said I couldn't help it, hut I felt like it was nothing hut right for me to pay them, for I was the one that put him there."
Two boys came in for the late lunch that had been prepared for them. “Did the cook leave anything for us? We're hungry," they said. Mrs. Brittain replied, "Now you know she did, for I think you boys must be her special pets. She's looking out for your plates before anyone else eats." They laughed, "Don't you think it pays to stay on the good side of the cook?" one said. "I'll bet you haven't lost any more eggs," was the parting shot of the other young man as she went to get their plates.
While she was gone one of them said to me, "Mrs. Brittain is a dear old thing and just like a mother to us all. She's good to everyone, but we do like to tease her for she's a good sport; she can take it. About the eggs, our cook was off sick and sent another cook in her place. The first night after supper she asked Mrs. Brittain if she couldn't just take her supper home and eat while she rested. Mrs. Brittain said that would be all right and, anxious for the servant to have enough food, she went back in the kitchen to give her more before she left. The cook insisted that she had a plenty, but she went to sit the plate down on the cabinet and, when she did, eggs began to roll down out of her sleeves and hit the floor. She must have had at least a half dozen up her sleeves. She was scared so bad she didn't wait for her supper; she sold out. Mrs. Brittain had to scrub the floor, and that cook didn't come hack. "
Mrs. Brittain came in. "Look out boys how you talk to this woman, you may get yourself in trouble," she warned them, "for she is writing a story of our boarding house." They asked what she had told me, and then said, "Oh, well! Can we tell you a few things about this place?" I assured them that I would be glad to listen.
One laughed and said, "Well, he told you about the eggs, I'll tell you about the wood. Mrs. Brittain cooks with wood and, haring lived on a farm, she still buys her wood from the farmers and keeps a good supply on hand all the time. She was out one afternoon when another cook was here, and that nigger was helping herself to wood. Yes mam, she loaded up a wagon full. A policeman came by and asked what she was doing. She told him that she worked for Mrs. Brittain and that she furnished her wood. He didn't know what else to say, but he told Mrs. Brittain about it and said he had noticed her sending out wood several times.
"Then one time Mrs. Brittain took a woman and her son in for a couple of days because they didn't have anywhere else to stay. When they left the room was awfully clean, yes mam it was. Even the linen off of the bed was gone. If we didn't have to get back to our classes, we could tell more about this place. Mrs. Brittain is easy in some ways, but we sure know better than to come in tight."
As the two young men went out the door a small boy, apparently between two and three years old, came in calling, "Granny!" She smiled and said, "This is my grandson." "I just had to see my granny," the child announced, and shyly explained, "I loves my granny 'cause her's so good to me." Soon he was asking, "Got any candy, granny?" His grandmother smiled, and he persisted, "How about a 'nana?" Before she could answer, his older sister came in. "He cried until we just had to bring him to see 'Granny and Fritie,' she said. Hearing his name, Fritie, the fox terrier came running and Jumped all over the little boy. They were both very happy to see each other. Mrs. Brittain gave him some candy and a banana and he went out to play with the dog.
After the children went out, Mrs. Brittain said, "We run up on many problems in a boarding house. The greatest one is good help, I have a good cook now. I pay her a week and feed her and her little boy. My laundry hill runs from a dollar a week up, and has been as much as $3. That is just for bed linens, towels, and table linen; our personal things we wash ourselves. Lights and water are reasonable, considering how lavishly we use them.
"A good many of the business girls get their lunches from me, and suppers too. I can feed so many more than I can keep here, for I don't have enough rooms. Of course, I could get a larger and much nicer place further out from town, but I don't really think that it would pay, for so many of my boarders couldn't go far out for their meals. I also feed lots more of the students than you saw today. Many of them don't come for lunch. Besides feeding those who came to the house, I sent out enough lunches last week to bring in between nine and ten dollars, and that is doing pretty good.
"My daughter has been doing some of the government work, but they put some of them off lately and, as she was one of the last ones to go on, she was put off, but she hopes to get back soon.
"About two years ago, a blind boy stayed here for some time. Not long ago, he was walking by here and heard me talking. He recognized ray voice and came in to see me. I was really glad to see him, for he was a nice boy and I liked him. He was very little trouble even if he was blind, and he was never blue about his trouble.
"Some people that are the best able to pay are the first ones that will try to beat you out of something, but others will pay good. I had a man that boarded here for some time. He got out of work and had to leave town. He owed three months board when he left, and I didn't hear from him for six months; then one day I received a money order for every penny that he owed. About the same time another man left the same way owing me $50, but I haven't had a line from him. That just shows the difference in the two men; one wanted to pay and did pay, the other didn't care. I try not to judge too hard, for we never know just what the circumstances may he.
"I once had a crowd of bricklayers hoarding here. Their board was paid in advance. They knew my rules on drinking, hut they thought if they paid in advance I wouldn't do anything about it. However, I just gave them their money hack and told them to get out the next day. They begged, hut it didn't do any good for that was one time that I was not easy.
"One man married twice while he boarded with me, and he still eats lunch here. He and his first wife separated and got a divorce. Several years later he married again, and this time it was to a girl who had lunch here every day. He lives too far out to go home at noon, so he still eats lunch here, and just real often she comes hack with him.
"I had another couple staying here with me when they got married. They both got out of work for a long time and go behind in their hoard. He finally got work in Virginia and asked me if he could go and send my money hack. I told him to go ahead. Just as soon as he could get paid he sent me every penny that they owed. They never come through Athens without stopping to see me.
"Some traveling men will get you if they can. They are quicker than 'most anyone else. I once had a shoe salesman here who seemed very nice. He said he only got his check once a month, and he stayed here while he worked the other towns nearby. The cook was doing his washing. I guess maybe he got his check, I don’t know, hut the day he said he was to get it he went out and didn't return. He had slipped his clothes out with his samples, and the cook and I were just out of luck.
"I have learned many things in running a boarding house. One is that it is very hard work, work that keeps you going from the early morning hours until late at night. One thing I haven't been able to learn very well is to turn away people that I feel like really needs help. But I do now require traveling people and others that I don't trust very much to pay in advance. I guess if I had done this long ago I would've saved something. I try to never worry over what has been done that can't be helped.
"I am thankful that my health is so much better and that I can still run my hoarding house, for it means my living to me and my daughter, and I only-hope I'll be able to continue to work. I hear the cook in the kitchen. I didn't know the time had passed so quickly."
Realizing that she wanted to see about her supper, I thanked her for the story, told her how much I enjoyed the lunch, and the very pleasant day. As I left, she came out on the porch with me and said, "It's been a pleasure to have you and I hope you'll come back again. You really should stay, for I see the music man coming."
<text not clear>
