"MY TIME IS MIGHTY NIGH OUT"
Aunt Lucy's face is lined and her voice cracked; but kindness shines in her dim old eyes.
"I ain't spry no more, honey," she said. "My time is mighty nigh out, but I's ready to go when old Marster sees fit to call me." She paused to cough hollowly, laying her hand impressively on her chest. "I's got a bad cold, and I been scatterin' chicken manure to cure it. Hit's good to break up a head cold," she expalined.
"I seen you comin' way off. You sho' does step it; you walks proudful-like." Aunt Lucy gave her chair a hitch that brought it closer, then leaned forward eagerly as she spoke. "I wants to axe you a question 'bout Carrie Bell, Handy's gal. Did you know her husband is in de pen? Carrie Bell ain't never had no pa. She's sho' pretty; a high breeded, no--nation nigger. I sho' is glad I ain't no mixture breed.
"Carrie Boll's husband is de one dat kilt Hr. Will Britt. Lawd, dat was one awful night. Dey wus heap of evil goin's on dat night. Nigger gals dese days sho' is sinners; sings reels, gits drunk and shakes dey foot all night. No wonder dey no count; ain't got no 'ligion. Now, I holds myself above sinners. Folks don't shout either lak dey used to. Book-reading done ruint 'em," she finished her ranbling complaint, and I asked about Aunt Holly Almonds, one of the old slaves.
"Honey, Aunt Mollie was a ageable 'oman. You know dat. She done gone now. Dey planted her de fu'st Tuesday after the fu'st Sundar in fodder-pulling time."
"What do you mean by planted? Aunt Lucy?"
"Dat means dey funeralized her, honey. I been unrestless ever since she gone. Ain't had nobody to set and talk with and smoke my pipe in peace. Just look at Handy Jordan. She don't count. Young as she is she already got nine head of chillun. She's the outbreedingest 'oman that ever I did see. She ain't much over thirty year old. She had two by her fu'st husband, Tobe. He's dead. Three by her second husband; he runned away. And de other four is slew-footed bastards. She sho' do dominize her chillun though." Here Aunt Lucy laughed gleefully. "Honey, here I is tellin' you 'bout Handy and you wants to know 'bout wash-'omans,"she said. "But what you wants to know all dat for, I sho' can't see, a white lady like you.
"I been a wash-'oman all my life, an' I used to be de best in New-Fallah, 'course now I ain't no count. I's on 'leaf and dey gives me termodities (commodities). Dat sho' hopes me. Then I goes out in de woods down by de creek and gits my wood.
"Talking 'bout when I wuz a washr-'oman, I wuz high-class; washed party dresses, window curtains and man's white shirts. Had a fluting machine. Ain't but one other 'oman had a fluting machine 'side me an' hit wuz Bunch.
"Here's de way we do:" she thus began to explain the technique of her craft.
"Fu'st, Monday morning you goes to de white folks' house and gits de wash. When I gits home, I makes a fire under de pot. Den I puts on a pot of water and let hit git hot. Then I sorts out de clothes.
"Fu'st you sorts your white clothes. You puts 'em in a number three rubbing tub. Then you rubs out de white clothes and puts 'em in de pot, then cuts up your bar soap and puts hit in de pot, then puts in your washing powder. Then you rubs out your towels in de tub. An' all dis time your white clothes is boiling in de pot. Then you takes your white clothes out and puts your towels in, and rinses your white clothes out through two tubs of water wid blueing in hit. Then you starches 'em.
"To make your starch you lets your water boil, then puts a little piece of lard, in it. Make up your starch in a pan and stir it in de tolling water, and let hit cook 'bout twenty minutes. Them you gits a pan and strains your starch through a clean cloth so de starch won't be lumpy and trashy. Then you starch de clothes and hang 'em on de lines with clothes pins. Then your towels you wash the same way but you don't starch 'em. Then you wash the colored clothes like the white unlessen you don't boil de ones dat fade. Jist put 'em in de hot water and take 'em right out, unlessen hit's over-halls.
"That's Monday, washing-day. Then on Tuesday you starts ironing.
"When you git ready to iron and take your clothes and sprinkle 'em down, roll 'em tight and put 'em in a basket. Kiver 'em up with a white piece of cloth and let 'em set. You make a fire over your ironing bucket with charcoals, then put your ironing board whilst your fire is burning and then you scrub your irons and wash 'em an' put 'em on de fire. Then you git your iron holder and a cloth to wipe your irons as you take 'em off de fire. You must watch out that you don't have a rough iron. Use cedar or wax to wipe your iron so hit will be smooth. Then start ironing your towels fu'st, then iron your silk pieces that you don't have to sprinkle, like gowns, slips, missouria (brassieres), panties and things. Next you gits a clean white cloth and keeps hit damp to wipe de wrinkles out de clothes while you irons. You irons upon a Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. Pack in a basket and upon a Friday you takes 'em home to de white folks and gits your money. Then" she added, beaming broadly, "on Saturday you pleasure; and you goes to meetin' on Sunday.
"Honey, wash-'omans has a good time in Summer - excusing a rainy spell. But in winter, Lawd, hit's hard. I is had my hands split wide open and my foots might' nigh froze washing out doors at de wash pot in Winter. I speck de turpentine in de soap hopes your hands and keeps 'em from gitting 'fected. If hit rains, dat's sho' worrisome. Has to dry de clothes in de house by de open fireplace, If hit rains on Monday us has wash on de back porch. Some niggers has a shed-room, but I ain't never had one.
"But you takes hit all in all, hit ain't bad. Us don't have long cold spells, you know dat.
"I hears de white ladies up North does dey own washing. Ain't dat somepin'! Lawd, sposen you had to do it? You just couldn't have done it, honey, 'cause you is qualfty!' Dey tells me dem Northern ladies sets and eats with niggers, but dey must be po' white trash, lak dat 'oman dat lives in de alley."
I told Aunt Lucy that the women up North had washing machines and it wasn't a bit of trouble and that some women down South have them and do their own work, but she couldn't be convinced. She talked on and on, shaking her old head that I've never seen without it's head-rag.
She said,she was born "fore freedom" but who can tell? Few ever know their age. I asked one old woman how old she was; and she looked about eighty. She said 'Missy, I 'epeck I's 'bout twenty-one."
Aunt Lucy then said, "Honey, Aunt Hannah is dead too. You writ 'bout her and had her picture took. She showed dat picture to everybody. Hit seems lak all de old niggers is dying out. But dey don' have big settin' ups no more. Dat's 'cause dey takes de body to de funeral home and enflumes (embalm) hit. Dey don't ever bum no fire in de room with de body, 'cause smoke would mix up wid de spirit and scatter hit. But us still has big funerals though and they's grand. Yes'um, I sho' believes in ha'nts but dey walks in special times, most ingenerally when de moon is young." She broke off suddenly to move stiffly to her door and scold several small and noisy black girls. "Dem little kinky-headed pickaninnies" she mumbled. "Dey sho' do pester me. Dey's Mandy's and dey so light-fingered dey steal air thing dey sees, whether dey needs hit or not."
I asked Aunt Lucy why they all wore earrings.
She said, "Honey, dey Ma's punches holes in de years (ears) tomake 'em see good out de eyes. Two of her gala is 'blue gum'. You know when a blue-gum nigger bites you., hit's pizen. Don't you 'member dat time Mr. Charlie Skillman hit dat nigger in de mouth wid his fist and Dr. Britt had to cut his hand off; den his arm? I wuz washin' fer dem and dey sbo' thought he was gwiner die. He didn't die but he came mighty nigh hit, and his arm sho' did. I don't want no blue gum nigger to bit me!" Then she resumed her story. "I is too old to do air work but I nurses de sick," she said. "Don't do hit fer pay. I does hit fer 'Old Marster.'
"I kin make good poultices, keep hot bricks to dey foots, rub 'em with kerosene, lard and turpentine. When Lavinia Roberson had de per- . mourney just 'fore Christmas, de white lady nurse dat comes 'round and visits said I done fine. She kept on poking a little glass stick in her mouth. (Lavinia called hit a 'mama-ter) and took her 'temptation,' but I don't know nothin' 'bout dat. I can't read. Day didn't let her eat nothin', excusin' orange juice, milk and female (premium) crackers which had been rolled with a rolling pin. Times sho' is changed. In my day, dey said, 'stuff a cold and starve a fever.' Ain't but one kind o' medicine I takes an' dat's 'black draws,' (black draught). Hit does all de good.
"Honey, I ain't been de same since Dr. Britt died. Hit pretty nigh broke all us niggers' hearts. He didn't care ef you had no money. You say, 'Doc, I ain't got no money,' and he say 'I ain't ask you, is '? He ain't never turned nobody down and ef you were bad-off sick he would take you to his horse-pital and never charge you one red copper cent. Bless Sod, he's settin' right up dar by de throne right now. There ain't never been sich a funeral in de United States and hit took one hour fer de parade (funeral procession) to pass. (And it did!) Dey let you view the body and I hears ten thousand folks passed by and everybody crying; mens, chillun, niggers and all. God bless him!
"No, honey, I never did marry. Didn't have no chillun neither. I speck dat's de reason I'm so calm-like. I is glad I didn 't have no husband to pester and rule me. I ain't never seen air nigger man a woman can trust. Didn't have none to throw sand in my eye. Look at Maida grieving 'cause Carrie Bell's husband in de pen. She ought to thank God he's dar; he would have kilt her by now. He went up North to Detroit. That's what runit him. And he come back here talking like a Yankee, puttin' on airs. He got a good pa and ma. I feels sorry for them, but I is sho' glad he's 'sont up'." I thanked her for telling me about washing clothes.
She said, "I know one thing I forgot to tole you; how much money . I made. I made good money; sometimes eight dollars a week and de white folks furnished soap and starch. Dese days tain't hard lak hit use ter be. All dem white, stiff, starch petticoats I've washed and ironed; all de corset covers, drawers and oh Lawd, de ruffles!
"In dese days ladies almost bees naked."
2/14/39
S.J.
