John H. Bunch
Negro Saw-mill Hand
200 Perry Street
Elizabeth City, N. C.
W. O. Saunders, Writer
April 6, 1939
<Text Not Clear>
JUST STAYS HOME AN' MINDS HIS OWN BUSINESS
Negro saw mill hands pass my home mornings and evenings going to and from their work. Those who pass my home come through a Negro settlement north side of the town to get to their homes in another Negro settlement on the south side of the town. Many of them live two to three miles from their work. And yet after an eight hour day of hard labor handling heavy boards and timbers that come from the saws of the big mill with its seven gaunt black smoke stacks, or feeding water sogged logs to its saws, they swing along briskly with a rhythm in their walk. They never lag. I never saw one lag in the days before first then N.R.A. and, then, the Wages and Hours Act cut their labor from eleven hours a day. They hurried to and from their work when they worked eleven hours a day, just as they do now when their hours are only eight with a half day on Saturdays.
They used to carry dinner pails packed with salt pork, biscuits and sweet potatoes and a jug of coffee. In recent years they carry their noon-day lunch in a paper bag or wrapped in an old newspaper, I haven't seen a dinner pail in the hands of a Negro saw mill hand in several years now.
I trailed one of these saw mill hands to his home on the other side of town. Afterwards I clocked the distance from his home to his job. It was 2.1 miles by my speedometer, and that did not count the 300 yards or more from the mill office to the point on the vast yards where the man labored.
But let me tell you about the home, of this Negro, that I found on a side street sandwiched between two white folks' cemeteries. When I saw my man lift the latch to the front gate and follow a neat brick walk around the side of the house to the kitchen door, I thought surely this was not the home of a mill hand whose weekly wage was only eleven dollars and who but lately got only $8.40 for a 56 hour week. But I was not mistaken, This was the home of John Sitterson, the subject of this brief life history.
I didn't reveal my presence at the time; I contented myself with viewing the house and its grounds. The door yard was a riot of flowers; jonquils, daffodils, iris, tulips, azaleas, pansies, violets and flowers I could not name were in bloom. And there were spirea, scotch broom, hydrangea and roses yet to bloom.
By the house was a garden in which peach trees bloomed and figs were budding. Blackberry bushes clung to the fence on the south side of this garden, and the soil had been prepared and seeds planted for the vegetables to come.
The house itself was a modest two story wooden cottage of four rooms and a one story kitchen on the rear. The house was painted and in good repair. It was evidently not a rented house. Landlords generally do not keep their Negro tenements in good repair, and Negro tenants do not expend much labor on the landscaping of rented property. It was nearly six o'clock in the evening, I went home and got my own supper and returned about seven o'clock that evening, I unlatched the gate, which swung freely on good hinges, walked up to the front porch, stepped on the porch which was firm to my tread, and rang the door-bell.
A neatly dressed brown woman came to the door, first switching on a light in the hall. She opened the door and contemplated me with an undisguised look of surprise. White men who knock at the doors of colored people at night -- or at any time for that matter -- usually are bent on one of two missions: to sell something or collect money for goods or services. When a Negro family is in debt, the visit of a white man is occasion for alarm and doors are opened cautiously. The white man may not be surprised if he is told that the party he wishes to see is not at home. But this door had not been opened hesitatingly to me. The woman who opened the door was nevertheless at a loss to account for the business that had brought me to her door.
"I am W O. Saunders," I said; "And if you don't know me, you probably have heard about me."
"Yes suh," she said; "You used to be the newspaper man; I'se read your paper. Preacher Cartwright has spoke about you." But she didn't ask me to come in. I went on to explain my mission.
"Your husband is a saw mill hand, and I am looking for a saw mill hand who will tell me about his life and how he lives on the wages he gets."
"Well you just come right in and talk to my husband. He's mighty tired when he gits home; his feet hurt him; on his feet all day and walkin' better'n two miles from his work 'fore he gits home."
She led the way to the sitting room in the rear, pausing to switch off the hall light as I entered the room.
I found her husband in the kitchen which opened off the sitting room. He was standing by the stove with a glass of water which he had just poured from a steaming tea kettle.
"I expected to find you soaking those tired feet," I said.
"No suh, I'm washin' my mouth out; gums hurt worse'n my feet. Aint got no teeth an' my gums get mighty sore, chewin' on 'em."
After rinsing his mouth with warm salt water he came into the sitting room, put a couple of pieces of pine wood in a small sheet iron stove and settled down to talk to me. In the meantime I had been taking in my surroundings. The house was plainly, but neatly furnished; floors covered with Congoleum in gay patterns and everything scrubbed and shining, indicative of good housekeeping. I had no means of discovering what they had had for supper, because all the dishes had been washed and put away. Mrs. Sitterson seated herself in the one rocker in the room and busied herself with mending a suit of faded but newly washed overalls.
"Like you see her now, is the way you'll always find her," said the husband, nodding approvingly at his wife. "Allers a doing somethin', if not in the house, out in the yard, where she spends most of her time when her house work's done an' the weather fittin'."
John Sitterson is a smallish sinewy man of 64 toothless and bald but clear of vision and articulate of speech. He has, evidently, been without teeth so long that their absence is no longer an impediment to his speech.
"I was born an' raised on a farm down in Perquimans County," he said; "My father was a tenant farmer and a hard worker. He taught his chillun to work. I worked on the farm till I was nineteen years old. Then I went to work at a ground mill run by a Mr. Old. He was a preacher and a mighty fine man. I worked for him about three years. He paid me a dollar and twenty five cents a day. That was good money them days, but I was young and didn' save much. After workin' for him about three years I had saved up $35 and bought a horse and went to farmin' for myself. I farmed on shares; took about 30,000 to tend -- I guess you'd call it about 15 acres.
"First year I raised three bales of cotton, 20 bags of peanuts an' about 15 barrels o' corn, besides my 'taters' and peas and a little garden stuff. Raised me two or three pigs too. The landlord took one third of the cotton, the corn and the peanuts. He let me have all the 'taters' and garden stuff, and the meat.
"But cotton wasn't worth but about $30 a bale, peanuts about $2.50 a bag and corn only about a dollar a barrel. It took all my corn to feed the horse and the pigs.
"But all years wasn't good as the first year. There were wet years when I hardly raised nothin' and would ha' gone hongry if I hadn't worked in the log woods and for other farmers when I got caught up with my own work. I could always find work.
"But, good years or bad years, there wont no way o' gettin' ahead on that farm. Landlord made us trade at his store. End o' the year when settlin' up time came I'd come in and he'd say: 'John, old fellow, you got right up to de fence dis year but didn't quite get over. Here's my books, here's de figgers; figgers don't lie; a figger is a figger an' a cipher is a cipher.'
"I was always in debt to that white man. An' then he'd ask me if I was going to stay on with him another year? If I said yes he'd holler to his store clerk to let me have a barrel o' flour, a side o' meat, some lard and molasses and a bolt o' yellow cottons, some calico, a suit o' overalls and brogan shoes. If I said I wasn't goin' to stay I didn't get no provisions and he would send and take the last peck o' corn that I'd kept for my share o' de crop. He was a hard man. He owned a lot of land, but he went blind in one eye before he died. And after he died his lands just went away from his chillun. Had a lot as fine timber as I ever saw; wouldn't cut a stick of it. But after he died all the timber was cut off.
"I'd been farmin' 'bout two years when I married my first wife. She was a big help until she got sickly. She only lived about eight years after we was married. It was before she died that I gave up farmin' and moved to town so she could be near a doctor. There was no doctor near where we lived, and livin' was mighty hard too. We didn' have much of a house, just a two room weather-boarded shack, not ceiled inside, with a kitchen set off from the house. We cooked in a fireplace; you'd be surprised what good biscuits my wife could bake in a skillet with a heavy iron cover on it.
"I came to town about 1907, It was January. Didn't have hardly enough money to get here, but we didn't owe nothin' and didn't have much to move. Two dray loads took it all.
"I got a job at Foreman-Blades Mill where I'm still workin', handlin' boards on the yard at a dollar and a quarter a day, workin' 'leven hours a day. My wife died in August the year we moved here. We had four children, but two of 'em had died. My mother was livin' then and she agreed to take the two chillun that was living, an' I broke up house-keeping. But after eighteen months boardin' I married again; married a cousin of myfirst wife.
"We rented a house and got along pretty good with my wife helpin'• She was always a mighty good field hand, an' a lot o' times she could make more money than I could make, pickin' peas, diggin' 'taters', pickin' cotton.
"I had always wanted a home of my own and soon after my second marriage I bought the lot this house stands on. Man sold it to me for one hundred and twenty five dollars, five dollars down and five dollars a month. But I paid him ten dollars a month and won't long gettin' it paid for. And then the War came along and we saw good times; wages riz to three dollars and a half a day. When we had six hundred dollars saved up I went to the white folks I worked for and asked 'em if they'd let me have the lumber to build a house an' let me pay 'em five dollars a week, to be took out o' my wages."
Here John digressed and began to discourse on the ways of white folk in their dealings with colored people.
"When you works for white folks they expect you to work; ez long ez you gives 'em a good days work an' they learn they can depend on you, aint much trouble gettin' a favor from 'em when you asks for it. The folks I work for is as good or better'n the general run. They let me have the lumber; it 'mounted to a thousand dollars.
"I took my six hundred dollars and bought the bricks, the shingles, nails, paint and hardware, and hired my labor and built this house. It took me eight years to pay for that lumber; interest eats you up. And then about the time I got that lumber paid for, they began to cut wages, first fifty cents a day, then another fifty cents, then another cut, until they got me down to a dollar and forty cents a day. Them was tight times. It was a pain, ugh! ugh! If I hadn't had this house paid for I'd ha' lost it. But, praise the Lord, I had my house all paid for and had bought the lot side of it for a garden.
"But it was tight times. My wife toted her end, but there aint but so many days a woman can find work in the field. And even when you got a house there's taxes and 'onsurance' on it, and always somethin' to do to it if you want to keep the roof from leaking and the place from runnin' down on you. But we scrimped along somehow.
Didn't eat much meat; a chicken when we could get it; stew beef when we could get it, a mess of fish once in a while; but mostly just salt pork, sweet 'taters', flour, corn meal, molasses, sugar and a little butter. We never went hongry, but we had to pinch and scrape to get along."
He paused, got up to put another stick of wood in the fire, resumed his seat, crossed his legs, leaned his head back against the wall, closed his eyes and was silent for a moment. And then he sat bolt upright, turned to me and said:
"But the Lord has been good to me. The Lord looks out for them that helps they selves and obeys His commandments. Why, Mr. Saunders, you couldn't raise a finger if the Lord didn't will it!"
I have been long familiar with the serene faith of simple folk in a personal deity who orders their lives, hears their prayers and never fails to answer a prayer if He considers the thing they pray for good for them or not inconsistent with His inscrutable plans. But I couldn't help marvel at the sublime faith and reverence of this simple day laborer who would as soon think of questioning the righteousness of a God who gave him a black skin with all of its handicaps, as he would think of cutting off his own hands -- those gnarled and knotted hands with which he had wrung a hard living in this competitive world for more than half a century. His faith in preachers and in churches may waver (indeed he will tell you that the preachers "mess things up") but his faith in his God never falters. And I seemed to see a look in his eyes that went beyond and back of the cross on Calvary, far back into the glory of a heaven where shone the refulgent brightness of a God with whom he felt on intimate terms and of whom he was unafraid. The mass of Christians may seek the favor of the Most High through the intercessor, Christ; others through the Mother of their Risen Lord; but not John Sitterson; he goes straight to God Himself, whose awful majesty holds no terrors for him. Jesus died that the. way to the Father might be opened to the children of men; John Sitterson, bows humbly and reverently to the Christ and the Virgin Mother, but pauses not in his confident approach to the very throne of God Almighty Himself. If God gave him a black skin, God had a reason for it. There is no eternal injustice. Skins that are white today may be black in the Great Beyond. Surely, black skins will be white. At least John Sitterson is sure of it.
John Sitterson hasn't a bath room in the house he built; no telephone, no radio. He never dreamed of owning an automobile and doesn't even own a bicycle on which to ride to and from his work.
But he has running water in his kitchen and electric lights. Contaminated water may have been responsible for the ill health and untimely death of his first wife. Oil lamps are hard on eyes that find much work to do after nightfall. And oil lamps are an explosive, ever present danger in the house into which a man has put his life savings. John Sitterson doesn't count his water faucet and the few electric lights in his home a luxury. Without those lights both he and his wife might have to provide themselves with optical aids to vision.
I asked John why he chose to buy a home site in such close proximity to two demeteries. "I thought colored folk were afraid of ghosts!" I suggested.
"No suh," he replied; "You needn't be 'fraid o' anybody after he's dead; it's the live ones you got to be afraid of, especially the way they're killin' an' robbin' one another in this day and time.
"Seems like the more folks see an' the more they know, the more sense they'd have; but it aint dat way; 'pears like the more they see an' the more they know, the worser they get. Trouble is they want everything they see; mos' folks livin' beyond their means; an' when you tries to spend more than you makes you're gettin' into trouble.
"I declar', folks has got so bad I don't go out o' the house nights any more'n I can help it. Never go down town Sat'day nights any more. Go down town an' get in a crowd, never know when somebody'll start trouble. I just stays home an' minds my own business."