KAY'S SHOP
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs.
Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
April 4, 1939
March 9, 1939
Mrs. Kathryn Jiles (white)
Manager of Susanne Hat Shop
230 College Avenue
Athens, Georgia
Milliner
S.B.H.
KAY'S SHOP
Mrs. James, manager of Kay's Hat Shop, was waiting on customers when I entered her place of business. "Just look around," she said, "and I'll be with you in a minute. There's a chair by my desk if you would like to sit down while I finish with these ladies.”
A colorful array of hats in the plate glass window facing the street attracted passers-by, and the pre-Easter trade seemed brisk. It is a small establishment, and its composition walls, finished to resemble natural pine, the floor of tiny black and white tiles, and its modern fixtures, combine to form a pleasing background for the style display. Full length mirrors are arranged along one side and the end of the shop, and these mirrors are equipped with handy little shelves on which the customer may deposit purses and small parcels, leaving both hands free to adjust the hats to the most becoming angles. Hand mirrors are supplied to enable the customer to see how the hat looks on all sides. A long mission oak table holds a display rack on which pattern hats may be seen. Around this stand are magazines, stylebooks and hand mirrors.
Near the front is the manager's desk and chair, and I occupied the only other chair that I saw in the shop.
At last, when Mrs. James had made several sales, and there was not a customer left in the place, she came up to me, smiled and asked, "Now, what type and color of hat would you like to see?"
"I’ve been admiring your hats," I told her, "and find them most attractive. I'll come by sometime and look at them when I am ready to buy but right now, I’d like to talk to you, if you are not too busy."
Her manner stiffened, and I am not quite sure whether she thought I would prove to be an insurance agent or would attempt to sell books and magazines, so I hastened to explain that I desired to record some of her occupational experiences, and a story of her life.
"Why don’t you go to some of these women that have been in business longer than I? I'm sure they could tell you of more interesting experiences," she protested. "However," she continued, "I do feel rather flattered that you would choose me out of a city full of others, and I’ll do my best for you. But I’ll warn you, it will be far worse than you anticipated, because I’m not at all interesting, personally, compared with others. I’m just living and working from day to day, trying to get along.”
Mrs. James is a small person, weighing scarcely more than a hundred pounds. She was wearing a white satin blouse with a man-tailored tan suit and matching tan hose with black suede slippers.
Before our interview could get under way a customer came in. "I want to see a lime-colored felt hat," she said. "This one feels like it’s going to fall off," she complained, when Mrs. James had carefully placed a hat of the desired color in a new spring style, on her head.
"Oh, no! It will not do that; it just feels that way now because you are not accustomed to this shape. Don’t set it too far over your face,” Mrs. James advised.
"Don’t you have another style?" asked the customer.
"Certainly," Mrs. James replied, "I have lots of styles and colors too. How about this little starched linen hat in blue? It just suits your hair and general style."
"Oh, it’s lovely!" exclaimed the customer when she tried it on. "And did you say $2 is the price? Well, I’ll take it and that lime green one too, the one I tried on at first."
When the customer had departed the manager said to me, "That's salesmanship for you. She tried on two and took both. You know women are like that. If you convince them you really think a hat or dress looks nice on them, nine times out of ten, they will buy. However, it isn’t always as easy as that. But you do have to sell them on the idea it looks better than anything else you ever saw them wear. If they are strangers, make them believe you think the article in question is ’just their type.’
"This is my first real experience in selling hats. However, I did make a few sales when I worked in a department store in Chattanooga. The people there weren’t hard to please, and the sales came easy to me there. We sold children’s hats there too, but in this shop my boss man hasn’t sent me anything for children, so far.
"Oh, yes, I have been working all my life. I was born on a farm near Carrollton, Georgia, and helped my parents with the farm work soon as I was old enough. However, I don’t care about the world knowing that I worked in the field. I have never mentioned it to people who didn’t know me when I was a child. I figure, what’s the use of telling a thing like that to people that don’t know about you already. I have chopped cotton, and picked it too, many a day. I remember I used to stop working when I saw a train go by and wonder what it was like to go places and see the world. I promised myself when I left the country that nobody wouldn’t be able to give me enough money to live in it again.
"Please don’t get the impression that my people were all that poor, for they were not. We lived in a fairly good house, and had plenty to eat and wear. In fact, we lived as well as other people did in that community. It so happened that my father’s health was bad, and we had to help my mother keep things going. There were three of us children, a sister, brother, and myself.
"Our parents got tired of farm life and moved to Cedartown, Georgia. I never told my mother how glad I was to leave the country, because I didn’t want to give her anything more to worry over when she was so distressed at that time over my father’s health. He took the money he received from the sale of the farm and went in business for himself, and did very well in town.
"I finished high school in Rome, Georgia, and after that I worked my way through. Miss Martha Berry’s boarding school at the same place, and that’s where I met my husband. He was working his way through that same school. Later, he became a member of the faculty right there where he had been a student. Plenty of things happened in those school days to make life happy and interesting. We had to work hard, but we had a good time as well."
Another customer interrupted us. "Do you still have that hat I was looking at the other day?" she wanted to know. On receiving an affirmative reply, she asked, "Is it still just a dollar?"
"Yes, “was the reply, "when I opened the shipment of hats that came in today, I found a letter from my boss man saying I could run my sale until this last shipment is sold out,"
The customer looked at herself in the glass with a satisfied smirk. "I was just passing and saw it still in the window, and thought I’d better come on in and get it before somebody else beat me to it," she confided.
"That’s fine, I’m so glad you did," said Mrs. James, "for my cutest hats are sold so quickly that I was afraid it would be gone before you came back for it, and it is so definitely suited to your individuality and style. Thanks, come back," she added as the customer departed with her purchase.
She was smiling, when she rejoined me at the desk. "You know that woman has looked at that hat every day since I put it on sale, and that was all of a week ago," she said, and then began again:
"At that school girls were taught just about everything that a woman would be interested in. We were taught dressmaking and millinery, as well as interior decorating, not to mention cooking and the other housekeeping arts. I specialized in millinery and dressmaking. How-ever, I have done less at sewing than anything else I was trained to do.
"Let me tell you a few of the things we girls did while at Berry. We were not allowed to go with boys unless our guardians were along. I never was interested in any other boy but my husband. However, there was one other boy in that school who did attract some of my attention for the reason that he could make the best candy I have ever eaten. My sister and I had a room at the back of the dormitory. This boy had a way of letting us know when he had made candy for us by whistling like a mockingbird. My sister and I got busy tying sheets together and hanging them out of the window. He would tie the box of candy on the end of the sheet-cable and we would draw it up to our room. What a time we did have eating that candy, as well as passing it around to our friends. Letters from various boys to be distributed to their girl friends were received the same way. At the sound of the whistle we hastened to let down the sheets, and then would have lots of fun with whatever came up.
"Our uniform included blue serge skirts, middy blouses, Bradley sweaters, black shoes, and black cotton hose, when I was in school. You'd better not be caught out with anything else on either. All of us girls had pretty pajamas. One night we were invited to a dance and were determined not to wear those blue middy blouses and black cotton hose, so each of us purchased a pair of silk hose. We were afraid to buy anything else for fear of being found out. We wore our pajama coats and the silk hose. Every time we saw any of the faculty of our school approaching we hastily buttoned our sweaters to the neck and trusted that our silk hose would go unnoticed, but one of them saw us and we were restricted for a whole month.
"In my last year in school we decided to have a picnic. Miss Berry gave us the privilege of visiting her Dream House on top of Mount Berry. We packed our lunches and started out. What a delightful time we did have that day! Not a care in the world. We never dreamed what was in store for us next day. When time came to go back, the gang decided to go down Sunset Trail. We started out and got lost, and we were about three hours late getting back to school.
"Next day we were called out on the carpet to explain ourselves. Was that crowd of kids frantic! We wondered what our principal might do. We were sentenced to restriction for several weeks, and you never heard such a howl as our bunch of students did make. Finally, they had to call in Miss Berry, and she told those in charge that she had given us permission to take the trip and that we really did get lost. She saved the day for us.
"Mother wanted my brother to attend the same school, so she put his application in and it was accepted. Just a few days before he was to enter school he ran away from home and went to Arkansas. Mother was heartbroken and did everything in the world to entice him back. He wrote her that under one condition would he come back and no other. That was if she would promise him she wouldn't make him go to the Berry School. She agreed, and he came back. He was the happiest kid I ever saw, just to be home again. But while boys were given wonderful manual training at Berry, none of the courses taught in that school ever interested him. His objection was not to what they taught, but to the school.
"Soon after I finished school, I married. My husband taught school for awhile. I often visited a friend living in Chattanooga. She owned a store, and I helped her in it without pay because I wanted the experience, for I was interested in the work. She finally gave me a real job in her store at $10 a week to start with. We really did do the business.
"After I went to work regularly in Chattanooga my husband gave up his job in Rome and moved to Chattanooga to be near me. He got a job with a real estate company at $25 a week.
"After several months my wages were raised to $15 a week. I worked for my friend three years and was making $18 a week when I quit. The first money I made was spent on clothes. After I got a supply of them I began buying things for our house, as well as helping my husband with other expenses.
"Selling ready-to-wear is a racket. I've known my friend to make from $3 to $5 on many a dress, and mind you, she only sold popular priced goods, no exclusive models or highbrow stuff. I did a little of everything there was to be done in that store. Once when one of the girls sold a woman an evening dress that was two sizes too small for her, I was called on to alter that dress because the woman who usually did the alterations was just rushed to death that day. A few weeks later that customer brought the dress back with every seam around the waist and shoulders ripped open, just fairly burst open. The girl that had sold it to her, got the woman who did the regular alterations to fix it up for her that time. I am not sure whether or not she was experienced in steaming velvet; anyway she completely ruined that lovely evening dress. The woman was furious and wanted the proprietor of the shop to make it good. She refused, and we lost one of our best customers. That was a case of being too sure of what you think you have.
"Not long after my friend gave me a regular job, a man came in to buy a dress for his wife. I sold him what he seemed to want, and he left the store. About two or three hours later he came back and said I had short-changed him $5. We argued and argued. I was sure I had given him the right change, as the bill was itemized and sent to the cashier’s office in one of those electric basket or cup contraptions. Oh, you know what I'm talking about! Anyway, there was no way of short-changing anybody when the money is counted out to them after the cashier makes the change. My friend, the proprietor, appeared on the scene, and learning the trouble, she calmly handed him a $5 bill. After he left the store she said to me: 'Kay, don't you know better than to argue with customers no matter how wrong they are. I am very sorry, but I will have to take the $5 out of your pay.
"Then I did hit the ceiling. I said to her: 'Dorothy, do you mean to tell me you think I did that?'"
"'No, of course not,' she said, 'but that is an ironclad policy that I follow in my store. It's the only way to keep things like that from happening, especially if you cannot make the customer admit the error,'
"I told her I was quitting that moment. Nobody wasn't going to get away with accusing me of doing such a thing. She begged me to stay, and gave me my money back. It wasn't long after that when the same thing happened to her.
"I quit work for awhile when my daughter was born. At least I didn't work out any more when I lived in Chattanooga. I took in sewing at home, and Dorothy sent me work to do from her store when they were rushed. I would make cotton frocks at from $1 up to $3 a garment, and silk dresses ran from $3 to $8 each. However, I couldn't make very much because I did all my work; washing, ironing, housekeeping, and caring for my baby.
"Last year, when my husband was transferred to this city, we rented an apartment on the other side of town for $25 a month, and soon as we got settled I set out to find a Job. I met one woman who worked for a real estate company and asked her if she would help me get a Job, or rather if she would make some suggestions as to how I might find one here. About a month later she called me to her office and said that someone she had worked for in Atlanta was considering opening a hat shop here. My application for the place of manager was accepted. This location was chosen and the place entirely remodeled and refinished. The worst obstacle I have is the high rent. It is awfully high. We have to pay $100 a month and I have to sell many a hat in the course of a month to meet all the overhead expenses, including rent, water, lights, and my helpers.
"My boss man pays me $15 a week, and my helper gets $10 a week." The girl spoke up, "Why do you call me your helper? I am a clerk,"
"Well, what difference does it make to you what we call your Job, Just so you sell the hats and collect your wages?” We all laughed, and Mrs. James continued her narrative:
”My boss man must have lots of confidence in me. He remodeled this place and fixed it up just like I planned it, then sent me the hats to be sold, and I have never seen him yet, although it was three months ago that he hired me.
"This shop is not owned by local people. It is owned by a company that has a chain of shops extending all over the South and their headquarters are in Atlanta.
"We operate on a strictly cash basis. However, I am allowed to operate a lay-away plan and to make a few concessions for people I know real well, but I have to be personally responsible for any risks. I have only made one exception to our rule, and that was for a girl that I am well acquainted with. She wanted a hat to wear to a party but would not have the money for a few days after the date of the party. She asked if I would make a ticket of it until the specified time when her money was due her. I told her it would be at my own risk to be paid out of my own pocket if it came to a show-down. I knew she would pay me. Alien she came back to pay me she brought a friend along, who bought two hats. You never lose on the right sort of people.
"We do not carry an expensive line of hats. They range from $1 to $3 each, and our best sellers are our $1.29 hats. And do you know some people even complain because they think that is too high for a hat, and those complainers are not always the people with the least money.
"I get a commission on all over a certain amount that we sell. In the beginning I had help only on Saturdays, but since spring business has opened up I have been able to afford someone to help me all the time. However. I do not put out anything on maid service, as I do all the cleaning and dusting myself.
"You know as well as I do that you have to deal with all sorts of people when you are out in the business world. Some are as nice and agreeable as can be, while others can’t be pleased, no matter how hard you try.
"Soon after I opened up, a Northern woman who lives here came in and tried on every hat in the shop. Nothing pleased her and she ended up by poking fun at all my hats. 'Whoever selected your stock certainly showed poor taste.' Was one of her remarks.
"Why I haven't had any trouble selling them," I told her.
'"I have observed the Southern people,' she cattily continued, 'and I haven't found a person who knows what good taste is. They do not know the first word about selecting clothes and how to wear them.
"As calmly as I could, I said, 'Well, I wonder why so many Northern people come south to live.' She made no reply, but hastily donned her hat and gloved, and snatched up her purse and left our shop.
"The last thing that I recall that took me off my feet may not be of much interest except to me, but it certainly is to me. Two prospective customers came in my shop, at different times during the same day. One of them had a hat laid away, while the other bought and paid for here and took it with her. A few days after the girl whose hat had been put aside for her some in and paid for it, both of them back together and got on my neck for selling them busts just alike. I tried to be just as nice as possible about the affair and asked them how was I to know they lived in the same apartment house and that they were accustomed to going out together. One of them said, 'When I wear my hat, someone will be sure to thing I am wearing Jean's hat for she got here first end wore it first.' I told them: 'Why do you care who says what, and apologited for the mistake they seemed to think I had made. Of course little things like that shouldn't amount to anything, but it just goes to show how catty women are.
"Only last week a customer came in and made me no mad. In all she has bought four hats from me in the last few weeks, and only paid $1.29 spiese for them, when she brought a friend in to buy a hat, I asked how she liked her hats, and told her I had a new shipment is that I had opened up that morning. She said she was not quite ready for another one, and added: 'On, let me tell you something: All my friends have been asking where I get such darling little hats and how I could rate so many at a time. They claim that every time I go to a party I wear a new hat. I told them, "On, I get them is Atlanta."
"I said 'Look here Margaret. If you were not a friend of mine I'd cuss you out, but I want you to know that if you are ashamed for people to know you buy your hats from me, you can go on to Atlanta for them, and are if you don't pay more them what you gave for them at my shop.' She tried to make a joke out of it after she saw I was offended.
"’Oh, Kay, came down off of your high horse,' she said, I was only teasing."
"We belong to the Methodist church. My daughter goes to Sunday school regularly, but I'm ashamed to admit I do not go as must as I should. After I work late on Saturday night, I do not feel like getting up end rushing off on Sunday morning in time for Sunday School However, my husband and I do attend church ever so often. Let me show you my hat I bought to wear Easter Sunday. This makes the third I have selected for myself this spring. I told the woman who rune the ready-to-wear shop acrose the street that if she didn't have a dream to match it, there was no need for her to try to sell me any-thing also for I wouldn't want so Easter dress that didn't match this pretty hat." The hat was lime colored falt with a large tan how on it.
I Negro boy same in with sort drinks and sandwishes. "Here's your order, Wise'" he said.
Mrs. James began hunting in her purse for money. "On back Sue," she addressed her helper."I haven't a sent. Please pay the boy, and I'll pay you back later."
"Kay," said the helper, "what do you do wish your money? You never have any."
"Don't ask so many questions," snapped her employer, "Just land me the money right now, if you are going to." The boy took the money and left.
I declined their invitation to lunch with them, and gathered my notes and left.
