Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. c.
DR. JOHN CREIGHTON BUCHANAN
76 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
Dr. John C. Buchanan is a retired physician and surgeon. He lives in the palatial old Boylston House on South Congress Street in the town of Winnsboro. He is a descendant of the two well known families, the Buchanans and the Woodwards, both prominent in the affairs of the State since the early settlement of South Carolina. The Woodwards were English settlers from Virginia, and the Buchanans ware Scotch-Irish from Ireland.
"My father was the late Dr. Robert A. Buchanan. My mother was Rebecca Woodward, daughter of Grandfather Osmond Woodward, who was a grandson of Captain Thomas Woodward, the Regulator, Our old homestead, still in a state of fair preservation, is two doors south of the Carolina Theatre building on Congress Street, in the town of Winnsboro, S. C.
"I was born in this old home, August 15, 1862. My brothers and sisters were Robert, Alice, Rebecca, and Osmond. Robert died shortly after attaining manhood. Rebecca lived to womanhood, and died unmarried. Alice married D. V. Walker. She is a widow 36 years old, but still enjoys good health, and is full of animation for one of her years. Osmond Woodward, four years my senior, married Sophia Tillman, daughter of the late Congressman George D. Tillman. Brother Oz, as we called him, was an attorney at law of the Winnsboro bar, a senior member of the firm of Buchanan and Hanshan. This brother was a member of the South Carolina Legislature for a number of years. Afterwards, he was elected Attorney General of the State, and later, Judge of the 5th Circuit. He was accidentally shot while a passenger on a Southern Railway train en route from Trenton to Augusta, Georgia. A parlor rifle in the hands of some small boys who were playing along the line of the railway right of way was discharged. The ball passed thru the coach window and lodged in his body. He died in an Augusta Hospital from the effects of the wound.
"My early school days were spent under teachers at Mt. Zion Institute. I passed through the tutorships, respectively, of Professors Clarkson, M. P. Connor, Captain Dwight, and R. Means Davis. I entered the South Carolina College in 1882, and was graduated at the head of my class in 1886. I served as tutor in mathematics at the college under Professor slaon, who was in charge of mathematics. In 1888, I taught mathematics at Mt. Zion institute. The following year, I taught school in the town of Lynchburg, S. C. I resigned this last position to enter the South Carolina Medical College. I might say that my ambition was to become a doctor. And the offer of a scholarship in the State College at Charleston, by State Senator T. W. Woodward, influenced my action. But I was careful to got the consent of the trustees of my school at Lynchburg before I accepted the scholarship. To my surprise, I was accorded first honors on graduation. I remained one year at the institution as an interne in charge of the Negro ward. Before you conclude this interview, I wish to tell you of my work in this ward.
"When I left Charleston, I came back to Winnsboro, the old home town. I had skimped all through the South Carolina College in Columbia and the Medical College in Charleston, and it was always remarked that I was the poorest dressed man in my class. It is one of the regrets of my life today that I did not have money enough to dress well and to spend money unstintingly upon my associates. I don't mean to convey the idea that I have one through life with an inferiority complex, but I feel that I may have missed something indefinably precious and refining. You understand what I mean?
"When I began the practice of Medicine fifty years ago, my only means of travel was a horse and buggy; automobiles were not in existence then. I bought the horse and buggy on credit. But over the stretch of years since that time, I have been able to acquire twelve hundred acres of county farming lands, eleven stores, three residences, and a number of vacant lots. This property, along with United States bonds and personal property, is valued at $100,000.00.
"My wife and I made a joint will wherein it was declared that on the death of either of us the real property should be appraised and divided among the heirs, and the survivor should retain the personal property. Hence, on her death in October, 1931, the division was made, and I retained only my bonds, cash in banks, and a few intangibles.
"Let's return to my boyhood. In my teens, the State was prostrate under the heel of Northern politicians and was politically dominated by the Negroes, who had the greater number of voters at elections. Without rhyme or reason, resident Grant issued his proclamation in 1871, commanding all persons in Fairfield County to deliver their firearms to the United states Marshal or his deputies within five days. Nobody observed the order. He then suspended the writ of habeas corpus. From this time on, there was constant friction between the races. The State was ruled by dishonest white men. Bribery, forgery, extravagance, and corruption were manifest in every department of the State government. The finances of the State and counties got into a bad plight.
The condition of the State Hospital for the insane was a shame to the State and an inhuman outrage upon the unfortunate inmates. The citizens of Fair field had tried endurance and patience until this policy became a crime rather than a virtue. A county convention of the Democratic Party was called to meet in the courthouse in April, 1876. There it was determined to put on nomination a straight-out white Democratic ticket. Hope was engendered in this convention, and this hope grew into enthusiasm, especially among the young men of the town and county. My brother, Oz, was among these. Their methods were crude and often unlawful, but they were expedient and effective.
"One of the great young men of 1876, a spellbinder in persuasive oratory, was Col. J. Feaster Cameron. He came out of the Civil war a colonel of an Arkansas regiment, but returned to South Carolina. Col. LeRoy McAfie, Grand Titan of the Invisible Empire, Ku Klux Klan, married his sister, Harriet Cameron. The connection drew J. F. cameron into the Klan, which did its work silently and effectively in this territory. This placed him in the front, as one of the leaders in the Red Shirt movement of 1876. Ho was an orator.
In that campaign there was a Negro called Rhode Island Smith, and, say what you please about the race, the Negro was a great debater on abstract questions of freedom, liberty, and equality. No one could handle the wily Ethiopian, until Col. J. F. Cameron met his at Jenkinsville and completely routed him. Colonel Cameron and our people defended their Ku Klux methods and our fraudulent activities at the ballot boxes in this way. Immoral conditions surrounded us; old theories of right and wrong in individual actions must be suspended in the warfare against this immoral condition. Half our votes had been left on the battlefields of the country. We were political serfs of our former slaves, and might become their industrial servants. Not content with political supremacy and ownership of lands, the Negroes would invite the scum of the disbanded armies and the unemployed scalawags of every part of the country to flock South, intermarry with Negroes, and demand social equality. The South, held down by federal bayonets would have to grant it, live among its horrors, or seek homes in other parts of the world. They resolved that a mongrel civilization of this kind, for our beautiful southland, on must be avoided at any costs and at all hazards.
"The three accomplishments I am proudest of in my life's public service are: 1. My work as an interne in the Negro ward at the South Carolina Medical College in Charleston. I saw that they received the same care and treatment that was accorded patients in the white wards - ample and proper diet, comfortable beds, efficient nursing and the correct medicines. 2. My services on the Exemption Board in time of the World war. The members of the board were Dr. Samuel Lindsay, Dr. James E. Douglas, and myself. You would be surprised at the number of man, now prominent, who claimed exemption from war service.
I have in my mind a young man who is holding a lucrative position with the government, and who, when he came before us, boo-hooed and cried like a baby because we turned down his application for exemption. 3. My service as a member of the Winnsboro Board of Public works. We have charge of the water supply and the supply of electricity to the town. I have been a member of the board for the past 13 years, and I am chairman of the body. We have about retired the bonds issued for establishment of plants for water supply and power-house, and have made the town a present of $4,300.
My wife was Minnie Yongue, a daughter of William Yongue and Amanda pickett Yongue. The family was very prominent and wealthy before the Civil war, but was in reduced circumstances at the tire of our marriage in 1890. Indeed, we bought our household furniture piece by piece, at different times. She was a great comfort and blessing to me until her death in October, 1931.
"You want me to tell you about the changes in the practice of medicine and surgery? Well, changes have taken place more in the Manner of diagnosis than in the method of treatment. An ounce of knowledge in diagnosis is worth a pound of information about treatment, and medical science has made great progress in enabling the doctor to come to the correct diagnosis.
"In the old horse-and-buggy days, the practice was more perplexing and difficult than it is today. A doctor was often called to go fifteen miles or more from his home or office in all kinds of weather. This would often take him over roads that were impassable with a buggy. This made it necessary for a doctor to have two horses, a riding horse and a harness horse.
"When the buggy couldn't be used, the gig or sulky, a two-wheeled vehicle, was used instead. But frequently the doctor visited his patient on horseback. His medicine was carried in saddlebags. These derived their name from the fact that they consisted of two pouches held together by a broad connecting band of leather. The bags were thrown on the rear of the saddle seat, one pouch hanging on each side of the horse.
"To give you an idea of our difficulties as rural practitioners fifty years ago, I will relate some of my experiences.
"One cold day in February a heavy snow was on the ground, and it was still snowing. A telegram called me to go to see a Negro on Mr. Davis' place, near Ridgeway. I took the morning train. When I got off at Ridgeway, I was met by Doctor T., with his horse and buggy. We drove four miles into the country, over ice incrusted roads, to the patient's home. The X-ray was not available to the country physician as a means of aiding him in the diagnosis.
"Doctor T. thought the man had a case of appendicitis. I said to him, "How much morphine have you given to allay the pain?'
"He replied that he commenced with one-fourth grain, increased it to one- half grain, then increased by halves until the last dose was two grains, and still the patient had found no relief.
"I was older than he and had a wider and more extensive general practice. I had developed a test for appendicitis with the use of morphine. If one-half grain did not bring relief, it was not appendicitis. I said to Doctor T., 'It must be gall bladder and kidney trouble. I advise taking him to Doctor Heyward Gibbes in Columbia for an operation at once. If Doctor Gibbes decides to operate for appendicitis, ask him to make the incision so as to explore the gall bladder as well as the appendix.' This was done. My diagnosis was found to be correct. I was given credit for it in the medical journals of that period of time, and the test became known in this country and in Canada as the Buchanan Test.
"On another occasion, I received a call to visit a Mrs. Tilda Ashford, who lived twelve miles southwest of Winnsboro, in the Hareb section of the Country. The roads were in such condition, covered with snow and ice, that the trip had to be made on horseback. I believe this was the worst physical hardship I ever endured. My horse slipped and fell twice while going out to the Ashford home. The lady had a case of pneumonia. Doctor J. was in attendance. After seeing the patient, and talking with the doctor in regard to her treatment, I sat down by a log fire to warm. I was soon disturbed by the young doctor, who requested me to go a mile further and see a boy who had typhoid fever. I thought it strange that one should have the fever at that season of the year. However, I consented to accompany him. When we reached the home, I made a thorough examination of the patient. I was mystified. He had high fever, but the young doctor persisted in saying that the boy had no temperature in the mornings. This was strange. I examined him again, placing my hand under the back of his head and neck. His neck was rigid enough, with my hand as a lever, to raise his whole body. I concluded at once that it was a case of cerebro-spinal meningitis. The patient died. The case gave Doctor J. such a shock that he, thereafter, diagnosed some cases wrong, calling them meningitis. He phoned in one afternoon for me to come out for a consultation. When I got there, two of the doctor's friends were present. One of them had just returned from Columbia with the powders to be used in a case of meningitis. A quart bottle of fine rye whiskey was on a table in the room. They had drunk about half of it. I examined the patient and pronounced it an ulcer in the head, stating that when the ulcer burst, the boy would be all right.
"While we were discussing the case, one of the young doctor's friends, Mr. S. was reclining on a divan in the room, apparently asleep. He finally got up, yawned, and said that he had had a vision. He said that he saw pus running out of the boy's ear.
"Sure enough, the next day the ulcer burst. The pain and discomfort disappeared, and the boy was overjoyed. Mr. S., the friend, ascribed the cure to his vision. Doctor J. took it as a personal professional triumph, but, in reality, nature, allowed to take its course, was the only true physician in that case.
"We had no trained nurses in those old days. In most cases the doctor was nurse and physician. I slept in the home many a night while attending a serious case, sometimes in a bed but most often in a chair before the fireplace.
"In childbirth cases we were lucky to have an old Negro woman as wet nurse. Her principal pay consisted in the affection of the parents and of the child delivered. The child, in after years, called her and gave her a small bit of money on her birthday and on Christmas Day.
"A doctor of old days saw much more of the seamy side of the history of the neighborhood than the present day doctor Who has an office and office hours and rarely goes into country, except in cases of emergency. I have gone many a wintry day into the country where the patient's home consisted of a single thatched room, lighted by a square of white linen cloth at the window. The floor was made of rough pine planks, which wore shrunken so much that freezing cold air rushed upward into the room. The room was furnished with a table, a chair, and a trundle-bed. Near the fireside were a few cooking utensils. Nothing within it spoke of ordinary life as we know it today. Much of that help- less condition among the masses has been changed, and there is a better attitude of society toward public health and the treatment of disease. The public is willing to spend money raised by taxation for preventive measures and hospitalization of certain diseases.
"There are a few ills, however, that remain unchanged. The ills growing out of poverty and unbalanced diets; the ills that flow from the excessive use of alcohol and its derivatives; and the ills that breed from lust and the abuse of the sexual relations. It is up to the state and society to find economic and social policies to rid the country of poverty and to control the use of alcohol.
"Great strides have been made to wipe out the evils of venereal diseases, but the greatest preventive measures must be devised in the homes and by society. Parents must take their children into their confidence. Priests, ministers of the Gospel, and school teachers should not leave the youth of the land in ignorance of the ills that flow from unguarded careless indulgence and abuse of the sexual relations (even between husband and wife). It often happens that I go into a here where there is a physical giant husband, head of the family, (weight about 200 pounds), seven or eight lively children, ranging from 6 months to 12 years of age, and a delicate frail little creature - the mother - weighing about 100 pounds. This husband needs a lecture on Godly self-control as much, if not more, than the husband who occasionally gets drunk and lands in the calaboose.
"I see some pretty mottoes hanging in the homes of my patients - 'God bless our home,' 'Let not your heart be troubled,' 'Peace be to this home,' and I would like to hang this motto above them, 'Godly self-control is the keynote of the psalm of life in this home.' No one knows but the doctor and students of pathology how giving way to the psychic emotions of love, hatred, and fear affects certain organs and glands of the human body. The topic of every fireside chat, the text of every sermon, the subject of every newspaper editorial, and the thought of every automobile driver could well be, for a long while, 'Godly self-control.'
