Mary A. Hicks
<text not clear>
James E. Stathacos was born in Hrypapha, Sparta, in 1882. His father was a peasant farmer and had great difficulty in feeding and clothing his wife and three children.
James' uncle was in Roanoke, Virginia, and he carried on an occasional correspondence with the family. He wrote glowing accounts of America and told them that they should send James to him even though James was but thirteen. He reported that there was a place in America for everybody. His parents talked to him about James, and he was so eager that they permitted him to stop school and come as soon as his uncle sent him the necessary fare for passage.
James was lonely on the boat. He was homesick and afraid of the seemingly endless expanse of water. He traveled second class but spent most of his time in the steerage talking with the other immigrants of his nationality. They tried to cheer him, out he was miserable, even when his uncle, whom he did not recognize, met him in New York.
They rested and went sightseeing, then they boarded a train for Roanoke. His aunt was as strange to him as his uncle had been, and he wished and wished that he had remained in Greece. He had hoped that he wouldn't be sent to school, but his uncle top him that he was expected to finish at the local graded school. But he had to first learn English before he could enroll.

James finished the seventh grade in Roanoke, then he went to work in a local drug store. In the meantime, his brother came over and got a job nearby, so that made James very happy. He worked at two or three drug stores and at candy stores, then he went to California where he did the same kind of work.
Seven years ago James came to Raleigh to work for his brother in the California Fruit Store. He had saved some money, so when Royster's Candy Company, a store with a high reputation, was offered for sale he bought it. And he has prospered since that time.
In 1923 James' mother wrote him that it was time that he was considering matrimony and that she knew just the girl. His mother felt that she would like for her son to marry a girl whom she knew. James wrote to her, saying that he would marry the girl if he liked her when she landed in New York.
Stella had relatives in New York whom she could visit indefinitely so, accompanied by her father, she went to New York to meet her intended husband. James met her at the boat and they immediately fell in love with each other. They were married in an elaborate ceremony and he brought her to Raleigh to live.
Stella learned a little English the first year, and after she came to Raleigh she learned slowly. She helped him in his business, and he learned that her flashing smile and gay greetings helped him more in his business than did his aloofness.
In 1925 he received his citizenship papers, and that same year his first child, a girl, was born. She is shy like her father. The same is also true of the second child, but the third, a boy, is gay like his mother.
James sends his children to the public schools. He can well afford a private tutor, but he prefers that they have an American education. Because he wants them to be Americans, he sends them to the Sunday School at the Church of the Good Shepherd. He and his wife belong to the Greek Orthodox Church, but they object to its location. In the first place, it is next door to the Salvation Army building, and the drums disturb the Greek worshipers.
Both James and his wife take an active part in local and national affairs. He studies politics and selects the men for whom he votes with great care. He reads several newspapers, including a Greek newspaper. One of his chief regrets is that he knows so little about his native land.
In 1933 he and his brother visited their homeland. His mother was living, and her request to see her sons before she died was the chief reason why they returned. James was disappointed in what he found over there. He had expected to see broad streets, palatial homes, and large vineyards, but he only found narrow streets, small homes, and struggling vineyards.
Soon after that visit his mother died. He is glad that he made that trip, but he says he sees no reason for ever returning again. He is an American, and he looks so American that few people suspect anything else.

