July 14, 1939
Anthony English
104 East 4th Street
Charlotte, N.C.
Waiter
D. W. Crawford, writer
I AM A RADICAL
No names changed
"From the viewpoint of the average Greek, I suppose I am a radical. I don't conform to, and I cannot tolerate, some of their attitudes and customs," said Anthony English, rising sophomore in the engineering school at the University of Louisiana.
"Tony", as he is known by hundreds who frequent the Sanitary Grill on East 4th Street where he is head waiter on one shift, has been working during vacations and at odd times since 1930, when financial reverses almost wiped out his father's business. He is twenty years old, more than six feet tall and weighs about 215 pounds. He is not fat. He played scrub football at L. S. U. last year and expects to make the varsity team this year.
"Yes, you can put me down as saying (and I don't care how strong you make it) that I have no patience with the manner in which Greek parents in Charlotte restrain their children. Before I even finished grammar school I decided that if a Greek boy expected to get the most out of life here in America, he would have to make, and take advantage of, all the social and business contacts which the high type American uses as an aid to success. I was the first Greek boy in Charlotte to associate freely with the American students in all their social activities. As a result I had a part in all the extra-curricula activities. I was a member of all the important committees and was an officer in all the organizations at one time and another during my high school years. All those contacts helped me and were benefits that wouldn't have come my way if I hadn't ignored the hard restrictions put by most Greek parents on their boys.
"As an example of how absurd some of their attitudes are I'll give you an incident that happened during my senior year in high school. On one of my afternoons off—I didn't get many—I met up with two girls out strolling around, window shopping, and so on. As they were members of my class, from two of the finest families in town, and good friends of mine, I asked them to go with me to the theatre. On the way we met two Greek women who were so dumbfounded at the sight of a respectable Greek boy escorting two American girls that they felt it their duty to tell my people.
"My mother is rather broadminded about such things and never mentioned it, but Dad, oh my! Did he cuss me out? I'll say he did. I quietly informed him that while I had always loved and respected him, I couldn't continue to unless he also treated me with respect and consideration and allowed me some of the minor privileges I considered important. "At that time and for several years before I had been making my own money and was saving it up for college expenses had never called on him for "spending money", and I felt that I was justified in my attitude, and still feel that way. I figured that what little I spent in keeping up little social contacts with the better people was a good investment. Fortunately, Dad understood my viewpoint; at least he has never discussed it with me since. This determination of mine to disregard the usual Greek customs has benefitted me in many ways, both in high school here, in holding jobs, and in my college life last year.
"I think I was just as popular as any freshman on the campus last year. I got a bid from one of the leading fraternities, and had I into the best homes and most exclusive social circles of the city. I gained a wide acquaintance among both men and women; acquaintance which not only made it pleasant for me, but will doubtless be of help to me in many ways in the future. If there is anything wrong in my attitude or conduct I am certainly unable to see it. Of course I have a high regard for the superiority of the Greek race of the past. Its history and traditions are such that any Greek may well be proud of; but I expect to live in America, and my success as an electrical engineer will not depend much upon my observance of out-moded customs of a distinguished race. When I have finished my training I will be dependent upon the general public for business.
Even if I had all the Greeks in the South as clients I would probably starve.
"While I expect to keep in close contact with American men and women in all walks of life, and want to observe and absorb everything worthwhile in their habits and customs, I do not mean to imply that I approve of the utter lack of restraint in many American homes. And, in so far as the customary restraint as practiced by Greek parents keep their children from stepping across the border line of common decency and morality, I'm for it. But those parents often go to an extreme that I do not think is fair to the youngster who will eventually have his own life to live and cannot always have the help and advice of his parents. In some cases boys have to lie to their parents in order to keep up what they rightfully consider their social standing with their American friends and associates. I have never lied to my parents. I preferred to scrap it out in the open. I. suppose I had just a little more nerve than the average Greek boy.
"Certainly I do not approve of the conduct of the average American youngster; the promiscous necking and petting, late hours and drinking, and their tendency to try to crowd too much action into a few hours. However, there are lots of young Americans whose minds are just as serious and whose conduct is just as circumspect as the model Greek youngster, and I see no reason why I cannot mingle with that class of people without injury to myself or disgrace to the time-honored Greek customs. At any rate, I'm willing to risk it, and I don't think anything is going to stop me.
"Yes, I utilize all my spare time, have been doing so since I was a kid. While in grammar school I worked before and after school hours as newsboy, delivery boy, clerk, etc. Later I worked as switchboard operator and reception clerk at the radio station. Sometimes I would pinch-hit for the announcer. I prepared the news items for the commentator as they came over the teletype, and acted as announcer at the dances and musical programs. I am getting all the experience I can around the radio stations, as I expect to specialize in that field of electrical engineering. When I finish at L. S. U. I expect to go a year or two to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Yes, I feel sure I will be able to complete my education, as I make fairly good money during vacation. I made a nice little sum last year coaching several young men in Greek."
