NELLIS RETURNS UNDER A FLAG OF TRUCE.
MY mother worried as-to the welfare, of my sister, Nellie, and towards the end of that period of the occupation of Jacksonville by the Federals, Capt. Frank Howard, who had married my widowed sister Mrs. Shad, are kept the "Suttlers' Store (Supplies) on Bay-st., and Lieut William White, a West Point man, a native of New Jersey, and who in the meantime had married my other sister, Virginia, in officer on the Warship "Mahaska" m the harbor/- offered to go under a flag of truce and effect Kellie's return. It was arranged with the Confederates to bring her, from Middleburg to the Federal lines, where she was transferred to her Federal escort and journeyed safely back to Jacksonville.
"Nellie was an ardent Rebel, and resented the marriage of her <text not clear>sider sisters to Yaknees - these marriages took place under Government supervision, as was required at that period, by the way. My mother <text not clear> a white house-maid to assist her with the great volume of work, and she had contracted typhoid fever and died a short time before Sister Nellie come back. My sister, Virginia, took this fever and was critical by will, when Nellie burst into the room und upbraided her for having <text not clear>a Yankee, saying - "I shall never speak to you again."
"Mrs. White died shortly afterwards and was buried with at half mast and full military honors, in the old cemetery on the south SIDE at Craig's Swamp," Afterwards when Evergreen Cemetery was laid out, <text not clear>the body moved there.
"At this period, everything was getting along marvously in the <text not clear>mother had those two large houses filled with the Federal officers paying her the $3.00 per day each for board and giving her their <text not clear> tickets, she investing the money in Jacksonville property.
The bought the land where the Graham building now stands, 168-ft. be<text not clear> at the Bisbee Building and coming on down to where the Cigar store <text not clear> is on Forsyth-st. On this site she later built the St. Johns Hotel.
ASSASSINATION OF LINCOLN.
"The Yankee officers took special delight in teasing my sister, Nellie - still a beligerant Rebel - and one morning when she came down is breakfast, Capt. Cole looked up from his breakfast, and said:
Lincoln has been assassinated." Nellie thought it a joke, to arouse her well-known repartee, and said pertly: "Well, what are you going TO do about it - fire guns and illuminate the City? The angry captain replied: "If you mean to rejoice at Lincoln's death, I shall not eat another bite in this house! The idea, that such a calamity could be made a jest!'
"Re marched angrily out of the door to find my mother, where he told her of Nellie's thoughtless remark, threw the money to her for what was due for his meals, and spread the news to the other officers of the back of consideration in a house they had befriended. My mother was a very dignified, poised, self-possessed woman, and although she begged the officers not to take the matter so seriously, that "Nellie we not much more than a child, and thought they were jesting, as usual," the house was soon emptied of them and their belongings.
"Or the corner where the Graham Building now stands at Forsyth and. LAURA-sts., there was a mess hall where the common soldiers were accommodated their tents ran through from Hogan to Main-st., and from Bay street to <text not clear>where also were negro soldiers.
A attachment of negro infantry came to our home about 11 o'clock, THE leader knocked at the front door, and told my mother they had come to arrest her and her daughter for rejoicing at Lincoln's death.
"At <text not clear> and Forsyth, where not stands the Columns Apartments, was the home of where the federal Quarter-Master General maintained his COL J.P.S. Anderson maintained <text not clear> Headquarters.
My mother made no remonstrance with the negroes but asked to be allowed to change dress and that of Nellie and get their hats. This permission was given. My mother took Nellie and ran out through the back yard which run from Forsyth to Bay-st., and was shaded with lovely old oaks, <text not clear> to the Quarter-Master General's Headquarters and ashed most politely <text not clear> see him. She was a small person, and very decisive. She was <text not clear> immediately, and said: "General, you sent colored officers to bring us to your office, and to avoid this humiliation, we have come ourselves to explain in this tense situation which has grown out of a supposed <text not clear> and ask you to save our home which the negroes are threatening to burn."
"The Quarter-Master General said: 'Mrs. Hudnall, I am satisfied with the explanation and am sure no offense was intended, and that your daughter is innocent of any insult to Capt. Cole. You shall have the full perception of my officers. I cannot understand his hasty actions, and you shall have a <text not clear>around your house, sufficient to protect you and your family.
"The Southern people heard about it, and said Mrs. Hudnall had turned Yankee."
"Seen <text not clear>harbor and the City of Jacksonville were <text not clear>ted by Federal forces, and the citizens who had refugeed to the interior of the State, and whose houses had been closed and deserted, returned with home.
"These friends and neighbors in many cases filled the rooms recently occupied by the Federal officers, and my mother's place became the <text not clear> for the southerners. Mrs. Swart also returned, and she paid her rent, for the two houses she had occupied by grace of the Yankees for Several years.
"In October, 1866, she moved into her new place, the "St. 'Johns Hotel" with her family after the War was over. The lumber and shingles for this building are all hand made. This is where I grew to young girlhood and for many years we had a fine business, from both home people and tourists who had begun to come in, traveling over the state of Florida, and people were pleased to have it known they had been guests of Mrs. Hudnall at the St. Johns Hotel, 46 west Forsyth-st.
THE PRISONERS FROM ANDERSONVILLE.
"My sister, Nellie, married Capt. Jesse Ward, Harbormaster, one, day <text not clear>re was a Government Transport came up the St. Johns River, and I well <text not clear> when the prisoners from Andersonville Prison were brought into Jacksonville. It was very warm weather, and they were dirty, tired and ragged their shoes off and their old trousers worn and ragged, most of them off to the knee.
"In our tremendous back yard, these poor men sprawled in the shade of the large oaks. The mesa hall a few feet away, which had been built with <text not clear> hoards and a thatched roof of palm leaves to shelter the colored <text not clear>, was their bivouac for the night. My mother felt so sorry at their pitiful plight that she cried, but went forward with a plan she had contrived to feed them. My mother called everyone in the house to make coffee and prepare food for these men, about a hundred of them. I was a small<text not clear> flying around with the olders, serving coffee in cups, <text not clear> glasses, <text not clear> out bread and meat. Then my other appealed <text not clear> citizens for clothing - shirts, pants, shoes, anything available to <text not clear> wretched bodies.
"That might they rested in the mess hall, and the next morning Capt. Jesse Ward, carried these men on his steamer. "The St. Mary's to <text not clear> Head, s.c where they could be exchanged and returned to their homes.
ICE BROUGHT IN SHIPS FROM MAINE.
In those days, wells dug in the yards served water for home use, and public wells were dug in the down town section. Our well was <text not clear> and had <text not clear> down the sides on which were placed, milk, butter <text not clear> to keep.
"In 1865, the first vessels of Drew., Hazeltne & Livingston, came into Jacksonville with cargoes of ice from rains, which was unloaded and placed in sawdust <text not clear> on the wharf.
Each day mother bought a 100-lb piece, for which she paid $1. 50. It was <text not clear>sawdust and kept in a tub covered with blankets, and during the day by chipping off pieces for cooling the drinking water and for other purposes. Later the price was reduced to $1.00, and finally to <text not clear> per 100-lbs. at which price it stayed for a long time, until manufactured <text not clear> into use.
<text not clear>on wood stoves, and had no gas or electricity. The houses were lighted with kerosene lamps."
