Mollohon Mill
1314 Milligan
Newberry, SC
Dec 19, 1938
G. L. Summer
THE HUFFSTETLERS.
Across a paved street which runs from the mill boarding house in the old village, in an oddish looking house that is not on property of the mill, sits a middle-aged man in a hanging porch swing. He can be seen sitting there most any warm day, where the rays of the sun in the afternoon strikes him. If you ask him what is his occupation, he says, "just piddling"; and any further explanation you want as to what "piddiling" means, he will tell you it emans working around the house. His wife, who has an expression quiet humor, if she happens to be standing near, will say that "piddling" means washing and ironing, and maybe cutting wood. As to this, he laughs, and explains that for the last few years he has not been able to get a job, since he had to give up heavy work on account of his rupture. "I believe hernia is the new name for it," he says, and then tells about the time when he first felt it about 35 years ago, and has had to wear a truss ever since that time.
The five-rrom house, with it's small, front porch, is shaded by two large china berry trees, one on each side of the walk; while on the right side of the front yard is an enclosed chicken yard, with a wire fence, in which are about 15 large Rhode Island Beds and Dominicks.
Glancing through the front door, discloses a living and bed room, both in one, an old-time dresser in an opposite corner, a few small pictures on the unpainted wooden walls, and a large, new rug, of a design that seems a bit out of blend with the interior. The ceiling is new and has never been painted. He says that the house was built a short time before the mill company built the new part of the village, and that two young women who live down belowe Propserity, in this county, own the house. He supposes that the rent they have to pay each months, $15.00, is alright, as you have to pay more up town for same size house. But "it ain't got no bath room", he says, and they have to take their baths in their bedrooms, in the old time was tubs, with water they get from the well in the backyard, as they are not connected with the city water works system. They do have, though, electric lights, that have always been in the house.
One of his daughters and his wife are out on the porch, listening to the talk, and then two other daughters come out, leaning against the bannisters. These are his daughters, as he explains, and says that he has eight children. One of these daughters who is 24 years old, works in the mill, in the spinning room. Upon being asked if she liked her work and her superiors, she says, she likes her job alright and likes her from oversser very weel-- "recon he will do"-- and as for her super he will do, too. Then, he says, hehas a son who works in the weave room as a weaver at $18.00 a week, and he is 50 years old. It appears that two daughters are married, and live away, three chuldren are in the public school of Newberry, one of them in grammar schhol and two in High School. He thinks it is good for children to go to work after they finish school; and his wife, who leans aginst the banisters, smiles her assent, allowing him to do the talking.
Now, he says, you never hear of my name around here. He says his father came from North Carolina, when a young man, and settled down in Lexington county, South Carolina, He was a saw mill man and a farmer. He run a farm down there, and married down there, where I was born and raised, he says. "I worked many a day at a saw-mill, too, and at log-rolling. "That is how I got ruptered", he says, "the new name fur it is hernia, you know." Then he talks about his wife's folks--she was Mary Amick before she married, a daughter of Adam and Jane Amick, and they all lived on a farm. Her gr-parents, too, lived in that section, where the old folks made plenty to eat on the farm, and lived "at home". He says that he quit farming in 1920, and did some carpenter work; that he had to quit carpentering on account of his hernia. "Talking about the Amicks," he says, did you know old Jeff Amick who moved up to Newberry many years ago. Then he asks the question about his daughters, that one lives in Neb Newberry and got a good job with the WPA. He tells shout how Jeff as a young man had to elope with his wife who was a Rawles before she married. He says that Jeff had been trying to go see the girl, and finally stole her awy from home; and when they ran off, the old man heard about it and got after him with a shotgun. Sais he would kill him cause he was not good enough for his daughter. But he didnt catch him and they got married. Of course, the old man coulnt do anything fater it was too late.
When he came to the mill about 15 years ago-- "it will be 15 years the first of this week"-- he says that he worked in this mill as a presser; but the work got so hard for him, and the lifting was so heavy, he had to quit. Onetime, he says, he was out a week on account of his rupture, and got behind and after talking about why he came to the mill, everything "went kerflunk" in business, and then says that he hardly knew what he would do if he couldnt hold down his job. After being out of the mill for a time, he went to the super and told him about his hernia, and the super was surprised, said that he didnt know that he had that trouble. Then, the super told him he, too, had the same trouble, and they talked a long time in his office; and the result was, the super obtained a cash loan from the foofice for him, and told him he could pay it back anytime in the future when he went to work, in small installments. Then, he went to the Presidnet, who the super had talked with, and they promised to get him lighter work, which they did. They gave him work in the mill at night, with no heavy lifting. They would go to work, he says, and work until after midnight. "they wus fine men, that used to run the mill in them days," he says, "all the mill people shore wus liking them." He says that he heard this super is now superintendent of a mill in Georgia, but if he was to come to any mill in South Carolina, I would move to his mill, he says. Mr Geo, the Prest is gittin old, and retired; but when he sold out to the Kendalls, he whore was missed. The Kendall company had it first some northern men here running things, and most of them didnt get along with the labor. They dont seem to get along with southern labor. But now they got southern fellows, and they seem to be doing very well.
He says that his children are satisfied with their jobs, and they are doing alright; but they had some cust in their wages.
He says that they want their children to finish schhol, as they believe in good education; they want them to go through high school. "We never had a chance", he says, "all we had was a one-room country school." The school he went to was close to his fathers home, and he didnt have far to walk; but his wife says that she was the ome who had to walk far, abiut three miles every day. She went to Macedonia Schjol, down below the Piney Woods section. All the country schools then were one-teacher schools, and "a teacher could do then what it takes three to do now," he says. They both think an education is an advantage at these times, and insist their children go on through school.
The churches they were reared up in were the Lutheran churches, as most of the churches in that part of the Dutch Fork were Lutheran. They belong to the Mayer memorial Lutheran Church, at West End, Newberry Cotton Mills, Newberry, and their children attend the Sunday School of that church, giving their regular contributions to the church and Sunday school. They like their pastor, Rev Fulmer, who was born and reared near the section from which they came.
They are juts a family of contented folks and seldom go in for any kind of amusements. The son who works in the mill, likes base-ball a lots, and the girls sometimes, though not often, go to a picture show; but other than that they dont have any time for amusements and running around. They dont have a car nor a radio, None of the girls have ever studied music, and not muc inclined towards music.
When they first came to the mill, he says, they lived in a mill house. That was when he worked at first so hard, with heavy lifting-- he had to put 100 yards to the cut--and lost so much weight, when the Prest got the super to give him lighter work in the mill, at night. He went to work at 5:00 P.M. and worked until 12:00 at night, then had one half hour for lunch, and worked until 5:30 P.M. Being in a reminiscent mood, he again refers to the time when Mr G. was Prest and Mr E. was the super, and were so good to the mill people. They built a new park, a new school house, of large brick design, and helped in other ways. to improve the conditions around the village for the people. He says they have a band, too, and it does pretty good, considering they have just a local boy as the dorector...
Glancing towards the front yard, a trash can is seen filled and the yard apparently having just been swept with a long brush broom. He says that the city trash cart comes around twice each week and takes up the trash, but they hadnt been back that day. They have four carts in town, he says, and it takes all their time to get around everywhere.... Across the street are seen neatly trimmed, greeen hedges around the yards of the village homes. He says that they are even prettier over in the old part of the village. That each family is retired to keep his hedges trimmed; thought the mill company planted them and fixed up the yards.
We have some good neighbors, he says, "around here", and "everybody attends to his-own business"... He says that at one time he lived by a feloow over in the old part of the village, who was a raw fellow. He didnt have anything to do with anybody else, in any way at all. He tells about the time this fellow got made when their two little boys got in a fight, and "slapped my boy," he says. They boys were the same size, and ought not to pay any attention to kids scarps, and he showed what kind of a fellow he was. "I got so mad, "he says," when I heard about it", I wanted to kill him, and would have killed him if it hadnt been for my wife. I went to see him and sked him why he did it, but he wouldnt say anything much about it. Then, the incident was reported to the super who had the fellow come to his office. The supet told the fellow, he says, that if it had been his boy he would have broke his neck. An dthe overseer under whom he worked said if it had been his boy he believed he would have got made enough to kill him. After they talked to this fellow that way, the super told him he could make arrangements to move away as they dint want him around the mill.
"Well, "he says," you come acroos all kinds of people in the mill business and in the saw-mill business." He has worked in the saw-mill business 15 years, and found out that "you got to know the nature of a man to get along with him." So many folks working at the same place, he says, some of them are bound to be rough-necks. He tells about a man who moved from Virginia to the Dutch Fork section, and started saw-mill and planing mill business. This man was named Robertson, and he would get up in the morning at day-light, along with his hands, and works just as hard as they did, until sun-down. He says the man had more energiy then some of his hands. "He cut over a million feet of lumber". Some of it went into the building of the new part of the Mollohon Mill. He says that he worked for old man Robertson and found him alright, except he was a man who wanted to have his won way in everything. Later, he says, the old man moved to Columbia, S. C., and started up a lumber business down there, and died in that city. He says that he will always remember the old man's horse, that he brought with him from Virginia. He called him "Douglass", and said he had some racing blood in him. He let me ride him lots of times.
"I didnt tell you", he says, "about ray two hogs, which we killed this Winter. I raised them in a lot away back of here, in back of Buzhardts place, some distances from the houses. Several men had hogs there in the loss, different pens, and and rasied some. My hogs weighed 480 pounfs each, and cost me $40.50 for both." They dressed the meat, and fixed up the old bam in rear of the home, in which they have stored it.
Asking about his garden, he says they raise some vegetables, a as the family like fresh vegetables; but they like heavy meets, too, he says. They raise beans, collards, and tomatoes.
He says that they take little interest in politics, but they vote, which is about ell they co. They dont belong to any union,. All are Democrats.
They have had no sickness in the family, he says, not for a long time, except two small children that had the measles about a year ago. But about two years ago, he says, three of their children had appendicitis, and had to be operated on at the county hospital, They got Dr Bonnet from Columbia to come up and do the operations. He says the family, all of them, have very good health., "except my hernia."
The daughters having gone into the house, and the wife, about this time starting towards the door, and one daughting standing in the door, they see their white cat start acroos the paved street, and sit behind a parked automobile. Fearing he might get hurt, one of them suggests that the cat should be gotten and brought back to the house; Suddenly, the cat jumps up and runs into the front yard of the neighbor across the street; and the women appear to be satisfiled, and continue into the house A well-dressed man of about 35 years of age comes up into the front porch, speaks, politely; then he is introduched as one who rents a room in the house, and works in the mill as a weaver.. Then he goes into the house.
