January 10, 1939
James Herring (white)
919 Chase Street
Athens, Georgia
Retired Textile Operative
S.B.H.
LIFE OF A RETIRED MILL WORKER
Mr. Henry Hunt's house was my objective when my walk was halted by a greeting from the Mrs. Bentley whose home I had visited a few days before. She introduced me to a group of women assembled on the lawn before the neighborhood clubhouse, and I soon learned that they were waiting for others to join them before proceeding to surprise a neighbor with a stork shower.
One of the more voluble of the older women in the party was of vivid personality and seemed to offer possibilities for a good story. I asked if I might are few in her home. "I don't know," was the hesitant response, "and anyway, what I know is too bad to tell you." Assured that her story could be of interest, if it referred to good or bad things, or both, she agreed. "Come on," she invited me, "I'll be ready to talk to you any time after this stork party is over."
A younger woman had joined the group and addressing Mrs. Bentley, wanted to know, "What are you old women doing with them packages? . . . Another stork shower? My God, they have one every week around here. I never heard of so many babies in my life." One of the women answered her, "It's the truth. We are going to another one next Friday."
The little woman who emerged from the clubhouse and stood watching us from its veranda can best be described as "ficety," for her manner radiated the type of aggressive independence which characterizes the small canines known as "fice." "Gimme that rag on your heed," she yelled to one of the women. "You go to the devil," was the swift retort, followed by the jovial challenge, "Come out here and I'll rub your face in the grass." She could not resist this invitation and in another moment approached me with the question, "What are you doing with that book and pencil?" I jokingly announced that I would use them to record the life history of the young person who had deplored the frequency of stork showers in that neighborhood. "I wouldn't let you do nothing of the sort if I was her," she snapped, "'cause it's nobody's durned business what her life history is." One of the group could not resist the opportunity to say, "That's all right, but it's one thing sure, I just bet you wouldn't tell her yours, for you wouldn't want anybody to know all the mean things you've done." The "ficety" little person replied, "I've answered all the questions I'm going to answer. One day last year, a woman came by and asked me all about my family; their age, and how many we had in school, what my husband did, and all sorts of things like that. Let old lady Brantley here tell hers. She's been here a long time. See how wrinkled she is. The wrinkles around her mouth are so deep she can't even get the snuff out of 'em, and here she is on her way to a party. I'll give this woman with the book and pencil a dime to scrub my kitchen, but I haven't got time for anything else. Well, I've gotta go. You old women, go on to your party."
They were still talking when I left them to continue my walk in search of Mr. Hunt's residence. The street number that had been given me as his address was above the door of a structure that had been erected to house a store. On the sidewalk an ordinary cane-bottomed chair leaning against a telephone post was occupied by an elderly man who was apparently dozing in the warm sunshine.
"Where will I find Mr. Henry Hunt?" I enquired. The sound of my voice aroused him. He stretched his arms, yawned and as he arose to his feet, he finally said, "That's him, that's Henry Hunt," and at the same time he pointed toward a man who occupied a chair in the paved area-way before the door of the house. There was no porch. Mr. Hunt put down his paper, stood up, and greeted me. He insisted that I sit down, and then went inside the house to get another chair for himself. A small white dog followed and sat down at his master's feet. Mr. Hunt is of medium height and his plump figure was attired in gray tweed trousers, a brown woolen shirt, and an overall jacket. Heavy black shoes and a black leather cap completed his costume. White hair framed his florid face. His frequent smiles revealed the fact that several teeth were missing, and the nicotine stains on the fingers of his right hand indicated that he had done much smoking.
He was silent for a few moments following my request for an interview. The movement seemed instinctive when he took a folder of cigarette papers and a sack of tobacco from a pocket and began making a cigarette, "Well now, I don't know where to begin," he started. "If I'd known you were coming I could have thought it over and had some interesting things ready to tell you. The modern cotton mills of today and those that were operated in the days of my youth are quite different.
"You take this place, for instance. I came over here when this mill was first started. Now it's 'most rotted down. In my time they worked seven hundred and fifty hands. Now I expect one hundred and fifty names would cover the entire payroll. The old mill hands have been replaced by modern machinery. Now, for instance, let me give you an illustration. At the time when they were working so many hands, there were four and one-half looms to each weaver.
"My grandfather - I was named for him - spent his life in the Athens Manufacturing Company's plant. That was way back before the Civil War. He made 75¢ a day working in the finishing room, where it was his job to get the cloth ready to be put in bales for shipping. Tell you why I remember that so well. It's because that was the standard wage for that particular kind of work. Some made 50¢, others made $1 a day, according to the type of work they did. That was in my schoolboy days.
"My grandmother kept house while my grandfather, my mother, two uncles, and three aunts worked in the mill, and at that time they did real well. Our family lived in a two-room house of an old style that was customary in southern mill villages at that time. While it had only two main rooms they were both large. They had a real large kitchen that was built off separate from the house, and it served as a dining room too. There was no roof over the plank walkway that went from the house to the kitchen and if it was raining you had to come and go just the same - if you didn't want to miss a meal.
"To make a good textile worker you had to start young, say around the age of eight. In those days you didn't see so many idle people walking around as now.
"Mr. Bloomfield was president of the Athens Manufacturing Company. In fact, he was the whole cheese when I was growing up. He was a devoutly religious man, and was good to the people that worked for him, but at the same time he was a strict and careful man; there was no foolishness about him.
"This is facts. Well now, we all went to school. Mr. Bloomfield provided a school for us three months in the year, but if he caught a child under twelve years old idle he picked it up and put it to work. It was go to school or go to work when you lived in his mill village. That was all right with his mill families. Every man, woman, and child among them simply worshipped him.
"We were paid off once every four weeks, and once a week the heavy groceries were sent to our doors. They were meat, meal, and flour. Mr. Bloomfield had these groceries sent around in a two- horse wagon, but to tell the truth those wagons were pulled by mules. Anyway, the wagons were sent to your door for you to select what you needed and the amount was deducted from your pay envelope. There was everything in that company store but matches and kerosene.
"Some few bought small lots and built homes on them. To those that did Mr. Bloomfield paid 75¢ a head for everybody living in that house to work in his mill, otherwise some of them might not have made more than 50¢ a day, but he wanted to help those that tried to own homes of their own. He visited every house and knew every man, woman, and child that lived in his village by their first names.
"Now it is customary around a mill village that if a family wants to change houses, they make arrangements with the manager. If it suits him you can move, but if it doesn't you stay where you are. That was not the way with Mr. Bloomfield; he decided for you. If he found that some member of a family had been sickly for awhile, he would have men, wagons, and teams go there while the family was away at work and move their things to some house that he considered was in a healthier spot. When that family would come back from work they'd find a note from him on the door telling them where to go, and when they reached there they found everything in its place; even the wood was in the wood box.
"My father bought himself a little lot that was a low and sort of swampy place, and he built a neat little house on it. Sometime after we had moved into our new house Mr. Bloomfield stopped by one Sunday afternoon when he was making his round of calls on the mill families. He found my father sick with chills and fever. He didn't mention anything about our moving or ask my father anything about it, but the next morning, bright and early, he sent his team around to our house and moved us out on Bloomfield Street, where it was higher.
"Watermelon season meant a holiday to us. The mill closed down and the hands went to the country, or did anything else they chose, but the object of the vacation was to give us the opportunity to enjoy eating watermelons. During that rest spell, hands were allowed to get food from the company store and pay for it when they returned to work. To tell the truth, ninety percent of the hands owed the mill, and ten percent was taken out of every dollar of pay earned, until it was all paid back. I've known several families that owed the mill as much as a hundred dollars at one time. Their households were large and the debt was held up off of their payroll accounts whenever their families would have suffered for lack of necessities if the regular deductions had been made.
"In my days at the mill, there was no hiring and firing like there is now. There were so many little children growing up to take their parents' places that they often worked in this manner. When a father or a mother, or an older sister or brother were sick, a younger one was sent to work in that person's place and the youngster continued to hold the place until the absent one returned. I'm telling you the truth, lady; many a child has started to work when they weren't no larger than this dog." He pointed to a tiny white dog that was shivering as it sat on the cold cement walk by his chair. "Lots of those kids didn't have the sense this little dog has. Once I went off and stayed several months and when I came back he was the first to greet me. Knew me just as well as when I left. Do you know what breed of dog he is? He is a mixture of fox terrier and Boston bull.
"I never heard of a strike, or of anything that came near amounting to one, but once. At the time, there were two rough sort of fellows working in the mill, and they decided to get up a strike. The mill was run by water power, and one day they went out and stopped the mill wheels; that stopped the machinery. Those fellows tried to get the rest of the hands to take part in their strike, but they wouldn't follow. The manager rushed to the scene, gave 'em all a good talking to and fired the men that had stopped the wheels. The mill was started again at once and the others went back to work. What brought about all this trouble was this: we had been working six months without pay because Mr. Bloomfield hadn't been able to sell his cloth to get the money to pay his hands with. That was the nearest thing to a strike I ever heard of in that mill.
"Want to hear about the first money I ever made? School was over and I was playing around in the ruins of Mr. Bloomfield's boiler room that had burned down, and was enjoying my vacation. Mr. Bloomfield came up and said to me, 'Hal,' - they called me that for Henry - 'there's an iron arch in those ashes. If you'll go in there and scratch it out of those ashes I'll give you a quarter.' You should have seen me digging for that piece of iron. Anyway, I found it, and he kept his promise and gave me the money. Do you want to know what I did with it? Well, in those days, they sold sugarcane in the stores and I spent every cent of that quarter for it. To me that was the best sugarcane I ever tasted. I'm fond of the stuff yet.
"My grandfather and grandmother Fischer came here with their children from South Georgy, and they had passed on before I was old enough to remember much about them. I've even forgotten the name of the place where grandfather worked as overseer for a wealthy plantation owner during the war. From what they said, there's just no telling how many slaves were on that plantation. An overseer's place was the only job a decent man could get in those days if he didn't farm himself. After the war, he brought his family to Athens to work in the mill.
"My mother, Edna Fischer, married Henry Runt, and I'm their only child. Mother was a spinner and father was a beamer. Re made 75¢ a day for awhile, and was then raised to $1 a day, and later on he made even more than that. The modern term now is a slasher. A slasher takes the place of six beamers.
"One thing that seems funny to me now is, why don't they let the hands work all day? I used to go to work long before sunup and it was after dark when I got home, and we didn't have 'lectric lights then like we do now.
"Say, neighbor, do you run a store here?" inquired an overall-clad man. "No, no, but there's one a little further up this same street."
The man still lingered in front of the house. "Do you have a toilet?" he asked.
"Yes, yes, go around to the back," answered my consultant. He was embarrassed. "Lady," he said, "The world is full of ignorant people."
He was silent as he rolled another cigarette; then he continued: "You know, since I've gotten too old to work I have an awful time. When I was working way back yonder it didn't take so much to live on. Our lives were simple and our wants were few. Worked from sun to sun, ignorant but contented. Now a 10-year old boy knows more than a grown men did when I was growing up. I mean he knows about more different things, and can no more things.
"I'll be 68 the 17th day of February." He chuckled as he added, "and I just missed being a valentine by a few days. When I was 15 I was working steady in the mill, and while I can't remember just exactly how long I worked there altogether, I'm sure it was as much as 35 years. I'd be working there now but I'm too old and am not suited to the modern way they operate the mills now.
"My first regular work was slashing; that is starching and processing cloth for the bolt. After I had worked at that for a long while I stopped and went to the Athens Foundry and Machine Works to learn that trade. Mr. Thomas Bailey was my boss at that place. Lord, I reckon I do remember old man Tom Bailey. He paid me $8 a month the first year, $12 a month the second year, and $15 a month the third year. I learned to be a moulder. We had to make the cast by hand and then the melted iron, or sometimes it was melted brass, was poured by hand. All of that's done by machinery now.
"Mr. Bailey was a mighty fine man to work for. He was so good to his hands. In summertime he took us boys out on fishing trips at his own expense. That reminds me, just as soon as the weather opens I'm going to try to catch me a mess of fresh fish. I don't know anything I'd rather have. But, I was telling you about Mr. Bailey, wasn't I? Well, when he started to work in that same foundry under Mr. Reuben Nicholson, to learn the trade, he didn't have a penny. He worked hard and saved his money and was worth quite a bit at one time. However, at the time of his death he didn't have scarcely anything left and was almost totally blind. My reason for leaving the foundry was that he didn't Rave orders enough to keep the men busy. By that time there were several other foundries in town. Concerning Mr. Bailey's foundry, the only regret I have is that right there in that foundry is where I started drinking. I fell in line with the other boys and the older men that worked there. Of course, Mr. Bailey didn't drink and wouldn't tolerate drinking in his men, if he knew it was going on, but you know there was always a way to whip around the ball. My father always kept whiskey in the house, but it was never served, only on Sunday mornings.
"After the foundry failed, I went back to the old check mill. It was known as the check mill because they made cloth woven in check designs in that mill. They made those checks on old-fashioned box looms, in this manner: Say you wanted to make a bolt of brown checks; you put four strands of brown thread in the warp and four in the filling, and when the loom shuttled back and forth it wove the material into checks. All the common people, both white and black wore those checks. We made a variety of jeans cloth out of wool and cotton and it was used for winter garments for men and women.
"Long before Mr. Bloomfield had to shut down his mill, my father got well of his chills and fever, and we moved back to a little two-room house right near the mill. This little house had about a quarter of an acre of land around it that we used for a garden. Everybody had a garden in those days. Father had sold the little place he had bought and built on.
"When Mr. Bloomfield was no longer able to get enough orders to keep his mill going, he had to close it, and then we moved over here to the Southern Mill. The old part of it had just been finished and was known as the 'batting mill.' There was where they made batting for quilts, and all the work was done on one floor. Soon after we moved here, they begun weaving in what was then known as the 'waste mill.' The reason for that name was that they took waste from other mills, mixed it with some good cotton and made the mixture into cloth. They first put in 64 looms, and at the time I left there they had a little better than seven hundred. Before I left that mill they had added three new buildings that were known as No, 2, No. 5, and No. 4. That plant was built up to a million dollar mill at one time.
"Do you see that oil tank and compress down the street there? Well, when I moved to this village they were grading it for a race track. It ran all the way to Barber Street. Where Chase Street School is now was famous as a circus ground. Oh, the changes that have taken place in my time! There used to be a heap of houses over there across the railroad track, but they are mostly rotted down now. This was a pretty rough place to live in when I first came over here. They used to have dances right over there, and every night they would get drunk end cut up. I have stayed out the most part of many a night going to those frolics. That hill you see over there was known as 'Happy Top,' and they've called it by that name 'til this good day.
"When I first started to work in the Southern Mill the standard wage was $5.10 a week. When Mr. Tippett took up the piece work plan, all the workers in one department quit but two, end those two averaged $20 a week. The others just wouldn't try the piece work. Said they would starve first. The smallest salary paid there now is 29¢ per hour. The weavers make 35¢ per hour. I worked until they changed managers. The manager that came after Mr. Tippett left was a hard man to work for, so I decided to quit before I got fired.
"My father and I had saved up a little money, not so much, but we decided to quit work, and we rented a house at Linton Springs. Mother was dead and father was old, so I had to stay there and look after him. That was the beginning of my downfall. We kept house for more than a year and then boarded a year before my father died. We were both sick in bed at the same time and neither one was able to wait on the other. Oh, we had hard luck, and such a tough time! The doctor coming every day and bills piling up. The folks around us said the reason I was sick was because I was such a hard drinker; that wasn't true. At that time I hadn't touched a drop in four months.
"When father died I tried to die too for it seemed to me I had nothing left to live for. I had six thousand dollars in cold cash at the time of father's death. I got to drinking harder than ever. I couldn't have blamed the family I was boarding with if they had driven me off for all I done was drink and lay around. My mind was so crazed with whiskey I didn't have sense enough to take care of my money. I never let anybody down that came along asking for money, and everybody came. Why, on Sunday mornings they would come to my room even before day, for liquor and money.
"My landlady used to say, 'Hal Hunt, you're crazy. Why do you let 'em ride you?' I'd tell her, they're not getting much out of me. I didn't realize how much I was spending. I let one man have two hundred dollars. I thought he was honest and didn't make him give me a note of any kind. When all I had was gone I begged him to pay me back a little at a time, and he wouldn't do it. He always argued that he was hard up and couldn't pay me. I went away for awhile and since I came back he won't hardly speak to me, and won't even give me a mouthful of victuals. If I had money today I'd remember that it's safer to lend money to a stranger than to your best friend. Yes, dear lady, when you have money you have friends, and when your money is gone you can't find 'em.
"Back in the early times that I can remember there was no public relief in regard to sickness, death, or want. There was no such thing as public relief. When someone died in a mill family and that family was not able to bury their dead a collection was taken up in the mill among the hands. This is the way they handled it. A responsible person was appointed as chairman and he passed the paper around to everybody. Each one wrote down by his or her name the amount they felt like giving. Then the paper was taken to the office and the money was turned over to the chairman in charge, and was spent for the purpose it had been raised for. When we were paid off, the amount we had subscribed was deducted from our pay envelopes. In sickness we helped out from the things we had at home.
"One boy that had a wife and child, contracted t.b. and we begged him to give up his work for we knew he couldn't live long. He felt like he just couldn't afford to quit work, but finally we over-persuaded him and he did quit. We boys took enough out of our own wages to make up the wages he had been getting, end gave it to him on each pay day as long as he lived, which won't long. After his death we gave that same amount to his wife and child 'til she was able to go to work.
"I don't never expect to see times like that again, and I wouldn't have them if I could. In them days, folks didn't crave the dollar like they do now, but I must say that this old world is a better place to live in now, in many ways. If anybody had told us all these modern conveniences would be invented and come into use we wouldn't have believed 'em. Yes, it's much better now, if only the people would be more contented with what they have."
The 4:50 train was passing. Mr. Hunt stopped talking for a moment as he looked in the direction of the train, then said: "We call that little train the 'hooker,' because it's so small. My mother was 71 when she died, and do you know she never rode a train in her life? She never had but one automobile ride, and that was when she had to go see about one of our relatives that was sick. Father was 83 when he passed on. If he ever was in an automobile or a train it must have been when he went to the Civil War or when he was coming back from there.
"I told you the old check mill was first run with water power. Well, I fired the first steam engine that was installed in that factory. That engine was named 'Lizzie' for Mr. Bloomfield's daughter. Mr. Bunch was the engineer and his health was real bad. I was hanging around the mill in vacation time and often he would let me help him. Pretty soon I'd learned to operate it, and then I often had to look after it for him. He made $1.75 a day, and paid me 40¢ a day out of his own wages. When school opened up that fall my father told me if I didn't want to go back to school I could continue helping run the engine at the mill and he would give me all the money I made to buy myself a suit of clothes and a watch. I never will forget that gray suit I bought that year and I still have that old watch. I thought I was the best dressed dude on the hill, and acted it.
"There is no comparison in the conditions under which mill hands worked in my young days and the present day conditions. In my young days the life of a mill worker wasn't very long. The close confinement, long hours, lint and dust that they had to breathe, all worked together to shorten their lives. 'Most everybody had a cough. I've had this cough ever since I can remember. Men and women all had sallow complexions, and the younger folks didn't have any color in their cheeks either. The mills of those days didn't have any way of controlling the dust and lint, and the air we breathed was dry and stale. Now they have humidifiers that keep the air moist. And another thing; in those days sanitary conditions were mighty bad sometimes. That was because so Many lived crowded together in the same house, breathing the same air that came from the lungs of the sick ones. Now they have sanitary inspectors to go around ever so often and inspect the premises as well as the houses.
"Oh, no! It wasn't all work in those days. We boys used to go to ball games, and we played football and baseball too. I used to follow the Georgy boys and their big games, but now I can't go and so I have to sit at home and listen to their games over the radio. My first trip to Floridy was to see Georgy play Floridy at Gainesville. That was the best trip I ever had in my life and it was the first time I ever saw the Atlantic Ocean. I'm just as big a fool over a football game now as I was at twenty. My father liked 'em too.
"No, ma'am, I've never been very religious. However, I did join the Methodist church with my mother, father didn't belong to no church. When he was sick the preacher come and sat with him a long time, and once he said to father, 'Henry, do you realize you will never be well again? Don't you think it is time you were serving the Lord?'
"'I've been serving the Lord all my life,' answered father. 'I went to Sunday School at old St. Gary's Church 'til I was a grown man. And as children, how we did look forward to that Christmas tree at St. Mary's! Good old Mr. Bloomfield built and owned that church that "he provided for the hands working in his mill, and he furnished all the entertainments held there. We could always count on him to do the nice thing by us.'"
His reminiscences concerning his father's attendance at St. Mary's were followed by his own memories of the same historic place of worship. "I'll never forget our Sunday School room. It was built right by the church and we knew very well that children were to go to that Sunday School room first, and not to enter the church proper until time for church services when Mr. Bloomfield would come and invite us to take our seats with the congregation. When we got in our Sunday School room Mr. Seagraves, the sexton, would lock us in. When Miss Mattie Parr finished teaching us our Sunday School lesson, Mr. Seagraves would come back and unlock the door. Some of those little boys would run over him in their eagerness to scamper out where they could play and frolic. Children ain't made to go to Sunday School and church and behave like they were then. These days, Sunday is just another day to be spent playing ball, skating, and doing anything they want to do."
Mr. Hunt invited me to enter his bachelor home for shelter from the chilly wind that had risen since we begin lackuy I declined his invitation, but I did peep inside. The cover on the two iron beds was not as fresh and crisp as a fastidious housewife might have displayed. There was an old oak dresser and one chair, but I remembered that three of his chairs were outside in the area way. Jute bags, better known in the South as "croker sacks," were suspended over the windows to serve as shades and curtains. My host apologized, "Really, it isn't a very nice place to invite a lady into," he said. "You know, this used to be a gambling place where they sold beer and had all kinds of slot machines to get our money. They took in so much money that thieves were always breaking in to try to take off what they could. That's why these iron bars were put on all the windows. No, the mill don't own this place. Jones and I rent it from a man, and we have to pay him $5 a month for it. That's too high, and we're looking for another place.
"Now, miss, I believe I've told you all I know that could be of any interest. I've forgotten what you told me your name was. Oh, yes! I know you weren't raised in these parts. Norfolk, Virginia? Well, well, the next time you go back there please send me some of those good Lynn Haven oysters. The best sea food in the world comes from Norfolk. Well, well, and you've been down here in Georgy 20 years. I reckon it does feel like home to you by now.
"No, miss! after all, this ain't such a bad old world, and if it wasn't for the old age pension, Jones and me would starve to death or go to the poorhouse and we don't want to go there.
"Good luck to you. If you had come along a few years ago, when I had a drink or two in me, maybe I could have told you a livelier story. I was noted for talking then."