CHIMNEY SWEEPER'S HOLIDAY
The chimney-sweep was taking a day off from work and he sat on the porch of a dilapidated tenement house in a street of similar houses all occupied by Negroes.
He was a little drunk and was having an argument with an old woman, a neighbor.
His wife, sad-eyed and skinny, stood watching as a male crony at the gate urged the chimney sweep to join him at the corner saloon.
There was a little whiskey left in the sweep's flask and as he drank it the old woman began to talk:
"I remembers the day that boy was born," she said. "It was on a Tuesday night in 1894 in Westwego. And there was a big to do at John Simms' house 'cause his wife Stella had just birthed her first and only child. Them niggers was raising it up. Tells was hittin' the ceilin' and Whiskey was all over the place. Stella had shown she could bring a child to the world even if she had done ran around with so many different mens.
"The crowd waited all day to see the thing happen, settin' on the front steps and in the side yard While the mid-wife looked on Stella, hoping she would prove her point. They was sayin' 'Come on Stella.' And Stella was lyin' there gruntin's her eyes was movin' around in her head like a top spinnin' on the ground. But Stella came on all right. A little black boy popped out and he commenced hollerin'. I was one of the first ones to smack him on his behine, bam! He jumped! I remember it so well, like it happened yesterday.
"I don't know, but I'm willin' to bet that John Simms, Junior opened his eyes to a pint of whiskey and some woman doin' a shake-down dance. 'Cause ever since that day he's been drinkin' whiskey and makin' women do shake-down dances. Them is dances where you slide back and pull up your dress; show your linen, you know.
"I drank with John Simms, Junior, befo' he was born, when he was born, and I been drink in' with John Simms, Junior, ever since. I can't do no shakedown dance but I can hare my fun."
It was Susie Walker talking, a rheumatic brown woman, little taller than a midget. She is on the Department of Public Welfare. When she is drunk, she is friendly; when she is sober, she is hard to locate. It is necessary to have Susie around when you're talking to John Simms, Junior, because she is the only one who can handle him. She says boastfully, "Didn't I pick that black bastard up and put him on my knee when he was a baby? If I handled him then, can't I handle him now?"
John Simms, Junior, dressed in shabby blue overalls, drunk, and forlorn, was standing next to Susie, and heard her introduction to his life without saying anything. He approved with a shaking head. John is a tall, slender black man with big eyes and white teeth. He walks proudly and talks at random. Susie says, "He is the best chimney sweeper in the world."
He is also a problem and a menace, to his light-hearted common-law wife, Emma Brooks, who is never allowed to say what she thinks for fear of his fists.
Emma whispered, "You talk to him, I can't. He might sweep me away like he sweeps them chimneys."
John Junior began to talk. "Me, I'm a chimney sweep from way back - a chimney sweeper havin' a holiday. My pa was a chimney sweeper... my ma was a chimney sweeper. Ask Susie." He wanted to say more about his mother and father but Emma interrupted him to remind him that his mother wasn't a chimney sweeper, but was a wash-woman. "Lissen, bitch, keep your mouth closed," John said.
"I was born in Westwego. Took after my pa and ma. She born me in whiskey. My pa drank whiskey like the tank that bottles it. He was a laborer in the Round House of the T. P. My ma didn't work at all. She was a good-time woman. But when she married my pa she settled down. She got into an argument with some people and bore me to prove she could have a baby. I'm she glad of it. No, my ma didn't have to work. She had enough to do takin' care of my pa when he got drunk. I ain't got nobody to take care of me."
This time Susie interrupted him, saying, "You is a damn lie, John Junior. Emma takes care of you when you is drunk and when you is sober." John Junior argued this point, telling her to go home before "I knock your damn head off."
He moved away from the post and eased himself down on the step. "I ain't got no education. Went to the third grade. That was enough fo' me. My pa stopped me, made me get a job on a milk truck. I was makin' two dollars a week. What I did with my money? I had a good time, that's what. She', school is all right fo' them who wants it, but I figures all you got to know is how to read and write, then nobody can cheat you out of nothin'. Ain't figures enough?
"I believe my pa and ma liked large families, but they tell me - now I don't know - but they tell me ay ma had such a time bringing me she swore she wasn't goin' bring no more no difference what happens. She and pa drank so much they don't even remember how it all started, to tell the truth. She, I drank, too. Pa used to make me drunk, half the time. I've always liked whiskey and who don't like the way I do, they know what they can do.
"I quit the milk truck, couldn't have my fun like I wanted to. Had to get up too early. I was only ten years old then. What I didn't like about the milk truck was I couldn't be wid that sweet little gal next door to me long enough. Mister, I don't know if we was doin' nothin' or not but it she was good. She at ten! What you think? Then, I got me a job rid in' a bike. Three fifty a week. I went to work so I could buy the clothes I wanted. My pa and ma wouldn't give me nothin'. I always did like to be dressed up. I like it now but my money ain't right. That's all a po' man can do - dress up, and have a good time."
Susie reminded John Junior that he spent three hundred dollars of his bonus on clothes for himself and his women.
But John had a defenses: "Ain't we got to look fine When we walk down the street?" Susie reminded him that he pawned most of his clothes for Whiskey, which encouraged John Junior to shout back: "A good bottle of whiskey is worth a suit in pawn anyday. Then agin, a man as ugly as me is got to spend money on women. Ain't that right? It ain't no need fo' me to fool myself. I always did spend money on women and I'm goin' to keep on doin' it.
"she, I done done other jobs besides workin' on a milk truck and ridin' a bike. I worked at the Round House when I was a man. Made twenty-one fifty. Used every bit of it up, that's right. Man, I used to buy mo' fun than a chicken had feathers. They used to call me 'lil John Junior. A chip off his daddy's block.' I was a mess. Had women shakin' down and doin' the Eagle Rook wid dollar bills in their hands. Have fun, live. You don't live but once. When you die square up the devil. No indeed! There never was a Christian in my family, we don't believe in that stuff. My pa used to say, 'Get me a bucket full of wine I'll join the church.' Spare time? Man, I ain't had no spare time. Don't have none now. In ay spare time I have my fun!
"I came to this part of town when I was about twenty. Bought se much stuff I had to go back on the other side. The policeman says, 'Boy, go back where you b'long. You is got these womens jumpin' naked.'
"Well, I tell you. There ain't nothin' wrong with being a chimney sweeper. The work might be dirty but the money is she' clean and long. Yes suh! You get bucks when you dean chimneys! SWEEPER! ROOAP, ROOAP, SWEEPER! CHIMNEY SWEEPER! GET 'UM CLEAN 'FORE YOU SCREAM.... FIRE! ROOAP! ROOAP! SWEEPER! I charge some people two dollars, and some two dollars and a half, mostly two and a half. I charge by the day and by the chimney. Jews make their own prices. You can't jew them up. The only thing I don't like about cleanin' chimneys is when them womens hang around me. They she' can give orders. What they know about cleanin' chimneys won't fill a book, but they hang around you. Sometimes I feel like tellin' 'um, 'Don't cry around me, lady. I'm not the fireman.'
"How I started cleanin' chimneys? Let me see. Say, you wants to know everything. Well, I was friendly with a fellow named Jeff Scott. He's dead. Jeff was makin' plenty money and needed help. So, me and him made up as partners. We used to make as high as twenty dollars a day fo' both of us. Wasn't bad, eh? Them was the days. That was before all this streamline stuff. Even the Chimneys is streamlined now. Ain't no money in it new. Everybody is using gas and electric lights. And then again, nobody wants to pay. Can't make but about four or five dollars a day in the season... that in the winter time. Some say let's get a union but not me. I don't want no union. Fo' what? Fo' a bunch of black bastards to land in jail.
"How we get our jobs? Well, most of 'un is from our customers. They send us to people. And the fire stations send us lots of business too. But, we just go along the street hollerin'. The reason Why the fire stations wants to give us work because it saves them from a lot of work. See?
"It feels alright to dean chimneys, It's a job. And a good job. She, I'm proud of it. All them people who laughs at us is crazy. I used to make me' money in a day cleanin' chimneys then some people who laugh at us make in a week. Money was just that good. Then agin, there is a lot of places that feed you. Everybody likes a Chimney sweeper. People think we is Mardi Gras. We don't care. We pick up a lot of tips like that.
"This is how we dean a chimney: We take them long corn vines and tie 'um together and sweep the soot down from top. It takes two men to do it. We draw down a small fire in the chimney by throwin' salt up the chimney. Salt is a strong acting agent fo' fire. It can't stand salt.
"I don't know why we wears beaver hats and them kind of clothes. I believes them is the uniforms because they don't look dirty. Nobody minds dirty clothes gettin' dirty. Does they? A white man gave me my beaver. The coat and pants is mine. We tie rope around our waist because we have to use it sometimes, to pull ourselves up and down the roof. We use that rope like a ladder. Man, sometimes we almost go down in one of them chimneys. I seen the time when I was in one of 'um like Santa Claus, reaching down in there like a baby reaching for candy. We take our pads, rags, salt and stuff and wrap them up in a bundle.
"The trouble with this business is that them bastards cuts the prices all the time. Some of them womens tell you, 'the other wan said he'd dean my chimney fo' fifty cents.' All that dust and stuff gets in your eyes. Man, that's dangerous. Suppose you get consumption? Cleanin' chimneys is bad on your lungs. I drink milk and liquor to keep from losin' my lungs. No, I ain't never been sick in my life.
"Man, I been tryin' to get on the W. P. A. but I can't do it. There ain't no me' money in cleanin' chimneys, ain't nothin' to it. Everything is modem and streamline. I'm tryin' to be streamline myself." He laughed and the women laughed with him. "I was so streamline I fell off a woman's roof one mornin'. The woman had done said, "What you goin' do way up there?' I said I'm goin' to examine things. She had to examine my head. Say man, them chimneys make you so dirty that When you get home you got to take a bathe in kerosene. Everything on you gets black. That work makes you nervous. A white man she' could never be no chimney sweeper. He would look like he was carryin' his shadow aroun'.
"Some white folks like to talk with you, especially them from the North. They say they ain't never seen nothin' like us. They wants to know where we live and how we live. One white lady ain't had nothin' fo' us to do, she just called us in and gave us wine and two dollars to talk with us. Man, we ain't told that woman nothin'. I ain't goin' to never let nobody know all my business. Specially no white folks. We get cigaretes, clothes and things from people. All in all we do all right. But, we don't take things instead of Money. Some of them white folks try to get you to do that, but not me. I tells them to pay me money, sumpin' I can use. I can get bread, clothes, and what I wants with my money. It ain't coneyfit.
"I strictly haves my fun. No, I ain't tendin' bein' no Christian. That's the trouble with niggers now. They pray too damn much. Everytime you look around you see some nigger on his knees and the White man figurin' at his desk. What in the world is they prayin' fo'? Tryin' to get to heaven? They is goin' to get there anyhow. There ain't no other hell but this one down here. Look at me. I'm catchin' hell right now. I'm drunk and I ain't got no money.
"If I had some? Man, don't ask me no question like that. What else is I'm goin' to do but have my fun. I pay my rent, give my old lady what she takes to pay the insurance, buy food, end get her sump in' and that's all. What I'm goin' to do? Ain't no need fo' me to save nothin', I ain't never been able to save nothin' in my life. I don't want to save nothin'. You want me to have troubles?
"I went to war - didn't get killed. Come on back - got ay bonus. And then got me a load of womens and threw it away. Ain't that being a sucker? When you spend your money you ain't got nothin' to show fo' it. When you spend your money on whiskey you got whiskey to show fo' it.
"My wife is a good woman. She ain't had to work in two years. I took her out the white folks' kitchen. She wasn't makin' but three dollars a week, anyhow. That ain't no money. She, she brought the pots and pans home. But what was in 'um? A lot of leftovers. Man, as long as I can make a dollar sweepin' chimneys I ain't goin' to eat nobody's leftovers. I can buy what I want and I'm my own boss. Do you know that I been sweepin' chimneys off and on fo' eighteen years? Before I did that I used to be a common laborer. If I can help it I'll never be a common laborer agin. I likes to be my own boss. Don't want no white folks hollerin' at me.
I fo'got to tell you that sweepin' chimneys is a hard thing in the winter time, it's mighty cold five o'clock in the mornin'. I'll never fo'get. Man, I went hollerin' under a politician's window one mornin'. ROOAP...ROO..AP.. ROOO...OAP! CHIMNEY SWEEPER...RO..ROOAP...REEE..REE..EEE..ROOAP...CHIMNEY! Man, the politician poked his head out of his window and told me, 'Say, you black bastard. If you don't get the hell away from here I'm comin' out there and rope your damn neck to one of them trees!' His wife stuck her head out the window and just laughed. It was early in the mornin' too. She just laughed; and said, 'Darlin', leave him alone. I think he's cute.' The man looked at her and looked at me, I was ready to make haste. He started cussin' agin, 'You black bastard, if you don't get goin' you'll be cute. You won't have no damn head.' Then, he looked at his wife. 'Cute hell. You run your damn trap all night and here comes that chimney man runnin' his mouth early in the mornin' and you say he's cute. I'll kill that nigger.' Man, did I leave from away from there! That's why we don't go out early in the mornin' no mo'."
The man with the bottle said, "Come on, John, quit talkin' and let's go to that saloon on Washington Avenue."
Emma said, "John."
He looked at her and said, "Baby, get my dinner ready. I'll be back."
But the woman knew that he was off with his friends. Old Susie was angry; she shrugged her shoulders and said, "Damn fool, there he goes bummin' with rats when he has a nice gent'man to talk with."
A black man called to John Junior from a passing automobile, "Where you goin'?"
He flipped his fingers and Shouted back, "I'm goin' make some women shake down and show their linen. Everybody is worrin' about John. Can't a man have a holiday?"
Emma was "plum disgusted" with John. "All he knows is work, more work, fun and more fun. That fool has more holidays than the president. He ain't never had nothin... ain't got nothin' and ain't goin' to never have nothin'. He's the best money circulator in the whole round world."
- Robert McKinney
Chimney Sweeper Holidays (kepro) <Text Not Clear>