In an otherwise identical version the following additional information appears on the top of page 9496; "Names of persons and places changed," and "Date of first writing: January 18, 1939." See also the note on page 9499.
NC-437
Robersonville, N.C.
Rev. E.C. Shoe (white)
Anna Belle W. Rogerson, writer
Edwin Massengill, reviser
A LATE EDUCATION
"I was born April 7, 1895, near China Grove, N.C., Howan County," said A.L. Coggins, in beginning to tell of his life. "My father and mother were tenant farmers all their lives. Mother died when I was seven years old. I was the third of their four children. Soon after I was was born our family moved into the Trading Ford community, about eight miles northeast of Salisbury where we lived for twenty years.
"After the death of Mother, big Sister, then about thirteen years old, took over the household duties and became a mother to us boys. Sister and I were the hoe-hands; Father and big Brother were the plowboys; and my baby brother carried the water.
"When not in the field, it was my job to make the fires and look after the cows, hitching them where the grass was greenest, and milking them night and morning, and Father and big Brother looked after the wood and did the feeding. Sister had no trouble in deciding what to cook--it was either meat and bread, or milk and bread, or molasses and bread. As I recall now, there was never much left after meals were served.
"My father was hard of hearing--could not hear any of our conduct, only what he saw could he correct in our lives. This was a great handicap to him and to us. Father had to work hard for everything he got. When I was six years old I sat up with him to shuck corn all night. He said I was smart. Often he picked cotton by moonlight till eight and nine o'clock. Several times I remember he got up and went to the field at one and two o'clock in the morning to pull fodder. When the crops were laid by he would do carpenter's work, taking the contract to build a four-room house, and doing ail the brick work, too, for $40.
"My early schooling was in a two-room building, the 'big room' and 'little room.' Our schools were of the four months type. I never lived nearer than four miles to the schoolhouse, and the roads were red and stayed muddy all winter. It was after Christmas when we got to school. The cotton had to be picked; the corn had to be pulled and shucked; and the wheat had to be planted. Many times we had to pull off the cracked bolls of cotton to get done before Christmas so we could start to school then. We'd pick the cotton at nights by the fire when we got back from school.
"We never heard of grades. Only the 'little room' and the 'big room' stood between us and graduation. I got in the third reader, arithmetic, and spelling book. By the time I had my second pair of long pants I had dropped out of school to help work, You see, it was a little too much for a boy fifteen years old to cook, milk cows, chop wood, go four miles to school, all in the same day, so I dropped out.
"Sister had married, so I became the housekeeper for about three years. I got along all right if we had no company. Life was not dull if it did seem a little hard. We had to accept the word that Christmas came once a year though it seemed much longer than that to us. But who wouldn't wait a long time for two apples, two oranges, four sticks of candy, and a few nuts?
"I walked the same four miles to Sunday School and church. We had to start so early we got there ahead of time. In the summertime we carried our shoes until we got in sight of the church. That was to keep them new longer, and to make them last the rest of that year. I united with the church when I was about fifteen, and three years later was made a deacon, the youngest deacon our church had ever had.
"Life was just beginning for me. In 1912, at the age of seventeen, I got a job with the Southern Railroad at Mockville. Making $1.08 a day, I soon had that bicycle I had wanted so long. I worked at this rate for about four years as a helper, then got promoted to a mechanic. My first trip on the big train was throughout the western part of the state, all in one day. Yes, the world was very much bigger than I thought it was. In one year I had bought a lot of needed things and banked $55, but this fabulous sum was not enough to pay my doctor's bill in the fall of 1913. For ten weeks typhoid fever almost starved me to death.
"Well, I got going again, and by the spring of 1915 I had as much as $80. This was enough to think big on, so on April 29, 1915, Miss Jessie Ewing and I were married. Things went along quietly until 1917 when the war clouds began to hang low. I was in class four. Then came November 11, 1918 and the Armistice. Everybody was wild with joy because the War was over. My joy was more than that: I was soon to get a $300 back-time check. My wife and I had also raised a bale of cotton after my work hours at the shops. Besides all this, we had two fat hogs and some chickens. Yes, they were bright days!
In an otherwise identical version line ten on page 9500 originally read: "read through the Bible."
All days cannot be bright. On November 22, Mrs. Coggins had to get up from her sick bed to wait on me with double pneumonis and flu. For three months and eight days I stayed in the house. This experience set me back about $800. What a jar! Could I ever overcome it? Time will tell. About a year later I had an accident at the shops which laid me up for two months. Could any good thing come out of that? Yes, I had tried two times to read through the Bible and could get no further than the book of Leviticus. But now, with nothing to do but nurse a crippled foot, I determined to read through to the end. Istuck to it until the joyous task was done, and it has been a new Book to me ever since.
"The house we had occupied was sold and we had to move, so we moved to East Mockville, nearer my work. We hadn't been there long until some friends began to talk to us about a Baptist church in East Mockville. This became a reality in January 1921. Mrs. Coggins and I and fourteen others were the charter members. I was the only one in the group who had served as deacon, hence I was elected to serve in that capacity. A week later I was elected superintendent of the Sunday School. Having no church building, we met in the W.O.W. hall. The little church was the talk of the community. From January to August the enrollment went to 170, with over 125 in attendance.
"In May of 1921 I attended the Southern Baptist Convention in Chattanooga, Tennessee. This was the greatest meeting I had ever been in. The spark that had been burning in me for about four years was greatly kindled. With my wife and our little daughter, Marilyn, our home was happy, but there was one unsettled question in ray mind and heart I could not make known yet.
"Rev. Amos Strikeleather was our pastor. He and his good wife began to lead us to deeper consecration and greater service. They worked untiringly, and the young church began to grow steadily. A greater harmony and enthusiasm, I have not seen in any church. All of this served to kindle the spark in my mind and heart and caused it to glow more brightly. Was I called to preach? This was the unsettled question which I could not yet make known.
"I couldn't read with much satisfaction and felt keenly the need of an education. But that was out of the question. Could I go to school? I had never heard of a married man going to school. Besides all the other angles to such a question, I had no means to back it up. All of this was 'Holy Ground' to me and I dared not tell anyone for fear the doors would never open. I did venture to ask one young minister what it cost to go to school. He said it cost him about $1,000 his last year in college. Gone again were my hopes, I would never have that much money. But who knows what he will do when the time comes?
"The third Sunday in August 1921 came, and we were gathered for Sunday School and church in the W.O.W. hall. With the inspiration of that great meeting (Southern Baptist Convention) still fresh in my memory, I listened attentively to Rev. Joseph Fountain preaching for Brother Strikeleather that afternoon. The closing hymn was announced. I guess the Spirit was in charge of things now. I stepped out and gave the pastor my hand in full surrender to Him, and, to my surprise, Mrs. Coggins did the same thing.
"Well, the question had been answered but not settled. I gave my resignation immediately as superintendent of the Sunday School. The folks began to ask what the trouble was. I wrote two letters, one to Moffette and one to Hales. I got a quick reply. Moffette had already opened, and Hales Academy would open the following week.
"Things had to hum now. We stored our little furniture with different relatives, and Brother agreed to keep the cow. Cyclone Mack was to begin a tent meeting the next Sunday, and how I wished we could stay for that but the trunk was packed. The wife and our five-year-old daughter were ready to go with me. Our train would leave at eight o'clock Sunday night, so with a wife, one daughter, our trunk and $60 we were off toward a country and people we had never seen or known.
"We got to Crofton about two o'clock in the morning, stayed in the station until seven, then took the train for Booker--the 'slow train through Arkansas.' It took us all day to make the distance of thirty-odd miles, a trip never to be forgotten.
"The first thing to do was to find a place to spend the night. We soon found one room with no furniture. I ran out and bought a second-hand bed and mattress. Our table was a goods box turned upside down; our dishes were the cans the food came in. For three days things went on like this. Think of a woman having to keep house like that, yet the wife complained not a word. Only those who have had similar experiences can begin to understand what we were passing through those first few days--no stove, no chairs, no cooking utensils. We then moved to another place where we had two small rooms and a little more furniture. Here we stayed till Christmas.
"Yes, we were in a strangely different world now. Instead of hearing the old whistle on Tuesday, August 30, 1921, which I had heard for the past nine years, I heard a bell--a school bell. Students were swarming about the Old Kivett building like bees. I didn't know what to do, but I took my place in line for registration and classification. Here I was at a loss.
"Well, I had to see the president for instructions. What a great soul he was! I have never felt the impulse of a greater heart or the hand of a greater friend.
"'Well, my boy,' he said, 'we'll let you do just about as you please, providing you are our kind You can start anywhere you wish, and if it is too hard you can drop back; if too easy you may go up. How would that suit you?'
"I had never had my first lesson in history, geography, or English. It was settled that I would try the seventh grade. Mrs. Coggins was passing through the same experience, only she started in the fifth grade.
"We had to be in school next morning at eight o'clock, but that was not too early for us; we had listened for the whistle for nine years. But how would the little daughter fare? She had never been away from her mother long at a time. Although Marilyn was not six yet, the president allowed her to start to school, too. She was left at the Pearson building, and Mrs. Coggins and I, almost walking backwards, went to our room.
"Who would be our teacher? Well, again heaven had smiled on us. Miss Elsie Nowell was her name. A kinder, more sympathetic and patient teacher I have not found, just the kind we needed.
"Sunday came and we were off to church. My, what an uplift; what good singing; what grand music; and what a sermon. The preacher cried and laughed and pleaded for everybody to be Christians. We thought of the service back at home, with very little equipment and a borrowed organ--wish they could be here. B.Y.P.U. that afternoon, church again that night, school next morning--how things were whirling now. We were so busy we didn't have time to get homesick. The president's chapel talks were of the greatest help and inspiration.
"As the weeks rapidly passed we saw our $60 passing also. What could we buy to make it last longer? That was a real problem. Marilyn and Mrs. Coggins picked cotton in the afternoons and on Saturdays. I began working in a barber shop. The small sums we earned saved the day for us, although business was not stimulated much with our buying during our nine years of schooling. Mrs. Coggins mended and remodeled the old clothes and kept them clean. Thank goodness for a school that did not major in styles and fads but in character. Back at home our physician, Dr. Inscoe, asked us how we stayed in school on so little. I told him that was easily answered by our rule--not to buy when we could not pay. The largest amount we borrowed during this period was $25.
"I thought I would never learn the parts of speech and English in general. It all looked 'Dutch' to me. Again I say the teacher was patient and enduring. We had thought everybody would make fun of us big folks in school but they didn't; they would offer to help us. At the age of twenty- six I heard my first school debate and learned my first lesson in English. I joined everything on the campus that was helpful. The first service put on by the B.Y.P.U., listed me on its program.
"My first examination came at mid-term. I had never heard of such a thing. What could I tell? Not until now have I heard from that test, nor do I wish to hear. But ray pay day came at Christmas. I had been burning the little oil lamp until three o'clock in the mornings. Think of a big '99' for on English! But there it was marked in red, the highest grade on that test. I felt like shouting but was afraid I could not do it again, so I passed it off by blushing. From this time on through ray college days I never failed a single examination. It sounds like boasting but hard work is the explanation. Add to that victory the announcement in chapel that I had won the improvement medal in society and you will guess that my head was swelling.
"Back home in the summer I supplied the East Mockville church during August for Brother Strikeleather. This was a great summer. My youngest brother gave me a stripped-down Ford roadster, and my old job at the shops was given me for the summer. During these three months after I got off from work I spent the rest of the day and part of the night repairing my car, and, believe it or not, I had a new car that fall to return to school. Such were a few of the many experiences we had while in school. Our second daughter, Sarah Sue, was born there.
"The president sent me to supply his pulpits a few times. My last year at Hales I supplied the Tufts Creek Church, near Morton. Then came graduation from high school, and what a great day that was. I shall long remember the thrills of that experience. By this time I knew that there was much more to be learned. It was no trouble to decide that Radman College was the place to go--the president had gone there.
"We found rooms at the Bowman Apartment. That was in the fall of 1925, and some of the old boys of Hales were there. They soon showed us the sights and we were ready for work. Brother lost his wife, and we took his three children with us at Radman for one year. Things were very different in college. During these years we met and formed many new friendships, which will stimulate memory for many years to come. The next year I was put in charge of the Squires Apartment, and this helped to pay house rent.
"Tufts Creek Church asked me to serve them as pastor my first year at Radman. They offered to raise the salary from $125 to $150 a year. It was only ninety-odd miles away. The church asked for my ordination, which was carried out by the home church the last Sunday in December 1926. Stanley Church near Radman called me, then Bullock's and Crable Churches.
"Let us drop back to the schoolroom for some extra activities. I hope this will not sound too boastful; as simply as I know how I am trying to state some of the experiences we had with a few honors we received while at Hales and Radman. At Hales I received all the medals given by the society; Improvement, Debaters, Declaimers, and Orators. I was never on the losing side of a debate. I was elected to serve in all the highest offices in the society and B.Y.P.U. The graduating class of 1925 elected me as class orator, and I was named to represent our school in a religious conference.
"At Radman I held some office in the society each year I was a member. I was elected to represent my society in a debate with the other society on Founder's Day, and my side won. I was on the debating teams to represent Radman College the term of 1928-29. Only once did my side lose a decision, that by a two to one vote. I served on the student council of the college and as president of the ministerial class of 1929; was appointed by the faculty committee as orator from my society the same year; was elected to membership in the Silver Leaf, highest honor society on the campus; and was chosen for membership in the philosophy fraternity. I received cum laude on my diploma, and during the nine years of school I never prepared a single lesson on Sunday.
"Mrs. Coggin's health began to fail at Hales and she had to drop out of school. When Sarah Sue was born I had to drop out of school one month to do the housework and serve as nurse. All of my teachers were of the finest sort. I never asked for a single favor, and never failed to hand in any special assignment. I do not recall being tardy on any classes.
"By cutting corners and following the most rigid lines of economy we managed to pay all bills before leaving both schools. Our debt of gratitude to these institutions and faithful teachers is great. Our slogan was: DAY BY LAY AND STEP BY STEP HE WILL OPEN THE WAY.
"In the fall of 1932 we moved to this city. The church here had been without a pastor for two years. However, the Sunday School was attracting large crowds. The equipment in the church was very little, and the building itself was badly in need of repairs. It was just a one-room building to which two very small rooms had been added behind the pulpit for the Sunday School. The church auditorium was crossed up with wires for curtains which made a very ragged appearance. There were about a dozen different colors of glass in the windows, and there was no shrubbery on the grounds.
"I learned that several years back they had talked of building but hard times and depression got them. All hopesof getting a church were vanished. The Ladies Aid had some money, and some suggestion was made to use this on repairs. I saw there was absolutely no interest in building a church soon. Tobacco was very cheap, and peanuts sold for seven-eighths of a cent a pound. Under prevailing conditions it looked like all the church could do would be to maintain one Sunday service a month. Seeing that all were so sure a building could not be undertaken, I thought it was a good time to prove our faith in God, and show our loyalty for His cause. The last week in January 1933, I showed some few people some church plans and asked them to build. Some laughed and said it could not be done. All agreed it was a bad time to start a thing like that.
"Well, on March 6, the old church began to come down. When the morning papers came they carried large headlines--'ALL BANKS CLOSED.' That was by order of President Roosevelt. Some of the folks got scared and wanted to stop the building until things got better, but it was too late. Half of the roof was off by nine o'clock, so the work went on. The largest personal gift was $500 and down to five cents. Some folks gave timber, some gave labor, and some sent a hand to work a day. The pastor was put in charge of the construction. It was not long until the enthusiasm was running at high pitch.
"The building is stucco finish, the cement blocks being made on the grounds. My brother and I worked together, using his machinery in making the blocks. The ladies of the church gave us dinner and supper, and people came in great numbers to see the work go on. Some were friends and some were strangers. Salesmen coming to town heard of the work and came by to see it.
"Once started, never did the interest lag. The pastor gave his labor, planned the interior, and carried the work on when the money gave out, using lumber out of the old church. We set out to complete the auditorium, and finish the basement and Sunday School rooms later. But all went along together. When one part was finished all was finished. We were in the new church the last Sunday in August. The pastor continued the work until it was finished.
"Many who have come to see the church have been very complimentary. No publicity has been made; all was done quietly. Some have estimated the building to cost all the way from $20,000 to $35,000. One pastor said he served a church costing $60,000 but would rather have ours. No one has guessed close to the low cost of the building; all have guessed twice as much and upwards of the cost.
"No debt has been on the building from start to finish, although it was built in the heart of the depression. No discord among the members or committees has been discovered. There has not been a year since the starting of the church but that there has been some addition to the church or parsonage or the equipment. The grounds have been beautified; a nice double garage has been built; cement walks have been made, The church is heated by an air-driven Holland furnace. New pews and new pulpit furniture are in. Last year we installed a Hammond organ. The church and all the equipment have cost less than $10,000. The budget of the church has increased five-fold; services have increased to two Sundays a month; and the membership has increased steadily.
"In the organized life of the church there is more interest now than ever. I find a growing spirit of cooperation. The church life of the membership is taken more seriously. Some forward-looking plans are being inaugurated. All in all, this has been a great experience which demanded a great effort and a great' sacrifice.
"A Late Education (Minister)Very Good Parents tenents- hard work - ungraded school - at 17 worked railroad- typhoid wiped out saving - drafter but didn't go - became churchworker - was he called to preach- surrendered to service - went to school away - have going but stuck it out high school and college - built church during depression.
Feature: A rather remarkable fight, overcoming belated educational beginning. Not stuffed shirt.
Name changes.
