Project # 1655
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, S.C.
December 27, 1938
Wilbur White
Marion, S.C.
(White)
"I bought this farm I'm living on now way back yonder in 1919. My, my, that seems like a long time ago. Time sure does fly. It's a dandy location though being only three and one-half miles from the town of Marion and right on Highway No. 501. The South was practically bankrupt at that time, and cotton wasn't bringing no more than five cents a pound. But when it comes to speaking of living on the farm, I'm a sticker. That's the life for me, I'll tell anybody.
"I just took a turn to follow up farming naturally, I reckon, for all my people were farmers as far back as we have record of them. The first settlement known of the White family in Marion County was made over here to Shiloh in the section of Wahee about 1800. I suppose that's how that long bridge over there next Pee Dee, called White's Crossing, gets it's name. Oh, that country was chock full of Whites at that time. Both my parents come from over in that section and my mother was a White same as my father. Yes, I tell folks I'm white all the way around.
"My grandparents owned acres and acres of land in their lifetime along with a bunch of slaves, but after the Civil War, they were stripped of all their Niggers and lost about all their land too. I really could not say exactly what my grandparents were worth before the Civil War, but I know they had nothing to speak of after it was over. I'm told they had a right good little number of Niggers in those days, but I cannot say how many. There's quite a bunch of Niggers by the name of White scattered all over Wahee and Centenary sections of Marion County today who are more than likely descendants of slaves once owned by the White family.
"Soon after the war was over, my grandparents died and my mother and father were left with very little - only a few acres of poor land which was lost in the struggle to keep on. In the 1880's, torn up and discouraged by the loss of his property and weary with some of his family always sick from living in the mossy malaria section of Wahee, my father moved to Centenary as a tenant farmer. But times were tight along that time and a tenant farmer had to scratch for a living, while the landowner sat back and raked in the wealth stored up by the hard labor of the tenant. As the years rolled by, my father moved from one farm to another, hoping each time that he might have the luck to strike a better place. Some years he cash-rented a house and small piece of land and other times he worked as a sharecropper. He preferred to rent for cash always as more freedom and independence was to be gained from this method.
"Finally, my father bought a few acres of land on the Carmichael place near Centenary, where I was born in a log house in 1892-93. But he happened to hit on such a poor piece of farming land that he was never able to pay for it and after four or five years, he had to go back to tenant life, moving from place to place as time went on.
"Times were mighty tight with us along those days and if it hadn't been for Mr. Blackwell in Marion, I don't know how my father would have managed. When he needed anything, he would make a trip to town and go there to Mr. Blackwell's wholesale store and trade two or three hundred dollars worth of stuff a year there in fertilizer, cloth, sugar and the like. Then at the end of the year, after he had collected from his crop, he would come to town and pay up his account. It usually took about everything thing he had made for the year, but it looked like there was no other way around it. My father used to say he had always lived a year behind the times and he expected it would follow him to his grave. And he continued to shift from place to place as a tenant farmer as long as he lived.
"In my childhood days, I went to Palmer School near Centenary and managed to pick up a right good little scattering of learning there. There were a hundred pupils enrolled in the school at that time, though there were no standards at all to speak of in those days. It was one of these old time two-teacher schools with no grades, no reports, and no promotions. One of the best teachers I ever had, I remember, was wild as a turkey; but I know that I learned more from that man than I ever expect any of my three children to learn from these educated teachers today. In my high school days, I went to the old Centenary school, which was graded and reports sent out quarterly to our parents.
"Oh, my children don't have any idea about the kind, of school I used to go to. No, no, when I was a kid, I didn't think a thing of walking three miles to school every day, rain or shine, hot or cold. With my dinner in a tin pail and my three books thrown in my little home-made sack, I would leave home every morning by daylight and I never recall getting home in the late afternoon that I couldn't see our old kerosene lamp burning through the window from a good distance down the road. Now, my children catch the bus right at our own door about eight o'clock on a morning and ride the three miles to town in no time. Then they get out of school at two o'clock and are back home every day no later than two-thirty.
"We children used to have no end of fun playing there to Palmer School and Centenary. Used to play baseball, shinney, steal chips, fox and dog, and Indian and American. One day, we boys took the girls by the hair and pulled them all over the school grounds. Oh, they fought and reared and pitched, but we took them by force and carried them off through the woods. You see, we were playing Indian and American.
"We used to have to walk the foot logs cross Reedy Creek, too, and that was a pretty dangerous business though we children didn't know it then. Those foot logs were about a quarter of a mile long and the water was at least two feet deep under them all the way. One time I was going cross them one freezing day in January and when I got about middle way, I heard a man coming along behind me trying to make an old ox wade the water clear cross. The ox wouldn't budge and the man was standing on the foot logs just a beating on the ox and yelling at him. It was such a sight to see them, I started walking backwards cross the logs and not looking which way I was going till it wasn't long before I fell off in the water. I had to run two miles home in those wet clothes and every rag I had on was about frozen stiff by the time I got there. An experience like that would give any of these town children pneumonia today, but nothing didn't hurt us then.
"Twenty or thirty of us boys were going to school another time one morning and we decided it wasn't right for the Niggers to walk the same foot logs as us. We all got together and said we were not going to stand for it another day and something had to be done about it. We declared we would fix them that day. Then we picked up all the sticks and old pieces of wood we could find around the woods there and lined up on the foot logs to wait for the Niggers to come along going to their school. It wasn't long before here come the Niggers and we told them that those foot logs belonged to the white people and if they wanted to get on the other side of the creek, they would have to wade the water. They said they wouldn't do it and commenced pulling up lightwood stumps to throw at us and anything they could get hold of. Oh, we had war there for a spell, but we made them Niggers wade that water before the fight ended. My, my, we had a big time with them darkies. Spencer Legette, he was in the bunch and he was such a whale of a talker, I think he just outtalked them. By the way, old Spencer is a major in the United States Army today. He is a graduate of the Citadel and later taught mathematics at West Point.
"I remember, one day a bunch of gypsies come along the road about time for school to turn out and when we children saw those long caravans of covered wagons, it nearly scared us to death. People used to tell us gypsies would steal any little children they saw and we believed every word of it. Gypsies traveled in scattered groups of a dozen or more with a long space between them, but we children didn't know about that then. Me and Max Rowell - just little bit of fellows at that time - jumped in the road after the first ones went by and started home. Soon we looked back and here come another dozen of them wagons. We scooted out in the woods and lay down in some gallberries till that bunch got by. Then soon as we got good and started again, here come another string of wagons. Then another and another. Me and Max knew, if we stayed on the road, there wasn't no way keeping them gypsies from stealing us so we cut cross the swamp and made for home. Went about two miles out the way, but we felt some proud to get home safe that day.
"When I was coming up, I used to walk to church often and sometimes my mother and father would let me stand on the back of their buggy and ride to church with them. I went to Terrace Bay Baptist Church part the time and to Centenary Methodist church at other times. My father was a Baptist and my mother was a Methodist. Neither one of them were inclined to be very strong to any one certain denomination, and I reckon that's how- come I've never stuck to any particular church. Me and all my family attend the Baptist Church today and that suits me good as any, I suppose. Yes, when I was a child, I used to go to the Methodist Sunday School in the morning and to the Baptist Sunday School in the afternoon of the same day. I believe I picked up a lots more going to Sunday School in my early days than children learn these days. Mr. Brown used to teach we boys there to Centenary Methodist Church and my, my, he could make a lecture. He would not only talk about the Sunday school lesson for that day, but also discussed any problems confronting the people at that time. In fact, I have never heard any man more instructive. But he was a sharp old fellow in more ways than one. We children used to have a habit of dropping a penny in the collection plate every Sunday and he told us one Sunday that there wasn't any sense in wasting money like that for the church didn't need it. I've never heard anybody give advice like that to children before or since. But that was a penny-wise old fellow, I'll tell you.
"All through my early days, we used to have these big Sunday school picnics on the river every year and that was one big day for all of us. Everybody would carry the nicest kind of baskets crammed full of good old country home cooking and we would cook what fish we caught right there on the banks of the river. Oh, we would have the biggest kind of time. We would always go in swimming in the morning and after dinner all the crowd would gather around old Captain Matt Stanley and listen to the stories he had to tell of his experiences in life. He was a veteran of the Mexican War as well as of the Confederate War. Oh, he was a great storyteller and would tell all kind of stories of what he had seen. He didn't have one bit of religion about him, but he would tell Bible stories without end. The old man was always fond of his liquor and wherever he went, he would carry it along and take a small drink before eating. But mind you, he wouldn't never offer nobody else none. Said it made his food go down lighter. But he was a wonderful old man and I really think I received a good bit of education just from listening to the old gentleman's stories. He lived to be ninety years old and when he died, that was a great loss to the Centenary community.
"After I finished high school, I hung around the farm until 1912 and managed somehow to save enough to go to a business school in Columbia. At the end of that year, I got a job as a bookkeeper for a man over to Bishopville, but I didn't like the work and went back to the farm in four months time. That was in 1913, and though the outlook for a farmer seemed dull, cotton being down to five cents a pound, I figured I could make a better living on the farm than I had been making cooped up like a chicken in a little town office.
"I didn't get settled good there home before the World War started and as time went on, things picked up on the farm considerably. Tobacco prices began to rise and in 1917, times were booming with cotton selling for forty cents a pound and tobacco bringing thirty-seven cents a pound. In 1918, I cleared $472.00 to every acre I planted, cotton bringing $200.00 a bale. Yes, everything picked up very materially for the farmers at that time. In fact, I consider that about the most prosperous period I have ever known. In 1918, I went in the Army, but did not go to France. In 1919, when I got back home, crops still sold high and I bought my farm for $11,000, covering a hundred acres. However, I could not pay for it all one time. The depression came on in 1920 and cotton dropped from forty to twenty cents a pound, tobacco from thirty to fifteen cents. The year 1921 proved to be worse times at which time both my mother and my father died. In 1923, prices began to pick up and I got married. In 1931-32, the boll weevil hit the farmers pretty heavy, but it really never has been a serious menace to any of us farmers. Then things picked up in 1933 and in 1935. I finished paying for my farm. In 1936, I was able to buy a hundred acres more of land which makes me own two hundred acres at the present time.
"In 1923, I bought my first automobile, a Ford Model-T, 2 bought a Chevrolet Coach in 1928, a Ford V-8 in 1934, and a Dodge Sedan in 1936, which car I drive now. I have three tenant houses on my farm, a large feed barn, stables, two tobacco barns and live in a seven-room house. In 1937, I added electric lights to my house to take the place of kerosene lamps and in 1938, I spent over $1,700.00 on furniture and repair work on the farm. Oh, I tell you, it takes money to live these days.
"I make all the corn, potatoes, and vegetables I need to run my farm and always have a surplus to sell. Also, I make a considerable profit on my hogs and raise more chickens than we can use. During my childhood days, my father usually made from $200.00 to $400.00 money crop a year, and the most he ever made was $600.00 in 1910. In 1937, my money crop amounted to $7,000, but not above expenses. In 1920, I made only 300 pounds of tobacco to the acre, while I made 1100 pounds last year; made 30 bushels of corn to the acre in 1920 against 45 bushels to the acre in 1937. It takes about four or five hundred bushels of corn a year to run my farm and I sell two to four hundred bushels a year also. Along with that, I use one to two hundred bales of hay a year to feed my stock on. Yes, there has been a tremendous crop increase since 1920, which is due to the use of more and better fertilizers on the farm. Although there is not as much land under cultivation today as there was during the Civil War, the average farmer makes a great deal more to the acre than he did then. My father considered a half a bale of cotton to the acre a fine crop now if a farmer doesn't get a bale to the acre, it's a flop. Just like my father thought a two-year old hog the ideal hog to kill, and now a six to eight months one is about right.
"But even with all the strides in the last few years, living on the farm can't come up to what it used to be. Christmas times, people used to take a week off and now they hardly have time for one day. I remember how people used to have neighborhood parties around to one another's house and everybody that went had a good time. All of us stayed in the house, too, but I hear people complaining that, when there's a party these days, they can't get none of these young folks to stay nowhere near the house. When I was coming up, people didn't know what a card was. Oh, we would have fine times at our parties playing all sorts of games that the whole crowd could join in and have a little fruit for refreshments before breaking up for the evening.
"Another thing, when I was a boy, I was great to hunt and fish and I know I haven't tried my luck at either in fifteen years. Used to hunt and fish all night long. When I was about seventeen years old, I caught twenty fish with a hook and line in no time one night and killed twenty squirrels one time in twenty-one shots. I remember, I waded clear cross Reedy Creek one day and killed a wild turkey that weighed seventeen pounds. Yes, I used to go hunting twice a week and now I don't go none. Oh, we did enjoy those nights on the river bank. Wouldn't carry a thing with us but what clothes we had on, a frying pan, fishing pole, and, after we had caught all the fish we wanted, we would make up a big fire to cook the fish and tell stories around. I did love to lie there and listen to the owls hoot and hear the river water running in the bushes. Occasionally it would come a rainy night and then we would, be in a peck of trouble. Those rainy nights were about as miserable as any I ever spent. But it's not much fun to ever hunt and fish now, since nearly all the land and lakes are posted these days, while the few places left open to anybody are kept cleaned up all the time. That's the way of the world today, I reckon; but when I was young, nobody ever thought of posting their land.
"Seems like sickness wasn't such a bear in my boyhood days either, and people were lots more healthy than they are these days. It would take two or three hours to half a day to get a doctor in the country years ago. Usually the patient was better or dead one, before the doctor got there, we had these old country quack doctors then who didn't know to give anything but calomel, soda and quinine, rhubarb, and asafetida - that was the limit. But one good thing, doctors didn't cost much then. The old time doctor would come to see a family all year and not charge more than $30.00 for his services. And I hardly think he knew what a prescription was like for he always carried his medicine with him and never had the occasion to write any. On the other hand, if he happened to be around anybody's house near mealtime, he would stop and eat with the family free of charge. Preachers used to do that too.
"Well, it seems to me the old way of living was much better than the present method. One thing certain, there is just too much government aid today, and it is destroying the very foundations of our country. People used to have ' a real backbone of their own and never thought to ask help from anywhere. If a person was in trouble back in the old days, the neighbors would get together and help them out. If somebody's house burned up, everybody would come together and help build it back. If a person got sick, friends would help nurse them. If the roads were bad and needed fixing, people would get together and help work on them, but nobody offers any assistance to one another very often these days. People were more sociable and I know they were better satisfied before all this government relief was showered upon the country. Taxes were practically nothing twenty-five or thirty years ago and now everything's taxed. This government relief has simply destroyed the morale of farm labor - has made the laboring class lazy and shiftless - has killed their will to do something for themselves. In fact, farming is not as satisfactory as it used to be all the way around and all because of government interference."
