<text not clear>
January 16, 1940
Cora Liao Taylor
Mabel B. Francis Editor
Miami, Florida.
(Mrs.) Catina Manos
761 SW 3d. Street
Miami, Florida
Mrs. Catina (Catherine) Manos, age 49, and her three children live in a cozy yellow frame cottage on the rear of a lot at 759 SW 3d. Street. One side of the house is shaded by a large mango tree while near the front porch entrance there is a tall coconut tree heavily loaded with fruit. Three hare rockers, a small flower stand and a corner cupboard with a mirror constitute the porch furniture.
As the appointment had been made in advance, Mrs. Manos greeted me very cordially, especially since I had broken down her self- consciousness as evidenced by her remark:
"Oh, me no speak English. You no could un 'crstan' me."
"Oh, yes," I explained, "you spoke English. I understood every word. I am your friend. I go around and help all kinds of foreign speaking people to speak and write English. I'll come to your home and help you to talk English."
At this she clasped my hand with both of hors and I road an eager appeal in her face as she said: "Aw right, you cum after 5:30. Me Mary she help you. T'ank you! T'ank you! Cum!"
They had just finished their supper and were washing the dishes at a small table in the kitchen. The dining room between the large front living room and kitchen was furnished with a bed for John. There was a bathroom adjoining the kitchen and another bedroom leading from the dining room.
Mrs. Manos is approximately five foot tall and weighs about 132 pounds. She is a brunette with dark eyes, and a motherly, rather careworn, expression. Her heavy black hair is parted in the middle and caught tightly into a large braid that coiled all over the back of her head. Being in her ninth year of mourning for her husband, she were a black and white polka dot voile dross and a black sweater.
She called Mary, age 18, and John, age 16, into the living room, and proudly introduced them. John is in his first year of Senior High School. He was friendly and tried to help his mother answer my questions by speaking Greek to her. He is of a muscular, ever-grown build and somewhat awkward, but closely resembling the photograph of his father.
In a short while he excused himself politely saying that he must go to the meeting of the Sons of Pericles which is a Greek organization for boys. In the meantime, Helen, age 14, also a brunette, slipped out to a neighbor's house to "do her homework."
During the course of the interview Mrs. Manos digressed several times by saying: "Oh, I so gland you cum. You see how smart me Mary is. She grad'ate, June. Now, you got her good job."
Mary has a charming form, a graceful carriage and attractive dark eyes and hair. She stands a few inches taller than her mother and, on the whole, presents an unusually radiant personality.
Proudly, her mother took a framed treasure from the wall. It was Mary's "American Legion Certificate of Scholarship Award" Which she won when she graduated from Junior High School.
"See! Road!" her mother urged. "that vet me Mary von!"
Mary explained that the school and teachers took a vote to determine who could pass the highest on "all round activities, character, courage, service and scholarship," and the award was given by the local Harvey Seeds Post, No. 29.
As her mother replaced the precious document, she came with two rewards of merit and a prize from the Gregg Publishing Company, one was a certificate for the hest legibility in writing shorthand and another was for receiving the highest grade in a theory test. While the two entitled her to the prize of a beautiful chromium inkwell and pen.
"Do you expect to be the honor student this year." I asked Mary.
"No, no I can't expect that, "Mary replied "but I've been on the honor roll every month. I am still working hard with my typing and shorthand because that will help me get a job. I can do 45 or 50 words a minute and I am trying hard to improve."
In my effort to encourage the mother to talk more freely. I handed her a new calendar.
"Oh, Morologi<text not clear>, Greek nom, Ca-lend-ar, American nom. See! Yaniaros."
"Yes, Yaniaros is Greek name for January I said your name, now, you say January," I entreated, and to Mary's surprise she said it plainly.
"She won't try like that for us. We don't think she will over learn to talk English," she added despairingly.
"You see, day laf at me and I no lak it, "the mother retorted.
"Well," explained Mary, "We can't help it. She calls a permanent wave a 'permanny wet.' How can we help but laugh?'
"Oh, no, I am sure you can say permanent wave, Mrs. Manes."
"Per-ma-nent." She repeated slowly, and with great effort she said "wave," and Mary chuckled.
"You're the first one that ever get her to say that."
In the meantime Mary had squeezed a glass of orange juice which she served as a gesture of hospitality.
While admiring her mother's long braids, I asked if her hair was long enough to sit on and she pointed to my knee and then to my ankle.
"Oh, yes, down here. Too much long, cut off zum. Von I vas girl in old country, me fodder, he go oud an' fin' snek' dress, (snake skin) three-four feet long. Not live snek. Snek gone oud. Look lak snek, but hollow. He eyes in snek dress.
"Me 'n' me sister ve tak dis snek dress an', praid it in our hair and dwist reun' our hot. Mak' hair grow! Se how mak' hair grow! Me sister, she have long hair lak dis, too. Sometim' tak' jus' small piece and stick in hair. Didn't have big piece, but it mak' hair grow."
"Why did you come to America?" I asked.
"Me vun sister an' brutter here long dim.' He zent money for me, fodder, mudder and sister. Folks say all over, 'Go Morica! Easy money! No nuttin' to do! Pipple aw dim' on vacashe-on! Too much idle!
"Heard about dis aw ever. I live wid relatives somedim' in France, Egypt, Germany. Lived in Egypt wid brutter ten year. Over Egypt blenty languages, Italian, French, aw kin's.
"Ve cum T'anksgiving Day. Lan'at Ellis Island, 1920, November. I t'ought it funny. Stores aw closed. No buy nutt'in'. Day say, 'stores closed to eat turkey today.' I no unnerstan'. Turkey, my country somedim'.<text not clear>, my island belong to Turkey somedim'. Greece somedim'.
"Why eat TURKEY I di'n't know it holiday. I di'n't know turkey American nom. I say, No you mus'n't eat Turkey! How can you eat my country <text not clear> day laugh at me.
"You see, me fadder got so blenty chillon, eight girls, two boys. Me fourth tak' care of younger. T'ree girl, van boy gone Ecclesiastical school <text not clear> hit. I goudn't go school. Cost too much. Me mudder taught road <text not clear> Greek, not much. Good schools dare but too much money. Dat why I di'n't know turkey American nom.
"Ve cum right on to Miami. Fadder an' mudder stay two veeks, went back to old country, died in gupple veeks. I met my husband g't married in 'bout month, sister marry too. My country blenty girls. Mon go war. Cum <text not clear> not married. So some girls cum here, got husband.
"Me husband run restaurant 'bout ten year. Had blenty money, but had vun bad habit. He love horses too vell. No blayed horses. Oh, los' so much money! Took seek. Not bet seek, long but doctor long dim'. an' cum <text not clear> nine year ago died. No money left. Don' know what wrong. Bad <text not clear> and worry.
"ve move in <text not clear>eg apartment house, 27th Avenue, I bay no rent. I <text not clear> blaco<text not clear>klon. No rent, but no money f'r food f'r chillon. I vash f'r apartment an' go oud somedim' an' vash. Cou'n't stan' it. Me wrists so seek. Dis vun oh, bad seek. Had to be in cast long dim' Dis udder not too good. It got seek too von it too much wring clothes.
"vun dime I, oud at vash pot. Lif' too many shoots on stick. Too heavy. Throw me over. Neighbor saw, came runnin', book me up or I might burn up. Dat fall mak' me back. Oh. So seek. Oh! Hoi! So seek wid back lumbago. I bet long dim'. Seex veeks. Ve liv' over dare five year. Vork too hard.
"Got job in Riverside Laundry. Can't stan' on feet aw day. It mak' back seek. So I sit at m'chino an' mondit. Somedim' put on batches. Somedim' sew. Somedim' vix 8. 8 1\2. 9 hour at 20 zents hour.
"Ve move here. Pay $22.50. Me went to courthouse. Tol' dom had t ' ree chillen an ' only 5. Me back seek an' must have help.
"Some say. 'She. No seetizon. Only made application'.
"Some say. 'She can't spick an' write English!
"Some say. 'She need help. if she widow an' have t'ree chillen. Her husand seetizen. Her chillens 'Moricans'.
"Some say. 'She Greek. She got aw help she need. Rich Greeks vill help her.'
"Don I say. 'Yes, Greeks help me vun day. Two day, but not aw dim.' Then, oh. 'Merica! Good 'Merica! Day gif me $20 a month. Not f'r me, but because I have chillens. They 'Moricans. Day can go school! Dis wonderful Miami schools! Me chillens so smaht! Oh, so t'ankful!
"I lak learn English, but no dim! Vork zix day. Too tired to go to night school. Love 'Merica! Love t' be seetizen, but no can't. Too hard! Too much! Must keep chillens in school! Don' do much Greek seeking anymore. No money, but we lak
GOURVERLAKIA
"Hamburger meat ball soap Tak'
1 lb. raw Hamburger
1 cup uncooked rice
1 onion diced
1 egg
Salt and pepper to taste.
Break the egg into the above mixture and make into small balls. Take plenty of water, - a little more than enough for five plates of soup. Place meat balls into boiling water and boil for 20 or 30 minutes. Skimming when necessary. Take out one ball and taste to see if rice is cooked, then add 1\3 cube of butter and turn off the fire.
"When relative dies we burn incense inside finery case lak dis. (Pointing to the oval glass china closet) Burn incense 40 day.
"Evil Eye mak' blenty pipple die. Me brudder vent church and someven wid Evil Eye look on him. He fell down in church. No dead, but died after.
"There is church on our island wid leetle hole in groun.' If any one has seek oar, he kneel down an' put oar to hole and hear vind blow in ear. Ear get well. They say dat is supposed to be St. Peter doin' dat miracle.
"Ven dim' was cum Easter. Me mudder an' beag croud at beeg meetin' at night dimo an' a beeg army of Turks game to burn church down. Ev'y body so scared. Scared to go and scared to stay and be burned up. Do pipple pray an' some look oud vindow saw four hourses. Some pipple saw horses. Me mudder no see horses but she heard them.One was red horse. Dey say St. James was ridin on dat horse. T'ree white horses. St. Gorrge. St. T'oodere an ' St. Lienas all ridin' on vite horses.
"Des four mon aw dress in vite rodo roun' an' roun' church oh, so fas' ven day heard prayers that Turks cum f'r burn pipple in do church.
"Boat three or four egg whites and add yolks slowly. Squeeze 1\2 lemon and take one cup or two of hot soup. Add and beat a little at a time. Pour into soup kettle. Do not cook. Soup is hot enough to thicken soup without boiling.
(Mary pronounced it, The-po-lis)
Thiplos (
(Mrs. Manos called it, De-be-les
"Mak' dough lak pie dough only put egg in dough. Use any kin' shortenin'. Vix oud wid roller pin lak dis. Cut 'bout 4 inches and 1 1\2 inches. Bick up an' pinch dough in middle lak ribbon bow. Fry in deep fat. Olive oil or other cooking oil. Dip in sugar and sprinkle wid broken nuts. This is a special dessert for new Year's Day. Only mak' it on New Year's Day."
"Can you tell me of any strange customs or beliefs that you know were practiced in Tenedos? I asked.
"I don't believe in killing spiders at night. Don't know why? Bat luck. I guess. Break mirror. No goot luck. Don't look in mirror at 12 o'clock. Your fate is supposed to pass by the mirror. If you look then, you won't be happy. But I don't believe in dat much.
"Ve don' have Santa Claus in Tonodos. We have St. Basilious.
"Turks saw horses going' roun' and' roun'. Turks started running'. Four saints gone away.
"Long dim' 'go dress different. Grandma differences dress. Women cover top of face. Only eyes pick out, so Evil Eye no hurt "am and strange mom look no at them. Women take cloth vind round hot. Oh! me don't know English. Vat call 'Morican?
"Do you mean a foz!" I inquired.
"Foz! Oh, oh, Foz! 'Merican? Foz, Creek. You said sam lak me. Don't wear foz now. I never wore foz.
Oh, dress. So much goots. Boog pontecoats, (petti-coats) no dress lak 'Mericans.
Games played lak 'Mericans jacks wid pebble stones. Swings hang on trees jump. Vix rope so high. Jump over dat. Vix higher next' dim' jump higher."
I closed the interview, but they seemed reluctant to have me leave and as they followed me out on the porch, I remarked about their beautiful Diefenbachia.
"What nom" she asked and I repeated it until she could say it correctly, then I spelled it for Mary.
"Mary, 'member dat," she remarked proudly.
"Strange nom for flower? No?" she inquired anxiously.
"Yes, I replied, "I think it is strange name for the flower. It is named after a great man who loved all kinds of flowers and made a study of them. His name was dieffenbachia which means deep brook, or deep little river."
"Oh, I t'ank you, t'ank you so much. I like plant. Two years ago jus' leetle. Now boog. He John put tonight in boog bucket. Too fas' it grew for under bucket. It droop. Now it grew aw right. T'ank you, t'ank you. Oh so glad! Cum again!"
Note: All quotations in the above article are unabridged transcriptions of shorthand noted taken <text not clear>ther during the interview or immediately afterwards.
gif me $20 a month. Not for me, but because I have childrens. They 'Moricans. Day can go to school! Dis wonderful Miami schools! My children so smart! Oh so thankful!
"I lak learn English, but no dim! Vork zix day, Too tired to go to night school. Love 'Morica! Love t' be scotizen, but no can't. Too hard! Too much! Must keep chillens in school! Don' do much Greek cooking anymore. No money, but we lak
GOURVERLAKIA
"Hamburger meat ball soup. Tak"
1 lb. raw hamburger
1cup uncooked rice
1 onion diced
1 egg
Salt and pepper to taste.
Break the egg into the above mixture and make into small balls. Take plenty of water, - a little more than enough for five plates of soups. Place meat balls into boiling water and boil for 20 or 30 minutes. Skimming when necessary. Take out one ball and taste to see if rice is cooked, then add 1/3 cube of butter and turn off the fire.
