February 15, 1939
J. B. and Birdie Lee Atkins (real names)
Municipal Trailer Camp
Tampa, Florida
Lindsay M. Bryan, writerunedited
"JAYDY" ABBIN
FLORIDA ADVENTURER
On the ragged fringe of the trailer camp an aged and battered flivver coughed and wheezed to a stop. It settled dejectedly in the sand, with flabby tires and drooping fenders. Attached to its rear was a smallmade home house trailer, or more accurately, a rough tin shanty on wheels.
The driver, an angular and weatherbeaten man of perhaps 35, in faded blue overalls, got out of the car and peered here and there under its bottom. Suddenly his long frame straightened up with alacrity. He shook a mop of sandy hair out of eyes, threw back his head, and gave lusty vent to the peculiar, half-yodling "hoy-e-e-epee," yell of the Florida cowboy.
Then, gazing into far space, he sang off-key in a robust but adenoidal tenor:
"I'm a-goin down to Tampa town
With money in muh britches,
A pint o' likker on each hip--
Look out, you sons-o-witches!
"Fer I'm a wild-eyed fight in fool,
an um gonna raise some h--l.
I'm rootin, tootin, cuttin, shootin
Cowboy from LA Belle."
The lilting ditty was sung to a tune something like that of "Dixie."
Intrigued by the picture and sound effects, the questing writer sniffed a possible story and approached the scene. As he drew near a woman's voice from inside the trailer quavered in mild rebuke of the singer:
"Jaydy, you hush up singin that nasty song. Fokes all think we're Yankees." Jaydy cut short his melody, and grinned amiably as he greeted the master.
"Well I declare!" the trailerite mused. "So you write stuff to print in books well, well! That seems like a curus kind-a trade to work at. I never thought uv a body follerin that for a livin. I read a book wunat. Hit wuz about a man named Robinson Crusoe. That feller shore had his sef a time on that island." He laughed and went on:
"Well, I aint fitten to go in no book, but I wuz bawn an raised a Floridy Cracker. Mostly in the woods and swamps. But I ben up Nawth sense last June. Jiat got back this fur, thank the good Lawd I'm a-headin fer Lee County. My name? I Hit's J. D. Abbin."
He was asked what the initials J. D. stood for, and replied firmly:
"That's my whole front name, jist J. D. But people calls me Jaydy for short. I ast my maw one time when I wuz a kid if J. D. meant some other name. But she said no, she named me jist that, after he uncle, J. D. Stokes, an he never had no other name. A right many fellers in Floridy's named jist with letters thataway."
"What did you do up North?"
"Me an the ole woman went off up yonder to Dee-troit to git me a job in Ole Man Ford's factory, me bein a jack-leg mechanic fum workin round cars an sawmills. Well, I gotta job nuttin fer bout six months, but got laid off in Dee-cember. So I built us this little ole piece-a trailer, an we lit a shuck for Floridy."
The vector suggested the trip north must have been a great experience for Jaydy, and asked him how he liked it. He drawled:
"we kinda liked some uv it. But if I'd a-staid up there I'd a-had to kill a whole passel o' niggers. Them Yankee niggers haint gotta bitta manners. Way, the black sons-o-buzzards all set right down by a white man, in a street car or any place. I got arrested twice up there fer kickin the tar outa niggers."
Asked what he had worked at in Florida, Jaydy pondered, as he took a knife from his pocket, whetted the long blade on his shoe and began whittling a pine stick:
"Man, I reckon I've done near about everthing. Never wuz no hand fer settlin down fer long in one place. I spose that's why I always ben pore. But by gravy I've had a heap-o fun in my time," he chuckled, his blue eyes twinkling reminiscently.
"Tell me about your life. I'll bet you've had a lot of adventures.""Well," he cackled again, if you aim to putt me in a book I better leave out a lotta things I done, or they'll chunk me in the jail house and thow the key away. But if you don't print my right name hit'll be all right. "
"I wuz bawn in 1903 bout ten miles outa Dade City, but don't reckoleck much till I started to school in De Soter County. Off an on I had around three years schoolin.
"When I wuz jist a yearlin boy about 16 my famly moved fum De Soter County to Mannertee County. Up to then we'd ben raisin a few hawgs an cows an doin a little farmin an stilllin in De Soter an Glades County, on shares, mostly.
"In Mannertee County we herded cows a while, then went share-croppin down on Sawgrass Slough, back Bradentown. Raisin tomaters an celery mostly. But overtime we'd gitta crop good started, seemed like, they'd come a freeze, er drouth, er blight, er bugs, er sumpun, and kill out near about everthing we had.
"Parta our twenty acres wuz pee-yore muck, so deep an soft an dry you could stick a hoe hannel down in it clean up to the hoe. One fall hit caught a-fire when some cow men so fire to the woods, an it tuck us two days an nights to outen it. We had to tote water in buckets fum the well, bout a quarter away.
"Hit burnt mighty nigh a acre, plum down to hard pan, on the twenty nex to ourn, where ole Jim Ralls wuz farmin. We holp him to outen his, an he holp us, but it tuck us an all our famlies to keep it fum spreadin any furder.
"Well, we couldn't hardly make our seed and fertilise a-farmin. So paw an me sot us up a little still down in the big hammock an went to makin shine. We done right good at that, sellin to bootleggers in Bradentown an Tampa, but it tuck most all we made to pay off the prohibition agents fer lettin us run.
"After we'd ben there bout two years maw died with playgry. Then paw, the ole billy-goat, went an married a neighbor gal ony 14 years old--jist a little fryin-size biddy, thout no more sense an a pond gannet. An paw goin on 50 year old! He traded her daddy six hawgs an ten gallon- a shine for the peaky brat. After they got married he brung her home to live with us in our ole shack.
"Me an Dory--that wuz my sister, a year youngern me an the ony other youngun left--we fussed a plenty at paw fer do in sich a fool thing, but he wouldn't pay us no mind.
"One time I come home fum takin a loada shine to town, and when I got to the house I heerd a scufflin an a screechin inside. I run in, and there wuz that little huzzy a-beatin on Dory with a tomater staub--an Dory too skairt to fight back.
"I wuz so mad I jist turnt her over muh knee an spanked her beehind till she hollered like a stuck pig. Paw heerd er an come a-runnin in fum the stable. When he seen what I wuz doin he retch up on a shelf fer his pistol and tried to shoot me. But I'd done shot up all his cattidges shootin at snakes, so he turnt to an started to gimme a pistol-whuppin.
"I fit him back a while, an I reckon I might coulda whupped him; but I jist hauled off an knocked him out with a jolt on the jaw. Then me and Dory gathered up our close an other plunder in a crocus sack, an we left home fer good.
"I shore hated to go off fum there, cause I wuz a-cotin a nice little gal named Birdie Lee Rodgers over acrost the slough. Her daddy had got religion at a Holy Roller meetin, and he said I wuz too no-count fer her. He'd done run me off his place with a shotgun, but me an her kep meetin in the woods right on till I left.
"Well, me an Dory walked all the way to Bradentown that night an staid with kin folks. I knowed a boat cap'm there that wuz runnin liquor in fum Cuby, an he gimme a job on his boat; mostly loadin an unloadin hams (sacks) uv liquor, an a-stannin watch a-lookin out fer guvmint boats.
"We had us a good fast gas cruiser, and we run ony at night, thout lights. But sometimes them coast guarders ud pick us up with their search lights, an then they'd wham away at us with their machine guns an little ole cannons. One night a thee-inch shell went smack thew our cabin, an missed my bunk ony bout a foot. Hut they never ketched us. I did git pistol- bit one time when we wuz fixin to land some booze an a depty sheriff shot at us-- jist a 38 slug they muh laig.
"Cap'm Bob paid me good money, but I spent it fast on wimmen an gamblin. Here Jaydy lowered his voice cautiously and cast a wary eye toward the trailer, from whence came the clatter of dishwashing and a woman's low voice humming contentedly.
"Them Cubian wimmen is shore hot mammas," he whispered enthusiastically. "They'll either love you to death, er stick a knife in you if you make em jealous. I reckoleck one little Spanish gal I had in Havanner----But shucks, I better not tell that." And Jady chortled and winked roguishly.
"Sometimes when liquor wuz scarce in Havanner we'd smuggle a loada Chinymen over on a dark night an putt em ashore at some lonesome place on the Floridy coast. One night we fetched over eleven head uv em at $200 a head. We putt em off jist afore day down on Lemon Bay. Cap'm Bob wouldn't go no closter to shore'n bout half a mile, cause the water wuz shaller. He made them pore Chinks jump overboard an wade ashore in about five foot-a water. They wuz a big movin van waitin fer em on shore to take em to Tampa. Hits a wonder some uv em didn't git drownded.
"I wrote a coupla times to Birdie Lee whilst I wuz boatin, but never got no hearin fum er, so I figgered she musta quit likin me, er either her daddy got the letters an never give em to er.
"One time we tied our boat up at Fort Myers fer a coupla days to git the engine fixed, an I decided to hop a train an go up to see Birdie Lee. But goin up town I met a bootlegger I knowed, an he tole me they wuz a warrant out fer Cap'm Bob. I got skairt they might want me too, so I high-tailed right outa there, an hitch-hiked to Marco.
"There I run into Virgin White, a feller I usta cow-hunt with. Virgin wuz a regler ole woods rat. He wuz fixin to go down in the Everglades a-- trappin, an he ast me to go in with him. I had around $80 on me, so I holp him buy the traps an rations an a tent, an we lit out fer Big Cypress Swamp. I figgered that wuz a good place to hide out if they had a warrant fer me.
"Varmints wuz plenty that winter, an we got a lotta hides--coon, otter, deer, skunk, gator, bear, an one big panther. By spring we had about $400 wuth.
"We went to Miami an sold em. My share wuz $197, an I felt purty rich with all that money burnin a hole in muh britches pocket. But I hadn't had no fun fer tha longest, so I started out lookin fer wimmen an liquor, an a little gamblin. Well, I found plenty-a all uv em--specially a big crap game I be John Browned if I could win a bet in that game, an by mawnin I wuz clean, plum broke.
The Florida adventurer laughed ruefully as he paused and leaned over to pick up a fresh piece of whittling timber. The back of his weathered neck presented a fascinating study, with its crimson and deeply creased skin, caked in diamond-shaped patterns like red alligator skin. Such necks are frequent among rural Floridians who have lived much of their lives exposed to the sun, wind and weather.
From the trailer now came busy sounds of sweeping, and the woman's rather sweet voice was lifted in an old church hymn.
Jaydy continued to reflect as he spat out a quid the size of a golf ball and took a fresh chew from a thick plug. Then he resumed his story.
"Well, I decided Miami wuzzent no place fer a pond hopper like me, so I hit the hard road a-walkin nawth. I soon thumbed a ride with a feller on a furniture truck goin to Lakeland. But we broke a axle some place in the woods in Polk County, an I started walkin ahead to call a garage man to tow him in. I phoned for one fum a fillin station, as then kep on walkin west.
"Goin thew the flatwoods a ole Ford coop ketched up with me, an drivin it wuz a skinny red-headed woman bout 40 years old. I thumbed er fore I seen she wuz a woman, but she stopped an picked me up any how. We got talk-in, an I tole er I wuz lookin fer a job. She said she wuz a widder woman with a 80-acre farm, an needed a man to help run it. Said her ole man had up an died on er a year back, an left er the farm an a flock-a kids, an forty head-a cattle, an she didn't know how many hawgs a-runnin the woods. She'd been to town after rations an seed cawn; an ast me would I hire out to her.
"I tole er I didn't love farmin a-tall, workin fum kin till can't an a- livin on grits an hawg's vest with the buttons on that's son belly. Asked what was meant by "from kin till can't," Jaydy explained it meant "fum the time you kin see in the mawnin till you can't see at night," and proceeded:
"But she lent over agin me kinda clost, an said if I'd come an work fer her I wouldn't hafta work moren eight hours a day, an she'd gimme $30 a month an board, with plenty ham, an chicken, an pie, an anything else I wanted. I reckoned she musta ben kinda bad off fer a man any how, the way she kep snugglin up to me in the seat, an me ugly as a skint buzzard.
"She wuz a homely ole varmint her sef, with her buck teeth, a long nose, an freckly neck. But by then I wuz so dad-blamed hongry my belly wuz growin fast to muh backbone, an me broke as a jaybird. So I tole er I'd hire out to er fer a while, an maybe longer.
"By good dusk we got to her farm, bout a mile back fum the road in a hammock. She had a good house an stable, with a mule, an plenty chickens an some hawgs an cows in the yard pens. So I thought I might could stan it a while, any how.
"As we pulled up to the porch there wuz a acreechin, an out poured five head-a younguns, all sizes fum knee-high to a saplin boy about 10--an all their heads so red you coulda lit a cigarette on em. When they seen me they all run behind the house an peeked at me fum around the corners, skairt like. But I started makin funny faces at em, an dancin a jig, an they soon made up with me.
"Well, the ole gal tuck me in an fed me up an bedded me down, an I wuz treated like a rich uncle fum then on. After bouta week eat in good vittles an bein petted a plenty, I sea to mysef, sez I: 'Well, old double-ugly, looks like you done won yo'sef a home, an a famly to boot. But, thinks I, this lady's shore-nuff hard up fer a man, takin the likes-a me to raise."
"Things rocked along thataway thee-four weeks. But fore long I got to messin up with another gal down the road apiece. Carried her to a peanut bilin an a coupla frolics, an sich like. But when the widder found it out she started rompin on me an pesterin me to marry her. Well, I looked at them buck teeth, an them spindly laigs, an thoughta that litter a-kida, an tola er I wuzzent no marryin man. Made out like I already had a wife in Cuby.
"But she kep ding-dongin me right on, an said if I'd marry her she'd gimme half the farm an stock, an a hunnerd dollars to boot. I felt right sorry fer the ole dame, but couldn't atummick marryin her. I even swore I had T. B., the ketchin kind, an tole er all my famly went crazy soon as they got married, an had to be sent to Chattyhoochy. But nuthin I said fazed her. I declare, she wuz the hell-bentiat woman on gittin married I ever seen.
"Finally she kep hen-peckin me till I got to whur I wuz plum fed up, an couldn't stan it no longer. So one day I drove her ole flivver to town, makin out I wuz goin far scratch feed, an left the car there an tuck a train fer Fort Meads. I'd already drawed a month's wages, an she owed me some more, but I never ast her fer it.
"Back-a Fort Meade I gotta job wooda--ridin fer a teppentine camp, an stuck at that bout a year, kinda hidin out agin. Then I putt in a year er two sawmillin; worked as guard on a chain gang; made shine fer bout a year; cow-hunted some, an done a lotta other things till 1936.
"Then I heard they wuz makin big money raisin truck down in Lee County, so I went down there an rented me a piece-a land an putt in a crop uv tomatera an beana. That year I shore made mysef a killin. Cleaned up $2,000 cash money.
"Then I met a nize old gal I'd knowed when we wuz youngsters. She wuz a-viaitin some fokes clost to my farm. Well, we found out we liked each other right much yit, so we got married an kep on farmin fer a while. I still got her, an a little money, so we aint so frightnin bad off. She's got religion--the Holy Roller kind, an she's shore a good woman. She's even got me readin the Bible a right smart, too.
"Next we're a-goin back to Lee County and drive round till we find a little farm at jist suits us. Then I'll buy it an settle down--maybe.
At this point the trailer door opened and a neat, pleasant faced little woman with graying bobbed hair leaned out. She placed two spread fingers across her mouth, pursed her lips and squirted out a hissing stream of snuff juice that hit the ground with a smack. Then she saw us, blushed, and smiled a little sheepishly.
"Hey, old woman, "Jaydy cackled, "this gempman's a book writer by trade, an he's put tin me in a book. Whaddya think a-that?"
"Pleased tu meet yuh," she nodded and smiled, "but I hope you won't putt me in yer book too, with this ole raggedy frock on. I aint had time to do no washin sence we left Dee-troit."
The dress was neat, clean and pretty, if a little faded. The writer asked: "Are you glad to get back to Florida, Mrs. Abbin?"
"I shore am proud to be in Floriday agin. I wuz raised heah, an so wuz all my kin people. If I'd-a had my druthers we wouldn't a-went off up there. I druther a-staid down here. But Jaydy wanted to go." Her brown eyes beamed on him, as she continued:
"I met some mighty nice fokes up there, but their vittles aint fitten to eat. Why, them Yankee storekeepers don't even know what grits is, ner turnip greens, ner haslet. I'm a-cookin a mess-a haslet now. Jady loves it too." Haslet, it was explained, consists of the lungs and liver of a hog, made into a kind of stew.
After a little further conversation, the caller said goodbye to the couple, and was cordially invited to come back and to visit them on their farm when they got settled. As he walked away, Jaydy called after him:
"Say, mister, I aimed to tell you, but I forgot--This here's that Birdie Lee I wuz tellin you bout."
He patted her arm and grinned proudly.
AUTHOR'S NOTE.-- In twenty years of frequent contact with rural natives of Florida, the writer has observed that they are far from consistent in their use of native peculiarities of speech. This is probably due to most of them having associated for periods with northern people and with better educated Floridians.
For example, a "Cracker" will sometimes say "hit" for "it," and at other times pronounce the word correctly. Also, he may either articulate his r's or slur them in using the same words at different times. He may at times say "muh" or "mah" for "my," or use the word correctly. The same inconstancy prevails in the use of all other words and phrases. Therefore, the inconsistencies of speech in "Jaydy's" recital as chronicled here should be attributed to literal recording instead of careless writing.
"Jaydy" Abbin (Florida peripatetic) Excellent
Florida cracker - to Detroit to work - trouble north with negroes sharecropped early - pickings small - began moonshining - paid for protection - mother died pellagra - 50 yr. old Pa married 14 yr. old - trouble - brother, sister, left - began rum running, importing Chinese - warrants out for arrest - trapped and hunted in Everglades - hitchhiking - picked up by widow who needed a man - lived and worked - her amatory importunities caused his exit - began turpentining - then truck raising - then marriage.
Features: A rolling stone with whimsicality
Name changes.
