February 3, 1939
C. M. Cooper, Prop.
Cooper Cleaning Works,
105 E. Colonial Ave.
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Dry Cleaner and Presser
W. O. Saunders, Writer
WOMEN DON'T KNOW THEIR MEN'S POCKETS
This then is the story of a man who started a cleaning and pressing business with a wash tub, a can of gasoline and a couple of flat irons in the days when most men pressed their own trousers between the bed springs and mattress--when their trousers got pressed at all. Here is an industry even younger than the automobile, and, strange to say, the automobile boosted it to its present dignity and magnitude--today a four hundred million dollar business. But let Mr. Dyer tell his own story.
"In 1912 I was shipping clerk for a local lumber firm," he began. "I had started the year before on a wage of $7.50 a week with a promise of a raise of $1.50 a week every six months. I got my first raise at the end of the first six months, but they forgot me after that.
"My work was under an open shed and my hands would get awfully numb on severe winter days. One morning the boss found me in the boiler room thawing out my fingers and bawled me out.
"A few days later I got a note from the order clerk in regard to a shipment of spindles. The note read:
"'Tie these spindles securely to avoid possibility of unnecessary damage in transit'
"Now that order clerk was one of those toppy-hatty individuals who went around with his nose in the air, carried a bordered handkerchief in his breast pocket and wore spats. I didn't like him and that note rubbed me the wrong way. It was worded correctly, but it was not the language of the lumber shed. A little thing, you say, but still just one of those things that piqued me just when I probably wanted to be piqued. I served notice on my employers that I was quitting the job.
"I was getting only $9.00 a week and having a struggle to make ends meet. I was married and had one child.
"My younger brother had a small cleaning and pressing business that was turning him in a profit of $12.00 to $18.00 a week. About that time he was offered a job as manager of the shoe department of one of the leading stores in town. He persuaded me to take over his cleaning and pressing business; he was tired and disgusted with it anyway.
"Believe it or not, there was little cleaning and pressing in those days. A man bought a suit of clothes and wore them out without once getting them cleaned. Most men who took pride in their appearance, pressed their own trousers by placing them between the mattress and springs of their beds. Some had wire trousers forms that they inserted in the legs of their trousers at night to warp them back into some sort of shape and restore the creases to them. Most of the pressing work was done for stores who had their better suits pressed before sending them out to the purchasers.
"I took over that cleaning and pressing business in 1912. The equipment consisted of a metal wash tub, a five gallon gasoline can, two flat irons, a dozen or so coat hangers and a bicycle for pickups and deliveries.
"The automobile was the making of the cleaning and pressing business. One could hardly take a trip in an automobile in those days without getting a flat tire or a stalled engine, which meant getting out and making repairs--and ruining a suit of clothes. The most popular men's suiting in those days was navy blue serge, or black or dark blue worsteds. Every grease spot one got on them picked up dust and made an unsightly gray spot. Men became clothes conscious.
"Our method of cleaning a suit was to souse it in a tub of gasoline and swish it around to dissolve the dirt and grease. The first suit that went into the tub fared pretty well, but after that--the suits that went in picked up much of the dirt from the suits that had gone in ahead of them. We dissolved the dirt and grease and spread it through the fabric. Thinned out, it didn't show. And, my, how they smelled! We would hold a suit three days before returning it and then the customer would hang it in the open air for two or three days to air the odor out. Nobody complained. In fact, if we sent a suit back without the gasoline odor we would get an immediate complaint; if it didn't smell, the customer was sure we hadn't done anything to it.
"Today we don't use gasoline at all; we use more expensive dry solvents, place the garments in a huge tumbler in which the garments are swirled in a generous bath that is automatically filtered. Efficient pumps constantly expel the solution from the tumbler and replace it with a filtered solution. The solvents in the tumbler are always clean, the dirt and other foreign matter finding its way by gravity into a receptacle underneath.
"Out of the tumbler the garments go into a deodorizing closet where powerful currents of hot air driven by electric fans expel every suggestion of odor.
"We now call for your suit, top coat or, the madam's dress in the forenoon, clean and press it and deliver it odor free the same day. But, for heaven's sake don't mention this: we can turn out an odorless finished job in two hours. Our record is one hour and six minutes.
"Of course, there is more to the dry cleaning business than that. Most of the cleaning business was formerly done by unskilled help working with a few gallons of gasoline in a wash tub. A lot of that kind of cleaning is done today; but your modern dry cleaner who is on his toes must be a manufacturing chemist as well as a merchant. The textile mills are constantly developing new fabrics, many of which would dissolve or be irreparably ruined by a spot remover that would work miracles on another fabric. We have to know our fabrics and know our chemicals."
"Why do they call it French Dry Cleaning?" I asked.
"It is called dry cleaning," he said," because of the volatile nature of the solvents we use, to distinguish it from the soap and water or wet process; and it is called French because a Frenchman is said to have discovered it less than a hundred years ago.
"Did you know that the dry cleaning business in this country doesn't go many years back before the World War? Why, man, we dry cleaners had a fight on our hands in War days to get the Administration to recognize us as an essential industry. They were going to ration our gasoline just as they rationed the housewife's sugar.
"Now we have our National Association of Dyers and Cleaners to protect us against fool laws and Administrative orders. This Association has a laboratory, model plant and training school at Silver Spring, Md., where new fabrics are tested out, every advance in dry cleaning chemistry noted, and the information passed on to its members.
"I sent one of my sons to that school and when he came back I found out how little I knew about my business. Why, I hadn't even learned that when we removed an iodine spot from a garment laid out on our wooden work table that the iodine would be driven into the wood, possibly to be picked up by the next garment we worked on. We use a glass table top now."
"Well, tell me, if you can: What has become of all the blue serge suits we used to see?" I asked.
"Now you've asked me something; I doubt that you could find a blue serge in any store in town today. I have an idea the automobile took 'em for their last ride. The old model automobiles with their leather upholstery made them slicker than ever; the old cars were open and concrete hadn't replaced the dirt roads. The amount of dirt that showed up on a blue serge after even a short ride in an automobile discouraged the wearing of them.
"And we dry cleaners were glad to see them go. We were still using the old tailor's goose or flat iron in the blue serge days, and it was a pain in the neck pressing one of them; you had to keep the full weight of the iron off the fabric to keep from slicking it. It tool, half an hour to press a suit with a flat iron and the presser's arm was sore when he had pressed one suit. We did well to turn out 18 or 20 jobs a day. Now, with our Hofman steam pressers we can press a suit in six minutes.
"I have never regretted the day I went into the cleaning and pressing business. Out of the business I have educated my three boys and lived comfortably.
"Before competition became keen I have made as much as $7,000 a year out of the business, clear of knots and limbs. Those were the years right after the World War when we were getting $1.25 for cleaning and pressing a suit.
"There are now ten dry cleaners and pressers in town and we get only 75 cents for a job that used to turn us in a dollar and a quarter. Fortunately the volume of business is increasing all the time. We estimate the total business for this town at $75,000 a year, and just a few of us get the cream of it. The volume of the business for the country at large was 540 million dollars in 1937, according to latest figures. The amount of money invested in dry cleaning plants using power driven equipment is estimated at 400 million dollars.
"People are taking more pride in their personal appearance and are more concerned with personal hygiene. Still, we have had a hard job selling men on the idea that they have their shirts and underwear cleaned several times a week and neglect the cleaning of their clothes they wear outside exposed to all the dirt and soot and germs in the air.
"There is a highly intelligent doctor in our town who wasn't won over until a few years ago. He argued that cleaning wore the garments out. Our argument is that a clean garment, free of grit and grime wears longer. Finally I persuaded the doctor to bring one of his suits down and let us show him how we would handle it.
"We didn't start the works up until he came in on the morning agreed upon. We took him back in the plant, showed him the tumbler through which the garments first went, showed him that the inside walls of the tumbler were perfectly smooth and could not possibly injure any fabric by friction.
"We started the tumbler and opened it up from time to time to let the doctor see how clean the solvent was. In a few minutes we removed the suit and showed him the dirty mess that had come out of it. He was flabbergasted. And yet that meaico had been going in and out of homes in which there were all kinds of sickness, carrying the germs of diptheria, scarlet fever, measles and God only knows what, in his dirty old clothes. When I see the dirt that comes out of some of the clothes we clean I think there ought to be a law to make doctors wear white cotton or linen uniforms on their visits to patients."
"Do you get any thrills out of your business?" I asked.
"Plenty of them," he replied. "For one thing, the cleaner and presser comes to know his fellow townsmen as intimately as the doctors, lawyers and Negro cooks know them. You'd be surprised at the variety of stuff that comes out of the pockets of the garments that come into us--money, pocket knives, keys, love letters and even stocks and bonds. We have pulled enough rubber goods out of men's pockets to make a balloon as big as the state capitol.
"A man has 15 pockets in a suit of clothes; 21 pockets if he wears an overcoat. Women seldom have any pockets at all. Most men let their women folk send their clothes to the cleaner, leaving their wives or mothers to empty their pockets. The average woman can't find all the pockets in a man's suit to save her life.
"And don't we catch hell because of the things we sometimes find in pockets!. Our custom is to return most lost articles with the garment. One day we found a woman's compact in the vest pocket of a man's suit. We put it in an envelope and pinned it to the suit when ready for delivery.
"That evening the man's wife called up and demanded to know about that compact. Fortunately I answered the 'phone and I had a hunch we had pulled a boner. I told the lady diplomatically that the compact was found on the floor of our delivery truck when our man came in with a lot of pickups and some one probably had just guessed that the compact came with that particular suit.
"Well, sir, it wasn't long before the woman's husband came in. He was mighty quiet and ominous and weighed probably 225 pounds. He said: 'It's mighty lucky for you that you handled that compact incident with discretion; but next time notify me if you find anything like that in my pockets. And now pick up that 'phone, call my wife and tell her that you found to whom that compact belongs; I've caught enough hell for one day and you've got to set me straight.' I took one look at the bulk of him, didn't miss the glint in his eye and reached for the telephone.
"My men are mighty particular in salvaging lost articles and returning them, We have established a reputation along that line that has won and held a lot of friends for us. We have a reputation for minding our own business. You'd be surprised at the married men who bring women's dresses and other female garments in for us to clean.
"We get a great kick out of some of our women customers. A woman will come in with a dress or gown over which she has spilled liquor. Invariably she tells us that she had loaned it to a friend who had soiled it, or that she had been handling some other woman's baby.
"One day a woman comes in with a spot on her dress and wanted it cleaned right then and there. 'You will have to take the skirt off, madam, before I can clean it,' I said; 'You see I've got to get under the spot to clean it.'
"'Well, if I can stand for you to run your hand up under my dress, I should think you could,' she replied.
"I went up under the lady's dress and removed the spot."
Reminiscing, he said: "The problems of this business are multiplying all the time. People demand and expect a higher quality of service all the time and we are on our toes to give them what they demand and have a right to expect. We must carry burglary as well as fire insurance to protect our customers against loss. In spite of all our technical knowledge and experience, occasionally there is a spoiled job for which we invariably pay without quibbling. And we have an occasional customer who will take advantage of our liberal policy by sending us an already damaged garment and then putting in a claim for it. Sometimes in a rush we overlook a special delivery job. On one occasion I drove a distance of 150 miles to deliver a dress to a woman who had asked us to make delivery in time for her to catch a certain train. But she wore that dress that night as she had planned to do. If she swore at us then, she has sworn by us ever since.
"Business conditions are constantly changing, and a fellow can't anticipate all the new trends. With the greatest volume of business in our history and with seven employes, two of whom have been with me nearly 25 years, we do well now to make 36 hundred to four thousand dollars a year. But I live comfortably at that; I own a home of a sort, I enjoy my car and my radio, go to the movies, dine out occasionally and, in the summer, find time for a ball game two or three afternoons a week.
"But the longer I live the more impressed I am with the little I know. God Almighty, man! with all my present knowledge and experience, backed by my membership in the N.A.D.C., I don't know one twentieth as much as I thought I knew when I was sousing clothes in a tub of dirty gasoline!
"But I do know this much: whenever we should find a lady's compact in a married man's pockets again, I shall get in touch with the man and tell him we've found a compact and that we are not sure whose pockets it was in; we won't make the mistake of sending some other woman's compact back with the suit to fall into the hands of a suspicious wife."
