MAID OF ALL WORK
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
March 29, 1939
March 16, 23, 1939
Julia Hicks (Negro)
169 Findley Street
Athens, Ga.
Housemaid - laundress – nurse
G.M.
MAID OF ALL WORK
There is little to indicate to the stranger that the famous old Botanical Garden, the pride of the university in ante-bellum, days, once spread a panorama of fragrant beauty over the lot on which Annie Hayes’ house now stands.
Leaving the paved street, I made a slow and careful descent of a steep embankment to the rustic bridge over the old Tanyard branch, now known as Willow Brook. It is this stream that has for more than a century watered the roots of scions from the willow tree brought by W. M. Crawford from Napoleon’s grave. Across the branch I followed a rough path up a high hill, grateful for the rocks that gave me foothold in the slippery mud. At the top of the hill is Annie’s weather-beaten old house. The paint has faded and peeled until its original color is scarcely discernible. The yard is enclosed by a tall green hedge and the crude plank gate across the walk is fastened to the post with a chain.
After overcoming the difficulties of the creaking chain, I opened the gate and entered the freshly spaded yard, where early spring flowers were blooming. A row of buttercups that encircled the yard was in full bloom. The mid-afternoon sun shone on an array of mattresses, quilts, blankets and pillows that were spread the entire length and breadth of the small front porch.
The front door was standing open and I heard Annie before I could see her through the short hall. She was singing lustily Lord I’m Coming Home, as she industriously washed a bedstead. At the sound of the bell a bedslat dropped from her hand and clattered on the floor as she turned to see who was at the door.
Inviting me to the back porch, she placed a chair in the warm sunshine. "Just set there," she said, "and be keerful. Don’t let them bedsprings fall on you. I has things piled up everywhere whilst my spring house-cleanin’ is gwine on."
Annie evinced no surprise at seeing me, but talked on as if she might be accustomed to having white people call on her. As she picked up the bedslat and renewed her attack on it with soapy water, she chattered:
"I has been tryin’ to do my spring house-cleanin’ all this week. I didn’t want to put it off and let the moonlight nights catch up with me," Seeing my puzzled look, she explained, "Of course, I don’t ‘spect you knows it, but if you will always do your house-cleanin’ in that part of March when the nights are dark, you never will be troubled with no bedbugs. That’s sho and sartain; I knows it for a fact. I was raised to that, and I ain’t never had no bedbugs in my house."
Carefully placing the bedslat in the sun with several others that she had washed, she turned to reach for another one and accidentally over-turned the bedsprings that were leaning against the banister. Dropping the slat, she managed to catch the bedsprings just in time to keep them from toppling down on me. Tilting them back against the porch rail, she said: "Lordy, but I’se glad they didn’t hit you. I would quite work and set down to talk to you, but with every blessed one of my beds torn down, I’se just gotta get through this work, so I can get a bed ready for my boarder to sleep on tonight.”
"Have you lived here long?” I asked.
"Lordy, I was borned and raised right here in this very house,” she replied, "Mother and daddy done bought this place long ‘fo’ all these other houses was built ‘round here. I means these other Negro houses. White folks used to live ‘round this neighborhood.
"My mother belonged to the old Thomas fambly and her mother was an Indian woman. Yes, mam! My grandmother was a full-blooded Indian woman. I remembers her very well. She was just a little bitty woman and wore her hair plaited in two long braids, and each of them braids was ‘most big as my wrist. She was one of them old time granny women; she worked with all the old doctors. I has heered my mother say as how grandmother was sont for by doctors way off, as fur as Savannah and Coweta. She brought ‘most all the white chillun ‘round here in them days.”
Two little Negro girls came around the house, and Annie said: "You all will just have to come back to see me again, ‘cause I is got comp’ny today, and I’se doin’ a little business too. ‘Sides I ain’t cooked my cake yet. I’m going to cook it yet, and I’ll save you some of it. Now, you just run along and tell your mama I said let you all come back another day."
They thanked her and left. As they went around the house, Annie said: “Today’s my birthday, and I promised ‘em a piece of my cake, but I just ain’t had no time to cook no cake with spring-cleanin’ on hand and the moon apt to begin shinin’ ‘most any night now. I’se fifty-two today," she said with proud emphasis.
Annie has the appearance of being much older than the fifty-two years that she admits, although there was no lack of energy in her house-cleaning activities. A soiled apron partially concealed her patched print dress, and an old felt hat was pulled down over her head. The sleeves of her overall jacket were torn off at the elbow. Suddenly she seemed conscious of her tousled appearance.
"I just ain’t fittin’ for nobody to see," she again said. "I just put on these old things to clean up in. They was clean when I started out this mornin’. I don’t believe you is ever been here befo’?"
"No," I replied, "This is my first visit, but I am enjoying it." Before I could say more, she asked, "Did you want to know about the tree?"
"What about the tree?" I asked, "Do you mind telling me?"
"Course I don’t," she replied, and pointed to the Napoleon willow which grows on the creek at the lower side of her lot. "See that there tree," she said. "Well, that is the old tree what come from ‘way over the sea, leastwise it’s the third tree. The first tree was torn up by the roots durin’ one of the worst storms I ever seed. Oh, it was a big tree and we watched it sway and bend in the wind until it come up roots and all. That storm started ‘bout daylight one Monday mornin’ and the tree stood ‘til ‘bout five o’clock in the evenin’. I was just a little bitty girl then, but all us chillun loved that old tree what had been such a good play place so long, and I ain’t never gwine forgit ‘bout seein’ it fall.
"After a time the second tree come up right where the first one had stood, but folks just kilt it slippin’ and cuttin’ off limbs to root when the sap was risin’. Why, they would even slip in here at night when we couldn’t see ‘em and break it up, and so it just died out. "Now, the one you see there is the third tree from the same roots. It’s done growed up right where the first tree was, and it’s on my lot. I sho has had a time keepin’ it from bein’ kilt. Why, I’se done run one of them perfessors from over to the university out a my yard mo’ times than one. I just tole him that if they wouldn’t come here at the right time of the year to git a limb off my tree, they could just stay out. One time two police just driv’ their car right up there and didn’t say one word to me, but just went on down there and cut off arms full of limbs. I hollered at ‘em and asked ‘em what the devil they thought they was doin’. One of ‘em come walkin’ up to me and pointed at his badge. That made me so mad that I just tole him that old badge never give him no ‘thority to come in my yard and tear up my tree, and that the quicker he got off of my lot, the better it would be for him. They got off too. Last March three white women came, and do you know what they tole me? Well, they just ‘formed me that they was goin’ to have my tree dug right up and moved some’ers else, ‘cause it was such a famous tree. I just ‘formed ‘em right back that I owned this place and that there wasn’t nobody goin’ to dig up my tree ‘thout I said so, and I sho wasn’t gwine to say so. Well, you see, just look at it. My tree’s still startin’ right there.
"A few weeks ago a man come to see me, but he was real nice. He ‘splained that the giver’ment was wantin’ to buy all this land up and make it into a park, like it used to be back in the old days ‘fo’ the war. Now, lak I done tole you, I was borned and raised right here on this place and it is home to me. But still and yet, things is not lak they used to be, and all them good old neighbors is done moved away. I miss ‘em. These other folks what has moved in ‘round here ain’t lak them I was raised with. In one way I’ll be glad to go, even if it does mean givin’ up my old home.
"I ‘members well enough how they used to baptize in that pool down there by the old tree when I was a little girl. ‘Course it was a much bigger pool then, and the branch was bigger then too. Lordy, but there was sho some big old snakes in there then! I used to set on the bank when we was chillun and watch them snakes in the clear water. That’s where my folks could always find me. I was a sort of peculiar chile and didn’t play lak other chillun. I never was no selfish chile; I just didn’t lak to play with other chillun.
"I ‘members when my father changed the course of that branch. Up ontil then part of that big old pool was right where you see our hogpen now. I always did love flowers and when I made my playhouses by myself I’d always find some kinds of flowers to go in ‘em.
"After freedom comed my mother worked for Miss Annie movies what lived right up here on the hill in the big old movies house. I’se still got some of the things Miss Annie left my mother. When she died it was right there in her will what she wanted my mother to have. One special thing she willed to ‘Duggie’ - that was what she allus called my mother - was her music box. It plays the sweetest music, but that last song, Home, Sweet Home, is what I laks best. Miss Annie had done buyed that music box in France, and I ain’t never heered tell of but one more lak it.
"I still has Miss Annie’s wine jugs what she used to use when she had them big ‘tainments, and just let me tell you right now, them was mighty swell affairs and folks just come and went ‘til it wasn’t nothin’ for two or three hunderd people to ‘tend one of them big parties. They didn’t say ‘parties.’ I Just don’t know what it was they called ‘em, but I does ‘member seein’ my mother mix up great big bowls of punch, and was it spiked? It sho was. There was plenty of gin in it. Them was the happy days.
"I’m all by myself now. Course I’se got three chillun, but they’s all workin’ in Few York. One of ‘em is workin’ in a fact’ry where they makes evenin’ clothes. He is makin’ good’ His Job is to see after payin’ off the hands.
"My daughter finished school here end then went two years to a college in Alabamy. When she went off to New York visitin’ her brother he got her a job up there. Yes, mam! She’s holdin’ down a job that a man couldn’t keep. She makes cakes and pies in one of them big clubs down on Broadway. She just has that talent for cookin’ and, if I does say it, she is a good cook. She makes good money and has real short hours to work.
"They is all good to send me money but that baby of mine is sho extra good. I knows ever’ week that I’se gwine to hear from him. Sometimes ‘t’aint much, for he don’t make much as the others, but it comes right on reg’lar just the same, and that ain’t all; he sees that the others don’t forgit neither.
"I’se worked all my life, ‘cause I was raised to work and I can do anything or any kind of work.
"Did you ever hear of Miss Mary Marshell? I knows you has, ‘cause she was one of them sho ‘nough great artists. Yes, mam! She done painted ‘most all them finest of the big pictures over at the ‘vars’ty school, and ‘specially them in the parlor at Soule Hall. They’s all her’n.
"I nussed Miss Mary ‘til she died out. It was me that found her dead. She was staying with some folks over on Milledge Avenue when her mind got bad. They was skeered of her. They didn’t know what to think when she would set by the door and burn her candles ‘most all the night.
"They told me I would just have to move her. I talked to her ‘bout it, but she said, ‘No, I ain’t goin’ nowhere.’ Finally the lawyer that was lookin’ after her affairs got her a house and fixed it up and with lots of beggin’ and pleadin’, we managed to git her moved. Her lawyer got a white woman to stay with her, but she wouldn’t have that. She didn’t want nobody but me ‘round her, and so I stayed with her, but she was sopitiful then that it just nigh broke my heart. Course she had plenty of money to have anythin’ she wanted, but she would refuse to pay her bills ‘til sometimes they would come out and cut off her water and gas. But my Miss Mary wasn’t lak that ‘fo’ her mind got bad. I always cooked our dinner here at my house and toted it over to her house, ‘cause she just had a little gas plate to cook on. I could fix her breakfast and supper on that all right, but it wasn’t no good for cookin’ a whole dinner on.
"Miss Mary always was good to me. Long ‘fo’ her mind got bad, she would go off on long trips to France, and she allus brung me something nice back with her. I still has a silk scarf that she got for me in France. It’s old and faded now, but I still loves to use it.
"I ain’t never gwine to forgit the time she had her mother took up out a the grave where she was first buried down in the old Cherokee Corners Churchyard. Miss Mary never had been willin’ for her mother to be buried off down there, and she said to me, ‘Annie, I has just got to have somebody to be buried by.’ Lots of folks tried to keep her from movin’ her mother, but when she ‘cided to do something, she never stopped ‘til she done it.
"She hired two men to move her mother and paid ‘em $2 a day ‘til they finished the job. The girl what toted water for ‘em whilst they worked was paid 50¢ a day. Miss Mary was mighty proud and happy when she got her mother buried again and her grave fixed up.
"For three years I stayed with Miss Mary day and night. Them was the times when she couldn’t sleep much at night and sometimes she would just talk to herself all night long. Sometimes I could git her quiet by just pattin’ her ‘til she drapped off to sleep. Miss Mary always carried a lot of money in her pocketbook, and ‘most everybody in town knowed it.
"One night when I got her off to sleep, I was just so tired that I went sounder asleep than was common for me. I slept in a little room next to Miss Mary so she could call me if she wanted anything. That night I woke up sudden lak. I heered my Miss Mary cryin’ and somebody cussin’ at her. I came right up outa my bed, I did, grabbed a pistol that I kept hangin’ at the head of my bed, and when I run in Miss Mary’s room I found two white boys in there tryin’ to make her talk.
"I asked ‘em what the devil they thought they was doin’ to that pore old woman. Course they said they was in the wrong house, but I knowed better. They was just after Miss Mary’s money. I made ‘em git, and git in a hurry. I told ‘em if ever I cotched ‘em there again I was gwine to shoot first and talk later.
"Sometimes Miss Mary would git mad at me and wouldn’t let me bathe or feed her. When I cried and told her folks was sho to say I wouldn’t take proper care of her, she would let me do anything. She would say then, ‘I just better not hear nobody say nothin’ ‘bout you.’ One day when I had come home and cooked her dinner, I carried it back to her. She was settin’ on the porch and she said, ‘Just put it down here by me. I’ll eat in a minute. I want you to go back home and sleep, ‘cause if you stays on here with me, I know you cain’tgit no rest.’
"I said, ‘Miss Mary, I ain’t sleepy.’ But she wouldn’t listen and made me go on back home. I didn’t stay home long, for I had a feelin’ somepin was wrong, and I went back. I thought just I’d slip in and she wouldn’t know it, but when I saw her settin’ so still on the porch and her dinner not tetched, I went out and called to her. She didn’t answer me and I knowed something was wrong, so I went out and got a white man to come see what was the matter with her.
"She was done dead. She had told me a few days ‘fo’ that, that when she died she didn’t want nobody to look at her. Miss Mary always wore tailored suits, but she told me that when she died, she wanted to be buried in a nice white dress. They wanted to put her away in one of her white coat suits, ‘cause they thought she would look so nat’rallak in that, but I told ‘em what she had told me, so they let me put a nice white dress on her. She was a beautiful corpse.
"She was a Catholic, and that was the onliest time I ever went to a Catholic funeral, but I stood right over my Miss Mary’s coffin to the last. I don’t know why they done it, but they just kept on sprinklin’ were water what they called Holy Water on her coffin, but, you know, I couldn’t understand a word of that funeral.
"She painted a picture for me of a colored boy settin’ on a wall, eatin’ a piece of watermillion. She said that was one of her very best pictures, and it was sho nat’ral lookin’. You could just see the Juice drippin’ down offen his chin. I wish I could show it to you, but some white folks come here and borrowed it from me and they ain’t never brung it back to me.
"After Miss Mary died her lawyer paid me well for lookin’ after her. I was just stricken to death ‘bout her bein’ dead, and it put me right down in the bed sick. I still cries ‘bout ‘er sometimes, for I sho did love ‘er and I misses ‘er so. She was one good, kind, smart woman. I still has the old Bible that she left me. She was always good to look after all my needs, and the clothes and shoes she pervided for me was nice new things, not what you would call fine, but good, and nice, and comfortable. They was clothes that would do me some good, and she seed that I had plenty of ‘em. I goes to see ‘bout her grave yet."
Annie stopped, moved the headpiece of a bedstead that was lying in separate pieces on the floor, stood it up against the side of her house, and revealed a stair leading through the porch floor. I asked if she had a basement.
"Lordy, yessum! That’s where I cooks and eats. Course it ain’t so handy that way, but I tries to keep things just lak they was when all my fambly was here together and there wasn’t no room to cook upstairs."
"My mother was workin’ for the Carters when she got married. She tole me they sho did give her a swell weddin’ and ‘vited lots of white folks. I’se still got one of them vases that she got in her weddin’ gifts. Lemme show it to you." She put down her cleaning rag and went into the house.
She soon returned with a small cracked vase. Across its front a ship was sailing on blue waters. Beneath the handles on each side were tiny bunches of very natural looking grapes. Chipped, cracked and faded, it still showed evidence of having been very lovely when it was new.
"The chillun broke it," Annie explained. "All of us loved to handle this old vase, ‘cause it was mother’s weddin’ present.
"I has done just about all kinds of work. I even taught school for 20 years. Part of that was down in Stephens, Georgia, and I’se passed house after house where beds, quilts, and furniture was just left settin’ in the houses where the Negroes had left ‘em to go up North, Now, I bet some of them very same folks ain’t got a bed to sleep on.
"I’se always worked for what I had and that’s what I wants to do. When I gits to where I can’t take care of myself, then I will just trust in my Lord and He will be here long as the world stands and that trust will last as long as oak and ash will burn. Now I’se just got to get some of these beds up. I just gits to talkin’ and can’t work.
"You come back next Wednesday ‘bout one o’clock and we can talk all tile evenin’." Realizing that I was dismissed, I began getting ready to leave and Annie said, "You will come back, won’t you? I want to show you that old music box."
"I’ll be back,” I promised, "I really want to see that music box.” As I passed through the old gate, I heard Annie singing There’s No Place Lak Home.
When I returned the following Wednesday to fill my appointment with Annie, the small porch presented a very different appearance. A swing was hung at each end and there were several large porch rockers grouped about.
"Is it too cold for you out here on the porch?" Annie asked.
"Oh, no," I replied.
Annie sat very still for a few minutes and then she began: "Life is just a up-hill journey. We take it step by step and then sometimes we falls and can’t git up no mo’."
After a few more moments of silence, she said, "My father was in the Civil War. He used to tell us of the hardships they had. He fought right side by side with some of the old white folks here. He told us that they sometimes walked in snow knee deep and left tracks of blood every step they made, and that they was hungry and many times had no place to sleep. It was just terrible.
"I’m worried for fear war will come now, and if it does it’ll git both of my boys. They are the right age, one is nineteen and the other is thirty-three. They-are right there in New York where they’ll git ‘em sho. I had a letter from my baby boy yesterday and he said, ‘Mama, I thinks this war will soon git us, and I am worried.’ I got up ‘fore daylight this mornin’and wrote him a letter and all I could tell them was just trust in God and have faith, but I’se worried too.
"He’s a good boy. He worked here for one of the papers ‘fore he went to New York. One day he just fell out like a dead man. They sent him to the hawspital in a ambulance and called me. The doctor said he had one of these eperlatic (epileptic) fits. I knowed what caused it. He et fresh sirup and green beans and then after he went to work he drunk some of them old cold drinks. The man he worked for helped me through that course. I paid him back the money, but it helped just the same.
"He’s a peculiar kind of boy, but he took care of me one time when I was sick with the flu. He had heerd about that old remedy for colds and he didn’t stop ‘til he got it all together and fixed it up. It just cured me right up."
"What was it?" I asked.
"Why, it is just an old remedy that my mother and grandmother used back in the days when they made up they own medicine. You just git green pine tops, rabbit tobacco, mullein and hoarhound, bile it and make a tea, then put the tea in whiskey. The whiskey keeps it from spilin’, and if that remedy fails to break up a cold or flu then you is really sick.
"My baby boy works in a quilt factory. I think I’se done told you what the other one does. My gal is fixin’ to git married, but she’s comin’ home next month to visit me. Course she asked me about gittin’ married. I told her that it was up to her but for her to ‘member that it was a lifetime job and that opportunity didn’t knock at your door but one time.
"My Chillun has done told me that I would have to come up there to line I don’t lak New York. I had ruther have my own little junk here ‘cause there’s just nachelly too much gwine on up there. Folks just killin’ one another all the time and I seed folks just sleepin’ right out in the streets ‘cause they didn’t have nowhere else to go.
"When I was up there on a visit to my chillun, I used to walk every evenin’ before they got in from work. One day I met a man and a woman; they was nice lookin’ Negroes. They was fussin’. Just as they got right even with me, the man pulled out a big old knife and said to her, ‘I has done lived with you for 6 years and I will just cut your head off.’
"Lordy, but I was scared to death. I turned ‘round and I run all the way back. My boy lived on the sixth floor of one of them ‘partment buildings and they had a elevator, but I didn’t wait for that thing. I run up all them steps and just fell in the door.
"My boy had just got home. He picked me up and said, ‘Mama, what in the world is the matter?’ I was plumb outa breath, but I got out that he was goin’ to cut her head off and when I got where I could talk I tole them ‘bout what I seed. They just laughed at me and said, ‘Why, that’s nothin’!’ It was somethin’ to me. I Just don’t lak it.
"Folks all knows me here and they ain’tgwine to let me suffer for what I needs. That’s why I ain’t gwine to no New York to live.
Let this from here on follow after “Gunie continued in a much lower voice”, I worked one time over at Soule Hall. In fact, I worked there for several years. The girls was all so nice to me. My work was for the house woman, but I used to slip ‘round and do things for the girls, lak washin’ and cleanin’ their rooms, but somebody told on me. The house woman called me in and asked me why I did it, I said, ‘They are all so nice to me, all the time givin’ me some little thing.
"She just laughed and said, ‘Well, Annie, after you finish my work you can do all you want to for the girls. I don’t mind.’ She was a good woman to work for.
"Sometimes the girls would slip out and get into things they hadn’t oughta and then they’d come to me and I’d help ‘em all I could. Sometimes they’d be out with their men friends and stay too late. Then one of the after girls help ‘em to slip in. They was all just the best of friends and more like one big fambly. They were all very nice girls."
Annie had been talking in a low monotone. Suddenly she raised her voice to a much higher pitch, as she said:" This is a cold hard world. You just has to keep tryin’ to override ‘structions." Then her voice rose higher still as a very bright-colored young Negress passed the gate. "Truth can be pushed down, but it will rise and shine blighter than a glitterin’ chain. I observes the Golden Rule and God ain’t gwine to let me suffer on ‘count of somebody else," When the girl was out of hearing distance, Annie lowered her voice, "I’se got some good friends, white folks and Negroes too. I loves ‘em too, I sho do, end I ‘preciates ‘em, I does. I wants to live and die right here in the South. I ain’tgwine to put my things in no basement to rot just so I can go North to live.
"Yes, up there, they’d go to church in the mornin on Sunday, just serve God in the mornin’, but after dinnertime there was ball games, card parties, end drinkin’. Why, you can see ‘em pullin’ the window shades down," In the middle of a sentence her voice grew loud and shrill. I looked up and saw the same young Negress coming back, and as she was even with the gate, Annie was ranting, "Yessum, they just pulled them shades down so folks couldn’t see ‘em drinkin’ and playin’ cards." The girl passed on, and Annie continued in much lower voice.
"Why, I ‘member when they had a church right up there," she pointed to a nearby hill. "I used to dress up when I went to that church. I wore a straw hat with bows of ribbon all over the top. Over my gingham dresses I wore pretty mother-hub bard aprons with ruffles on ‘em, and we wore drawers with lace on ‘em. How I did love to show off them pretty clothes at church.
"Long time ago folks used to raise big famblies and they would git ‘long good and had plenty to eat and wear. Chillun was raised to work and ‘specially to ‘spect older people.
"I ‘members when I was just a little gal ‘bout six years old, mama was washin’ and she sont me up to the next place to borrow a little blueing. She was washin’ too. She said, ‘Gal, is your mama through bilin’?’ I said, ‘Aunt Hetty, don’t say bilin’, say boilin’, just that way. I pranced on back with the blueing. Aunt Hetty came right behind me. She walked up to mama, and said, ‘That gal done sassed me.’ Mama said, ‘She did?’ That was all, but she got some green peach tree switches, put my head between her knees, pulled up my dress, and when she got through, with me, my back was black and blue and had big whelps on it. I had sho got a thrashin’. When she turned me loose, she said, ‘Now, you just try sassin’ somebody again and see what you gits.’ I was so mad, and it wasn’t but ten minutes ‘fore Aunt Hetty called me to go to the store to gither a bar of soap. I didn’t want to go but I knowed better than not to go for that would have meant another thrashin’; that was the way we was raised.
"You know I never heard my mama and father fuss. They got ‘long ‘thout that. My father cooked ‘most all the time and he had to have a clean apron and shirt every day, and mama had them ready all the time. She was a worker and kept everythin’ clean and in place.
"I went to school here and finished at old Knox Institute. That was a boardin’ school then. Everybody had to board the last year they went there. After I finished there, I went two years to Clarke’s College in Atlanta. When I was ‘bout thirteen, I went to teachin’.
"The first place I taught was Chestnut Grove school. I taught there for two months and just helped to finish, out that year. I made $40 in all; that was $20 a month, but how rich I was! Do you know what I done with that money? Well, you see these two long windows on the front. That’s where my money went. I had them two windows cut down to the floor and I ‘members the dress that mama bought me then. Course it was just a second-hand dress, but it was new to me. It was a real blue silk velvet. I was rich and dressed up.
"After that I taught at Stephens and in the old Antioch School. I just had a way with chillun and could manage all of ‘em. I had one boy that nobody else would let come to their school. They said he was too mean. I took that boy, gave him the job of keepin’ the room warm, and made the others play with him, and do you know before school was out, he was one of the best boys in school. Folks can’t do no thin’ with chillun when they is always tellln’em how mean they are and that they will never be any good. You can’t expect ‘em to try when folks talks to ‘em that way.
"I was twenty-three when I married, but I worked right on just the same, and I has not stopped workin’ yet. Why, I’se washed my washin’s out this momin’ and planted part of my garden and cleaned up my yards too. I can still work.
"Times sho has changed since I’se been in this world of trouble. What does you think folks would have said back then if they’d seen all these here women folks drinkin’? It just wasn’t done, honey. No, mam, it won’t. Why, it would have been outrageous, plumb scandalous if a woman had been seen on the streets drinkin’ and runnin’ after some man. She sho would have been counted out, but now it’s common as pig tracks, just hard down common." She fairly shouted these sentiments.
"Menfolks don’t ‘spect women folks now. They can’t be blamed for that though ‘cause it’s the way the women does. You has to fight for ‘spect now, sho as you’se born.”
There was venom in Annie’s shrill words. I was afraid to look again as she said, "But menfolks can’t go no further’n the women will let ‘em. When the women just runs after ‘em, you can’t blame the men. All these gals havin’ babies and make in’ the men marry ‘em, t’ain’t no ways right, ‘cause if these gals would just give ‘em a good cussin’ out, there wouldn’t be no babies.
"See that house just cross the way. That ain’t nothin’ ‘cept just a bad house. Why, they kept one white gal there ‘til she had her baby. I don’t know what ever did become of that gal. She was a pretty little thing and real young, but they just ain’t no ‘count a fall over there. Why, the man the woman lives with is some other woman’s husband. But that ain’t all, one of the highest Negro undertakers meets his wife’s sister right there in that house. Yes he does, and that ain’t all neither, he’s got two chillun by his wife’s sister. Then too, he has some chillun by his wife. Folks is just corrupted these days.
"His wife asked me if she could come to my house and watch to see if she could cotch ‘em together. She said she knowed he met her sister over there hut she hadn’t been able to cotch ‘em. I just told her that she could do what she wanted to, but that when she started out to git ‘em that I didn’t want her to start out from my house, ‘cause I didn’t have no holdin’s with no sich folks myself.
"I ‘member long time ago, one white woman had a bad house right up the street. She just kept girls there all the time. There was one real pretty white chile that had a baby there. She used to just set on the back steps and cry. One day she came down here to talk to me. She said she didn’t know what to do ‘cause her folks at home thought she was off workin’ in a store and as long as she sont money home they didn’t care. She said that they was mean to her at home, just nagged at her all the time and that she couldn’t ever please ‘em, and that was why she left home. She said, ‘but just look at me now, I don’t know what to do cause I love my baby and wants to keep it and raise it right but they wouldn’t let me come home now.’ I just felt so sorry for that chile, and it made me think too, ‘cause lots a folks does nag on their chillun too much.
"They finally made the woman move and the day they had her move they all got drunk and just shot all ‘round here, just try in’ to skeer folks. They was white folks and they didn’t take in Negroes. But this house over here, now, why white men come and take young gals there any time; that woman don’t care.
"‘Bout the maddest I ever got was not so many years ago. A old gray headed man, a man that fought with my father in the Civil War, and had been to our home plenty times to see my father, come here one day with a right young gal and tole me he wanted a room for a while. I was just so mad, I said to him, ‘You old gray headed devil, git out of my yard and stay out, and if you wants any of that you will have to go ‘cross the way.
"When I said that the woman over there heard me and came ‘cross the road and hit me in the head with a parasol, right in my own yard. Well, that started a fight and ‘fo’ it was over all her chillun and my chillun was fightin’, but I made her git and since that time she has just tried to do all she can ‘gainst me. That’s my house and I rents it for $1.50 a week, She skeers them off ever time she can and now since I’se got city water at my house, they even runs the water at nights. They is just plumb low down, no ‘count Negroes.
As she stopped for a few minutes, a large car pulled up in front of the house directly in front of her house, and a tall well-dressed man got out of the car and went into the house.
"Do you know that man?" Annie asked.
"I do not," I replied.
"Well, he is a bootlegger,” she informed me, "and he must be a big one ‘cause he has lotsa Negroes sallin’ whiskey for him. That’s what he is gwine in that house for. They sells whiskey for him. They don’t bother nobody and ‘cept for bein’ bootleggers they is all right and good neighbors. They ain’tlak them no ‘count folks next house to ‘em.
As Annie talked she kept raising her voice until she could be heard much farther away than just across the street. I wondered just what the listening, watching neighbors would do, but they finally went in the house and closed the door. I realized then that Annie was satisfied, and I didn’t think she would gossip any more. I was right, for after a few minutes of silence she started on a different subject.
"You know I loves my little home and I does hate to think of leavin’ it, but still if the giver’ment wants to buy it, I’ll sell. But I will just put it right back in another home. Course I’ll go to New York to see my chillun, but when I goes I ‘spects to have my own fare so I can come back any time I wants to, cause I sho wants to die here."
"Tell me something about your childhood days and what you did for pastime," I asked.
Annie laughed, "Well, we worked but we played too. Course it is lak I done tole you, I didn’t play with other chillun much. Them days chillun played marbles, mumble-peg, dollies, walk in’ on the green grass, hidin’ the switch, and course we played ball. Then as we growed older we had parties. We laked best to go to them pound parties, Did you ever go to one of them?" she asked.
"I don’t know," I answered, "but what did you do?"
"Well, it was lak this. We sont invitations ‘cause nobody went if they wasn’t ‘vited, At the bottom of the invitation they was told to bring their pound of ‘freshments. Sometimes us sho had ‘freshments, ‘cause they would bring a pound of just ‘most anything to eat.
"We played cards, but not bridge lak they plays now and no poker neither. It was just straight old seven-up and smut, but we had good times and we danced too. There wasn’t nosich carryings-on as they have at dances these days ‘cause our folks wouldn’t stand for us to do that.
"Then sometimes we would git a crowd of ‘bout twenty-five or thirty together and have a party. Each one would pay a quarter. Things wasn’t high lak they is now, and we could have plenty good things, but our folks would bake the cakes for us and we didn’t have to buy ‘em. When we had picnics everybody went. We sho had good dinners then. We went in wagons and tallahos and our folks went right ‘long with us. I’ll tell you another thing too, we sho did have to stay in plain sight of the old folks, and if some smart young gal went off into the woods with a boy she was counted out and left alone.
"We went to church. We had to go every Sunday night. We couldn’t set at home and entertain. No, mam, we went to church, and we wasn’t ‘lowed to go with the same boy ever time neither ‘cause the old folks said it didn’t look nice to run ‘round with just one boy all the time. ‘Course we had our special boy friends but we sho wasn’t ‘lowed to just go with ‘em all the time. We had to go with different ones.
"Lordy! Here I has done set and talked this blessed evenin’ and I bet it’s ‘most six o’clock. Does you have the time?"
"Yes," I replied, "but it’s only five-thirty."
"Well, I’se gwine to show you that old music box that Miss Annie willed to mama." She led the way through the clean little hall. The floor was covered with linoleum. A picture of a young Negro man on a small table was surrounded by a collection of shells. An old-fashioned hat rack with a mirror was near the front door. At the rear end of the hall was a small ice box and a chair was placed conveniently by.
As she opened a door, she said, "Now I ain’t got to this room yit to clean it up, but I’ll turn on the light so you can see." The small electric light revealed a crowded room which evidently served as dining-room and living-room. The large china closet was packed with a surprising collection of china and glassware, some of the pieces seemed very old. Picking up two small glass wine jugs, Annie said, "These are the jugs Miss Annie used to serve her wine in. She gave them to me, and here is the music box. Some folks say there’s some of Miss Annie’s diamonds hid in the box. I believes it too, honey. There’s diamonds in this old music box. Some white folks was down here last Sunday from Atlanta. They was tryin’ to buy my music box and they wound it up so tight that it hasn’t played since then. It played all right befo’ that."
The music box is very lovely. The mahogany box is about eighteen inches long, and about eight inches wide. The lid raises to reveal the rolls of music under a glass shield.
"Are you going to sell it?" I asked.
"No, I sho ain’t," Annie replied, "‘cause it belongs to my chillun now. I’se done had a will made to that effect. And too, they’s done asked me not to sell any more of these old things.
"This little table - I thinks you calls ‘em end tables now - it was Miss Mary’s. Miss Annie had it and she tole me when she died I might have it, so they give it to me. Just look at these what-nots. They’s really old too, and they belonged to some of our oldest white folks,"
The what-nots were elaborately carved. One extended from the floor almost to the ceiling. The other towered to the same height from a small table. Both were filled with a varied assortment of bric-a-brac; vases, small porcelain cats, dogs, etc.
Annie said, "Now just look here. This is the old perfessor Waddell’s soup tureen." The china tureen appears to be very old. One of the handles is missing, but otherwise, except for the cracks in the glaze, it is intact and rests on its original platter. Annie said, "Some of the white folks here in town wants to buy that old tureen, but I just don’t know ‘bout sellin’ it.
"See that picture." Annie pointed to a large framed picture. "That’s my mother. Don’t you think she was nice lookin’?"
"She was," I replied, "and I think you are very much like her." As I looked at the picture of the stout Negro woman, long straight hair done up on top of her heed, and the high cheek bones, I thought I could discern her heritage of Indian features. As if she was reading my mind Annie said," My mother had hair like my Indian grandmother, and she sure did have lots of it. This here picture is my father. He was a good father. He was crazy ‘bout his chillun. Now these are my chillun. This one here with the mustache is my oldest boy. Ain’t he fine lookin’? This is my girl. I think she really looks better than her picture. This is my baby." Her tenderness of expression as she displayed the last picture revealed partiality.
While she was carefully replacing the pictures, I looked around the room. A dining table was at one side, a small table with a radio was by one of the windows, and there was a surprising assortment of chairs, among which were dining chairs, rockers, small chairs, and two leather-covered rockers. Linoleum in a gay flowered design covered the floor. Signs of a recent fire were in the grate, and Annie said, "The girl that boards with me had company last night and I just ain’t got in here to clean up today. She’s a good girl. ‘Course she was raised in the country, but she’s good to mind me. She don’t go any place ‘lessen I tells her I think it will be all right. She works for some white folks here in town, and she sure is a heap of company to me.
“We both sleep in the same room, ‘cause she is ‘fraid to sleep off in a room to herself. She is smart and sews good. She is make in’ her baby sister a dress for Easter.
"I’ll show you our room ‘fo’ you goes. Now this here room ain’t cleaned yit," she said, as we went into a bedroom across the hall. The sections of a dismantled wooden bedstead were leaning against the wall. Annie went on, "See, I has all the curtains down and the scarfs off the dresser and tables, I’m cleanin’ this for my girl. She’s comin’ next month. It’s her room and I wants it to be fresh for her when she gits here." The furniture appeared to be old but it seemed clean. The mattress was spread across some chairs. The flowered linoleum that covered this floor was not as gay as that in the living-room. A table and some chairs completed the furnishings.
Next, we went into Annie’s own small room which was crowded with its wooden beds, a dresser, a trunk, and a washstend. There were piles of folded clothes awaiting ironing. A fire burned in a small laundry heater. Two large open windows admitted plenty of air and light. Clean white curtains were suspended from the battered old curtain rods over the windows.
My hopes that I would get to see the basement faded when Annie said, "I sho has enjoyed talkin’ with you and I has had a good rest. I needed that rest. Now, I’se just got to get to work for that chile will he here and want her supper." She opened the front door and I knew the interview was ending. I thanked her for the story, and as I passed through the gateway, I noticed the young Negress across the street, "Come back to see me," Annie was politely saying in her kindest tone, when suddenly her voice rose to a high pitch and she shrieked, "I always ‘tends to my own business, and tries to treat everybody right."
I was glad when I finally succeeded in scrambling down from the high embankment, for I had no desire to witness one of those fights Annie had described.
