Carl Davis	H. W. Corley
Sheffield Township	Federal Writers' Project
Upper Moore County	Greensboro, N. C.
North Carolina	November 30, 1938
Post office address
Steeds, N. C.
Montgomery County
THE DAVIS FAMILY
When Carl Davis married, his father, old Stephen, gave him a portion of the old home place for a farm, choosing the part which marched with the "quarrel fence" so that henceforth the feud with the Dunlaps would belong to Carl and not old Stephen or even to the good son, Arthur. For Carl had married Camilla none too soon to suit old Stephen's moral convictions and a little while after the neighbors raised the three room house for the newly married pair, the first child, Pauline, was born.
To the city dweller's eye the house would appear very poverty stricken, but it suited them nicely and the Davises were considered very well off indeed by the neighbors. Many newly married couples live at the home place of either bride or groom until they can afford a home of their own.
A three room plank house, unpainted and now silvered by many years of weather, the Davis residence stands high enough on stilts for hounds and hogs to run about beneath it. The front door opens on a porch bordered with flowers potted in old tin cans and a white painted swing is suspended from the roof.
The "front room", in winter warmed by a small fireplace, contains a mirrored dresser, a worn out phonograph, two beds and a sewing machine. On the walls are bright and antiquated calendars.
There is no radio. "Danged if I'm going to have the whole neighborhood in here Saturday night,” Carl explains. For it is the custom for the families affluent enought to own a radio, to play host each Saturday night to those who do not possess one.
Camilla shakes her head at this heresy. She is tall, with curling hair, a placid brow and fine blue eyes. Her quiet calm seems to have a soothing effect on Carl who is jolly and garrulous, ungainly and kind-hearted, and possessed of a certain wayward charm which serves to extricate him from many a difficulty. She explains when an opportunity arrives that Carl is not "really mean like that”. It's just that"-- her voice trails off.
Carl has two slogans-one for the elect, When you are at my house, you are at home; and one for those with whom he may be feuding; Keep off my Place or I'll drill clean through your hide. He is not unhospitable. But his Saturday nights, usually devoted to carousing, are not open to casual visitors who might drop in and, dropping out again, report on his goings on and condition to the entire countryside.
Another room on the other side of a curtained door at the left is just large enough for two beds and a table bearing a huge pile of quilts. Each quilt was made especially for a certain member of the family and if the supply is sufficiently large those not needed for immediate use are held in reserve against the day when the son or or daughter "moves out" as the saying goes, or marries and has a home of his own. A son in his twenties will show you his quilts as proudly as one of the daughters.
The kitchen is the main room of the house and the largest. It is by far the most confortable. Here is a large fireplace, a long table, a stove, a safe for “cooked rations" and innumerable shelves stocked with half gallon or quart fruit jars full of green beans or tomatoes; peaches or cucumber pickle or sauerkraut. There is only one window, at the back, but there are two doors opposite usually open for light even in mild winter weather. In the kitchen one finds the only chairs in the house, which are moved about from room to room as the need arises.
Even with doors closed, the house is not very tight - wind blows through it and the family when at leisure huddles about the fireplace. The fire is not intended to heat the room; rather to furnish a place where at intervals a body can warm himself and around which visitors may gather while Camilla keeps patiently at work at table or stove, whose fire, once the cooking is done, is allowed to die.
After Pauline was born, there followed Shelton, Mabel, and Hazel, in such rapid succession and with such mounting responsibilities that Carl for sometime seemed to promise to "straighten hisself out." He acquired two cows and a mule, hogs, and chickens, and cultivated the land with wheat and corn, with vegetables for his table and tobacco for his money crop.
But raising tobacco, a "job for thirteen months in the year" was not entirely to Carl's liking. Choosing a place on the county line where evasion of either sheriff would be facilitated, he took to making and selling "corn likker." And if a certain old woman, grandmother to one of Carl's woodscolts, hadn't "took to rambling up and down the creeks in search of stills and reporting them to the sheriff" he would have prospered earlier than he aid.
"Danged if the old witch didn't miss me for a whole year", Carl would say with a grin. "Stood smack on the still one time! But we had it covered so good she never knowed it was there."
As the children grew up, there were intervals when for vague reasons, Carl was "dodging", which meant eluding the law and accordingly making only very hasty and unannounced visits to his family.
To facilitate sudden departure a trap door had been built under the bed in the front room; when the law approached by the front road, Camilla would hold the sheriff at the door long enough for Carl to drop through the trap. She would invite him into the house and aid his search for a period long enough for Carl to crawl through the tall grass to a path which led up to the "old place", from which a road ran to the main highway.
At the "old place" Carl kept the Model T. Ford he used for the first lap of the getaway, discarding it at the house of a friend who under cover of night would return the car to the "old place", ready for the next hour of need.
This interesting phase, broken by occasional sessions at court, finally passed; "the trouble blew over”, again vaguely, and Carl returned half-heartedly to work on the farm. When this proved too monotonous, his fines paid off, Carl bought a truck on time and began to do hauling for a nearby saw mill, putting nearly all his earnings into payments. When the first truck was clear, he bought another for Shelton which took the boy entirely away from the farm work.
Thus the care of the money crop, tobacco, fell entirely to Camilla and the girls and with it, since Carl was generous enough, the money. The family drew sustenance from the land, the wheat and corn going to the mill for the flour and meal for bread; they had vegetables from the garden and relied on chickens and pigs with an occasional calf for fresh meat.
But gradually Carl's excursions to and from court at the county seat introduced him to various canned and packaged delicacies and frequently he would supplement the larder with a lavish buying of fancy groceries. But since it also introduced him to bottled wines and beer, Camilla deplored this phase of his absences heatedly.
When he is plain drunk he gets Vienna sausage, pork and beans and canned corn beef, mostly", she explained.
"When he's extra drunk, Lord have mercy! Every kind of new fangled canned stuff and bottled mess you ever see.” She pointed to the bottles of tomato catsup, Worcestershire sauce, and pickled onions which lined the shelf over the table.
Pauline, the oldest girl, at seventeen was very beautiful, but the other girls, sixteen and twelve were undeniably plain. But all three girls were good workers and with their mother soon handled the entire work of the farm.
Pauline had many suitors but on only one, a near neighbor, Clarence, Ann Eliza's seventh son, did she look with favor. She had nothing of the flirt in her make up. But since Clarence's constancy did not match her own, Pauline would stay at home from preaching, or a party at the schoolhouse and go home early from a cornshucking rather than have any boy other than Clarence accompany her.
That Clarence couldn't marry her, Pauline knew; Ann Eliza wouldn't let him. For old Stephen was Ann Eliza's brother and that made Clarence and Carl first cousins. Thus Carl's daughter, Pauline was reckoned "too kin to wife with Clarence."
"She'll probably change her mind", he would tell Pauline comfortably. But Ann Eliza did not change it - not even when Pauline's baby was an event of the close future, and the talk of the community.
"Better only one child than a dozen", Ann Eliza would say. "They are too close kin and I won't let Clarence marry her nohow. That baby won't hurt Pauline's chances none. My first two, before I married Aaron, didn't hurt mine, did they? I won't hear tell of it."
So at seventeen and a half Pauline found herself a mother and the recipient of much verbal abuse from her father who drank more and started rambling with his gun to "catch Clarence out", a local term which meant to catch him off his own land where a beating would not rate the same legal punishment as a beating on home territory. Aware of Carl's intentions, Clarence kept well out of his way unless accompanied by one or more of his elder brothers.
Illegitimate children are far from rare in this region but despite that fact, public opinion was sternly against this particular situation. Despite his mother's influence over the boy, every-body blamed Clarence severely for not taking Pauline to the preacher. He was a nice looking boy, but all the girls and many of the boys sent him to Coventry.
Only Pauline forgave him and when the baby was six months old, they were going together again, but quietly, so that Carl, who could hardly help but hear of it, at least would not see them meet. Many a night Carl drove his truck full speed up and down the road drunkenly shouting he would kill them both, but nothing came of it.
Then Mabel, now 16, had a baby too and Carl's punitive attentions were directed toward another lad, also firmly entrenched amongst elder bachelor brothers, a lad with at least one other woodscolt to his discredit, whose mother, also had the name Mabel.
"If you've got a girl named Mabel, lock her up", Carl roars as he drives drunkenly about the countryside in search of the new miscreant.
Upon Camilla rests the real burden of the disaster common enough in the community though it might be. She accepts the trials philosophically. There was hardly a family in the community in which illegitimate children did not figure, there was a chance that both girls sooner or later would marry some man if not the fathers of their children just as soon as Carl "stopped running round and raising Ned".
Also, it was only her own good luck which had kept her from the same position, as Camilla recalled. For Carl’s own woodscolt, Maudie Owens, was but a few weeks younger than her own Pauline; he might have married Maudie’s mother! The two girls, very friendly, too, look like twins. Maudie is a frequent visitor at the house and Camilla sometimes makes dresses for Maudie as the girl's mother's husband begrudges the child anything new.
The two babies -- Pauline's girl and Mabel's boy -- were cared for mostly in the kitchen but in a fairly modern fashion for Kitty, the negro midwife, teaches her mothers "city ways". Her charges are $5 if paid the same night she is called, $10 if she is paid later; if the bill is never paid the debt raises to $15.
She says she won't come on the Sundays her boy Sam is at home from the C.C.C. camp when she likes to bake for him and set forth a feast of everything bam likes.
"Girls, time them babies right," she will warn them "or Kitty just won't be there."
But invariably she is, even if it means riding a truck back home a couple of times to look at the roasting chicken in the oven.
Though Carl spasmodically starts digging for water, the Davises have no well, out regularly share a nearby spring with some of the feuding Dunlaps. Thus the spring has been the center of many altercations, Camilla and the Dunlap women exchanging descriptive repartee or the men aiming wild and shooting over each other's heads into the bushes.
But apart from defending their men when necessary the women do not take the feud very seriously. In order to obtain money for a new dress Pauline will "slip off" to the Dunlap home and help Florence with the washing, then "slip back" again before Carl can discover her whereabouts. It was Pauline who "writes the orders" for John Dunlap's family. She goes blackberrying with Conie, John's daughter and Alma, Neely Dunlap's daughter, was one of her best friends.
Like all families of the community, the Davises leave the buckets on the shelf on the porch and wash out there even in nippy weather. They usually use cold water.
"Of course, if you are a sissy, you can have warm," Carl sometimes admits and helps himself to warm.
His ablutions stop at neck and wrist, out the girls, "sponge bathe" themselves regularly, and dress as daintily as their limited knowledge and means allow. Before Mabel’s baby was an impending calamity, she and Hazel frequently persuaded their father to order from the "wish book" and thus acquired plenty of too thin underwear, too sleazy sweaters and wash dresses. Garb of woollen material, known as northern dresses, are rare.
But for all Carl's comparatively lavish earnings, estimated at $12 a day when he hauls, out of which he must pay for gas and oil, repairs and monthly payments; for all his generosity, both Camilla and Pauline must "arrange”, as Camilla puts it, for whatever they want or need for the house or themselves. Despite, perhaps because of her beauty, Pauline is not Carl's favorite child. Some think her resemblance to Maudie is responsible for his aversion to her.
Arranging means devising some form of barter -- eggs usually, or in moments of extremity, a hen, at the store whose owner "hauled" to Greensboro. The rolling store, which served the community until its owner shot his wife and himself, would always take eggs or chickens as money. Even boys putting themselves through college by selling magazines would take them. Thus one way or another Pauline nearly always had a dress for preaching.
"Only trouble with that", says Shelton, "is every other girl does the same thing. Come Sunday in Church you can count up a dozen dresses all alike especially when Charley (the storekeeper) gets in a special piece."
Pauline's major fear regarding Clarence is not Ann Eliza, who sooner or later will be gathered to her fathers, but the young and attractive "uppity mill girls". The silk mill is at Hemp, eight miles away and some of the neighborhood girls who could be spared from the field find jobs there.
They make "good money" which theoretically is their own, though some of the homes broke from the life long custom of living off the land to the fastidiousness and extravagance of a grocer's bill. But there was enough money left for silk hose, high heeled shoes, powder and perfume to say nothing of permanent waves which might be secured at Hemp.
The mill girls wore silk or wool dresses in the latest style and always had good shoes; their families never lacked head gear, or flavoring, or jars of peanut butter. It was even rumored that they sometimes had light bread by the loaf.
Clarence, too, worked in the mill where he was driven by his brother Earl who had the monopoly on "toting the mill hands", which, since he made much more toting than he did weaving, is regarded by many as something approaching a racket. Earl’s prices are high for he has no competition and he piles the passengers in on each other's laps three persons deep.
Thus Clarence in the course of time, will ride to work with each of these girls seated in his lap, a situation not to be countenanced elsewhere than in a "mill car", and to Pauline a calamitous situation.
Then, too, the mill girls, many of whom work at night, brought in a new and fearsome angle on the social life of the community. Frequently on Saturday nights they give parties beginning after work is over at midnight. These parties are circumspect; the boys "make music", they dance, sing, or crack nuts or bake sweet potatoes in the coals. Often they finish just before day light with an abundant breakfast.
Innocent enough, of course, but to Pauline, excluded by reason of not being one of them, they very thought of making merry during the hours when for generations the neighborhood has slept, is in itself very exciting and frightening.
And so when the baby was a year old and could be left, Pauline found a position in the silk mill working from midnight until eight in the morning. She does with little sleep so that she can help at home, and in caring for the little girl. Her weekly wage is about $12, much of which she saves, for the work she does about the farm is sufficient for her keep.
One of her first expenditures was a "store bought bedroom suite", from Montgomery Ward's in Greensboro, delaying the day of purchase until her fatter "felt better toward her" so that he might drive her in and carry the suite in his truck. She is keeping it until Anne Eliza relents -- or dies -- and Clarence can marry. Clarence has already purchased a cook stove against that day.
But will that day arrive? The Kennedy boys aren't the marrying kind, everybody realizes. They are far too comfortable at home; Clarence is next to the "baby child" and easily influenced by his older bachelor brothers.
Every now and then the situation gets too much for Carl. Sunday nights when there is preaching Pauline will dress in her best and go with Alma. As Carl is well aware, Clarence is apt to meet them down the road. One night with his gun, Carl set out for Alma's house.
"Neely, I'm going to kill Pauline and Clarence", he told Alma's father. "What shall I do with Alma, Neely?"
"Send her home before you start firing them shells", Neely suggests.
"Okay, Neely. I'll send Alma home.”
Sometimes at a filling station where he "tanks up" on beer Carl runs afoul of the law. Usually, however, the fracas takes place in Randolph County which begins just a few miles away from his home and then the law takes him to Asheboro. Word comes back to Camilla that "Carl's in again" and that she knows "what to do”.
And true enough, Camilla knows from long experience. If she can catch a ride down the road to Frank Garner's store well and good; if not Camilla walks the four miles to ask Frank if once again he will go Carl's bond. Then she gets one of the Kennedy boys to drive her to the jail at Asheboro.
Once in the presence of her lord and master she is noncommittal. "Lookes like you'll have to stay her, Carl," she says. "Ain't sure Frank will go your bond this time." She looks him over impersonally. "Maybe he'll change his mind on it. I'll see what I can do."
On her way out she stops in the jailer's office, to collect the cash taken from Carl when they locked him in his cell. And for an entire day the town belongs to her and the children. She buys hose and underwear; hard candy. She buys shoes maybe, a kitchen utensil or two and a bottle of perfume. The children select ten cent store toys and finally, the entire brood lunches in a hamburger joint.
On the morrow the loot well hidden away, Camilla leaves home once again and calls at Frank Garner's store. "He's ready to come out now any time," she tells Frank. Then she prepares a feast for the prodigal, chicken and dumplings, cornbread, hot biscuits, butter and brown sugar, turnip greens, Irish potatoes, beans and canned peaches. As an added gesture she throws away the coffee grounds, scours the pot and makes fresh coffee. Sometimes, if she has time, she bakes a cake and is usually spreading on the icing when the truant truck drives into the yard. Carl is very sheepish, very remorseful, very grateful. He doesn't ask "what went with that roll of bills I had in my pocket." He knows, as he has known every time before.
Between times there is always the feud with the Dunlaps to keep Carl busy. The feud, he admits, is getting very spineless. Instead of stalking each other with guns as in the old lawless days, the modern method is to take advantage of every phase of the law to do in one’s enemy. This is not Carl's way; his fists, he declares are still good; they will serve a while longer.
The Dunlaps rather lean toward the law. They know that in court the word of a woman is accepted far more frequently than that of a man and when feuding with Carl not one of them ever left his own premises even as far as the woodpile unless accompanied by a woman. This chaperonage Carl points out gleefully does them out of a lot of fun. But he was rueful too.
"One day the only woman up there, Florence, was out in the woods of her house tending some sick turkeys. Floyd, he went down for the mail with his gun. I hid in the woods, made a noise like a rabbit and Floyd he chased off his own land onto the Kennedys where I slapped him down. In a bed a week or more he was, and deserved it, too. An I’ll be banged if Florence - tending turkeys all the time, back of the house, a mile away - didn’t get up in court and swear she was hiding in the bushes near the mail box and sees me swat Floyd on his own land."
Carl got off with a fine which worried him not at all, and failed to please the Dunlaps; so they meditated. Finally one day the Davises received a thoroughly unexpected call from the sheriff who poked around and found several fruit jars of corn whiskey buried to a half hearted depth among the cabbages in the garden.
The Dunlaps bragged about it later so Carl knew one of them did it. He had that case hanging over him for a couple of years and then got off with a fine.
"Floyd he got the worst of it", Carl opined. "Hasn't been able to sleep good since. Takes his gun with him even to the barn to feed the mule. Drags sourpuss Florence everywhere he goes for a witness. Dassn't go to preachin' or corn shuckin's for fear of me. I had to pay the fine, sure, but money don't mean nothing to me. I'd spent it anyway one way or another.
"And I can sleep good nights; my nerves they ain't gone back on me and I can go places without dragging my old lady to protect me."
He glanced at Camilla appreciatively. "When I take mine along", he declared, "it ain't because I got to. No ma'am. It's to celebrate.
