Rose Shepherd
No. 202
April 26, 1937.
JACKSONVILLE - (Historical)
New Berlin,
Personal Interview,
Mr. David C. Von Balsan,
1537 Liberty-st.,
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mr. Von Balsan says: "My grand-father, Dr. Henry Von Balsan, <text not clear>Germany to New York in the late 50's, going from there to New <text not clear>, where he practiced medicine. He came to Florida in 1860, settling on purchase of fifty acres of land on the St. John's River, 12 miles from Jacksonville, which was a part of the old "Brown Spanish Grant <text not clear>back to the second Spanish occupation of Florida.
"My grand-father's place was first known as "Yellow Bluff," <text not clear>himself changed the name to New Berlin, in honor of his native town in Germany. He laid out a small town, with streets running straight North and South, and due East and West, in accordance with his methodical German <text not clear>ining. The principal street he called "Caroline" in honor <text not clear>grand-mother, who was Caroline Johnson, of Virginia, a niece of the great statesman, Henry Clay.
"During the War between the States, my grandfather had a Hospital at nearby Denis Point, where he cared or sick and wounded soldiers, also during yellow fever visitations, it was operated as an isolation hospital.
"Much mystery and romance, with rumors of buried treasure has always enveloped the New Berlin section.
"I remember my grand-father telling about schooners that came up the St. Johns River at night, anchored, putting the crews ashore where they dug industriously for hours in the clay bluff, departing as mysteriously as the some. The excavators were in most instances foreign-looking and non-committal, so it was never known just what they were looking for, Mother they found the objects of their quests, but great <text not clear>remains as mute evidence of their visitations.
"On Mother occasion, a stranger came and located near an old “enquire well of Spanish occupation origin. He ordered lumber to build a house, and the neighbors began to look upon him as a neighbor, although he was not very friendly. He, too, started digging - in the old well. He dug and dug. The lumber for the house was delivered, it was never use, and the new settler continued his digging. One day we missed him. He had departed without any communication with the residents as to when, or why he was going, or where. He never returned, and the number for the new house rotted on the ground where it was stacked.
"Across the River in a section we called "Mill Cove", because in early days a saw-mill was located there, are the remains of the two or three old Indian Mounds - one quite large. These have been a source of curiosity for many, am it was a popular passtime to row over and explorer these remains of ancient days.
Many relics have been found there - arrow heads, Indian pottery of all description, and only recently a vase was dug up in a fair state on preservation, that is, it was intact and not cracked or chipped, though, or course, it was worn and faded from being buried so long.
"One of the most enthusiastic of these excavators was a physician from Philadelphia. He came in his own private yacht, anchored at the <text not clear>line, and with his assistants spent many weeks investigating the <text not clear>of these mounds. That he discovered, he carried away with him whether he was an authorized archaeologist, or simply a wealthy private collector, we never knew. But he came at different times forty or more years ago.
"A Mr. James Grey, an cla<text not clear>ent of New Berlin, and a native of that <text not clear>, now about eighty years of age, may be able to tell the name of the Philadelphia physician-explorer. He also may know of have seen some of his finds.
"The Yankees destroyed the fortifications here at New Berlin during the war between the states- they were never very extensive, just sand <text not clear> to thrown up. Since time period the dredging operations in the <text not clear>to <text not clear> the channel into the port of Jacksonville, <text not clear> with <text not clear>erosion, has destroyed the former great beauty of the River front. (The Union soldiers did not molest my grand-father who was a naturalized American citizen and naturally a Union sympathizer).
"The stately old oaks am magnolias that flanked the <text not clear>-ments have washed away into the mighty St. Johns. These used to offer a sanctuary to the birds. But now the birds are also gone.
"In Dunn's Creek, two miles down the River from New Berlin, the heron used to come in large numbers to nest and to feed. They were a beautiful sight - the white, gray, blue - all colors. Now, however, they <text not clear>to prefer the salt water locations. Many are found around Fort George.
"The magnolias and oleanders which my grand-mother planted with <text not clear>.care <text not clear>ended with much love for many years, to beautify the ground <text not clear>in her adopted State of Florida, have also tumbled in the St. <text not clear>, as the tide washed away the shore line.
"A peculiar feature of the early settlers seems to have been their fear of everything. They were afraid of newcomers and afraid of each other. If they had valuable, they seemed to have buried them, or at least, so the rumor has persisted thru the ages, they kept their own <text not clear>, here uncommunicative, and went their own separate say."
NOTE: Mr. Yon Balsan had never heard of the medal of 10-k gold 2 1/2" long by 1 1/2" wide found at New Berlin fifty years or so ago. Thought Mr. Grey might have some knowledge of it, and will visit him to find out.
