Day Laborer
Puryear, Tennessee.
November 10, 1938.
Recorded by Ruth Clark
Revised by Aswell.
FINIS EVITTS
Finis picked some short willow billets from the wood box and stuffed them into the old oil drum that served the Evitts as a chunk burner. In the ruddy glow from the bed of coals his high cheekbones stood out sharply and the lines in his leathery face deepened. He dropped the lid in place and knelt to scrape with a stick at the choke of fluffy ashes in the ash box.
"I burn wood," he said, "because me and the boys can cut it at leisure time and don't have to be out no money. If I had it to buy I'd jest buy coal but we can go down here in the bottom and have all the willow we want jest for the cutting. And a lots of times somebody that's got wood on their land will want it cut on the shares. Like today we cut some good oak that way for a widow woman. It'll be good to burn with this here seasoned willow. We usually swap work to git it hauled."
"Poor folks has to do poor ways," said Ludie from her corner.
Finis looked toward his wife and nodded. He got to his feet and let himself down in his chair by the chunk burner.
Ludie bent over her quilting frame again. A thin woman whose gray hair was frizzled with a cheap permanent wave, she was in her late forties and looked ten or fifteen years younger because of her good complexion. She stitched carefully, steadily, squinting in the flicker of light from the blackened chimney of the coal oil lamp on the dresser. Now and then she glanced across at the home-made rocker where buxom fourteen year old Venna hunched over an arithmetic and tablet. J. T., a strong, dark boy of ten, sat on the floor and fingered his hoard of pop bottle caps while he listened to the talk.
Printis and Burmon, the two grown boys, sprawled on the bright coverlet of the iron bed. Like their father they were short and swarthy with big heavily veined hands. They rolled and smoked cigarettes, shifted positions on the creaking bed, and occasionally passed a few words between themselves in drowsy undertones.
Finis leaned forward in his chair. "Poor folks sure does have to do poor ways!" he repeated emphatically. "Truer word was never spoken ever. Look at that now. Window lights broke out and you got to patch them with newspaper or old rags or have the wind come tearing in and freezing the meat off your bones. I guess we'd like to have some pretty floor rugs and window curtains as much as the next one, but it's poor ways with us and like to be so far as I can see it."
"We don't do so awful bad, come to study about it," Ludie put in. Her eyes wandered to the battered cabinet victrola, the wall paper with its large pink flowers, and the rickety chairs with their split-woven bottoms. "Three rooms and a roof that don't leak none, some beds to lay on and cheers to set in and enough something to eat to get by ain't so bad. They's heaps of folks worse off this day and time."
She added, "You can't hardly beat Finis when it comes to cheer bottoming."
Finis hitched his chair back from the chunk burner. The draft was roaring and a dull red flush crept around the bowed sheet iron and began to streak the pipe.
"I can bottom cheers at thirty-five cents a piece," he explained, "or maybe on the shares like I do wood cutting. All the cheers we've ever had I got that way. I've give a set of six old cheers to each one of my five married children. Of course, figgering thirty-five cents for the new bottom, that makes them cost about seventy cents a piece and I couldn't cash them for that. But that's jest odd time work when I can't be doing nothing else.
"And I tell you, they's a lot of the time when I jest ain't able to do a whole lot of hard work. Folks bring their cheers here so I ain't bothered with toting them here myself. Sometimes if I ain't too tard I can bottom a cheer after supper. Since we moved here to Puryear we set up later than we used to and git up later too. But you know if a feller gits up at five and keeps knocking at his job all day and don't lose no time, he'll do about all he wants to by night.
"No, I wouldn't mind telling about my life and all I done if it would help any. Of course I'm ignorant and couldn't tell it like some folks but being left an orphan and coming up like I did might be sort of interesting."
He gave Ludie a sideling glance and showed his gapped snuff stained teeth in a grin. "Jest one thing that I ain't going to tell and that's about my sweethearts. Ludie'd git fighting mad if I started in about them." He laughed and winked.
"Go long with you," smiled Ludie. "I don't keer about your sweethearts."
Printis and Burman nudged each other. Venna giggled and J.T echoed her.
Finis stared thoughtfully at the glowing chunk burner. From a side pocket of his jumper he took a small can and dribbled a pinching of snuff under his lip.
"I don't much remember my daddy," he said. "He read his Bible and pondered over it a lot and folks thought that drove him crazy. I don't really think it was that. He had the dropsy and water got on his brain and after they taken him to the asylum they operated and dreened that off and his mind was good. Still and all he never was right well and he died when I was six.
"I don't remember a thing about him before he went away but I do remember when he came back. And I remember once they hid his Bible and he raised sand. Then once he was setting in the back yard and told me to bring a drink of water. About the time I got there a rooster hopped up and crowed right in front of us. So I dashed the dipper of water on him and he went off shaking his head and sputtering. Pap laughed and laughed. Then one time after he was bed fast I run across the floor and he told me not to, but childlike I done it again and he rapped me on the head with his cane. It didn't hurt but I remembered it. "
"Pap didn't live long. He died and left my mother with ten children. I was next to the youngest. We scuffled along some way for about two years, then mammy married an old gentleman who had a home but he was deaf as a post.
"I guess us children was aggravating at times. Old man Ford never had but one mule. He hitched him to a slide to haul wood. He'd set on the wood. He always had a little limb and pecked at the mule all the time. One day the old mule was stepping sort of lively and one of us young ones yelled "whoa!" The old mule stopped so quick that Mr. Ford fell off right up against the mule. We didn't think about being dangerous. It was funny to us so we done it over and over. He was too deaf to hear us, so he took spite out on the mule and thrashed that old mule good.
All mammy's children but us three youngest ones was working away from home. Mammy and Mr. Ford didn't never quarrel. He was good, but he decided, I guess, that he'd made a bad bargain so he left one day. After a while he came back and told mammy that he wanted to live with her but wanted us children to go live somewheres else.
"Mammy said, 'No siree! I'll never give up my young uns for no man. It's me with the young uns or not at all.' So he left again. After a while he wanted to sell the place. Mammy could have refused but she didn't think she had no real right, so she signed the deed and we moved off.
"We didn't have no home. We jest lived in any backway place we could and the older boys making the living. Then mammy taken lung trouble and was, down a long time. Then one day Mr. Ford came back while Mammy was on the bed and talked mighty ugly to her. My sister came running and told my oldest brother and he came to the house with a stick but Mammy told him whatever you do don't hit him. He was deaf and couldn't hear what my brother and mammy was saying. Brother caught the old feller by the arm and led him to the door. He went away and we never saw him no more. We was always afeared he'd come back till we heard a street car had run over and killed him in Paducah.
"We scuffled along and managed some way. We couldn't go to school much. We always lived a long ways from school and Mammy died when I was twelve. Our oldest brother and our youngest sister Mary made a home for us a while and then Mary wanted to git married."
"She married a man from over in Stewart County. I guess if she'd knew something about his past it would made a difference but she didn't and so he done better after he married. He quit drinking but he always had a temper and as long as he lived he'd have a fight once in a while.
"But he was good to Mary and worked hard and they done well. When they was gitting ready to marry he told Mary that he'd take one of us boys. So they taken Ben because he was the youngest and my oldest brother made a trade for me to stay with a Mr. Duke near calvert City. Kentucky. We always lived in and around Calvert City. My mother and father and six brothers and sisters is buried there. I've for a long time wanted to go back but I don't know whether I will or not. We couldn't even leave this place when the brother who died with the measles in Liverpool during the war was brought back and buried there. It made me feel mighty bad but the government pays me five dollars and seventy-five cents war insurance money on account of him dying and it's a help to us."
"Well, I lived with this Mr. Duke nearly a year. My life would have been different if I'd stayed on there but I wasn't happy. We'd always been poor. I'd had my brother for a playmate and this life was so different. A great big house and nobody in it excepting me and Mr. Duke, Mrs, Duke, and Buelah, a twelve year old daughter. I thought Buelah was awful sissy. She didn't never git out and play like my sister had. "
"Mr. Duke had six acres of tobacco and I stayed in it nearly all the time if Mrs. Duke didn't have me helping with the washing or doing something about the house. I wasn't used to working steady but I went on and never complained and they was kind. They never nagged or scolded."
"My oldest brother had made a trade with Mr. Duke that I was to work all summer and git my board and clothes and four months of schooling. My brother after gittin me settled went on off and didn't come back till next fall. Mr. Duke hadn't bought me but a fifteen cent pair of galluses all the year, and I had already missed so much of the school that I couldn't git the four months noways. This made my brother mad so he let me move and jest hire out around. Mrs. Duke and Buelah seemed sad-like because I was leaving but Mr. Duke never seemed to keer."
"I hired out then to farmers by the year but I never was exactly satisfied and didn't stay more than a year at a place. The year after my mother died my eighteen year old brother accidentally shot his self. Him and some more boys had stopped at a persimmon tree and was resting and eating persimmons. They was a pond nearby and while the two other boys went around the pond to shoot at some killdees he seen a rabbit and started to git his gun through a fence to shoot the rabbit. Both hammers hung on the fence and shot right in his breast."
"He lived for two weeks and the doctor got all the broken bones and the shot--they was just in a wad--out and doctored the best he could but he knowed they wasn't no hope for him. When he died we put him away nice for orphan children, but we still owed about three dollars on Mammy's burying and now we had to pay for my brother's. We jest paid along as we could and finally we got it paid."
"Then I got so homesick for my brother that I went over to Stewart County and hired to my brother-in-law over there. I saved ninety-five dollars that year. I wasn't satisfied there so I went back to Calvert City and found my oldest brother in hard luck. So I spent my savings for food and things as was needed and made a crop. The crop was a failure so then I had nothing again.
"I got a job that fall and come to Tennessee to hack ties in the bottom of the Tennessee River. I met Ludie that winter. I decided I could do a heap better if I had a home. I persuaded Ludie to have me. I was eighteen and she was sixteen. We started out with nothing and still ain't got nothing. Every time it looked like I was going to git ahead something would turn up to take it all."
"Ludie's folks was all tie hackers. I never missed a crop, but winters and leisure time I done a lot of hacking after we was married. If you'll notice it, after a poor man marries he kind of takes up with his wife's people and does like them."
"Well, they was some money in tie hacking back then but now ties is sawed mostly. A sawmill and four men can make better than two hundred a day and not be nigh as tard as a hacker'd be making fifteen the ties is more regular and then they ain't nigh as much waste with a mill. What we use to hack up into juggles makes planks now. Juggles is chips taken off in squaring up a tie."
"I don't never think of juggles but what I think of Ludie's mammy. Being a tie hacker's wife, she' cooked with juggles for stove wood for years and years. I guess she had had a lot of weary trying to cook with them when they was green and wet."
"She was taken with pneumony and right bad from the start. For three days and nights her whole talk was trying to cook with green juggles. The fire wouldn't burn, the biscuits wouldn't brown, and the meat wouldn't fry, coffee wouldn't boil. The poor old thing died worrying like that."
"In the first place they don't need as many ties now as they did. Very little if any new railroad is being built, and the creosote they use makes them last so much longer. You've saw these little tags on ever tie. Well, they have the date when they was put down. Ever time a section hand takes up a old tie he knows exactly when that tie was put down. Since they been using creosote they had just as soon have gum as any, if they can git it before it begins to pile burn. But gum is bad about that. If it is piled up it just soon begins to turn dark. It won't take creosote after that decay starts in. Oak makes the best ties. White and post oak usually brings the most but a heap of red oak is used too."
"They are a lot more particular about ties being the right size now. Every railroad I ever heard of wants ties eight feet long, except Henry Ford's. He wanted them just seven and one-half feet. The last ties I cut was for Henry Ford's little road. He built it jest for his own benefit. I heard a preacher talking about it not so long ago. He said Henry Ford's was the only railroad that didn't run on Sunday and it was the only one that made any money."
"They's three special cuts in cross-ties, the pole ties where you git one tie from a cut, the half moon where you git two ties, and the quarter cuts where you git four. You have to be mighty keerful about the quarter cuts. The grain won't run right. They'll split slanting, or splinter up. They finally got to where they didn't want them much. The pole ties is the best. And one advantage with them is they didn't have to be straight if they was squared up pretty well six inches deep, and the width might vary from seven to ten inches and there might be a considerable crook in the pole, but a split tie was so much more apt to warp and splinter."
"In hacking ties we most always used some poles for a scaffold to keep from chopping our axes in the ground. For tie hacking you've sure got to have a sharp axe to keep from splintering or hacking."
"First we cut down trees and got them scaffolded up. Then they was a lot of examining to see if it was knots and bad places that would have to be cut out, and then we studied how to cut to git the most ties and the least hewing."
"After we'd decide on this, we partly split the log at the right places. Then we scored the top of the log. Scored means hacked it with a razor sharp axe. Then we taken a broad axe and chopped off the juggles as deep as we'd scored. After the juggles was off, we'd sometimes have stabs we could cut off for planks or other pusposes. They was sure a lot of waste. After we'd hacked and hewed one side flat we'd turn the flat sides down and fix the other sides the same way."
"The last time I bought a track of timber for ties, I paid a hundred dollars for it. I'd go into the woods and count the trees and figger the ties I could git. Then I'd buy allowing for work and everything. Three of my boys worked and I hired three so we could run three saws. It kept me busy the blessed time measuring and filing and waiting on them six."
"Sometimes I'd make pretty good and again I had to work pretty cheap on such contracts. Sometimes timber would look better than it was. Sometimes not so good, so you'd never know. The ties is nearly all hauled out with trucks now, but by mule teams when I first begin. A man with a wagon and team could make pretty good hauling then."
"I've tried everything. We've been to Paducah twice and I worked with a lumber company once and a plumber outfit the other time. We made good the first time but I've always wanted to farm, so I went back to the farm and lost out again. The last time we just couldn't make a living so we come back to Puryear and we've been here ever since. I don't guess I'll ever try to farm anymore."
"We done very well, I reckon, until eighteen years ago. I was making a crop with Mr. Dick and he was a mighty good man. I owned a mule but I needed another so Mr. Dick sold me one and took a lien on it. Ludie wasn't well all the year. She ain't never had good health till the last few years. After I got my breaking done I got to trading on my first mule and made two or three bad trades, then I jest didn't have no mule. Then about the time my tobacco crop was ready to top I took bad sick with my stomach trouble. I had a stomach ache trouble for years and I'd have to be careful what I eat and then I'd have spells. The first day of July twin babies was born in our house. I got better."
"The children was all small and wasn't big enough to work indoors or out. I drug around and tried towork both places but I jest give out. I offered to sell my crop and Mr. Dick would buy it but he didn't pay much. He took the mule back and by the time everything was straightened I was flat. I guess we'd have got hungry that time but my brother-in-law came over from Stewart County and brought us enough to tide us over."
"Well, we raised ten children to be grown and they are every one big and strong excepting the oldest boy. He looks well and strong but, as I tell them, he's hystericky like some old woman. He jest goes to pieces about things. They's been times when we got mighty low but no time ever when my children asked for something to eat and they couldn't have it. Wasn't always what they'd liked to had or what I'd like to give them, but it kept them from being hungry. Lots of times their clothes got awful shabby. One winter I bought the whole outfit some cheap out-of-style shoes. They give each other fits all the winter about them shoes, but it's the best we could do."
"Worse thing I hate about it is I couldn't never send the children to school. Didn't none of them ever do no good in school excepting Venna here, and she's doing fine. But J. T. don't take no interest in school. He's ten and jest in the third grade. He didn't pass last year."
J. T. broke in with: "I didn't have my English and made an E today."
Ludie said, "Well, I'd be ashamed to tell it."
The two older boys laughed. They got up, stretched, and walked into the next room. "Tard," Printis numbled. "Got to hit the hair."
Finis went on, "Things got better when the boys got big enough to work and we made pretty good. We had two cows and two teams of pretty good horses, some chickens and hogs, and I rented and, furnished myself for two or three years."
"Then I got down again and the doctor said an operation was all that would save me. I stayed at Mason's Hospital three months. They cut out two ulcers and cut off two inches of intestines that had turned black and they sewed up my stomach and sewed the intestines on at another place. I sold my horses to pay the bill which was three hundred and ninety-five dollars. I think it was four hundred but they knocked off five dollars. Of course that's been eleven years and I ain't never got strong but I'm lots weller than I was."
"So we plugged along. I thought if I could jest git well we'd soon git it back. But the older children wanted to git married. I'd try to help them some and then four years ago was, I guess, the hardest year of all. I had a pretty good team of horses, sort of stylish horses, and I reckon we was all prouder of them than any we'd ever had. Then in the spring one of them got lousy. I doctored it and killed the lice. Then it got stiff in the joints and got down and died. Then three weeks to the day my sister died and I went to spend the night with my brother-in-law. That night my other horse got in the mire. The neighbors got it out in the morning but it took the pneumonia and it died."
"That summer I had a hemorrhage of the stomach and like to have died. While I was sick our cow--we jest had one then--took some kind of running fits. They wouldn't tell me nothing about it, but I could see her through a window from my bed. They doctored and fooled with her. For months she was skin and bones but she finally pulled through and got fat again. And about the time I was able to be up again our last baby was born. It jest lived three weeks."
"Three days," Ludie said.
"Of course," Finis went on, "the children always had to work mighty hard. I jest couldn't have made it if they hadn't holp like they have. My oldest three sons liked to work and they are every one making a good living for their families now. These grown uns that's here with me now don't keer as much about it and it's been harder for them to save. I guess the times has something to do with that."
"Now take me. I would like to run a car and we got an old trap out there right now. But every time I've got to doing pretty well and got one and says to myself, 'Now, we'll jest use this for business to go to work or for something that will make us something'--then I swear it ain't no time hardly till we forgit and ride as long as they's anything to ride on."
Ludie said, "Well, if I was going to buy a car I'd jest made a mistake and buy me a cow instead. I know plenty of milk and butter is half the living."
The fire had burned low end cold air was blowing across the floor.
Finis got up and stoked the chunk burner. As he was sitting down, he said, "I guess they's been times when I'd been bound to ask for help if I hadn't had some credit. I ain't never run much of an account but they ain't never been a time when I couldn't buy something to eat from my nearest grocery man til I could make a shift."
"None of us has ever had to get relief or go on the WPA but I sure hope the WPA don't bust up, though. It would hurt me and my boys as bad as them that's on it. Now we git all the odd jobs hiring around and if all the WPA bunch didn't have no jobs we'd have to divide our work. Way it is, we git work pretty nigh every day and when they's work at the 'tater houses we run into big money."
"Oh we git along, I guess. When the boys ain't so tard they usually loaf a while up town after supper or set around here with a music box. I learned them every one to pick a gittar. They all got so they play better than me so I jest quit. I read some nights. Venna had a book from the liberry last night and I leafed over to the middle and read three pages. It was named Little Women and some girls was gitting ready to go to town in it. It took them the whole three pages to git ready. I decided that story was too draggy for me. I don't see why they put a lot of stuff in books that they do unless it's jest to fill it up."
"I guess I ain't as good as I used to be. I used to go to church. I'm ashamed to tell it but I quit and I don't have the hope I once had. Lately I've thought I'd go back but I jest don't. Don't none of my family belong to no church."
"So I'm gitting old and though I'm weller than I've been in years I can't do much heavy work. I've decided it ain't much use to save no more and fret about gitting ahead. I've jest kind of give up, I guess."