Approximately 1,800 words
41 C
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
A VETERAN NEGRO JANITOR
Date of First Writing December 17, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed  Walter N. Hughes
Fictitious Name None
Street Address  1428 Taylor street
Place Columbia, South Carolina
Occupation  Janitor
Name of Writer  Stiles M. Soruggs
Name of Reviser State Office
"Janitoring doesn't pay a great sight of money. But it is not difficult work, and the pay is sure and regular. That helps keep the wolf away." Such was the cheerful greeting of Walter M. Hughes, polite Negro janitor at the Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church.
"Last Sunday, the Rev. Dr. Samuel K. Phillips, my big boss, said in his sormon, 'It is not what we leave when we die, but how did we earn it while we were here, that counts.
I like that, because it was just what I was thinking.
"I was born on March 3, 1872, in Columbia, and I have lived here all my life. I never was arrested and never was out of a job more than a day or two since I was a little shaver. Lucky? Yep, that's what I call it. I surely an thankful for this, for I have seen many folks suffer for lack of a job all along the rocky read for 66 years.
"The $14 I draw here every Saturday helps to keep my wife and I comfortable. I am very thankful for it and I try to earn it. I've seen many people who didn't have even that sum.
"My daddy was John Hughes and my <text not clear> was Annie (Mitchell) Hughes. They were born in slavery and belonged to white folks by the name they took. Their daddies and mammies were slaves who had been set free under the law after the Civil War. I never heard the talk much about slave days. They didn't live in slavery long enough to learn much about it, and they probably didn't discuss what they knew about it with pleasure.
"Most of the talk I heard between Daddy and Mammy was about work and the conditions that bore down on everybody during reconstruction. They had many white and black friends during my childhood. And they kept busy doing such work as they could find in the years when every one had to do a lot of scratching or suffer.
"They set the work plan for me by their daily life. I learned early that it takes plenty of labor to secure food and clothes. And I have noticed that both white and black people who keep busy doing something worth while generally live pretty well. The wide road of crime leads to jail sooner or later, and I have seen a considerable number land there. Crime never pays in honest money.
"My mammy was busy washing and ironing clothes for white folks of quality when I became old enough to take notice of affairs about our little home. My daddy was so keen to make a living that he would hire out on the big plantations in the country, if he couldn't get a job in Columbia.
"Daddy was a fine trainer of race horses, and a good <text not clear> horse flesh, too. He was employed for several years on the big <text not clear> of General Johnson Hagood, in Barnwell county. He trained the <text not clear> so well that they often won races at Charleston tracks and at the State <text not clear> in Columbia.
"Daddy worked for General Hagood from about 1878 until <text not clear> He could come home sometimes on Sunday to see Mammy and us children, and it was always a happy occasion at our house. It was a happy day for all of us when General Hagood came to Columbia late in 1679 to assume for office of Governor of South Carolina (1880-1992).
"We were pleased because the new governor had chosen <text not clear> drive his carriage from Barnwell to Columbia. Daddy met Mammy and <text not clear> the State House steps and hugged and kissed us both.
"'The general told me as we was comin' along that I <text not clear> in the State House, but he never has told me yet what I was to <text not clear> told Mammy. 'You just wait',' Mammy told him, 'General Hagood <text not clear> of his word, and he will not forget you.' 'Yes, Mammy, I'm not <text not clear>. I just wanted you to know that everything is bright and <text not clear> daddy. The next day after General Hagood bacame governor, Daddy was <text not clear> head janitor of the State House, and he stayed there as long as General Hagood did.
"You pleased mo so much awhile ago when you spoke of my <text not clear> of the English language. I think I'd better tell you know I learned to speak as well as I do. I began to attend Edward school when I was six years old, and I studied there for two years. There I learned to spell a little, read a little, and cipher a little. That two years at school was all I had, but I have kept up my study of books, newpapers, and magazines to this day, whenever I get a chance.
"Some of the hooks and magazines have helped me in the field of janitoring. My reason for quitting school was due to the fact that Paddy died when I was thirteen years old, and I felt it was necessary for me to work and help Mammy make a home for us. My reading aided me. And working for fine white folks further helped me to say what I had to say so it could be easily understood.
"My first earning work was in carrying white folks' clothes, which my mammy had washed and ironed, to their homes. I was not a big boy and I'm not a big man, as you see; and white folks often gave me small coins for making the trip. How and then other white friends got me to carry a note or a package, and they paid me.
"This errand-running work developed, and I was soon adding more to it by selling newspapers on the streets. I was proud to learn later that the newspapers of Columbia gave me a fine recommendation when they found out that I had applied for a job with F. L. Brown & Brothers, big retail grocers of that day, who needed a boy to drive a delivery wagon. I got that job and held it for three years. Then I quit and went to work for the R. B. RcKay firm. The work was similar to my old job. but they paid me more money.
"That firm, in a few years, became the E. T. Hendrix Store, and I delivered goods for the Hendrix firm until it went out of business in 1927. I had begun work at the Brown store at $7.50 a week, and when I transferred to the Rckay store it was raised to $10 a week. When Hendrix took the store, they raised me to $12, and every year added. In 1927, I was drawing $14 a week.
"I was not idle long after Mr. Hendrix quit. He had <text not clear> can that he was, that his health forced him to stop work, and <text not clear> notice so we could look out for other jobs before the old <text not clear> talked with some of my white friends, and one of them went <text not clear> about a job as janitor at the Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church. <text not clear> the next day or two I was called as janitor, and I have been <text not clear> 1927 to date. I am pleased because I never have been harshly <text not clear> for sorry work or conduct in the eleven years I have been hers.
"This eleven-year-old job, which I am lucky enough to <text not clear> no reasonably busy. The Arsenel Hill Church is not the <text not clear> columbia, but it is one of the busiest. There is an average of <text not clear> a day at the church or at the Sunday School annex. The <text not clear> it's annex must be swept and dusted daily. sometimes there <text not clear> more meetings in twenty-four hours, and I take pride in keeping <text not clear> ises as spick-and-span as possible all the time.
"The office and study of the Rev. Dr. S.K. Phillips <text not clear> the annex, and I usually attend to these the first thing in <text not clear> before he arrives. Then I sweep and dust the church <text not clear> return and attend to the remainder of the annex. There is <text not clear> sort of work here over the course of a month.
"In addition, fires must be built in the furnaces of <text not clear> annex for five or six months during the fall and winter <text not clear> the summer period, fans and ice must be looked after. So <text not clear> told, one rust keep going here pretty regularly to keep the <text not clear> in apple pie order. This I try to do. From the treatment <text not clear> experience from the pastor, his secretary, and the membership of the church, I'm inclined to think my services are appreciated here. I'm expecting to get a raise in pay this coming Christmas, if I live. Hints dropped to me indicates such luck.
I've been married twice. My first wife was Ellen Williams. We met at a church social in 1915, and we courted along for almost four years. Sometimes I thought I was hitting in high gear in my drive for a wife, but, like as not, at the very next meeting I had to decide the old car wouldn't do anything but shimmy. But I wouldn't take no for an answer, and in 1919 Ellen and I were married. We lived happily until she got sick in 1927, and it kept me scratching hard and regular to pay our expenses during her illness.
"Ellen's folks moved to Ohio shortly after we married. And, when she took sick, they wanted her to come to them at Cincinnati. They wrote us and said that if she wore there they believed the medicine, the climate, and special attention might bring back her health. I asked her if she wished to go to them, and she said she would be powerful glad to go. But she smiled at me and added, 'My dear hubby, I sure would hate to leave you behind, and I know we could hardly pay for the expense of a trip for me.'
"I was plain worried. My white and black friends noticed my worriment and asked me if I was sick. By and by I told them what was troubling me. The quiet, silent way in which they came to my aid, with dollars, half dollars, quarter dollars, dimes, and nickels, the next few days, warned my heart for all humanity. Ellen and I soon loft for Cincinnati. There her folks made her as comfortable as we could afford, and I kissed her and came back to my work. Ellen didn't improve at Cincinnati. She made a game fight, but death claimed her in 1930. I last looked on her face there, where we burried her.
"I came back home sad and weary. I buckled down to work, but it was sure lonesome at the end of the day to go home to nobody. Not long after that I met Mary Young, and we became friends. In the course of time, I convinced her that married life was the happiest of all. So Mary and I were married in 1937. We began our home life in a little house in the rear of 1428 Taylor Street, Columbia. We still live there. Mary is a good housekeeper, and she side me in making a living, when aha gets a chance to work at some of the white folks' houses.
"Mary also helps to supply our needs in many little ways that I reckon you wouldn't think of. For instance, in the wee home where we live, the yard is small, but she plants sugarcane, poenuts, and potatoes in little comers around the house. She attends these plants like most folks look after flowers, and her thoughfulness in this respect means that we have some good things to eat on long winter evenings.
