Seaboard, N.C.
Mt. Carmel
Roland Maddrey
Bernice Kelly Harris
SHARECROPPING'S THE BEST
"I reckon this looks like a lonesome place to folks that see it for the first time, but we've always lived here and wouldn't feel natural nowhere else. It's where I was born, where my four children was born, and my two grandchildren. Today's the first time we ever thought about it bein' lonesome enough, though, to draw bears. One come out o' the woods yonder and bloodied up the biggest dog right smart when they went together this mornin'.He was a good sized black bear, big enough to o' tore these two little dogs up if he had got a-foul o' them instead o' the big one. They set up such a barkin' the bear loped off into the woods. I reckon he must o' come from Potecasi Creek, and I hope he'll go back there and stay."
"It would be a good time for a bear hunt, " James Maddrey, Roland's fifteen year old son, observes as he brings a rocking chair into the side porch for the visitor.
"I ain't no huntsman nor fisherman myself, " Roland declares. "The only time I ever went huntin' they laughed at me because all I killed was a snow bird. Some time ago I got a gun on my shoulder and went after a rabbit that was botherin' my corn, but i'd come nearer gettin' that rabbit with a stick o' stove wood! Once I did kill a pig without a gun or either a stick o' wood. I climbed over the fence and scared the pig to death. That's the truth; he fell right over dead. It was before I lost my teeth too! Close to the woods like I am here, a lot o' men would o' hunted all the wild things back toward Dismal Swamp, but I never bother 'em. Howard, my oldest boy, worked close to Dismal Swamp one time, and he saw plenty bears over there. If bears take to comin' here and gettin' into my pigs, I'll have to use somethin' that hits farther than a stick o' stove wood.
"One reason I never got in the habit o'huntin' and fishin' when I was growin' up was there wa'n't no time for it. My father died before I can remember, and I had to take hold when I wa'n't big enough to see over the plow handles. Pa and his brothers was raised yonder across the dunghill, and he never got out o' the county, though Uncle Punch and Uncle Ben moved up the country and died in Wake County a few years ago. Pa's name was Trot Maddrey, and they used to have somethin' always goin' about his name. One time when Grandpappy sent him across the field, he hollered to him: 'Run, Trot, run.' Uncle Punch said, 'How in the hell can he run and trot both?' When Pa was married, he bought fifty acres of uncleared land where we're livin' and started tendin' a one-horse crop. After Ma was left with we four children, she tried to fill Pa's place in the field till we was big enough to take hold.
My oldest sister Cora --- that's her yonder in the dinin' room clearin' the supper table---first learned me to bed up cotton rows, though she wa'n't much older'n me. I'm fifty, and she's fifty-four, but as the oldest ---"
"I ain't but fifty-two some. I'll be fifty three my next birthday. Don't make it no worse'n 'tis, " Miss Cora Maddrey calls, bustling from dining room to kitchen as she clears the table.
Mamie Maddrey, Roland's wife, leaves the dishes to her sister-in-law and takes her seat on the porch. Immediately the little four year-old grand-child who is spending the night with her grandparents leaves James, climbs into Mamie's lap, and hugs her neck.
"Hazel says it ain'tno trouble to get Loretta to be smart. All she's got to do is say: 'Now if you'll be smart today, you can go spend the night at Granny's.' She stays with us a lot o' nights. James, hand me her bottle. It's her bed-time. She still takes her milk from the bottle and a lot of it, how come her so fat. She's had milk from the same cow here since she was born. Hazel and Sam lived with us till this year. Now, honey, go on to sleep."
"Like I was say in', " Roland resumes, "Cora had to help Ma with the plowin' at first, but soon as me and Early could reach the plow handles we went to work. Pa hadn't cleared much land, just little patches here and there, and we hadstumps to dig, land to shrub, brush to burn, and logs to roll before we could do much farmin'. Soon as farmin' season was over, we went to work cuttin' and haulin' cord wood. There wa'n't no money then. We raised practically everything we eat. When we'd go to Mr. Crocker's store to trade out our eggs and meat for sugar and coffee, he'd always give me and Early a sack o' stick candy. Many a time I walked to Seaboard with a bag o' eggs to pay for a pound o' coffee and eatin' candy on the way home spilt the coffee. I'd set down and pick every grain o' coffee out of the dirt and go on home eatin' candy. The little money that come in from our bale o' cotton had to buy what clothes we had.
"There wasn't much schoolin' for us. We had to walk three and a half miles to Mt. Carmel through the woods, and the weather was so rough most winters we didn't average but about thirty days a session. Them was hard days, but I reckon we had a good time. I ain't got no complaint to make about how we fared. Our main pleasure was breakin' steers. As there was no stock law then, the woods was full o' steers. We run 'em down and broke 'em so we could hitch 'em to carts and ride. Neighbors didn't care how much we run their steers.
"We was all healthy and managed to make a livin', hold on to our fifty acres, and clear most of it while Ma was livin'. She died about twelve years ago. Cora's never been sick enough to have the doctor to her all these fifty three years --- "
"That's right, " Cora agrees, pumping water from the side of the porch. "Here a few years ago when I fell and hurt my arm, I went to the doctor to see if it was broke or no, and that's the only time the doctor ever laid his hand on me." Cora returns to the kitchen.
"Me and Mamie got married when I was twenty-one and she was twenty-two ---"
"We was the same year's children, though, " Mamie interrupts. "I was twenty-two in April, and he was twenty-two in August. We got married before his twenty-second birthday. I was raised in Jackson, though I knowed Roland and his folks all my life We used to see each other first Mondays durin' court week, at revival meetin's, and around at picnics. We've been together twenty-nine years, and I do pray we'll live to celebrate our fiftieth anniversary."
"After we got married, I enlarged my farmin' some. There was enough land by then to raise a two-horse crop. Later on I bought a ninety-six acre tract that was in Uncle Ben's old place, and today I tend a four-horse crop. We had a setback about thirteen years ago. Our house and everything we had got burnt up, with no insurance to cover a thing. At that time there was seven of us under one roof, three children, Ma, Cora, Mamie and myself. Through our good neighbors' help we built back a shelter to house us till we could do better. It wasn't till a few years ago that we ceiled and plastered the inside and added this side porch. I got behind in farmin' along then and with the debt of the new house on me --- it cost $1800 to turn it from a shell into this house---I had to mortgage the farm. My creditors were goin' to sell me out, but I borrowed money from the Federal Land Bank and saved my place. This past year I couldn't pay my premiums, but the gover'ment was mighty good to me and let the payment go over till another year. From the looks of the crops now I'll be able to pay off the premiums all right. It's too dry right now; if we just had a old-timey root-wetter, stuff would grow off pretty sure 'nough.
"I reckon you can call me a successful farmer. I come from a one-horse to a four-horse farmer, with two sharecroppers on my place now. From a steer cart to a surrey we've climbed to an automobile. From a turnin' plow, I've come to improved farm machinery, disc harrows, and plows, though I don't own a tractor yet. I'm goin' to try to buy one soon as I get my debts paid off. One reason I don't climb no faster is because I'm honest with my sharecroppers, to the penny. There's ways a landlord can take short cuts and buy him tractors, but I never cared to own one that way. I make my men keep a set o' books just like mine, and every time a bag o' fertilize is bought or a dollar's borrowed it's set down in my book and theirs just alike. I furnish so much money a week and what extra they're bound to have. At the end of the year they can tell me how we stand from their book good as I can from mine. Some landlords claim their sharecroppers owe them for stuff they never got and take their corn away from 'em to balance their account, as they say. I can't take corn away from 'a sharecropper. Last year the colored feller that had a crop with me fell behind $36, but when he moved I let him take his share of the corn away with him. I say let 'em have the corn. You can't strip a man right down to the bottom like that. Maybe that's how come my corn growin' off so pretty yonder. Did you notice it as you drove along?
"Sharecroppin' is the best way of farmin' I know. If every man owned land, who'd do the work? It would mean puttin' the four-horse man right back where he started from, to one-horse farmin'. For the big farmer --- well, it would just ruin farmin' like it's done round here, and we'd be back to worse'n horse-and-buggy days, to steer days. It wouldn't last nohow; if every sharecropper was give a farm of his own he'd soon mortgage it up and the land would be back in the same old hands again. This colored feller on my place now got his rental check here a little bit ago, and right straight he bought him a old piece of car. Now he'll go without rations and clothes to buy gas to ride the roads. Most of 'emis like that.
"So far as makin' big money out o' farmin', I never look to do that. I don't expect to go no higher than a four-horse farmer. If I can get the debt paid off my place and make enough to give the two children that's with me a education, I'll be satisfied. Hazel's married and got two children; she and Sam are sharecroppin' out on the road this year. Howard's married and livin' in Weldon, though he stays on the road most all time haulin' truck from Florida to New York. James will be in the senior class at Seaboard next year, and---"
"I want to go to State College when I finish there. Then I'm goin' to join the highway patrol. Anyhow, that's what I want to do."
"Then there's Mildred, just thirteen. She's started home economics and is learnin' how to sew and cook real good. She'll want to go off somewhere after she gets through at Seaboard. She's spendin' tonight at Howard's in Weldon. Folks has got to leave the neighborhood these days to look for a good time. It ain't lively like it use to be when neighbors met at each other's houses Saturday and Sunday nights and had ice cream suppers and sing-in's and basket picnics every Fourth of July. Me and Uncle Punch and John Coggins use to play the fiddle and accordion and call figgers for the old-timey break-downs in the neighborhood. There ain'tnothin' like that today. Even church ain't like it use to be. You can't tell the end from the beginnin' of the service now. Me and Cora belongs at Pleasant Grove Methodist, and Mamie and the children's Baptists at Mt. Carmel. We all go together though, in the mornin's to Carmel and in the evenin's to Pleasant Grove.
"I reckon we have as good a time as folks use to though, only it's different. My folks goes to the picture shows, but I never went to but one because I don't like 'em. We go to Ocean View sometimes in the summer, to Tuscarora Beach, and up the country to visit our cousins. Every summer me and one of my cousins has a joint-birthday dinner, bein' as our birthdays falls on the same date, one year at his house in Wake County and the next one here. We always build atable under the oak in the front yard and spread the dinner there. Every Christmas we have a barbecue and invite all the kin-folks to come eat with us. Keepin' warm in the winter ain't never apt to bother us, with all these woods around, and we got plenty shade to keep us cool in the summer; here on this side of the porch you can most always catch a breeze. There's apple, peach, and plum trees, grape-vines, somethin' grow-in' in the garden all the year. We have all the milk and butter we can use, chickens and eggs, hogs, corn meal --- in fact our smoke house and barn keep us pretty much in pantry supplies. We trade our corn and meat for flour, sugar, coffee, and the things we can't raise. We live at home mighty near to the penny. We've got a reputation for curin' good hams, and when we want beef or fish or mutton we sell off a ham so we can have a change. Cora tends to the smokin' of the meat."
Cora advances to take little Loretta from Mamie's arms and to carry the sleeping child to bed. Roland continues. "I love to eat, and I do believe in settin' a good table. Every Friday evenin' my folks looks forward to ridin' over to the Rapids or Weldon to buy some fancy groceries for Sunday. You can find most everything you want there in the chain stores, cheaper too. I ain't like Miss Lidie used to be. When she'd go out to Seaboard and see fish for sale, she said she'd want a mess so bad she didn't know what to do. But she'd say to herself: 'No, we've got butter at home and chickens. We'll do without the fish.' Miss Lidie was the tightest pore soul that ever lived, and what did all her denyin' herself of things she craved amount to? If her husband lent you a dollar, neighbor or kinfolks, he'd expect you to pay back $1.06. He used to go to Seaboard and peddle pigs' feet on the streets. Now I wouldn't sell pigs' feet; I'd give 'em away. They're all gone now, Miss Lidie's folks, and none of 'em got no pleasure out of them rusty dollars. Miss Lidieused to say: 'If I had every penny in the world but one, I'd bake two ginger snaps and sell 'em so I'd getthat onepenny in my possession.
I'll never own the dollars she did, but when I want fish I'm goin' to buy 'em or a beef steak if it costs one dollar and a half. I believe in livin' good while you're at it.
"One thing that I think would help the farmers is for him to know what he's goin' to get for his cotton and peas when he plants 'em so he'll know how to plan for the year. In the past he's been havin' to go ahead blind and make investments, not knowin' where cotton will be eight cent or ten, usin' high-priced fertilize, buyin' improved machinery, hirin' labor at high prices, when the income from the crop might not justify it. If the cotton price could be stabilized for everybody before plantin' time, the farmer could plan to advantage. Of course there's always the boll weevil and hail and wind to reckon with, but that's enough risk without havin' to bet on the price. The farmers is the backbone of the nation, and the gover'ment ought to help them market their cotton to better advantage. The gover'ment has done a good part these last few years. But the income under crop control don't count up much better than when we raised all the cotton we pleased at a lower price. Of course without crop control now the farmers would be in a mess in a little while, for with all this improved land from the gover'ment rotation of crops so much cotton would be raised that the surpluses would run cotton down to nothin'. Peggin' the cotton's good, but it don't go far enough. Now, I ain'tkickin' the gover'ment. No, I think Roosevelt's helped the common class all he could, and if he was to run again I reckon I'd vote for him. But I do wish there was some way of knowin' how to figure on the crop income ahead of the investment that has to be made. Last year I made seven bales of cotton on fifteen acres and 317 bags o' peas, where I was figurin' on fifteen bales. Years like that will come, when all the figurin' and all the gover'ment prices ain'tgoin' to save the farmer, but ordinary years the gover'ment could establish the price before plantin' as well as regulate the acreage.
"This year is goin' to be a good crop year. Old cotton and corn's already a mess! Did you notice my corn as you drove along, and them oats back o' the lot? I ain't uneasy about livin' hard. We're goin' to have plenty to eat long as I keep my health. But money comes in mighty handy along."
Sharecropping's The Best	N.C.	Excellent
Farm-owner who assured responsibility early on father's death – not much schooling – burned out 13 yrs, ago – now recovered with help of Federal Land Bank – has climbed from one to a four-horse farm – treats sharecroppers fairly – they keep duplicate books – believes sharecropping's the best system – how else would work get done - raises most of what is eaten – misses neighborliness of old days – believes in good eating – crop control – likes New Deal but wishes farmer would know how to plan his investments by knowing something of price.