Names of persons and places changed.
Date of first writing	January 31, 1939
Name of person interviewed	Rev. J. R. Everett (White)
Address	Washington, N. C.
Occupation	Minister
Name of writer	W. L. Vaughan
Name of reviser	Edwin Massengill
Number of words	About 2,650
<text not clear>
Revised
THE BACHELOR PREACHER
The church stands on a prominent corner on Main Street. Its large central dome and high massive front columns and portico are impressive. Of red brick, with fine modern lines, its smooth lawns appear greener by contrast. On a bulletin board on its front appears, "First Baptist Church, D. J. Boone, Pastor."
He was in a small study with book-lined walls, its door opening into the auditorium, and easily accessible from the main entrance. Of slightly less than medium stature, with kindly eyes and smooth, pinkish skin, in appearance he is much younger than his actual age. With a cordial, easy manner, his eyes flashed a friendly welcome.
"For eight years, I have been pastor here," he said, as he looked toward the main body of the church. "When I came here this denomination in Bookerton had just emerged from a serious split, and the church membership was torn by dissensions. The conditions were not unlike those which usually prevail under similar circumstances. When called, I had just returned from my second stay at the seminary. The church was burdened with an old debt and contributions were not sufficient to meet current expenses. A few of the members and regular attendants were either lukewarm or sullen. Most of those, we felt that we could count on, were either poor or of very modest means. Many were unemployed. The picture was by no means attractive. Thoughtful members told me they needed a man of poise, judgment, assurance, and extreme patience. They did not minimize the difficulties, and my decision was based on a full knowledge of conditions. But there were many devout souls, and most of them had learned a lesson in forbearance. Had I followed my own inclination and natural judgment, I might have declined, but, so far as I knew how, I sought Divine guidance--and here I am."
He had been speaking very slowly. For several minutes he remained silent. Then he continued:
"Ever since I became converted, and gave my heart to God, I have always endeavored to trust Him, also with my mind and my life and have, as best I could, appealed to Him for guidance in all things. Often I have been strikingly conscious of His direct and unavoidable answers. I try to follow such guidance, and when I have done so everything has eventually worked out all right.
"And so it has seemed in this case. Through changing membership, by reason of some families moving away and others coming in, and for other reasons the old sores in the Church are gone, and at present there is love, forbearance, and harmony. The rift has closed; the wounds are healed; and the matter is little thought-of today. Most of the old debts have been paid, and our conditions are now no different from that of the average church and the other churches here.
"I am happy in my chosen work and feel that I am filling the place God has intended for me. I am still not satisfied with my personal attainments. I am ambitious to be a real success. Yet in my small churches and in the communities where I have served, I feel that I have been greatly loved and respected for what I am.
"In entering the ministry, I was aware that it meant sacrifice--money and other material things some might desire. My early aim and ambition had been to go into business and make money, for I had always been deprived of advantages more money would have afforded me. But I surrendered that ambition, or rather substituted for it, to what I believed a higher one--that of serving humanity in the highest possible way, and I feel that I have made some small success in my chosen calling."
"My conversion completely changed my outlook on life. I had never been considered a bad boy, but I had done things which are better left off. I had drunk with my companions and entered into other indulgences which I gave up entirely upon my conversion. For some years thereafter I was even narrow, as I now think, in regard to certain amusements. While I still disapprove of the kind of dancing now usually practiced by our young folks, am altogether opposed to gambling in any form, and dislike cards because of their usual associations, I do not believe the mere playing of cards as a pastime is a sin. For several years I did not attend movies, for I had been told, and caused to believe, that they were generally immoral in tone. Because I was a Christian I felt it might lessen my influence on others. In recent years, however, I have, with discrimination, been sometimes attending.
"I am a tither and have been for the most of the time since my conversion. I believe it is Scriptural, and, when done in the right spirit, I believe the tither always receives a rich blessing.
"I was not a robust boy, and I have never been husky. In fact, all my life I have had to fight delicate health. To what extent this has affected my early handicaps and tendencies, I don't know. For the past several years I have not been entirely well, which I believe is a result of worry and mental and nervous strain during my college and seminary days, especially the latter. Since I left home I have had, always, adequate medical care. Before that such things as dental care was neglected.
"During my boyhood days we had plenty to eat, but not always the kind of food we needed. I know now that even in my college and seminary days I did not have a balanced and proper diet. When twenty-six years of age, I entered wake Forest College. I had only $200 saved and owed $175 and some interest, which I had borrowed from a friend to finish 'prep' school. With another student I bached. We did our own cooking and dishwashing and kept our rooms. We had sent to us, from home and from friends, some foods, and the Sunday School at home sent me $16 per month for eight months of the first year. All my school days were a fight against poverty, and extreme frugality was always necessary. At the same time, I was doing extra work to help make expenses. All this, no doubt, had a lasting effect on my health, as well as on my disposition and ultimate outlook on life.
"My boyhood days were not happy. I did not have the freedom of play and the advantages of a normal childhood. I had to share the responsibility of the family from the time I was eleven years of age until I was twenty, when my father gave me my freedom, telling me I might have that year to go to school since I had always wanted an education. I had been denied school life during early years when a person should go to school and be laying the foundation for a well-rounded life. I, therefore, became very serious minded and have never been able to get entirely away from it. I have worried a lot and often thought everything was against me. I have always felt I had to fight for all that I ever had or gained.
"I was denied opportunity to develop the social graces and amenities so necessary to a full and well-rounded career in any vocation, especially mine. Therefore, either from nature or because of early environment and lack of opportunities, I developed an inferiority complex, and I have always been, and still am, rather timid. I have not had sufficient self-confidence. Yet, in and through it all, I have had great determination and would never give up nor admit defeat.
"Yet this has not been without certain advantages and perhaps repressions, if you please, and having been myself what might be called an under-privileged boy, I have had a more sympathetic feeling for, and understanding of others of like kind. This attitude and lack of a feeling of superiority has enabled me to better minister to the poor and the unfortunate in my churches, and in communities where I have served. In spite of such success as I have been able to enjoy in securing an education, and regardless of my college and seminary degrees, I feel there is something lacking that I have never been able to supply. Because of it, perhaps, I feel the better able to mingle with and minister to all classes in a way I might not have been had my early life been otherwise.
"Perhaps I am what psychologists call an introvert; I certainly am introspective. How much of this came from environment, I am unable to determine; anyway, it makes no difference. Certainly my early surroundings and habits did not lead me toward the Baptist Church and the ministry. My parents were not professing Christians, neither of them having been church members. In their own way, they were devout, holding to the Ultra-Calvinistic doctrine as taught generally by the Primitive Baptist Church. They attended that church about once a month and took me with them. But they did not believe in Sunday Schools, and I never attended one until I went off to boarding school at twenty years of age. While there, at my first prep school, I first attended a Union Sunday School, and later one in the Baptist Church. At a revival meeting of that church, at twenty-one years of age, I professed faith, and two years later joined a church of this denomination. I early formed the conviction of serving humanity in a religious capacity as a teacher in the Sunday School, and still intended to go in business, make money, and as a layman give my life and service as best I could to the Church. It was later, while I was a student at Mars Hill College, which was just a high school giving a few college courses, at age twenty-three, that I joined the Church, fully determined to become a minister. And a became one of the ministerial group of students there. From a purely natural standpoint, I cannot now explain why I came to feel that I should preach. I had never had the least thought in that direction and it all came upon me without any known natural influence or reason, but I have never regretted the change and have never since that day felt the least doubt, or inclination to change.
"As a minister, my salaries, while modest, have always been adequate for my needs. I have never been able to save anything except the accumulated reserve on my $6,000 of life insurance. As I have not married, and have no dependents, I have usually been able to live comfortably and enjoy some cultural advantages that I could probably not otherwise have afforded on the small salary I have received. My annual salary has averaged about $1,700. For a pastor with a family this is far from adequate. Considering the position, and what one is expected to do as leader of his Church, I think he should receive at least $2,400. With less he is undoubtedly handicapped in his work, and unable to provide education for his children and make the least necessary protection for age and disability, even with such help as may be provided by Ministers Old Age Pension, or Relief and Annuity of the Denominations."
"I cannot remember when I did not have an ambition to rise above my childhood environment and early station in life. I always thought the best way to do this was to get an education. As I grew older, though unable to go to school, and with no prospects in sight for the future, I was determined to do so in some way, regardless. I fully believed it could be done if I remained willing to make sufficient sacrifice. I am now at forty-seven years, still striving to improve myself and to learn and grow, probably working harder toward that end than in any other period of my life. I am the only one of the seven children of our family to reach maturity who had any ambition for an education, or desire to accomplish anything more than to make a bare living. None of the others even so much as entered high school. None of them even finished the seventh grade. Just how and why I was different, and why I was imbued with this ambition, is more than I have ever been able to explain. But I believe that God in His infinite wisdom and mercy laid His hand upon me and called me to a work he wanted done.
"My father was a tenant sharecropper, very poor and entirely uneducated. He could not write his name and made no effort to learn. As long as he lived he made his mark on all checks and legal papers. He was without ambition. So far had his associations been from anything of that nature, he seemed without the trace of any kind of influence in this direction. He would work, but he was a poor manager and seemed not to care whether he made anything more than a bare living.
"My mother was also uneducated. However, at one time she had worked as housekeeper and cook in the home of a prominent family in the county, and there she had learned some appreciation of the courtesies and social graces and of the better ways of living. I suppose this accounts for her superiority to my father in this respect. She was most industrious, and she had some ambition for herself and family. She did learn to write her name and to read a little by spelling out each word as she read. But she was handicapped because of lack of opportunity. She had been left an orphan when a small child and had been reared by a cousin who, according to her, had made a slave of her.
"I was born January 11, 1892, in a little tenant farmhouse in Edgecombe County, North Carolina, where the town of Macclesfield is now located. I am the oldest of a third marriage on my father's side and of a second marriage on my mother's side. My father had four children by his first wife, and my mother had one child who died in infancy by her first husband. By the second wife of father there was one child, a girl, who married at age sixteen when I was about five years old. I had three sisters, one of whom died in infancy, the others now living.
"When I was about one year old my father moved to another farm where he used his own team and simple farming implements but still farmed on shares. Six years later he moved again. He had gotten in debt to a 'time merchant' with whom he traded, and having a mortgage on all his feed, team and farming implements, the merchant foreclosed on him and came and carried away almost everything he had. A few things, he, and we children carried off to the woods and hid. Then with the help of the landlord he bought two mules, some old plows, and other necessary tools, and began his crop. That year he managed to pay his expenses and to clear about $100 to pay on his purchases.
"From that time on he managed to make a frugal living and pay his expenses until he had gained a reputation for honesty, and he became able to receive credit without giving crop liens or mortgages as most other farm tenants of his class were forced to do. After four years on this farm, near where is now the town of Pine tops, he moved again to a farm where the family remained for thirty-four years, and until his death. The houses where we lived were of a very poor sort, with no ceiling or paint and with cracks through which one could see, and through which the chill winds blew in winter, as I well remember.
"We always had plenty to eat of a sort, which was mostly plain pork, and vegetables grown in our garden. We raised most of the meat consumed by the family, but often we would have to buy 'white side' from the store before the year was out and 'hog-killing time' came again. We kept no cow, and no milk was used by the family. We had very plain clothes to wear and enough to keep us warm, and fairly decent clothes for Sunday.
"When I was seven years of age I began school in a one-room, unpainted schoolhouse without ceiling or plaster, and furnished only with homemade desks and benches. It was a four month's term with one teacher. I attended there for four terms. In the spring my father would have me stay at home sometimes for two or three days at a time to help plant corn or do some other farm work such as a child of my age could do.
"When I was eleven years of age he became ill with rheumatism and for a whole year was bedridden. From this trouble he never fully recovered. He was never able to work to any extent afterwards and walked with difficulty by the help of a walking cane, sometimes having to use two at the time to get along. He took me out of school to work regularly, and I plowed every day, doing almost all kinds of farm work along with a hired man. I would go to school after the cotton was picked, which was usually about the first of December, until we began to break land for the next crop, usually about the second week in January, or if the weather was bad, the first of February. Thus I was in school from six to eight weeks each year, with exception of two years when I did not attend at all.
"At twenty-one years of age, just after Christmas, I left home to attend a boarding school, the lowest-priced school I had been able to find, where I entered the eighth grade, although I had never completed the seventh. The year before my father had given me my freedom and I had rented sixteen acres of farm land on half-shares from our landlord, but separate from our father's farm. I had boarded and roomed at home, paying $5 a month for same. I had worked hard and practiced extreme self-denial in order to save some money, and I had cleared $500 from my part of this crop. By working on the farm during the summers I was able to attend school here for two and a half years. Then I secured a position as clerk in a general mercantile store where I worked for fourteen months, and this, together with the $175 I borrowed, enabled me to go to Mars Hill.
"During my studies at Mars Hill I had managed to pay all my expenses by working around the school, mostly in the kitchen and dining hall, together with what I had earned on the farm during the summers. For three summers I had rented four acres of tobacco, leaving someone to prepare the land and plant and take care of the plantbeds while I was away at school, and having someone to grade and market it after I had returned to school in the fall. Thus I had cleared from $150, to not anything. One year my crop had been an entire failure.
"During the summer of my first year in college, through the influence of a minister friend, I was appointed pastor to some mission churches. This work I did through most of the next two years.
"I finished at Wake Forest College in 1921 with a Bachelor of Arts Degree, age twenty-nine, after three years of attendance. By frugal living and with the help I received from my churches, I had been able to pay all my necessary expenses and save up $400, besides. This enabled me to repay what I owed from high school, and left me $200 surplus. From work during that, summer as missionary and as assistant to a local pastor, I saved $100 and with the total I entered the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary at Louisville, Kentucky, that fall. Here I studied for the following two years, after which I accepted a call to a field--one village church and two country churches. This paid me $2,000 annual salary. During this time I paid for an automobile and saved enough to pay all my debts--money I owed to the seminary loan fund, and a note at the bank for $200--and had about $400 left.
"Again in September 1925, I returned to the seminary to finish work on my Th. M. degree. Just before graduation in May 1926, I was called home on account of my father's serious illness, which resulted in his death. On graduating, I was called to Plymouth, North Carolina, a small full-time county seat pastorate, where I remained for two years and seven months. But I was not yet satisfied with my education. I resigned and returned again to the seminary for post-graduate work. During that time my health was not good and my money was insufficient, so I left without finishing my degree work and accepted my present pastorate.
"In politics," he replied in response to a change of subject, "I followed my father and brothers and registered as a Democrat which I have always continued to be up to the present time. However, I am now an independent Democrat and feel that I should vote for the best man and for the principle rather than follow strictly the party. In recent years I have voted for a number of Republicans when I have thought they would better represent my ideals.
"My attitude toward so-called worldly pleasures for others is not harsh. I refrain from criticism and sermons of bitter denunciation. I believe all men should live morally. Personally, I try to appear before the world just as I am. I make no effort to be a 'good fellow' and refrain from the appearance of trying to 'be all things to all men'. I spend most of my time in doing something pertaining to my work. I try to follow a daily schedule of study, reading, and visiting. Occasionally I play a game of golf, or go fishing. While in school I neglected proper exercise and recreation. I usually have two weeks vacation in summer but spend most of it at some religious assembly. During that time I do try to rest and enjoy some form of recreation."
