A VISIT WITH AUNT JERRY
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens and
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
February 16th, 1939
January 13, 1939
Mrs. Josephine Wood (white)
250 Baxter Street
Athens, Georgia
Housewife
G.M.
A VISIT WITH AUNT JERRY
The appointment to interview Mrs. Geraldine Hill had been made several days before or I probably would not have started out in a heavy downpour of rain to visit her. I realized that it was "Friday the 13th," but contrary to the old superstition concerning this date, I was fortunate enough to be invited to ride the entire distance. However, as the old car turned from the main road and I looked up at the long steep red hill that towered before us, I wondered if we would be able to get through the thick, slippery mud of that unpaved thoroughfare.
After considerable slipping and sliding we stopped before Mrs. Hill's door. Stepping out of the car I slid into a mudhole that filled my shoes with water, but I thought myself lucky indeed that I did not fall down in the mud. As I gained the sidewalk I found myself mired down in deep, oozy mud again. Inside the yard there seemed to be no way around a widespread puddle of water that covered the walk, so I went splashing through it to wash the mud off my shoes.
Mrs. Hill's daughter opened the front door before I had reached the top of the porch steps. "Come right in to the fire," she invited me, "and dry your feet or you will surely have a cold." How right she was! The cold contracted that day is a major discomfort almost a month later.
I removed my coat and hat in a spacious reception hall that was furnished with bookcases, a library table, and several large rocking chairs. I was then ushered into Mrs. Hill's bedroom, a large comfortable room, where the rosy glow from a heater was particularly attractive after my disagreeable experience in the cold and rain.
"When I awoke and saw what a rainy day we were in for, I was afraid you wouldn't be able to get here," was Mrs. Hill's greeting. Her other daughter, Mrs. Davis, and her baby were in the room. My hostess insisted on seating me near the stove where my feet would dry, and continued with her welcome, "My, but I'm glad you did come for it'll help to pass this dreary day."
Mrs. Hill suggested having a fire made up in the living room because she was afraid her grandbaby might worry me, but I insisted that there was no need for privacy and that the baby would not disturb or hinder me in any way.
"I don't know whether I'll be able to tell you anything of interest or not for you see I was born and raised in the country, and some folks don't think that country people have any real exciting experiences. My mother and father were Robert and mary Head, and they lived between here and Barnett Shoals, about two miles from Blackstock. I was still very small when my daddy moved to Blackstock, The village was called by another name then, but later they named it for the Black family that owned the mill at that place. About the earliest bit of history of Blackstock that is important is the march of Sherman's army through there and the way those soldiers behaved. We were living there when those raiders came and it was not a bit like it is now out there. Every house and lot was fenced off to itself. The Blacks had their home out there. All the men that were not too old had gone to war, except the men of the Black family; they ere at home looking after their factory and general business interests.
"Everybody was scared when they heard the yankees were coming. The people buried everything they could, as fast as they could. The yankees came through Franklin and Hart bounties, and just tore up everything as they came along. They took all the cows, horses and mules. They killed the hogs in the pens, and carried them off for their own food. They went through the houses and took whatever they saw that they wanted, especially anything to eat. One of the meanest traits they displayed was that what they didn't want or couldn’t carry off with ’em, they tore up or destroyed so that it wouldn’t be any use to its owners or anybody else after they finished with it.
"One of my grandfathers was living on a farm rented from a Mr. Wallace, near Lavonia, Georgia, when the yanks came by his place. Mr. Wallace succeeded in getting all of his provisions and other valuables and necessities buried under his kitchen floor before the raiders got there. Grandfather was not so lucky. They caught him as he was trying to hide his foodstuffs, and they took every bite to eat that grandfather had. Grandmother got down on her knees and prayed and begged them to leave her just enough syrup and bread for her children’s breakfast, but they wouldn’t do even that. They poured all the syrup they didn't want out on. the ground, and didn't leave that family a crumb of bread, or a dust of flour or meal.
"One of grandfather's daughters had raised a little heifer and she cried and begged 'em not to take her little calf; to leave her that one thing, but they carried it off with the rest of the stock. Grandfather sure did hate the loss of his hogs. They didn't even leave him a pound of pork. It was five days trip from grandfather's place to Augusta in a wagon, and that was the nearest place that you could buy provisions. After the yankees had gone, Mr. Wallace came down to grandfather's and offered to let his family have enough to eat until he could make the trip to Augusta and back for food.
"When the soldiers got near Blackstock the people there were so scared they didn't know what to do. No one was there except women and children, and they were working in the mill for a living, while their men were away fighting for the South. All of the Black family except the oldest son, Joe, came to Athens for protection. Joe Black took some blankets to keep him warm and slept hid out in an old hollow tree.
"There was just one old man left in town to look after all the women and children. He was old Mr. Quackenbush, and he was so old he couldn't hardly get about.
"I was just about four years old at that time, and I guess the reason I remember what took place so well is that I was scared so bad. Those were sure enough scary times. We children climbed up on gateposts to watch the line of yankees coming down the long red hill. It is said there were about four hundred of them in that company of raiders.
"They searched the houses as they came to 'em, and said they were hunting for all the men; that they were going to kill all the rich folks. After they had searched through ell the houses they went to the mill and said they were going to burn it. The women gathered around the soldiers and got down on their knees begging them not to destroy the only way they had to make a living for their children. At first the soldiers wouldn't listen to 'em. Then they went into the mill and got all the cloth and thread. They even tore cloth off of the looms. They then divided the cloth and thread among the women but told 'em they would come back and kill any of ’em that gave anything back to the Blacks. The Blacks owned the mill then. Next the soldiers went to the commissary, the 'company store' we called it then. Of course they found it locked up, but that didn't stop the yankees. They just busted in the doors and windows, went in and brought out everything that was in the store and piled it all up on the ground outside. They called up the women that had been working there and divided up the stuff among them. They even made those women hold out their aprons and poured syrup in ’em. One woman begged 'em to let her get a pan to put the syrup in, but they told her to take it that way or not at all. It was strange the difference in the way they treated the farm folks and the mill hands. They would leave a woman on a farm without a drop of syrup, or a cow, or anything to feed her babies, but they took the things out of the store and gave them to the mill hands.
"The yankees stayed around there several days to hunt for the Blacks. Old man Quackenbush would slip out to the hollow tree and take Joe Black a little something to eat every chance he got. Finally, it seemed like the yanks were all gone; we hadn’t seen anything of them for nearly a week and we just knew they never would be back. Joe Black crawled out of his hollow tree and went up to old Quackenbush’s one day to get something to eat, and no sooner had he got inside the door when someone come running to the door and said, ’The yanks are coming I’ Mrs. Quackenbush had more mind about her than all the others put together. While they were just standing around scared to death, because they knew Joe Black would be killed if he was found, she jerked the covers off her bed and made Mr. Black get between the feather bed and the mattress.
"She hadn’t finished making up that bed when the yanks got there and started searching her house. First, they asked her if any of the Blacks were around and, being a truthful woman, she would not tell a story about it but she didn’t say Joe Black was there either. ’Go on, and search the house and see,’ she dared ’em, and she kept on insisting, ’and be sure you look upstairs and in the kitchen good.’ She kept right on talking to ’em and making the bed at the same time. Finally when she had tucked the last bit of the cover tightly, she led ’em out to unlock and search her smokehouse. When she got ’em on the outside and interested in the smokehouse, poor feeble old Mr. Quackenbush loosened a corner of that heavy coverlid, so Mr. Black could get a little air, for it seemed like he might smother to death if he had to stay tucked so close in those feathers long. He was right weak and limp when the soldiers finally did go on off and it was safe for him to get a good breath of air.
"Those soldiers just tore up the Black home, and they even took the girls' dresses from there and gave them to the mill women, but after they left that time, they never came back there anymore.
"Children didn't get to go to school much then, except when the field work was all laid by and finished, so you can know we didn't get much schooling. We had to walk two or three miles to get to those little schools, and when we got there we had to stay all day long.
"I'll never forget some of the big old school celebrations we used to have, especially one at the Old Standing Methodist Church.
They used the church house for preaching on Sunday, but in the week days it was where we went to school. This particular occasion was what was called a 'school celebration' at that time, but later we called 'em 'school entertainments.' The children all had to recite and were marched inside the church. The audience sat on the outside where benches and makeshift seats had been fixed for them, and there was a sort of stage or platform in front of the church, door, where the children would come one by one to speak their pieces. When it came time for me to go say my first piece I was scared so bad I was shaking all over. It wasn't much that I had to say, but I was scared so bad that I ’spect I could remember every word of in yet. Let me see! The name of it was, I Am Five Years Old Today, and it went like this:
’Once I was a very little child,
But months have passed since then.
I am bigger and have taller grown;
I am five years old today.
'At first I could not talk or walk,
But now I can talk and walk about,
Can eat, run, and play all day long
For I am five years old today.’
"Not much to get scared about was it? But I sure did have stage fright, only we didn’t call it that then. Because I said in my piece that I was five years old that day, everybody got the idea that was really my fifth birthday, but I was already seven years old.
"Them school celebrations were one of the biggest events of the year, partly because folks didn't have so many other places to go for excitement as they have now. They always had a big dinner on the ground after the exercises.
"Right there at that same old church was where I heard the first sermon that I can remember about. Mr. Ellison Stone preached it. He sure was a grand old preacher.
"I went to school near the paper mill some, and some at Princeton too. It was there at Princeton that we dreaded so bad to go, for we hated that teacher so. He was one of the meanest men I ever knew. Nobody liked him. He didn’t have but one arm, but he sure could hold a switch in that one hand and frail little folks. He was a little afraid of some of the biggest boys and he made them stand on one foot, in front of the classes.
"Just to show you one of his mean' ways; he wouldn't let us go to the spring for a drink of water, even at dinnertime. The spring was a pretty good distance from the church house where we went to school, but that was no reason for him to make us go all day long without water, especially when most of us had to walk miles to get there and had to stay all day long. One day when it had rained awful hard and the churchyard was full of suddenly-filled mudholes, we ran out there and drank water from those mudholes. I told my father about it and he was mighty mad. He went and bought a bucket and dipper for me to take to school, and he said that teacher had better let us have water to drink. Next morning when I came walking into the schoolroom with my bucket and dipper, the teacher wanted to know what I'd brought those things to school for, and I gave him father's message. He didn't say another word about it, except to send one of the big boys to the spring for a bucket of water, and after that we didn't have to suffer for water anymore. Just think of little children being made to go all day long in hot August weather without a drink of water.
"The older boys loved to worry that mean old teacher. One day when they didn't know their lessons he put two of 'em in a small closet under the altar and told 'em they had to stay there. It was dark and close down there and after awhile he got afraid they might smother, so he told 'em to come on out, but they refused to budge. They told him they were going to stay there all night long and let their people come and find 'em there, so everybody would know what kind of man they were paying cash to teach that school. This scared him for he knew none of the children liked him anyway, and he was afraid that putting 'em in that closet under the altar would be the end of his job. He begged and pleaded until time to go home, before they would come out. How we did enjoy seeing him beg!
"His children went to that same school, and his daughter Kara and I were good friends, and she was always wanting me to spend the night at her home. I went one time, but I never wanted to go again. He made us study until eight o’clock and then we had to go straight to bed, without any time to play at all. That old teacher was just as mean in his home as he was at school.
"We didn’t have oil lamps for a long time as I grew up, but there were candles enough. I bet I’ve made a million candles in all. After placing the wick-string, we poured hot tallow in the candle moulds, and set them aside to cool. We had home-made sconces and candlesticks to hold the candles as they burned, and it was years before we had any other way of furnishing light at night, except from the big wood fires in the hearths in winter.
"We burned oak and hickory wood in the fireplaces, and let me tell you right now that fire had to be carefully banked at night for matches were scarce, expensive, and hard to get. If our fire went out we had to borrow a little fire from a neighbor, or start it again with flint and gunpowder with punk wood or maybe a little very dry cotton. I’ve watched my father start a flint fire many a time.
"Hooks and racks were built into the kitchen fireplace to hold the pots and other cooking vessels, for all our cooking was done on an open fireplace, and what good food those old ovens and pots and pans did turn out! People hardly ever were sick.
"I guess I was in the first cyclone that ever struck 'Georgia. At least, I've never heard of one being in this state sooner. I was small but I was big enough to work in the field. One Saturday morning me and my little brother wanted to go see our grandmother. After mamma had given her consent for us to go, she said we’d better wait awhile for it looked too much like rain for us to start out on a four-mile walk through the woods. Pretty soon father came out to the field and told us we could stop work and go on to grandmother’s for he didn't think there would be any rain that day.
"It didn't seem like we had gone far when suddenly a strong wind started and it began to get so dark that we could hardly see how to walk along the path in the woods. As we got out of the woods and were in sight of grandmother's house the rain began to pour down on us and the wind got worse and worse, and we began to run for we were terribly frightened. Soon the cyclone struck in earnest, but we were safe. It blew down most of the trees in that woods we had just come through. Houses, barns, and stables were torn down, all through that section, and one man that owned a fine tract of land about ten miles square, lost every tree in it. He had refused several fine offers for his timber and was holding it for more money. Folks said that his greed was the cause of his trees being blown down.
"Before the rain stopped we saw two cows swimming across the road in front of grandmother's house. People said it was the worst storm they had ever heard of.
"Out in the country where I was raised, we had to card and spin the thread to make our clothes. Mamma wove the cloth. I had to knit my own stockings, cotton for summer and yarn for winter. Sometimes we dyed our thread before we started knitting our hose. The right combination of red-oak bark and alder produced a pretty shade of light red. Dogwood bark with alder made a dark purple that was almost black. There were more ways of combining those old barks and herbs for dyes than you could write down in a long time.
"All our clothes, even to men's suits, were made at home by hand, and I want you to know we didn't have any sewing machines then either. All that sewing was done by hand, after the cloth and thread were made by hand first. Men’s suits were made of jeans and mamma could really make a nice looking suit. Our underwear was made out of drilling they sell in the stores now.
"Special church occasions, particularly protracted meeting time, meant a great deal to the country folks. Everybody went. You could see more wagons end ox-carts around a churchyard than in any other assembly. Why, I've been to meeting many a time in an ox-cart and enjoyed it the best sort. I'd like to see some of you young folks start some place in an old ox-cart. Why, child, I don't even remember seeing a buggy until after I was married.
"My father moved near Watkinsville to run a sawmill, and that is how I met my husband. He came there to work for my father in the sawmill and boarded at our house. He worked for his board and $10 a month.
Soon as he was introduced to me and I heard his name I knew I would marry him. At least I was pretty sure, for that was the very name that I'd found when a friend and I tried our fortunes not long before then.
"Oh! So you want to know how we tried fortunes do you? If I tell you, you’ll just laugh about it, but I’ll tell you right now, young lady, folks didn’t laugh at things like that in them days. Laugh if you want to, but anyway, here’s what we did:
”On the last night in April, after sundown, we walked backwards to a wheat field. On arrival there we took a white handkerchief and threw it over our right shoulder. We left the handkerchief to stay where it fell all night, and when we went beck the next morning before sunup, the first day of May, we walked backwards again ’til we reached our handkerchiefs. When we turned around and picked ’em up, there was the name ’B. O. Hill' on mine. The writing looked like it had been made by a worm trailing around on my handkerchief, but anyway the name was there and it was plain and easy to read. I had not met him then, but it wasn’t long before he come to our house to live and work for my daddy, and I married him just the same.
"Now if you’ll excuse me, I’ll go in the kitchen and fix the cornbread for dinner. These girls of mine are pretty good cooks, but they can’t make cornbread to suit me. You just rest a little while and I'll be right back.”
The baby was asleep on Mrs. Hill's bed after tiring himself playing with his toys. As I sat along with the sleeping child I looked about the room. There was an old walnut dresser with a large mirror. The washstand matched the dresser, both very old and very lovely, and showing that they had been well cared for. The costumes of the persons whose pictures hung on the wall, indicated that some of these were family pictures of older generations.
The child awoke and wanted to get out of bed. His mother came in just as I approached him. She laughed and said, "I don’t expect he I’ll let you take him, as he seems so afraid of strangers.” In a few moments the child was in my lap playing happily with my pencil.
My hostess returned to the room, and seemed amazed at the sight of her grandson in my arms. ”How in the world did you get that baby!” she asked. About that time someone at the front door called, ”Aunt Jerry!” and Mrs. Hill went to answer the summons.
Everybody around here cells mamma, Aunt Jerry,” remarked one of the daughters. "They’ve been calling her that for years and years. Mamma’s getting along in years. She’ll be 78 next month.
”I heard her telling you how old I am,” laughed Mrs. Hill as she rejoined us around the heater. ”But now, honest, do you think I look that old?” she inquired.
Then I really looked at her - all the morning I had been more interested in listening to her - she is tall and is still very straight. On this occasion she wore a neat blue house frock, and there were very few gray traces in the thick reddish-brown hair coiled on the top of her head. It did not seem possible that she had passed the age of three-score-and-ten that signifies old age, and so I told her that to me she didn't look to be a day over fifty. That pleased her. Then she said, "I've been here a long time. Why, I have 36 grandchildren, and 30 great-grandchildren, so now you can realize I am an old woman. But now, you just lay that book and pencil down for dinner is just about ready. I urged the family to go on and eat their dinner, while I would wait and work on my notes. "Young woman," Mrs. Hill said, "as long as you are here in our house, you're going to eat with us; that is, if you think you can eat what we have. Of course we haven’t got so much, but it'll keep you from getting hungry before supper time. I hope you won't refuse to eat with us, for I love to have company and am not used to having anyone refuse my invitation to eat with us." It seemed that she would be actually offended if I did not accept the proffered meal, I thanked her and told her I would be glad to share her dinner.
As we passed through a large dining room on the way to the kitchen, Mrs. Hill explained, "It's such a bad day and so cold, we thought you might like to eat in the kitchen." She opened the door and I could readily understand that there was good logic in her decision. The kitchen was small, and the fire in the large wood-burning range made it warm and comfortable. The large kitchen cabinet, a square dining table and chairs took up much of the space. "Look around this side of the table," my hostess directed me, "I want you to see the old bench that all my children sat on to eat as they were growing up, I've raised some pretty rough boys, but that bench is still intact. The back has never come off yet: It was made for my children to sit on at the table, and I wouldn't take anything for it."
Mrs. Hill sat at the head of the table and gave thanks for the delicious food before she served it. After tasting it, I could readily understand why she was proud of her ability to make corn-bread. I’m sure I never ate any before that was quite so good.
"Where did I leave off in my story?" asked Mrs. Hill when we were again seated by the heater in her room. "Seems to me I was telling you about the way I learned the name of the man I was to marry.
"Not long after he came to board at our house, we decided we wanted to get married. When he finally got up his nerve to ask mamma for me, I was so scared I went off to stay with grandmother a few days. I knew mamma would be mad, and I didn't want to be there to hear what she would say. To my surprise, it seemed to be all right with her. She told us both that if we were going to get married, we were sure to marry at home, and she added that I didn't have any business getting married young as I was, for I was only fifteen.
"We got married in July. Lord, but we had a time getting married. July was in the time of protracted meetings in the country, and the preacher we had engaged to marry us was called away to preach at a meeting a long way off, and did not get back in time for our wedding day. Some of the boys started out to hunt up another preacher, but they didn't have any luck in finding one. Some of them just happened to see old Judge Thomas, going along the road, and remembered that he was a Justice of the Peace. They stopped him and he married us. After we were married all of us went on in a two-horse wagon with, the crowd to High Shoals, Georgia, to preaching.
"We were living near Watkinsville when we got married, and since that time we've lived 'most all over Oconee County. My husband wouldn't stay on a farm. He didn't know much about farming, and he was a good carpenter, so not long after we married we moved to Athens.
"That was about the time they were finishing building the Central of Georgia railroad to Athens. The man that had the contract to build that railroad died before the work was finished. His wife took it up where he left off and finished the job. It was a sight to see that women direct the work. She made those laborers work just the same on Sunday as any other day. She wore two big pistols strapped around her waist, and there was no disputing her orders. She would curse like a man when she was trying to speed up the work, and especially when some of the white men failed to show up for that Sunday work.
"When we moved to Athens there was only one railroad in actual operation; that was the old Georgia Railroad, and it had been here a long, long time. Why, my father rode off to the Civil War on that old Georgia Railroad, so you can know it’s been here a long time.
"The first circus that ever come here after we moved to Athens was set up over in East Athens not far from the old Georgia Railroad depot across the river on Carr's Hill. I went to that circus, but I've never wanted to go to another one. I go to see the parades whenever a circus comes to town now, but I've never cared anything about going to the performance under the tent.
"Those old fairs used to attract great crowds here, and I used to go to all of them. The first fairground that I can remember was between here and Princeton. At one of those old fairs they had a wedding right there on the fairground. I don’t remember who the couple was, but I do remember that they called it a cotton wedding. They were dressed in cotton as it had come from the gin. The cotton bats were just laid on them in layers until their clothes were completely covered in cotton. I guess there must have been as many as five or six thousand people there to see that wedding. "Ever hear of the covered wagon days? Well, would you believe it I’ve traveled in covered wagons right here in Georgia, even if we didn't make such long trips. We moved to Hartwell at one time while my husband was working there, and our visits back here to see our folks were all made in a covered wagon. We couldn’t make the trip in one day and we camped at night. We took plenty of food along end a long-handled, thick iron frying pan and cooked over a campfire. We did enjoy it. Of course we always picked out a camping place where there was plenty of good water. ’Most always there would be some other families camping there too, and after supper we’d all sit around the campfires and talk awhile before we crawled in our wagons to sleep 'til morning. Those times were lots of fun and I really think we enjoyed our covered wagon trips more than folks do their trailer trips now, even if we didn't have so many conveniences.
"There were no very good bridges in this section and every time a hard rain came and the water rose, you’d near of bridges being washed away. It was nothing unusual to start somewhere that you just had to go to, and then when you arrived at a creek or river the bridge would be gone. That old Simonton bridge was worse than any of the others. At least, it seemed that way. Once I had started to see mamma when she lived out at Blackstock, and when I got to the river that old Simonton bridge had washed away, as usual. I was holding my baby with one arm and a satchel full of baby clothes with the other when I got in the old ferryboat to cross the river. When we reached the ether side the ferryman jumped out to hold the boat steady for me to step out, but just as I stood up the boat overturned end into the river went baby and me. I managed to hold on to my child. When I managed to stand to wade out of the water I realized for the first time how cold that November day could be. There we were wet to the skin and shivering in the cold, and I spied my satchel floating down the river. I knew I had to have it, for it had all my baby's clothes in it, so I waded on down the river until I could get hold of it, and then I guess I must have been crazy for instead of walking on up on the bank and coming back to the ferry landing that way I just turned around and waded on back up the river to where the boat had turned over. I don't think I have ever been so cold and wet as I was when I crawled out on the bank with my baby on one arm and the satchel full of wet baby clothes in my other hand. The ferryman, he wasn't anything but a young boy, was standing there on the bank so scared he didn't know what to do. He wasn't to blame for the accident and I told him I didn't blame him but that the baby and I were mighty cold and we needed a fire to get warm. He got" busy and built up a big old fire built was hard for me to manage for it to do us much good for we didn't have a dry thread of clothes to put on. I stood by the fire and got warm but I knew I couldn't stay there long enough for our clothes to dry out, and I knew too that I couldn't walk far with all those wet clothes on - women wore lots more clothes then than they do now - so I pulled off all I could, and my yarn stockings, and set out to walk the rest of the way to Blackstock. I just knew it would kill me and my baby too, but do you know it didn't even make us sick.
"Did I tell you about my husband's father? He was captured by Indians soon after he got married. They carried him off and it was three years before he was able to get away from them and rejoin his bride. The worst of it was that after he was captured those Indians made him marry an Indian girl and after he had been made to live with her three years they thought they could trust him enough to let him go to town by himself for some supplies they needed at the camp. He knew that they were watching him, even after they pretended to trust him, but he managed to give them the slip and get away. He left their mules and wagon tied in front of a store and slipped out the back way. It took him a long time to get back home to his family. His wife said that he never was the same after that. He had stayed with the Indians so long that he had lost the habit of talking and it was a long time before they could make him tell much about his experiences, or talk about anything else. Most of the time when they talked to him he only gave a grunt for an answer. I tell you people had to go through some hard experiences then.
"I was nine years old before I heard of anybody dying. Until then I didn’t know there was such a thing as death. Then a little Negro boy died not far from where we lived, and Mamma promised to take us to look at him before they buried him down in the ground. When I looked at him I couldn’t believe that he was dead. ’Why, he's just sleeping,’ I told mamma, and it was not until we saw them bury him that I was convinced he was not alive.
"You couldn't just call in an undertaker and turn things over to him when folks died in those days. There was no embalming as far as we knew. The neighbors came and washed and dressed the corpse, and the menfolks made up the coffin out of planks. The women lined those crude coffins with cloth and fixed them up as nice as they could.
"Those dear old neighbors! They would manage by doing each others work to arrange so that someone would be with the family from the time of the death until after the funeral. People came from miles and miles around when they heard of sickness and death in a home, and the population of the whole countryside turned out to attend the funeral and burying. Many’s the time I’ve helped my father finish off a coffin when someone had died in our neighborhood.
"People rode in wagons and ox-carts to funerals then. The coffin was placed in one wagon and led the procession, and I've seen the pallbearers sitting on top of the coffin as they rode to the graveyard. People just had to do all sorts of ways then. Their needs drew them close to each other and made them ready to help out in any way they could when there was trouble or sorrow in the family of their neighbors.
"We had ten children and were fortunate enough to be able to raise nine of them to be grown and married, and I've still got seven of them left alive. I've already told you about my 36 grandchildren and 30 great-grandchildren. I hope that I will live to have them all together in another family reunion this coming summer. These reunions are such happy times for me. My husband has been gone a long time now, but we learned long ago that we have to be satisfied with things just as the Lord sends them.
"I don't think of anything else of interest," she said, and sighed. I realized then that she was tired and needed rest, so I prepared to leave.
After extending my very sincere thanks for her hospitality and for her story, I was about to leave when she said, "Come spend the day with me some Sunday, so I can have all my children with me to show then off to you. They live around here and all of then drops in to see me on Sunday."
The door closed behind me, and I was out in the cold end rain again. I looked down the steep red hill with its treacherous mud and mire, and made myself a solemn promise that the next time I make a visit to "Aunt Jerry," it would not be on a rainy day.
*Changes in proper names
Mrs. Josephine Wood - Mrs. Geraldine Hill Jim White - Joe Black Whitehall - Blackstock
