Hftmf of persons and places changed, 
/Dafte of first writing: 
Person interviewed: \ Address: 
Occupation: 
Writer: 
Reviser: 
No. of words: 
March 20, 1939 Mrs. Lily Brewer Justice, N. C. Teacher and Seamstress Mary A. Hicks Edwin Massengill About 
4,750 
y*** 
ofi^. 
BAD BARGAINS ARE SOMETIMES GOOD 
1
t>> 
Jr* 
I am separated from my husband on the account of my dead daughter's diary. She left it locked in her trunk when she 
went to the hospital and made me promise never to let human eyes see it. She didn't tell me what to do with ^ it if she 
died and so I just left it where she had it. I should have buried it with her and that would have saved my home 
perhaps, but I doubt it because she had kept us together for seven years before her death* 
' She had been dead only two months when Dave broke the lock and read the diary. The first I knew of it he was 
holding the little red-backed book out to me, his face dark with rage. ne told me to read a certain paragraph and as I 
read I relived a certain short chapter in my own life. She told a story both beautiful and sordid of her love for a man 
whom her father detested. She went on to tell of their stolen hours together and of her bliss when he at last proposed. 
He persuaded her to go with him to the mountains where he said they would be married. After they reached the 
beautiful little inn on Lake Lure, John told her that marriage would kill their 
715*8 

-2- 
love, and he persuaded her to stay with him there for a week. The description of the scenery was beautifully expressed, 
but in every word one could read her heartbreak, I wept as I read and Dave cursed me for my folly in letting her go on 
that trip which was supposed to be a visit to a girl friend in another city. I read on, paying no attention to his curses 
and I saw that all of the neighborhood gossip, or nearly all of it, was true. She had been too intimate with a number of 
men. Her life was ruined when John did her wrong, and soon after that she began the practice that ruined her life and 
sent her to her grave at the age of seventeen. She had married a year before her death, but her diary told of her hate for 
her husband and that she married him for spite. I had TB and spent most of my time in bed, and I had thought that she 
wouldn't live with him since she relt that she had to stay 
with me. I learned the truth from the little red book. 
I! 
She still worshiped John and she said that she didn't 
care what happened now as she had learned that he did not love her. She literally threw her life away. A few months 
before she went to the hospital, our family doctor found out that she had TB and ordered her to bed. She changed some 
then—let cigarettes and beer alone and often read the Bible. \£he told of her despair and her hopes of leaving the 
earth} ^n the last pages of her diary,/ and she expressed the hope that John 
715)9 

-3- 
would come to her burial. He did come and brought a huge heart of lilies, and he told, me that she was as pure as the 
flowers he brought, ^e talked to me as if he were my son, and he cried and told me how he loved her. 
When I finished reading the diary I threw it in the fire and I held on to Dave with every ounce of strength I had to 
keep him from retrieving it. It burned to ashes while he cursed and I looked calmly at him. I heard him say that my 
child had relived my own life over again. He said that I had no need to be angry or hurt. I just looked at him and said 
nothing, but I was hurt because she hadn't justified my faith in her. I reflected that I hadn't justified my mother's faith 
in me either, but that made the pain no less. I had worshiped my daughter, and I thought her pure in everything. She 
had tried to copy Mae West and Jean Harlow, and she had favored Jean and Mae a great deal with her golden hair, 
blue eyes, and perfect figure. She picked up their ways and words, too, and I hadn't objected because I thought it was 
so becoming to 
her. 
// 
Her father was a tall handsome blond with a way 
about him. I was teaching a little school here at the time 
I fell in love with him. He said that he loved me, too, and 
we were engaged. One day my father came in and told me that 
a girl in a nearby town was going to have a baby for him. I 
7200 

-4- 
didnTt believe it, and I asked him about it. He vowed that he didn't know the girl, but Father forbid me ever seeing him 
again. He said that he had heard others say things about him, too. He claimed that all the world was unfair to him and 
he persuaded me to go away and marry him. It was the same old story—lived together for a month without any 
ceremony at all. He left after that and when my daughter was born I was all alone. I told my mother the truth and she 
stuck to me, but Father told me that I must leave his nouse. Mother sent me what money she could get out of cnickens 
and. eggs ana that helped a lot. When the baby was three montns old I went back 
to teaching but not here; they wouldn't hire me again. 
// I met and. loved Dave when she was a little over a 
year old; I told him the truth, but he married me just the 
same. I can't say that he loved me, though, because he let me 
work for him while he loafed and drank. I taught school and 
supported the family while he pretended to hold a job as a 
printer. He was a good printer and he made good, wages, but 
he so often wouldn't work and when he did he spent what he made 
on foolishness. If I reproved him he always reminded me that I 
was lucky to get anyone to have me, even ir I did have to work 
for him. 
i
We had been married a little over a year when a boy was born. I had no money for hospital or nurse to stay at 
7201 

home with me, so I suffered for the lack or attention. Dave was proud or his son but not proud enough to work and 
support him. As soon as I was up again I got a school and began teaching, hiring a colored girl to stay with the 
children. She didn't take very good care or them and I changed again and again. Dave stayed at home most of the time, 
but he declined the responsibility of taking care 01 the children. 
We had been married three years when I got on at the printers as a proof reader and a lew weeks after I got on there 
Dave got sick and the doctor said that he had Tb. I had him a sleeping porch built and kept him in the bed while I 
worked and paid the bills. He was too ill to look after the children at all, out when he took a notion that he wanted a 
drink he wasn't too ill to walk out to the bootleggers' and get it. I'd often find him dead drunk when I came home from 
a hard day 
in the office. 
I) When the boy was two years old Jean was born. I 
had managed to save enough to go to the hospital that time, 
but one evening when I came rrom work I found Dave gone and 
my money gone, too. When he got home two days later he had 
an old piece or a car and two gallons of whiskey. He told 
me with a grand touch of defiance that when a couple was 
married what belonged to one belonged to both and that he 
has as nuch right to the money as I had. He also said that 
I ought to be eternally grateful that he married me. I said 
7^02 

nothing to him, but I cried and cried in secret. So when she was born I had an old Negro midwife and no doctor or 
nurse at all. 
// 
The boss was kind, and when Jean was three weeks 
old I went back to work. He advised me never to have any 
more children, and he told me what doctor to visit to get 
the information I needed. I did as he said and ? never had 
another. 
When Jean was five years old I had a nervous 
break-down and soon I learned that I had TB. Dave told the 
doctor that we would all have to depend on charity to keep 
us up, but the doctor told him that he was now able to work if 
he could get an outdoor job. He did arrange ror me to go 
to the Sanatorium on charity, though. My children went to 
stay with my mother and that left Dave on his own. I heard 
that he tried to get on charity, but a man he appealed to 
got him a job as a guard at the prison rarm. 
1/ When I got out or the Sanatorium, Dave got a house 
on the farm and moved us to it, and he worked for us from 
then on until three years ago. He hated it, though, and he 
often talked of what a burden we were to him. He especially 
hated my daughter and once in a fit of rage he told her that 
he was not her father. She only smiled and told him that she 
was delighted that he was not. She told me then that she 
didn't care a thing about it. !f I had been married before 
7203 

.
-7- 
and wished to keep it a secret she didn't care. If I hadn't been married before she still didn't care, just so Dave wasn't 
her rather. I never did tell her and she never asked me again, but I think that she knew the truth. Dave told her 
afterwards that he was only fooling, that she was his as much as the other 
girl and boy. 
// 
/ She had a hard lire rrom the first she could remember, 
but she had the stuff it takes to do things. She was ambitious, 
sensitive, and sympathetic. She had high ideals and a poetic 
nature that made her reel things more deeply than the ordinary 
person would feel them. She had to look after the younger 
children when she was just a little tot, and I was ill for 
the last nine years she lived and she had to do the cooking, 
washing, scrubbing, and house cleaning besides looking after 
the two younger ones and waiting on me. Dave fussed with her 
on the slightest provocation and from the time she was twelve 
he woulu accuse ner 01 every conceivable thing. Poor child, 
she simply had to get hardened. She missed few days in school, 
though, and she finished high school at the age or sixteen. I 
had hoped that she could go to college but she simply couldn't 
make it. 
// 
She got a job on the ERA before she died and did 
clerical work two days a week. She had to catch rides or walk the seven miles to town for that work, but she never 
7204 

missed being there regardless of the weather. She didn't make much, but she bought her own clothes and she took out 
an insurance policy on herself which buried her. I think that sne knew then that her days were few. 
For several years she had been keeping Dave and I together by using a lot of tact and smoothing over the rough places 
for us both. If we started quarreling she'd try to stop us by explaining or by changing the subject. That child bore 
troubles that would have killed an ordinary person. Even when her father Degan having affairs with a common sort of 
woman close by us, she nad to bear the burden herseli. They would write notes to each other and send them by 
prisoners. The prisoners woflLLd give them to her arter they round out that she found one they had lost. They could 
have gotten into some serious trouble about it, but somehow they didn't. They gave her the notes and she kept them 
hidden. She told Dave that she had them and once he tried to beat her and make her tell where they were, out she 
wouldn't. She blackmailed him to force him to be Kinder to me, but, at last, I found one or her notes in his pocket. 
Dave had been better to me since he learned that she had the notes but she was careful not to let me know it. One day I 
found a note in his pocket and I confronted him with it. That was how I found out that she had the letters. He 

9- 
spoke up and saia that she had given me the notes. I then tola him where I got it ana ne triea to make out like he w as 
joking about it. He slapped me, though, ior searcning nis pockets, and then she waikea in ana toiu mm that she still naa 
the letters ana tnat sne was going to snow tnem to me and to the woman's husband. He ordered ner to bring them out, 
but she knew wnat his intentions were. So she waitea until he went to work berore sne snowea them to me. 
Never in my whole life have I ever seen such vulgar things written. She told him that her youngest baby was his and 
that she felt sure that he knew this. She mentioned a rumor or her having a date with a prisoner and denied it bitterly. 
She begged him to meet her in the cornfield at certain periods and she also mentioned a certain house in town where 
they occasionally met. 
I could have gone to her husband, but I preferred that he be kept in ignorance as long as possible. I had a hard time 
restraining my daughter then. She seemed determined that the husband should know. When I pointed out that that 
might be the best way of separating them and thus giving her to Dave she saw that I was right, but she went to the 
supervisor of the farm and told him the story. Both Dave and the woman's husband worked there, and she begged the 
supervisor to transfer one or the other. He tola her that 
7206 

-10- 
he had heard that this woman was selling whiskey and demoralizing the prisoners. He wanted to get rid of her ana that 
he would transfer her husband at once. 
' He did transfer the husband to another camp but his wife refused to move. She stayed on at the house and Dave 
openly spent nights with her. My daughter went back to the supervisor, and he ordered the woman to move. She 
refused and then my daughter went to the Welfare Department and reported that Dave wasn't supporting us—our bills 
were away behind and Dave showed no inclination to pay them. He bought this woman a lovely new spring outfit and 
gave her a ten dollar bill in public. The welfare officer put a stop to that, though, by telling him that he would go to jail 
if he didn't pay the bills and buy some groceries within the next few days. The supervisor went to her and ordered her 
to move within a few days or he would have her thrown out, and he also told Dave that unless he gave that woman up, 
stopped drinking, and began to take care of his family better he would fire him at once. She was furious but she 
moved, and Dave was in a towering rage for several weeks. He accused my daughter of doing all the mischief, but had 
he known for sure that she did he would have beaten her. I begged her to keep the secret and let him think what he 
pleased. 
7207 

-11- 
// 
I should have left him during his affair with that woman, but I loved him and felt too dependent on him. But when I 
heard him defaming my dead child I picked up and left in a few minutes. I told him that I was never going to live with 
him again and that the children shouldn't claim him for their father. I left in spite of his pleas. At last, he 
said that it was good riddance and let us go. 
// 
After we left him, he stayed drunk and ran around 
with bad women, neglecting his job for vice. He got fired and for a short time he had no work at all and lived on 
anyone who would give him a meal and a shelter to sleep under. Two years ago he got on with the Government. He 
didn't make much but he could live on it, and all tne time he was pleading with me to come back to him and writing 
me letters, telling me how much he missed us and how much he loved us. 
At first I didn't answer the letters, and when he came I refused to see him or let the children see him. I heard from 
several sources how hard he worked and how he had quit drinking; I heard that he was not interested in other women 
any more and that he was going to church every Sunday, so I finally made up my mind that if he would prove himself I 
would go back to him. I wrote and asked him to come to see us. , 
I found that he had changed as much as rumor said 
he had. £e made love to me like he used to do when I was 
7208 

-12* 
little more than a child, and he promised to care for me if I would give him a chance. He admitted that he had been at 
fault all the way, and he also admitted that I had broken my health to take care of him while he was ill. He says that he 
feels that the rest of his life will not be long enough for him to make it up to me. I hope that feeling will last the rest of 
his life. 
I write to him once a week now and he writes to me once a week. He sends me half of the money he makes and I am 
proud that I can put it up and not spend it. You see, I sew well and in the Sanatorium I learned how to make fancy 
bags, beads, hats, and a lot of other things. I make these and sell them here in the neighborhood and send the surplus 
to town. I take in sewing for my neighbors and, as the house is mine, we don't have to pay rent, so we managp pretty 
well. I even put away a little of my income sometimes. Ihe boy works at a local store and makes $10 a week and his 
lunch. He gives me $5 a week, and I make about $8 or $10 a week. 
He finished high school last year and is hoping to go to college next fall. He is going to try to save a little on toward it 
and then get in so he can work his way through. Jean is in the tenth grade this year and I hope that she will finish next 
year and get an opportunity to go to college the next. I would like for both of my children 
TM3 

-13- 
tto attend the college where I once graduated with great pride. My parents were proud, too, but our pride came before 
our fall. 
We had nothing but the little farm here when I finished high school and announced that I would like to go to college. I 
begged Dad to do something about my ambitions and he did. He mortgaged the farm to borrow money for my 
education and he hoped that I would pay it back. I did pay part of it, but my daughter was born ana I had all I could 
do to keep body and soul together. After I married I had a family to support and nothing over at all. I dressed neatly 
but cheaply, and I never had a cent to pay on bills made 
before my marriage. 
// 
Before I left home Dad saw to it that I had nice 
clothes, but he made no distinction between my two sisters 
and myself. He dressed us equally well, but when they got 
ready ror college he protested that college probably had a 
great deal to do with my downfall and that he was through 
with education for life. He resented the fact that they 
wanted to go to high school, but Mama insisted that they be 
allowed to go. She sent them in spite of his dislike for 
it, and she dressed them neatly in spite of the fact that he 
gave her very little to dress them on. He told her that they 
ought to be satisfied to be country girls and not try to do a 

-14- 
thing but stay at home and get married to some farm boy that 
they had known all their lives, 
H He gave me permission but reminded me that the Bible 
said to rorgive seventy times seventy and that he had forgiven 
me already more than that. He treated me nice but showed no 
interest in me at all. I left the baby with her nurse because 
I felt sure that he would not care to see her. When I started 
to go Mama wanted me to stay over the week-end, but I told her 
that I could not leave the baby that long. She told me to go 
back home and get her and come back. 
a
Dad got interested in her because she seemed so fond of him from the start, ^he would play with him and try to get on 
his lap, and she tried her best to say "Grandpa." He loved her like his own before time to go and from then on we were 
welcome visitors there. He sometimes kept her for a week at the time, When the boy was born he was delighted, but 
he loved frail little Jean the best of all. She was the most like him with her big brown eyes, dark skin, and brown hair. 
She had slender ringers, too, which Dad thought meant that she would be an expert musician. Dave and Jean look 
much alike, and it's no wonder that my other daughter's fair beauty caused Dave to hate. her. Everything about her 
reminded him tnat she was not his. I guess it preyed on his mind, and I can't find it in my heart to blame him much. 
7211 

-15- 
' Mother taught me a lot about life. She told me all 
the secrets of love ana she taught me about child-bearing. 
She told me much about the beauty of nature and one of her 
favorite sayings was, "Blessed are the merciful." She taught 
me to love all of life and to think it pure and sweet. I 
learned the birds and the little animals at an early age, and 
I also learned about domestic animals and fowls. I studied 
wood lore with her, and I loved the study. Together we read 
poetry and philosophy, travels, ana lives of great people. We 
both loved the Bible ana we often studied the mystery of the 
parables, the beautiful simplicity of the beatitudes, and 
we found much pleasure in singing hymns ana love songs. I 
worked in house and field and went to school, but I lived a 
dreamy sort of life. I) Mother taught me not to gossip ana not to juage. She 
said that a person always {Judged others by himself ana she 
taught me that for every little wrong one aid he must pay 
double. She saia tnat conscience was the worst devil one had 
to meet and that we must all meet him. 
" Dad preached a stern philosophy. He said that we 
would pay here ana hereafter, too, and that we would pay a 
XT 
thousandfold for each little wrong. ae preached hell fire 
and the anger or a just God. There was very little room for 
love in his life except his love for my mother, and sometimes 
she could not even dent his hard shell. 
•
7212 

-16- 
r
He belonged to the Free Will Baptist and Mother to the Missionary Baptist. I joined her church and we ail tried to 
discuss our beliefs with each other and get to the bottom of things. Dad was sternly just but very unreasonable about 
some things that he had always believed in. He would hear no talk of a heaven unless the speaker brought in nell as 
well. He would have no talk of cheating at cards not gambling for any stake, and. he called fairs and shows tne devil's 
playhouse. I got most of my ideas from ^ama. but sometimes I remembered 
Dad's talks with a shudder. 
// 
My daughter took her thoughts from me just like I 
did from my mother. She loved me just as I loved my mother, 
and she believed in the Missionary Baptist, too. My dad was 
a Democrat, though, and -1- followed in his footsteps as soon 
as women were allowed to vote. If ^ama had been Republican I 
would have voted her way, though, I'm sure. 
// 
I never was used to anything but poverty and I 
wouldn't know how to act if I were to suddenly get rich. Mama 
and *apa had a modest income from the farm but we raised what 
we needed at home. Our forty acres supplied all the foodstuff 
we could use and we had enough money crop to buy clothes and 
the extra things we needed. We seldom borrowed and seldom 
loaned, but we often red the hungry and helped the sick. 
7213 

-17- 
ll The people in our neighborhood practiced helping 
their neighbors. They would, sit up with the sick, cut wood 
for them, and attend to their work almost as well as the 
owner himself would. I can remember once when Dad was sick 
the neighbors did nearly all of the work for us for over a 
month. Few people would be willing to do that now. 
" My county has the reputation of being one or the 
most ignorant and superstitious in the state. My family 
and my neighbors certainly were not superstitious and they 
were not ignorant either. They all had some education and 
most of them had the equivalent or a high school education 
now. 
H After -1- was married we had very little, and since 
Dave and I parted there have been some bad times. I inherited 
this home from my mama when she died four years ago, and it 
surely proved a refuge in my time of trouble. If I hadn't 
had this place I don't know what I would have done. I've 
thought it over, though, and I've come to the conclusion that 
sometimes a bad bargain aoes more for a person than a good one. 
Now, if 1 had married a good man -1 would never have learned 
that ^ could support myself under these circumstances. I 
would never have Known how to appreciate a good man like I 
appreciate Dave now. 
7^14 

)/ 
'We have poor funiture, as you see, but it is all A 
ours. Dave never bought a piece or furniture in his lire. I bought some or this when we were nrst married. That old 
brown dresser there and the bed to match are two pieces of it, and the old wood stove and the old table in the kitchen 
are two more. The wardrobe in the boy's bedroom, he made of old timber, and the dressing table I made with three 
orange crates and some cretonne. My son made the bookcase, too, and there's nothing in it but old orange crates. That 
easy chair is made from a barrel. Wm had two of them but one gave out. He built the pantry shelves and the cabinet 
in the kitchen and he rebuilt the old safe in the kitchen. It was a hard job for a boy, but he learned how to do a lot of it 
in school last year and I taught him what I knew. I think that the jars and cans he painted ror vases are lovely, and I 
made the flowers that are in them. 
The children want me to go back to their daddy, and if he can go on for a little while longer saving and not drinking 
and he can get us a place to live near him I am going to move. We have $500 saved now, but i think we ought to have 
$1,000. It won!t take us long to do that and then we will move back with him and try to buy some new rurniture and 
let the boy make all he wants to as well, 
7215 

;
•-
19- 
*
I've learned a much needed lesson during this three years I've been away from my husband: That it isn't necessary to 
lie in the bed all the time, because I'm better now that I've been working some; that my work keeps me from being so 
self-centered; that my reading and my association with others makes me a more interesting companion and keeps me 
from talking about myself and my own ailments; that the love I have for Dave is more important than his love for me, 
so far as I am concerned; that a lot of our trouble was my own fault; and I've teamed to be cheerful without appearing 
to be just smiling and bearing it. I really am getting some pleasure out or life now. I am happy for the first time since 
my daughter was born. Of course, 1 remember her and feel sad that her young lire was ruined, but I remember that it 
had a purpose. 
''When Dave comes this week-end S shall try to tell him some or what I have told you, and I'm sure our broken hone 
will be mended soon and that we will all see that we have benefitted by a tragedy, but isn't that the way of life? One 
always prospers by a hurt but seldom by a good fortune. 
<iy 
7216 

