Mamie Berryman
989 Connell Avenue
Dyersburg, Tennessee
January 5, 1939
W. M.
AS I GO ALONG
"Why, my name's Mamie Berryman. Are you going to help us? I thought you's one of them case workers, maybe. You know, the kind that finds out how folks is living. Well, they sure is living hard right now.
"My man's name is Dalton Berryman and he ain't strong. Got hurt in a car wreck over a year ago and ain't got over it, but he can still do some work. He was walking along the highway watching a car coming toward him and one with no lights come up behind him and hit him. Broke his ankle bone and shoulder blade and. busted a lung. He's got signed up on the WPA but ain't never got no work to do. He got a doctor to sign him up able to work but he ain't. He spits up blood all the time but we jist can't starve. He went up yesterday and begged them for work or supplies one, and they said they couldn't give no more 'modities than they was allowed to give and it would be March before he could start working. He's been killing and selling rabbits but he has to go eighteen miles to the bottoms and pack a gun to do that, and the law is run out on them now. But he's going to keep hunting till he can git something to do. He gits fifteen cents a rabbit and kills five or six when he hunts.
"No, he didn't git no medical aid. The fellow that hit him took him to the hospital and offered to let them hold the car for the bill but they said they had all the old. cars they needed and sent him away. They brought him home and put him on the bed and left.
"Will Essary a deputy sheriff heard about it and put him back in the hospital long enough to get him bandaged up. All the fellow that hit him ever give him was a quarter. One day he saw him out of tobacco after he was able to drag around and gave him a quarter to buy some. Now he picks cotton in the fall but nobody won't hire him that knows about his health.
"We used to be good farm livers before they took the crops away from us. Then we was forced to move to town and depend on public work and Dalton done public work enough to make us a living as long as he was able.
"Maybe we'll make it somehow till the canning factory opens. I'll try to git work there again. That's where I caught rheumatism. At the canning factory standing in slop and stuff with tennis shoes on. I've had it all fall and winter.
"We've been living here three years and pay a dollar a week for our rooms. We use lamps and they's a hydrant in the front yard and a privy in the back yard. The floor of the house is about to fall in and it's a regular nigger shack but the best we can do. Needs window lights in it too. Looks awful.
"You see we've got a batching outfit. I ain't got but two quilts. I got an old feather bed that I put over the chillun since they give us a mattress, and we use the quilts and old coats and sich to cover us. Why, we nearly freeze cold nights. Jist look at my ankle right now. My joints jist swell up and hurt something awful. Reckon if I had some stockings that would help some. I ain't actually got no stockings. When I have to go to town I go barelegged.
"I ain't under a doctor's care. I've been putting sulphur in my shoes and soaking my feet and hands in epsom salts but nothing ain't helped me. I ain't got the money to buy medicine. I've begged for clothes and them with heaping piles of money ain't never give me nothing to wear for none of us. They only give me that mattress after I begged and begged for one. We've done everything except ask for help for these little dependent kids. Well, we'll go down today and try that.
"Charity folks won't give us no clothes. We git 'modities but it's about enough to last a week and it has to last a whole month. We git a twenty-four pound and a twelve pound sack of flour and ten pounds of prunes and we jist can't stand them hardly. Ten pounds of raisins, the kids eats on them all the time mighty nigh. Ten pounds of potatoes – they's a lot of holp. We all eat them. Ten pounds of sweet potatoes, some beans and four pounds of butter. You see there's five of us to eat and that can't last a month. The flour lasts bout two weeks. They say they ain't allowed to give no more. Dyer County just don't git it's quota, so many cotton farmers been put on relief. I believe they would if they could. They seem sorry for us.
"We don't git no dry milk, and my babies needs milk. They love it, too. But we got a Christmas basket from the Goodfellows. It was mighty nice along with our 'modities.
"All my oldest children is married. I'm thirty-seven and Dalton is thirty-five. We have five children dead and four living, but Daughter is living right yonder in that red house, and she's looking for a baby.
"Coy B. is fifteen and in the third grade. He's been sick a lot and kept out of school but he goes every day when he's well. This is Bobby Jean and that's all the clothes he's got. And you see the seat is all out of his overalls. But if he is ragged, I try to keep him clean. Yes, he's a fine looking kid if he is mine and I do so myself. He's got good health but he's got a bad throat. He needs his tonshuls cut out is the trouble and he has to stay mighty close to keep from gitting sick with them.
"Now, Dorothy Juanita she's fine. Fat as a pig. She goes to Sunday School every Sunday but Bobby jist won't go. I won't go neither because somebody might say something slightly about me and then I'd say something they wouldn't want to hear. They go over here to that Pentecostal Church. They's a bunch of kids around here that goes over there.
"I've lived in Dyersburg all my life nearly and I was borned at Finley. My daddy lived there. He's Irish and a farmer, a cotton farmer, but I was moved to town with the family while I was little.
"Dalton's people is English and Irish but they ain't farmers. His daddy is seventy-six and gits the old age pension and his brothers do public work and relief work since they don't make cotton crops. He was raised near Halls on a farm, but as soon as he got grown he went to public work and then we went back to farming and farmed till three years ago in the cotton sections. We raised what we eat and a crop of cotton and lived lots better than we have since.
"We git up early, around four or five o'clock, and time we git the house warm and through breakfast it's time for him to go to look for something to do, but folks won't hire cause they can tell he ain't able to work. He's stove up all over. I git the kids ready for school, straighten up the house, and then I'm through till time to fix supper. I go visiting my neighbors a lot to pass away the day. I ain't got nothing else to do.
"No'm, we don't play cards. I don't like sich as that. We go to shows when we can spare the money. We help Coy B. with his lessons at night and that's about all. I'd make some quilts if I had anything to make them with. But I don't never have no scraps. We has to wear our clothes till they's not fitten to make quilts out of. I never could crochet and embroider. It's too teejus for me. But jist give me something to cook and turn me loose in a kitchen. Man! I'm happy as I want to be. I can cook anything I take a notion to. I'd jist live in the kitchen if I had something to be cooking on. Mamma learned me to cook everything and we always had plenty to cook with.
"All I've got to cook on is a little box stove. About all I have to burn is cobs that we pack from the cob mill in sacks and wet bark that Mr. Fields gives away. We can fill this old stove full of wet bark, and in a few minutes it gits to burning and warms things up. Every evening when Coy B. gits home from school he has to pack sacks of cobs till night. If we had a team we could git plenty of wood at the stave mill but we ain't got no team. The cob mill is where they buy corn on the cob, shell it and sell or ship the shelled corn in sacks. They give the cobs to us. The bark we burn is bark off of the stave blocks that's no good for nothing and Mr. Fields gives it to folks to git it out of the way. But I guess I can cook as good on my stove as anybody when we have something fitten to cook.
"When I work at the canning factory in the summer and fall we have lots better things to eat. I make high as a dollar and a quarter a day when I git to work all day but last summer we jist got to work part of the time. But it was a big holp. Sometimes we went to a show on Saturday nights. Yes, ma'am, I like shows better than anything and we need something to pass away the time. A fellow would go plumb crazy if he never got to do nothing I and specially if he's always been used to going somewhere once in a while. But now it seems we don't ever do nothing after supper but go to bed. Ain't nothing to do. We ain't able to take papers.
"Yes'm I can read. I got a fair education so's I can read and write and figger a little and Dalton can, too. But we don't have no place to git books or papers to read like they do in other parts of town. I wish they was something out here for us to do. Just sitting here studying about how we're to live nearly runs a feller crazy. And when I go visiting it's the same old story with my neighbors. We're all Jist about in the same boat.
"I'd be willing to do anything to make life a little better, but I can't do much sewing and sich because jist look at my eyes -- I'm nearly blind with granulated lids and it hurts to read, too, but I jist will read sometimes.
"When Miz Parker run the store down here we used to go over there lots of nights and stay a while. We'd always trade there and she was glad fer us to come. We nearly always had a little money to spend. It was some place for us to go, too. She sure was nice about letting us sit around and talk. She sure was friendly.
"Miz Parker opened her store with five dollars and now she's got a full store over on the other side of town and it paid for. She had to move out of that one because the old nigger that owned it wouldn't fix the roof and it leaked in there. He wouldn't let us have it to use to set around in unless we paid rent.
"That's the only vacant building in this end of town. Two or three families in every house and then they can't hardly pay the rent, cheap as it is. About all anybody has to live on is their Social Security cheeks. Nearly all these women worked at the canning factory. They draw about two dollars a week on that. And we don't have no place to go or nothing to do. It gits lonesome."
Very Good
As I Go Along
Woman living in shack works in canning factory in summer -- Man formerly farmer, now on relief, shoots and sells rabbits --Woman says relief very inadequate -- five children dead and four living -- Man too sick to work but makes effort.
Features -- Details of sub-standard living of family badly in need of help -- not degenerate.
Names not changed.