There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Approximate words.
23B
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
THE GREEKS HAVE A WORD
Date of First Writing	December 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	George Mehales
Fictitious name	None
Street Address	The Dixie Lunch, East Main Street
Place	Spartanburg, S. C.
Occupation	Part Owner of a Restaurant
Name of Writer	R. V. Williams
Name of Reviser	J.J. Murray
"I was born in Athens, Greece, 47 years ago. When I was three years old, my mother sent me and my brother Louis, who was sixteen, to Brooklyn, N.Y., to live with an uncle. Louis went to work in my uncle's cafe, and when I became old enough, I entered the public schools.
"I finished high school in 1909 and went to work for Steve Bokettas, who had bought my uncle's restaurant. About a year later I returned to my old home in Greece. My mother had died, and four of my brothers were ill with tuberculosis and unable to work. I worked on the farm for a while and later took up teaching.
"We had only a few schools in Greece where English was taught. At that time there were many Greeks who planned to come to this county. The immigration laws were not so strict in those days. 'Most everybody who had enough money for their boat passage could get into the United States. I earned enough by teaching English to some of these people to take care of myself and my sick brothers. My uncle and brother in Brooklyn sent some money to help out. At last I had enough money to care for my brothers for a while, and I came back to America.
"In New York an old friend and I put our money together and opened up a restaurant. We bit off more than we could chew. We could not pay for the expensive fixtures we had bought. In three months we were broke and had to close our place. Some friends got me a job in a Greek school. I had only twenty pupils. I taught Greek to Greek children who had been born in this country. I didn't make much money, but I managed to save a little, and to send a little to my brothers.
"Nothing else much happened to me until the War. I enlisted in New York and came to Spartanburg with the 27th Division. When I enlisted the officer told me I would be used as an interpreter. He said there were a lot of Greeks in the Division who didn't understand English. When we got to Camp Wadsworth, they put me to cooking in Company c, 106 Infantry, and there wasn't a Greek in the whole company. I never was used as an interpreter.
"Do you remember that big snow we had when the camp was here? I don't remember the exact date, but anyhow, I slipped on the snow and fell from the back of the mess shack, I broke my ankle. It was a bad break. They took me to the hospital and operated. They took two bones out of my foot. Then they told me I could never walk again without limping. Six weeks I stayed in the hospital.
"The officers came around to see me. They said I could get an honorable discharge, but I didn't want to go. I begged them to let me stay when I got well. Cornelius Vanderbilt, Jr., came to see me. I told him how I felt, and he went to see his father, Colonel Vanderbilt. In two or three days the officers told me I could stay after the doctors let me out of the hospital.
"I went back to the mess shack on crutches. They told me I did not have to go back yet. I wanted to. I sat in the kitchen and supervised all of the cooking. Soon word starts around that we move out any day for France. I was still crippled. I wanted to go with the boys, but Captain Cline tells me I can't go. The boys in the company heard that I could not go. They signed a paper asking officers to let me go with them and do the cooking. I went back to the hospital for another examination, but they said it was no use. It almost broke my heart to see them go. I cried lots.
"After the boys left, I went back to the mess shack on crutches. I got rid of them as soon as possible. I went to this officer and to that officer and asked them what company I was to work with. They said they would take it up with headquarters, but I guess they were too busy with other things for nothing happened. For about two months I just loafed about. I slept on a cot in my old mess shack. I folded it up every morning and packed it away. I ate with the new men that came in. They were from from Indiana and belonged to the 91st Division. They were fine fellows.
"By this time, I could walk almost without a limp. My pay stopped coming. The captain told me to go to headquarters to see about it. I hung around there about three days before I could get any attention. Then an officer heard my story. He told me to go back to my mess shack and stay there until something happened. I went back and began to work in the kitchen. The boys liked to have me there because it made less work for them. Inspection day came along, and the officers wanted to know what I was doing there. They said my name was not on the company list. For about the hundredth time I told my story. About a week later, an officer came into the mess shack and told me to go with him to headquarters. When I got there, some officers told me that a mistake had been made in the records. They said that the records showed that I had been discharged about two months before. They told me that the papers had got lost somehow. They had the doctors at the hospital look me over again. Then they shoved a lot of papers at me to sign. I didn't know much what was in them, but I didn't care. I was glad that somebody was paying some attention to me- They told me to go back to the mess shack and go to work. A few days after that, Captain Johnson came in and told me that I had been assigned to his company. On top of that I got paid for the two months, and did that money look good! I guess for those two months, I was just lost to the United States Army.
"Armistice Day was a great day at the camp. Our company had not used up its allotment of food for the period. The quartermaster decided to put on a spread. He went to Spartanburg and bought turkeys. It took us all day, even with an extra detail, to get ready. But we had a swell dinner that night.
"After my discharge from the army, I found myself without a job. For a while I worked in a restaurant owned by my brother who had not gone to war.
"My brother and I decided that one of us would have to go to Greece to look after the property that Uncle Louis had left us. My brother said that I was freer to go than he was. The trip was my second trip home. The immigration officials told me I would have a hard time getting back, but when they found out that I was an American citizen and that I served during the war, I didn't have any trouble at all. I stayed in Greece about three months, and then came back to America.
"I stayed in New York for awhile, and then came back to Spartanburg. I had always wanted to come back here. I lived here with some Greek friends for a while. I took up school teaching again while I was looking around for something better. Two of my brothers in Greece died within ten days of each other. They left me about three hundred dollars in American money. I found an owner of a small restaurant here that needed some capital. With the money I had and what I borrowed from my brother, I bought an interest in it. Our business grew fast, and we had to hire extra people to take care of the trade. We were open day and night.
