A NEGRO DENTIST
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
March 23, 1939
March 14, 1939
Dr. S. S. Jackson (Negro)
195½ W. Washington Street
Athens, Georgia
Dentist
G.M.
A NEGRO DENTIST
Dr. James’ office is on the second floor of an office building in the Negro business section, and is identified by a sign in the hallway which reads;
"DR. JAMES, DENTIST
RECEPTION ROOM."
My knock at the door was answered by a young Negro girl with straight bobbed hair, dressed in a neat dark blue crepe dress. She evidenced no surprise at the sight of a white person seeking admittance to a Negro dentist’s office, but very politely asked me in.
A library table in the center of the room was bare except for a small vase. A long settee and several leather covered rocking chairs were occupied by two well-dressed young Negro men, another young woman, and two small girls of the same race.
I decided that they were patients awaiting the doctor, and asked for Dr. James.
One of the young men stood up. "I am Dr. James," he said, "Is there anything I can do for you?"
When I had explained the purpose of my interview, he invited me into his office, placed a comfortable chair, and waited for me to be seated before taking his place at the desk. "Now, if you will just tell me what you would like to know, I will try to help you for I have no idea of how to begin a story of my life." He laughed and added, "In fact, I don't know if it would do to tell too much of it."
"Is this your home town?" I asked.
"Oh, yes," he replied, "I was born and raised right here in this old town. And I guess I was just about like all the other boys, I went to school here until I finished high school in the old Knox Institute, but that has been done away with now as a high school. After I finished there was nothing else for me here, so I went to college in Minnesota, and I also finished my dental course there. My six years of college life were very happy, but there was nothing more interesting in them than is usual among college boys.
"After I had passed all my college examinations then I had to stand State Board examinations, and I passed them all. My first work was in Gainesville, Georgia. I worked there for some time and then I worked in Macon, Georgia.
"About two and a half years ago I came back to my home town and opened my own office here. I think I have made a fair success of my work and would have done much better than I have, but people just do not have the money now to have the really necessary work done.
"Most of my patients that come in for examinations and find that they need fillings will not agree to fillings at first, but want the teeth extracted because they think it will be much cheaper than a filling. Sometimes it takes me a long time to explain to them the advantages of fillings. They only seem to think of the cheaper way. They just don’t stop to consider that if teeth are extracted that it will require bridge work and sometimes a set of new teeth and they are much more expensive than filling your teeth and saving them.
"And too, I have had many patients who have had the crowns of their teeth broken off to the roots and they are much harder to extract than when the whole tooth is there. Do you know the patients with teeth in that condition will say, ’Doctor, you should charge only half price for this one, as half of it is gone.” That is the way it goes.
"I think one of the most amusing experiences that I have ever had in my work was when I was working in St. Paul. I was working with another dentist there at the time. A man, a patient who had all of his teeth extracted, came in and wanted a set of artificial teeth right away as he was on his way to a dance. We tried to explain to him that we couldn’t get him a new set of teeth right then as it would take several hours to make a set of teeth but he said he couldn’t wait. Looking over the office, he saw some old plates in a box. Asking if he could try some of them, we told him to go ahead as we were very much amused. He finally selected a set of the old plates and left.
”We laughed about it and wondered how he came out with his teeth. We heard nothing more from him for about a week. Then he came walking in one day with the teeth in his mouth and said he came to see how much he owed for them for he wanted to keep them as they were a perfect fit.
"Do you know that ’most every patient, at least nine out of ten, still think they must use hot applications after an extraction? That they are really necessary, but I give my patients instructions to use ice packs and nothing else.
"I remember one patient that I had who would not take my advice and used hot applications with the result that she had a very badly infected and swollen face, which required me to lance it about fourteen times. But you just can't tell them nothing until they try out their own ideas. Yes, my profession has advanced in the short time I have been practicing. We learn new methods and have newer and better equipment at least every year.
"To me it is a very interesting work and I really enjoy it. Of course, it brings me in contact with all kinds of folks, both good and bad, but they are all patients and I try to do the best I can for each one that comes to me.
"At times I am very busy and then again I don't have so much to do. But I guess it goes that way in any kind of work or profession. I take every care and precaution in my work to protect my patients.
"Of course, I get the cash for my services when it is possible but when they can not pay it all at one time, then I do the work on credit terms that require some payment to be made on the account each week.
"Oh, yes, I get caught and lose plenty of times, even that way. But taking it all in all, I guess I have done pretty fair. I make a living and that is something in these times. I do not have a dental assistant and I do all the work myself. My secretary looks after my office for me, keeps my hooks, and helps with collections.
"I have been married, but I have a divorce and am now a single man again. I have no children either, so it really does not take so much just for me to live on."
I had explained that we would not use his name in connection with his story, but as he finished the interview, he said, "Now, there is no objection from me as far as using my name is concerned for I have told you nothing but the truth and have nothing to be ashamed of."
