Wilson L. Heflin
Editorial Department
James McDaniel
Winfield, Alabama
I WOULDN'T BE A FARMER
A tall, tan-skinned boy in his shirt sleeves got up from his place by the window and offered his seat to my wife. He wore glasses and his hair was curly.
"That's mighty decent of you," I said. "I was just telling my wife that there weren't any more gentlemen these days. I shouldn't have made so comprehensive a statement."
"I almost have to get up when I see a lady standing," he said. "Lots of people feel that way on street cars, but when they pay for a long trip on a bus, they figure courtesy cheats them out of their money's worth. Somehow I can't feel that way, though."
We held to the trunk rack overhead, and the bus swayed out of the station. Before it started, it was hot inside, and oil fumes from the running motor made the place small. Now a breeze came through the windows.
"Going as far as Jasper? That's where we're headed."
"About twice as far." he said. "Winfield. Going to see my people. I try to get up there every week-end."
I asked him if he worked in Birmingham. "In the summer," he said. "For my uncle at Mac-Wates Fuel Company. Mac is short for uncle's came, McDaniel. That's my name too."
I told him my name and we warily loosed our hold on the trunk racks and shook hands. The bus turned a comer and threw us to the opposite side of the aisle. We both laughed.
"I have a fine hot-weather job," he said. "Stoking. Mighty hard work but I can save some money doing it. To go back to school on, and to send some to my mother. She's pretty sick now."
I told him where I lived in Birmingham. "That's not far from my place. I'm at a boarding house on Highland Avenue, just off Five Points. It's a classy place in a way, that is, nice people, and they don't charge me much, $30 a month for a room and two meals.
"The worst part about it, though, is the nice people. I come in from work with soot all over me and grime on my finger nails. I take a quick hath before supper, but it doesn't get me very clean. And usually I'm too tired to dress up. I come in in my shirt sleeves. The other people--most of them are pretty old--come in dressed up. Now and then a couple of the old fellows wear dinner jackets. I guess they think they're gentlemen of the old school or something. I usually sit over at a small table by myself, and, feel self conscious. The landlady talks to me some of the time. But mostly her attention is diverted to pleasing the old people.
"I know I shouldn't feel the way I do, because I think Inferiority complexes are silly. I don't have one, really. It's just that grime on me makes me feel funny when I'm around clean people. I know it'll he different when I'm a Ph. D. Then I can have some lasting self-respect."
"You're mighty young to be talking Ph. D's, "I said. "Where do you go to school?"
"Iowa State," he said. "I'm twenty, though I guess I look older than that. Got my M. A. out there last year on a fellowship, and before that I went to the Berry School in Georgia.
"I suppose I don't talk much like an educated person. But when you work around niggers all summer, you just can't help getting sloppy about the way you talk. I haven't picked up a Mid-Western accent either. Lots of boys who go out there come back with funny speech traits. Suppose I would too if I was more of a mixer and less a worker.
"Don't do much playing around. Get up at six and study till class time. Then I'm in class or lab--I'm doing my work in chemistry--until nearly dark. Sometimes then I walk around if it's not too cold. Gets thirty below during the winter, and an Alabama boy like me really feels the cold. My roommate and I usually take a walk together. We try to talk about anything but shop, because the walk and about an hour after supper when we listen to the radio is about the only diversion we get. Except on binge nights. Most of the time, after our little radio session I study till one o'clock.
"I don't require much sleep. Got used to getting up early when I helped Dad on the farm. Most college boys stay up pretty late. I picked up that habit, too. It works out fine now for my studying. I sleep like a log when I do sleep."
I asked him about the snow in Iowa. "It piles up mighty high," he said. "You know, the first time I saw it I nearly bad a fit. It was so pretty, all piled up in banks. Never see snow like that in Winfield, though we had about three inches in Rome one time when I was at the Berry School. When I first saw an Iowa snow I wanted to go out and wallow in it, and have a snow fight and make a big snow man like I used to see in magazine pictures and at the news reels. We ran around the dormitory, my roommate and me, and got a pitcher. Then we filled it with snow and poured milk and vanilla into it. Man, that was good ice cream, and no freezer handle to turn. There was some soot in it, but we didn't mind. Then we took a picture of us in the snow and sent it back home to show the folks how it was out there.
"Snow is funny. Get a fellow drunk and let him get out in it and he'll pass out right now, and freeze to death, too, if somebody don't come along and help him. I thought it was different. Used to read about St. Bernard dogs with little kegs of brandy around their necks bringing it to freezing people in the Alps. Maybe it's different with brandy. Not with the stuff we drink, though.
"Really I don't drink much. But every now and then we get so full of formulas and so tired of books that we have to do something. That's on the binge nights I spoke about while ago. We get pretty rough then. Sometimes we have women. But mostly we drink in a group. My Dad used to warn me about drink, but a fellow in this kind of work just about has to have some kind of release. Drink makes my mind get all hollow. All the time I'm sober my mind goes around and I think all over the place. But it just blanks when I've had a few.
"I guess it works different for different people. One of the boys who got scared before exams, scared he wouldn't make the required average, tanked up on wine to boost his courage and help his memory. Then he did the same thing before he went in the exam room so he wouldn't forget. He passed all right. And some of the other boys tried that too. If I had, I'll bet I couldn't have written the formula for sulphuric acid. So I just drink to rest myself. I'm afraid of the habit, though."
I offered him a cigarette, but he shook his head. Then I had difficulty in lighting mine against the wind and holding on to the rack while the bus swayed.
"Can't afford an expensive habit like cigarettes," he said. "The liquor I was telling you about costs almost less than nothing. We get it out of the lab, snitch it if we have to. Grain alcohol. It's mighty stout, but you can fix It if you know much about chemistry. We put sugar and some water in a gallon jug of the stuff. Then we leave it out in the sun. A day in the sun is equal to a year of ageing in a charred keg. The sun and sugar and water set up an ester--that's a kind of side reaction. Then it doesn't taste bad. It's pretty potent, but it's good and suits our purposes. Put a little in a bottle of Coca Cola and you've got a right good drink."
The bus stopped at a cross-road and three people got on. They looked around sheepishly. We moved toward the back to make room for them.
"So many people, these days don't have any ambition," he said looking at the people who had just got on. "I'm glad I'm not that way. Seems that youngsters who grew up in depression times get a beaten attitude before they get started at all. Instead of like me. I had a hard time and still have, but I'm determined it won't be that way for long. I guess being at Berry did me a lot of good.
"Everybody was poor there. We went to school four days and worked two. Went to church on Sunday. I feel funny at Iowa on Sundays. The teachers go snooping around the library to see if you're buried in a book. I'm there because I have to be, but all the time I think about organ music and what the preacher must be saying.
"Berry was good for me, like I said. There were no rich boys to snoot you, and everybody worked together. We knew we were working for what we got and so we got it. That's where I learned to fire furnaces. It was that work on the side, and not my M. A. in chemistry that got me my Birmingham job this summer. My uncle helped me some, but I didn't get the job just because I was his nephew. I wouldn't do a thing like that. It was because I'm a good stoker.
"We used to have a good time at Berry, especially when anybody got a box from home. Mother used to send me cakes, and home-made candy, and fried chicken. When I got a box I'd put a sign on the door, like everybody else did. The boys would come piling in the room and we all ate it together and had a big time. If anybody got a box and didn't put up a sign, he got mighty unpopular. There weren't many boys like that, though.
"One thing the depression taught me is to keep my yap shut and not talk out of turn. Out at school some of the professors come around to the lab tables and say 'What the hell are you doing?" If you speak up tart or profanely like some of the students do, the profs will get on your ear and mess you all up about the experiment. I keep quiet most of the time or speak up civil-like and go on about my work like I know what I'm doing. They go about their business too and leave me alone."
He changed his grip on the trunk rack and shifted his weight. "I was telling you about talking out of turn. About four years hack when we needed every penny we could get at home, my older brother, Ed, had a pretty good job. Dad was making little or nothing off the farm, not enough to buy gas so Ed could go to work in the old Ford. He had to get up mighty early to walk in to work at the commissary store, and he didn't like that a bit. Ed has a good deal more temper than I have. He kept it in check as much as he could, but one day he got mad at a clerk in the store. The man was trying to command Ed around and make him move a show-case. They had been re-arranging the store all morning and Ed had been toting sacks around till his clothes were all white with flour. The clerk told Ed to drop what he was doing and come move a show case. It had already been moved about three ways that morning. 'Move it, yourself,' Ed said, 'You're a clerk here, too even if you are older than I am.' The man said he didn't like Ed's attitude a damn bit and would tell the boss so when he came in. 'I don't like yours, either,' Ed said and took a swing at him. Ed got fired and we knew he was right, but there was nothing we could do about it.
"They say Ed came home ramping mad with the flour still on his clothes--I was at school then. He wanted to get another job but nothing turned up for a long time. They had a hard time of it at home, and Dad just about decided to take me out of school and put me to work on the farm. Mother cried though and talked him out of it. She said I hadn't cost them a penny since my second year in high school and I had a chance to amount to something. I guess if I ever do it will be because of her. That winter she made sausage and sold it to the grocery stores."
Several people got off the bus at Adamsville and we got a seat. I turned around to where my wife was sitting and nodded that I was enjoying the conversation. She nodded back. The McDaniel boy sat next to the window.
"I think I'll get married when I can," he said. "I think being married is the right way to be. I don't have any money now and don't guess I will have for a while. But I can wait. Not for a girl hack home like you read about in books. I don't have a girl in Winfield. Haven't been there for any length of time in so long. I don't have a girl at all now. Didn't have any girls at school, either. Couldn't much afford dates and I didn't have time, either.
"Most boys go through a stage of having dates, and fun, and going to dances. And all that is so big and colorful at the time that they don't have any definite end in mind. Marriage, I mean. That's too far off then, and the things of the moment seem big enough in themselves. Petting and if you can do more--nearly everybody tries to--is about all they think of. I think I just grew up and life skipped that stage for me. I was a boy who played with boys, and thought girls were silly, and now I'm a man and I know it's right to get married.
"Girls have a funny time of it, chasing boys and not letting them know it and then fighting them off and still keeping them around. It's interesting if you've got time to watch how they act, especially the young ones. They don't seem to like it at first. But they think they have to conform or not be popular. I'm not sure what kind of girl I'll marry. But you can bet she'll be one who's not hell-bent on chasing boys. I think I'll know the one the minute I see her. I guess I should, try to pick a girl who will like my kind of work and can help me to get ahead. But if she loves me, that'll be the chief tiling that matters."
He looked out the window at a group of boys standing at a cross-road. "There were thirteen of them there last Saturday. And I had to wait my turn in line. I'd have hitch-hiked today if it hadn't looked like rain. Caught a ride up this far last Saturday with a man in a long green car. I'm gonna have a car like that some day. And other things too. That's why I'm ambitious.
"I was about to tell you about the work I plan to get in. I haven't said anything about that yet. I think I'll be a research man with some big company if I can get a place. I don't want to be a school teacher like most Ph. D's. So many of them are screwy. Either too smug or too much exhibitionist. Once in a while you find a good one, like a fellow at Berry who used to talk to the boys and go around with them some. But I'm not the kind to teach. I want to be left alone at my work. Not have a bunch of gawking people watching me all the time. I'm about the happiest I can be when I'm pausing in an experiment waiting for the chemicals to act and thinking to myself.
"Maybe I will be a doctor, though I don't think so. I'm minoring in bio-chemistry just in case. I could get a Ph. D and an M. D. by the time I'm twenty-eight, if I kept at it. But sometime when I'm on a binge and can think at all I figure I may get tired of all this work. Not when I get a job and do real research, I mean, but like now when I have a bunch of teachers to please."
Two men got on at Sumiton. I remarked that one of them looked like Lon Chaney used to.
"Lon Chaney?"
I explained who Lon Chaney was.
"Oh yeah, I've read about him. I don't think I ever saw him, though. Must have been before I went to movies. I don't believe I saw a picture show until I was eight or nine and then I saw mostly Western pictures on Saturdays. I remember I used to like Ken Maynard a lot, and Buck Jones, too. For a while it was a toss-up whether I wanted to be a cowboy or more like Tarzan. I used to ride an old mule around the farm and sometimes I'd take off my hat and whip him first on one side, then on the other, and ride as fast as I could, yelling and shooting a toy pistol. Sometimes people would shake their heads and say that I'd grow up to be a wild buck. But it was just a stage boys go through, I guess. I'm not very wild now.
"I read all the Edgar Rice Burroughs stories I could. The Mars books too. There was some science in them and in the Tom Swift hooks, too. Maybe I got interested in chemistry from them. But mostly from those books I got the urge to swing through trees and got my hands fill of callouses for it. And I remember I used to be scared sometimes at night that one of those Mars men who had heads walking around on crab legs might crawl in my bed. All this was before Dad got real hard up.
"Maybe the thing that really got me interested in chemistry was watching the old man down at the drag store filling prescriptions. All those pretty-colored bottles with big names I didn't understand and the mortar and pestle and those tiny scales were mighty fascinating to me. Of course I really didn't get to know anything much about chemistry till I went to the Berry School.
"I remember an incident at Berry that made me realize how powerful chemicals can be. Some smart-alecks who didn't know beans about chemistry had seen a professor show how sodium would react when placed in water. The professor would take a little pinch and put it in some water and it would run round and round and make a little fuss. These boys slipped in the lab and snitched a pretty good quantity of it and took it to the shower room while some of the boys were playing basketball. I don't guess they hardly got the shower turned on. I happened to be walking outside the door when they came running out scared to death trying to get away from the fumes and not be hurt by the reaction. I still remember the look on their faces. They weren't hurt, though I guess they should have been and learned a lesson. Nobody could take a shower for a while. I remember how the boys playing basketball came over sweating and wanting to take a shower and how they cussed those two smart-alecks. They nearly got kicked out of school, those two."
We looked out the window at some cows grazing in a pasture beside the road. Then we saw some hogs in a big pen. I remarked about the size of one of the hogs.
"I used to like hogs and hog meat," he said "But I don't any more, except bacon. When I was five my brother and I had two pigs. Dad gave them especially to us. I used to go out to the pen and feed my pig--I called him 'Red' because of his color--and I'd talk to him and have a big time just like any other kid does with his pet. One day in the winter I was in the house when I heard an awful squealing in the pen. I ran out to it and saw two men killing 'Red'. I yelled at them and picked up some little rocks and threw at them. But they went right on. I stood there and cried because my pig was dead. When we had sausage five days later I wouldn't eat a bite. I got up from the table, crying and shouting at them, accusing them of eating a pig that was better than any one of them. I couldn't eat any kind of hog meat for a long time, but finally I got to like bacon. I remember that every time I used to see sausage strung up in a butcher's shop, I'd want to get a brick and bust the window and go in and whip the butcher with the sausage. I know I should feel different now because I told you while ago how Mother's selling sausage helped save us during the worst part of the depression. But I can't eat sausage yet.
"I don't guess I'd make a good doctor because I don't like to see things die--like 'Red', for example. The sight of blood gets me, too. One time at Berry one of my pals and I were out walking at night. We heard an awful screeching of brakes and saw a car turn a corner and run into a ditch and then out of it into a telephone post. Then it turned over on its side and stayed there. We ran to the car as fast as we could, all excited and curious and feeling heroic. At least I did. When we got there a man had crawled out and was lying on the grass groaning and writhing around. He said there were two more inside. I could smell liquor all around. We went over boldly and I said I would pull them to the window and my pal could help me lift them out if they were hurt that bad. I remember when I reached in and got hold of one of the men he was limp and loose and felt like a dummy with joints all stuffed full of soft glue. Then I felt something warm and thick and sticky running on my hands. And I let him go and held up my hands to see. There was <text not clear>ed blood all over them. I fainted then and didn't know anything until I heard the siren of the ambulance my buddy had called. People had gathered all around them and some of them thought I was in the wreck. One of the men died at the hospital. I don't guess I ever got over that wreck."
"When I said that about blood, I meant it is warm live oozy blood that gets me. Blood on a microscope slide from somebody who isn't hurt or dying is different. I guess if I ever get an M. D., I'll do research work like I plan to do now in chemistry. I don't think I'd ever be up to cutting at those dried up scrawny nigger cadavers all drippy and smelly from phenol vats, though. They give me the creeps.
"I remember when I was first out at Iowa. A boy who roomed next door to me was in first year med. He was mighty nice and wanted to show me around. We had lunch together one day and then went down into the basement of one of the buildings. It was cold and damp in there. I don't believe there was any ventilation at all. I think there were about six big vats spread around over the room. But the thing I first saw was three niggers lying there on the floor between two of the vats. The first one was a woman. I don't guess I'd seen but about one naked woman before that, nigger or white. I don't want to ever see any more if they look like that one did. Her head was all out of shape and her belly was sticking out and she lying there with her feet pointing straight up, and her mouth half open. This boy walked over and poked her in the bead with his toe and said, 'Syphilitic, no doubt about it.' There were some torsos on the shelves with their insides scooped out and two on the floor. The boy kicked one as he walked by and it skidded across the floor and the chest end hit the wall. It didn't make a loud sound but I could hardly keep from screaming. We looked into two of the vats after he'd taken the lids off. I could make out the shapes of some of the bodies in the solution. Then this boy reached in one of the vats with his bare hand and started pulling up. 'See, we don't only cut niggers,' he said. He pulled up something all hairy and shapeless at first and the phenol all dripping off it.
'Chimpanzee,' he said. Just before the head came to the surface, it looked like the eyes opened and leered at me. And then the head was out of the water and I saw those awful teeth and it looked like the phenol was dripping right out of his mouth. I just about gagged. 'Let me out of here,' I yelled and ran to the door.
"Boy, it was good to get out in the pure air again. The first thing I saw was a live co-ed walking across the campus. She was pretty and smiling and swinging her books. I never had thought much about death until that minute.
"The med student laughed at me and said I'd get over it. Said some of the first year men brought cadaver arms to meals for fun, and some of them made tobacco pouches out of the hide. I couldn't think about medicine for a long time, and I don't guess I could now if I didn't have ambition."
He looked at me and smiled. "Maybe we'd better change the subject," he said. We looked out the window and saw a farmer plowing cotton.
"I don't guess I could ever be a farmer," he said. "Though I helped a lot around the farm when I was a kid. I'm sort of like one of my uncles. He used to be crazy about fox hunting. One day he was out plowing when he heard the hounds baying and he just about couldn't stand it. He ran his plow into some stump roots and broke it. He was mighty strong. Then he stood there and cussed the mule so everybody could hear him. In a minute or two he was off after the hounds. I've felt like that lots of times though I don't guess I had the nerve or the strength to break a plow. It would have cost Dad too much money."
Pretty soon the bus came into the Jasper station. We shook hands and I thanked him again for giving his seat to my wife. He stuck his hand through the window grill and waved as the bus drove off.
8/10/39
MS
