White Oak Mill N. C.
28 Vine St.
Greensboro, N. C.
I. L. M.[Ida L. Moore]
JOHN VINSON
There was moonlight over Vine Street that night, the soft, misty light of a new December moon. I passed the three intervening houses and stood presently on the porch of the fourth house, and from there looked at the moon mist hovering over the third house further down the street. I knocked on the door and waited for a response.
The door opened and a stooped man stood there peering at me through the bright light of the little hallway. "Come in," he said as fumblingly he opened the screen door and held it open while I entered the small recess between the two front rooms. "The old lady's in here," he said, directing me to the right. "I just brought her home from the hospital today."
"Yes, Lord Jesus, and not a bit of rest have I had for seven days, "the woman said. She lay there on the bed in the corner and when she had stopped speaking her eyes which seemed forever dodging the light moved slowly. She drew thick heavy lids down over them and turned her head wearily upon her pillow. Two heavy braids of hair, the color of frosty sage, lay against her white high-necked gown. Invalidism had not softened the weather-beaten hardness of her face.
"She cain't see you atall," the man said as he sat down and indicated a chair for me. "She couldn't even see the side of the house. Stone blind."
"No, Lord, for four long years I haven't seed a thing. Had the high blood pressure and it took my sight away." "Comin' from the hogpen one day--we used to try to keep about two hogs all the time--when she first noticed it. Everything got right hazy."
"No, pappy, it was blue, the quarest sort of blue I ever seed. I was afeered from the first because I'd heard tell when things started turnin' blue you was gettin' blind. My way got dimmer and dimmer, and then one day before I could get to the house all the sight was gone from my eyes. I hadn't had no health for four year before, and addin' to that there four dark years it makes eight I've been might nigh a invalid. Doctors all the time."
"Sickness has about ruint me," the man said, "as he pulled his old black hat further over his eyes and hooked his bare heels onto the second round of his chair. His thick black hair bushing out around the edges of his hat narrowed still more his lean, yellow face. He looked up at me and said, "You ain't a welfare worker, are you?"
"No, I'm not," I answered. "I saw your house and wanted to come in to talk awhile. you? Some of us has a time.
"Speakin' of the welfare," he continued, "they're the hardest folks to get any understandin' from I ever had dealins with. At the beginnin' of the winter, Eva Belle--she's our daughter, only one we've got. We never raised but two children, her and Will. Well, Eva Belle needed treatmint for her sinus trouble and Dr. Young said he'd give his time free if I could get the welfare to furnish money for the medicine. I went up there and talked with the woman at the desk, tellin' her how I was forced to ask for help, and she told me to go on in there and talk to Hr. Hardin. I went in and told Mr. Hardin what I'd come for, and he says, "All right, whatever the lady out at the desk says." Well, I went on back out to her desk, and she told me, 'You go tell Mr. Hardin I said it was all right with me.' But when I got in the office the second time to see Mr. Hardin he'd took his hat and left. I ketched on they aimed to pass me from one to t'other all day, so I come on home, and Eva Belle ain't had her treatmint yet. I don't seem to have no mouth for beggin'. Some folks do and they can git help, but I cain't."
"No, Lord Jesus, they know John Vinson ain't the kind to beg and he don't get nothin'. In all his fifty-seven years he's never had no luck in gettin' along."
John Yinson removed his bare feet from the chair round and planted them flatly against the floor. He wiggled his grimy toes, and seemed for awhile uneasy with his thoughts.
A girl came from the adjoining front room, nodded at me, and sat down in a chair by the fireplace. She wore a belong rag around her head and her celluloid-rimmed glasses fitted flat against her red nose. "I've been in the hospital five times for sinus," she said. "See my nose, how red it is. That's because I've got sinus. Got a awful cold now. Keeps me scared, thinkin' I may have to have another operation. I guess I better be gettin' to bed. I ain't been up but a few hours today."
And, as if her sole purpose for coming into the room had been accomplished, Eva Belle got up and left us.
"She's been in the hospital twice for pneumonia and once to have her tonsils took out," John said. "Them tonsils cost me $50 back in '35. Eva Belle, she's a free bleeder and I had to have a special nurse with her."
"Yes, Lord Jesus, it's been one hospital bill after another and no help from nobody. I think they've sent me home for the last time though, I ain't gonna git well. They meant to operate but they never. Just used radium and took X-rays." The covers on the bed flapped as the woman moved her body slightly.
The close air was laden with a sickish odor emanating from the John had dropped into a state of half-dozing and I was wondering how much longer I could stay without a little fresh air when the woman spoke, "Crack the door, Pappy. It's gittin' too hot in here." John jumped up from his chair, slid his bare feet across the floor, and opened slightly the door leading into the kitchen. A refreshing current of cool air cleared to some extent the oppressive atmosphere.
"Course, I have to keep help," John Vinson said as he sat down. Eva Belle can't do the work and Mamie ain't been able to do nothin' the past two year. I'll go down there to nigger town and I'll offer one $3 a week to come and cook for me. They'll say, 'The relief gives us more'n that.' I tell 'em I can't help what the relief does, $3 is all I can pay. I got a girl a few months ago that's been with us ever since though, and I don't pay her but three dollars. She sleeps here part the time, got a cot in Eva Belle's room.
"Three dollars goes for help every week, two dollars to the hospital,-- I signed up to pay that much and the company just takes it out of my pay-- ninety-four cent a week for house rent, twelve cent for Social Security, and eighty-five for the laundry. And they ain't a week passes I don't spend from two to three dollars for the old lady's medicine."
"Pappy, is they any rubbin' alcohol in the house?"
"Yes, Mamie, they's some here. That don't leave me much out of $11.52. If it wa'n't for Frank workin' we couldn't eat."
"How much does Frank make?" I asked.
"Same as I do. He's good about helpin' but any young boy wants a little money of his own. Frank ain't healthy neither, born with leakage of the heart. I used to feel so sorry for him when he was a little fellow settin' down on the grass watchin' the other boys play. Doctor'd told me if he run any to amount to anything it'd kill him. He never got no further'n the sixth grade but he's smart. I bet you he could out-know you on some things and I low you went right far in school too. He can tell you names of places, where they are, and how far they are from here. Good in figgers too. He pays for the telephone, says he aims to keep one in the house no matter what the welfare thinks of it. When the nigger ain't here and me and him's in the mill workin' Mamie and Eva Belle would he plumb trapped if one of 'em took sick and nobody here to go for the doctor. It gives 'em a safe feelin' to "be able to go to the telephone and call him when one or the other's had a spell."
"Pappy, I reckin you better shut the door. It's gittin' cold in here.
John Vinson got up to close the door. "While you up, you jist as well give me my nerve medicine. I'm gonna have a time goin' to sleep tonight."
"Maybe I'd better go," I suggested as John Vinson gave the medicine to Mamie. "If everything gets quiet maybe you can sleep."
"Tain't a bit of need for you to go," Mamie said. "It's pain keepin' me awake. Talkin' keeps me compny."
John Vinson sat down again and in a weary sort of way rubbed his face with his hand.
"Pappy, did you give me my nerve medicine?"
"Yes, Mamie, I give you your medicine. She ain't crazy nor nothin' but the high blood pressure busted blood vessels in her head and it hurt her memory. She can remember what happened way back yonder but not what's just happened to her."
"I reckin you know Miss Minnie Fields, don't you? Mamie asked.
"No, I don't," I replied. 'Who is she?"
"She's a social worker for this compny," Mamie answered. "She comes here and makes like she thinks we're doin' well because the boy is workin'. Yes, Lord Jesus, doin' well, when that John Vinson don't know where the next sack of flour is comin' from. She's awful unseein', Miss Minnie is. Pappy, you can give me my sleepin' medicine now."
John Vinson took two "big pills from the small box on the bedside table, rolled them in the hollow of his hand and waited until Mamie had raised herself up and then dropped them into her mouth. Mamie groped for the water-glass which John finally placed in her hands. When the pills were at last swallowed she lay back against her pillow with a groan. "Oh Lord Jesus, if they'll just bring me a little sleep."
John was seated again in his chair and gazing wearily into the fire. He seemed to be listening for a reassuring sound from the bed in the corner, and presently the heavy breathing had changed to jerky snoring. "She maybe'll sleep a while now," he said. "It wears me out cornin' home tired from the mill and then tryin' to wait on her. The nigger ain't goin' to work night and day for three dollars a week, you know. I try to keep from askin' her to do air thing after she's done with supper dishes.
"No sir, I've thought about it a heap of times, wonderin' what's kept me from killin' myself. They's plenty of men had the trouble I've had woulder done it long ago. I don't care much for livin' myself but I'd hate to leave them in a fix. And agin, it's a sin to take your own life.
"I've worked as hard as air man I know but like Mamie said I've never had no luck a tall in gettin' along. Course, I never had no schoolin' to amount to anything. Pore folks never had much chance for learnin' when I come along.
"I was raised in Guilford County on first one farm and then another, wherever Pa could make good arrangemints with the landlord. When we started gettin' up some size Pa hired out by the month and we raised the crop. My oldest brother took a notion they was better things than farmin' for him and he went to Ossipee to work in the mill. He done right well and after he'd saved some money he got it in his head to get more schoolin'. Before he quit he'd got about two year in high school.
"Leonard seemed to be doin' so well at the mill I tried to persuade Pa to move there too. But Pa never could make up his mind to move and I stayed at home with him till I was twenty. By the time I come to Greensboro, Leonard had done started paymints on a house and lot at Altamaha. It was the same house he traded later for ninety-eight acres of land. Before he died two year ago he'd got to ownin' two hundred and eighteen acres.
"I got railroad work when I first come to Greensboro, worked at it reg'lar, and had 'cumulated 'bout a hundred dollars when I got married four year later."
"I was Mamie Flack and the Flacks come from East Tennessee," came from a sleep-drenched voice in the corner. "We bought land, I worked hard all my life. Yes, Lord Jesus, I done everything but plough."
"She ain't good asleep yet. I'll stop talkin' for awhile and maybe she'll git all the way to sleep." Finally there came from the corner one long, deep sigh. Mamie had at last fallen into a drugged sleep.
"When I left the railroad I got work at a sawmill firin' a "boiler," John was saying. "I was there when the German war started. The man give me three cuts and I quit. I come right here to this mill and I've been here ever since. Not in this same house, but in this here village. We moved in this house the day Roosevelt taken his seat.
"The mill was right promisin' in them war days. It never paid such high wages but it give a awful good bonus. First fifty cent on the dollar and then dollar for dollar. But when Woodrow Wilson went out and old man Hardin' got it the bonus business was finished.
"I'll tell you for why the best I understand it. I ain't very well read and what I know I've learnt ayself but it all seems to figger about like this: Wilson had it fixed so the manufacturer could make just so much and the rest had to go to the goveramint or the worker. Well, they hadn't raised wages much so when the surrender come and the governmint stopped pinnin' down on the manufacturer, they just took off the bonus and got by without havin' to say they'd cut wages. Hardin', he was for the big man, and so he let the manufacturer have for profit all that went durin' Wilson's time for bonus.
"If the bonus hader lasted I was fixin' to ketch a way to get me a little spot of land. But 'bout the time I got up to $26 a week along come surrender, and I ain't made real good money since.
"But I never give up the notion of gettin' me a house and lot till Mamie went blind and doctor bills doubled on me. In two year's time I borrowed $700 from the banks for hospitals and the doctors. It was fixed so a certain amount could come out of my wage every week. Mamie had one brother with a little land and a store and he went on my notes.
"Dr. Young's one that can tell you if I had what I've paid for medicine and treatmint I could live in as good a house as they've got in Greensboro. And I ain't never been able to buy even a lot."
John stopped speaking for a moment and looked toward the bed. The cover's rose and fell with Mamie's labored breathing.
"As for me," John said presently, "I don't have much longer to live nohow, and not havin' a house for myself wouldn't worry me no more but I keep athinkin' what a fix they'll be in when I die. Not so long ago I was walkin' down the street and such a sharp pain hit me, come in my chest. I went up to Dr. Knight's office and when I got so's I could talk I says to him, 'I want you to see what's wrong with my heart. Have some sort of foolish spells with it, got one on now.' He joked me a little at first but when he'd finished lookin' me over he told me my heart was leakin' awful bad and I'd have to quit the mill if I wanted to live much longer. When I told him they wa'n't no way for me to quit he looked at me right hard and said, 'I ain't tryin' to scare you, but one of these days they'll carry you out.'
"It must've started on me when I was a child, that heart trouble. I can remember how of a cold frosty mornin' when I was runnin' hard on my way to the rabbit gums a stingin' pain would hit me around the heart and near 'bout knock me out. I'd squat down right still for awhile and it'd ease up on me so's I could go on. It's a plumb wonder I've lived to do all the work I have. If it wa'n't for the family bein' in such a shape, I wouldn't mind.
"The only pleasure I've got left is chawin' my tobacco. I've never went to but three picture shows in my life and I've never spent money on liquor. I think sometimes how some folks can take a whole week's pay and spend it all for pleasure, play cards if they want to, or maybe get drunk now and agin. But mine, when I draw it I start to thinkin' how many bills I can pay this time. Whenever they's a dollar I ain't bound to pay on back debts, I try to go up town to the A and P store and pick up a few bargains. Up there they sell onions six pound for sixteen cent and out here they cost three cent a pound, potatoes is ten pound for seventeen cent and out here three cent a pound. Sometimes I ketch a ride with a neighbor and can bring my groceries back in his car."
John's voice had ceased and the room was very quiet. For two full minutes there were no words spoken and John seemed deep in thoughts for which he could find no means of expression. Finally when he spoke he looked straight into my eye as if trying to draw from me some satisfying answer to the questions within his mind.
"The Bible speaks of the pore," he was saying, "and it says they'll always be here. But in spite of that I can't see why some folks that don't never work has thousands of dollars just to throw away and others that work all the time can't have all the victuals they actually need. Why, they's folks here in this town could pay four or five hundred dollars for a railroad ticket if they wanted to, just to ride out for the pleasure of it. And ever since I've been big enough to move a hoe along I've worked hard, awful hard, and I couldn't even take me a dollar trip on the train."
