Mrs. George Peschau
Frances L. Harriss
NICKOLAS PATELLOS
Nickolas Patellos was born in the village of Rahas, on the island of Nikaria, in January 1896. His father was a farmer of moderate means who owned and operated and almond grove and vineyard.
When Nickolas was sixteen he felt a longing for the country across thesea about which he had heard so much. He talked with his father, and his father mortgaged all of his property in order to get money for his son's passage.
Nickolas landed in New York in 1912, He had relatives there, so he soon went to work in a cafe as a dish washer. He could not speak a word of English, but he met an Englishman who taught him, teaching him three words a day for five months.
Then he was allowed to take orders to apartments which usually paid well because of the tips. In fifteen months he had saved enough to return every bit of the borrowed amount to his father.
Nick came to Wilmington in 1913 and there joined his cousin who operated the Brooklyn Confectionery. They formed a partnership and it has since continued. But they have closed the confectionery and now devote their entire time to a large grocery store.
Nick believes that business success depends on truth, honesty, and hard work. He still works from sixteen to twenty-two hours a day. Pride is a Greek characteristic, but he sends his parents money without them asking for it. He was able to send $1,000 to each one of his sisters when they were married.
In the World War Nick was a volunteer, joining the United States National Naval Volunteers. Later he became a petty officer on a submarine chaser. He received his final naturalisation papers at the close of the War.
In 1922 Nickolas married Marvika Kazakides, the ceremony being performed by a priest of the Greek Orthodox Church. Now they have three children, two boys and one girl. All the children attend the public schools of Wilmington and are being reared as typical Americans. The boys are members of the Y. M.C.A and the Boy Scouts. They attend Sunday School at the local churches with their American friends. Nick's wife takes an active part in the Parent-Teacher Association and has been a president of one association. They livein a large apartment above the store.
The Patellos have been to Greece once since they have married, and that was in 1986. They were over there six months then visiting relatives.
