"I'VE BEEN DRIFTING…..”
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Asst. State-wide Project
Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
August 4, 1939
July 21, 1939
Mr. Roy Clinton Hale (White)
351 East Clayton Street
Athena, Georgia
Shoe Salesman
S.B.H.
"I’VE BEEN DRIFTING……"
Reuben Newton was waiting on trade when I entered the shoe store. As he took one pair of shoes after another from the shelves I heard the customer say, "There's sure a heap of cool-looking shoes in here if anybody wants cool feet."
"Just have a seat and make yourself comfortable," Mr. Newton said to me. "I'll be with you in a few minutes." As he patiently tried to fit the shoes I could not avoid hearing a running fire of comment from the customer:"These are too big," --- "Ouch, this hurts, it's too small," --- "Ain’t you got this sort in another color?"
As I waited I surveyed the surroundings. Mr. Newton stocks women’s shoes exclusively, and his line presents a wide selection of styles and colors. The wall on one side of the long, narrow sales-room is lined with shelves filled with footwear and on the top shelf shoes are displayed on stands. Near the front, on the other side of the room is a display case of hosiery and house slippers, and the top of the case serves as a wrapping counter. The space back of the display case is utilized as an office. A brunette, seated near the telephone and cash register, was leisurely manicuring her nails. She saw me looking at her and at once came over and resumed operations with the implements and supplies from a small manicure kit as she chatted pleasantly with me. "I have an awful time keeping my nails smooth, and nice," she confided. "Fitting shoes on customers is hard on the nails, and I often break 'em off. Then, if I'm not mighty careful vixen I show hosiery, I'll pull a run in a pair of silk stockings in spite of fate. I've had to pay for several pairs I've ruined that way." Customers came in and she excused herself to wait on them.
My chair was partially screened from the rest of the store by a long rack on which shoes are displayed in rows. This is the bargain rack. A green and gold curtain hangs over the entrance to the stockroom, which is separated from the salesroom by a green and gold partition. There are two long rows of green and gold chairs for customers to sit in while shoes are being fitted, and before these chairs are strips of carpeting - the only floor covering in the store. Currents of cool air swept through the vents of an air-conditioning system and the room was comfortable despite the shimmering waves of July heat to be seen on the outside.
I now took the opportunity to observe Mr. Newton's personal appearance. He is a man of medium size and height, having black hair and blue eyes. This morning his attire consisted of blue trousers, white shirt, dark blue tie, low-cut black shoes, and navy blue socks.
His customer left and Mr. Newton perched himself on the low stool in front of my chair. "Well, here I am," he said. "Would you believe it, that's the fourth time that woman has come in here and tried on all those same shoes. Each time her choice falls on one certain pair that she wants me to reduce the price for her. I'm not going to do it, for I'm sure she wants 'em bad enough to pay $1.99 for 'em. I know her kind. She’ll be back and pay my price for ’em before the day's over. You have to deal with each customer individually. I know some of my customers so well that when they come in and tell me the type of shoes they want, I show 'em, and nine times out of ten the purchase is made without delay and without a word of sales talk from me. On the other hand, there are others that you have to talk your head off to get 'em to buy. Sometimes you talk too much and ruin the sale. That's the life of a shoe salesman.
"I was born and raised on a farm about three and a half miles from this town, and I'm living out there right now. Before the State highway cut a new road through our property we had a beautiful grove of oak trees in front of our house. Oh, I never did much farm work other than milking the cows and feeding the chickens and stock. When I was big enough to go to school I went to live with my grandmother in Winterville, and that's where I went to school until I got so mean they bad to kick me out. Then my dad sent me to a private school here in Athens. After finishing in this private school I took a business course.
"Just to show you how mean I was, they tell me that when I was still wearing dresses if any of the folks at home made me mad I'd strike out down the road to my grandmother's home and stay with her for a month or more at a time. Nothing mother and dad could say or do would induce me to go back home with 'em. Grandmother would tell 'em:' Let Reuben alone. He'll get mad with me soon enough and go back to you of his own accord.’ And sure enough I would.
"I'm ashamed to tell you how many job. I've had. To tell you the truth, I'm 42 years old, and I haven't made a success in life. While I was in business school dad bought a bicycle shop for my brother and me to operate. Brother ran it and I helped after school. We kept about ten or fifteen bicycles in stock and rented them out at a dollar a day. Bicycles were all the go them days and my share of our earnings then was more than I make now. Dad made us pay our own shop rent, and we paid for our board and clothes too. We were pretty well bossed, for we lived with an aunt and uncle, and they saw to it that we didn't spend money foolishly. Dad cheeked up on our little business every week end knew all the time just how our finances stood.
"When I finished my business course, I went in the grocery business in partnership with another man. Our stock and equipment cost us $5,000, on which each of us paid in a thousand dollars in cash. We arranged to pay off the balance in monthly installments. We sold strictly fancy groceries and ran a delicatessen in connection with our store. We done good. In fact, we never took in less than five thousand a month. Of course, it takes that much in sales to make a thousand dollars in profit.
One day a man offered ms $1,700 for my interest in the store. I agreed to sell and in a few days when all the papers had been drawn up he came back with his check to close the deal. He had borrowed that $1,700 from a local bank operated at that time by a Jew. I took my key to the store off my key ring and pitched it on the counter to him. Then all of us - my old partner, the man who was buying me out, and I - went across the street to sign up the papers and have a notary put his seal on the transaction. I left them and went straight to the bank to cash my check. The old Jew looked slyly at his partner and then at me, and said, ‘That check’s too much to cash.’
"‘All right,’ I told him, 'One place is as good as another. I'll just open up an account with you and leave the money here with you.' That seemed to please him very much. In about a week I began drawing on my account, and within a month I had all of it drawn out and deposited in the bank where I've always preferred to do my business. That's one time I got by a Jew.
"Before I left the grocery business I had a time getting our money from a man who owed us an account of something over $40 that was long past due. I went to him and offered to give him a receipt for the entire account if he'd pay me $35, but he rejected the idea. 'Look here, man,’ I said, 'I need that money. I've just got to have it before I can get a bill-of-lading from the bank so I can unload a carload of flour we have on the tracks.' He handed me the $25, end took his receipt for the $40 account, but I'd fooled him. I didn't have any flour on the tracks. That was just the only way I saw to get a cent out of him at that time. He continued to buy his groceries on credit from us. In order to collect the remaining $15 due on his old account, I added a few cents to the price when I charged each purchase he made. When he got our bill at the end of the month, he came in the store raising cain. 'You fellows are charging me too much," he accused us. 'Come on to the back of the store and let me show you what we're doing," I told him, and I let him see just the plan we were using to get the balance he had never paid on his previous account. Oh, how he did curse and fume at us! 'What did you take us for? Eggs!' we asked him. We almost came to blows. He swore he'd never trade with us again, and right then I didn't care what he did about that, just so he paid shat he owed. He came back and paid up, continued to buy groceries from us as long as I retained my partnership in the store, and best of all he was always prompt in paying his bill from that time on.
"Another man owed us $85 and the poor devil was in such tough luck that he had to go in bankruptcy. He worked on a switch engine, and you know those jobs don't pay much anyway. His wife and kids were sick all the time and he had plenty of expenses. He owed everybody in town and couldn't get a cent of credit anywhere. I told my partner to watch me get that money from him. I went out to the railroad yard and crawled up in the engine with him. 'Look here, pal,' I began, 'it's all right if you can't pay that little you owe us right now, and I hear you're in hard luck. If a little money will ease things up for you, I'll loan it to you. Just say how much.' He refused to take any, but he thanked me. Next morning he came up to the store and ordered more groceries on credit and borrowed a little money to pay up some of his most pressing bills. From that time on our bills were the first he paid up when he got his pay envelope. When he was transferred to another town about a year later he didn't owe us one cent, but he hadn't paid up all his other creditors. "After I sold out my share in the grocery store, ay old partner end I bought a wholesale feed store on a street back of our old location. Each of us ran a drawing account of $100 a month for salary in our new business. Soon we opened up a Negro poolroom in the back of the feed store, and for a long while our profits on the combined business averaged about $300 a month. At that time the man who controlled this town was our friend, but after his death we fared rough. The man whose hardware at ore was next to our place filed complaints about the noise from our building. They made us close our pool room, so we sold our equipment to a Negro man for $500. He moved it to a hot corner and opened up a paying business. As far as I know the first poolroom for Negroes ever opened in Athens was the one right there in the back of our store.
"Things hit bottom about the time war was declared in Europe. You couldn't hardly sell a bale of cotton at any price. Our business hit the wall, so we decided to do our own closing without waiting to be forced into bankruptcy. We paid our creditors in full, but there wasn't anything left over for us out of the sale of the business.
"My automobile brought $300. I took that cash and lit out to Massachusetts. You've heard of fellows having foot-itch or roving fever. Well, you see one of them guys right here before you now, for I've never been settled or contented since we sold the feed store. In Boston I got $50 a week working in a grocery store, until I got fired. I might as well tell the truth about it. My roommate and I were staying out' most all night hitting the hot spots, and everyday we'd be 'most dead on our feet. We were never on hand to draw our pay envelopes on Saturday nights. In order to live through Sunday, we'd make a touch from some acquaintance and try our chances at gambling. One night I iron $200, and believe you me, it looked like a million dollars. I paid off my buddy I'd borrowed my stake from, and with the balance of it I lit a rag for Springfield.
"Jobs won't hard to get in them days - that was during the war - and the very first day after I landed in Springfield I went to work in an armory making rifles. In the two years I worked in that plant I made from. $150 to $200 a month. Then I got a job in a chain grocery store, but the manager was hard as nails and I wouldn't work for him longer’n a month. I went on to Greensboro, North Carolina, and went to work for Morris Shoe Company. I was relief man for 'em, supplying in the absence of the regular men in the various towns idlers their stores were located. Believe me, they have many a shoe store scattered through the Carolinas and Virginia. They paid me $185 a month and traveling expenses.
“I landed in Wilmington, North Carolina, the day they had declared as a holiday for the dedication of the causeway from that town to Wrightsville Beach, and I came in on the same train with the Governor of the State. When I had finished supplying for the Wilmington man, I went back to the home store and told a longyarn about the town, of Wilmington declaring a holiday for the Governor and me, and I even made some of the boys believe it.
"The most interesting work I ever did was selling shoes for Henry Ford in Detroit. I was in the shoe department in his commissary at Dearborn. This commissary served all three of his plants. We didn't get in a few cases of shoes at a time like the ordinary shoe store; they came in carload lots. Why, I've seen solid carloads of men's shoes of just one style. That was the sort the police wear, and the men in the plants wore them at work. I've forgotten whether it was $2.95 or $3.95 they sold at. Everyday was pay day at the Ford plants in them days. Ford kept everything under the sun at his stores for you to spend your daily earnings on. There were about a hundred and fifty thousand people working in his three plants, and that's a right big group of prospective customers.
"The stores in Detroit fought Ford and his commissary system, and during the time I was there lots of the downtown places wouldn't sell a thing to a person they thought was a Ford employee. However, as far as I know, Mr. Ford never gave any orders about a word being said to us about not trading at other stores. He was not that sort. I never handled a cent a customer paid for shoes. Here's the way it was handled. When a sale was made the amount was marked on the package, and a form recording the sale and showing details of purchase was presented to the cashier, who received the money as the customer left the commissary. Mrs. Ford came in the commissary 'most everyday, and ones I had the pleasure of waiting on her. When she had selected the shoes she wanted I wrapped 'em up and turned in the record on the required form. I don't know whether she paid for 'em when she passed the cashier's stand or not, but I would imagine she did. She was able, wasn't she? The only time I ever saw Mr. Ford was out at the airport one day. If he ever came in his commissary, I never saw him. Therefore, you see, a man paid me $185 a month for a long while and I newer glimpsed him but ones, and then newer had an opportunity to speak to him.
"I sure was sorry to have to leave the Henry Ford Commissary. Dad was sick and mother wired me to come home at once. I've been drifting ever since, but that's all I've ever done anyway. Soon after I came back to see about dad, I ran a filling station in a mighty nice section of this town. My sales ran about $500 a month out there, but that kind of work is the hardest in the world. You can work your-self to death in those long hours everyday and Sunday too, and then newer accomplish anything.
"I've newer accumulated a thing in my life, for I've spent everything I made hawing a good time. That's why my first wife couldn't get along with me. She left me and went back to Carolina to the town where we were married. "After dad got better I went off to Miami, Florida. Do I like that city? It's swell, but it ain't no place for a poor person that's trying to get on. In the rush season it's no trouble getting some sort of a job in that city. When I landed there I went to work for a wholesale tobacco house, and soon they had me working 47 stores, including liquor houses. If my sales dropped under a thousand dollars a day I'd be sure to get bawled out. However, the only time this happened was my very first day's work when a man went around ay route with me to show me the places where I was to call. There's more business done in Miami on Sunday than in this town in a whole week's time. "Liquor flows there as free as water, and the strangest part of it all to me is that the women down there drink more than the men. What bothered me most was the fact that those folks in Miami don't have any regard for their churches. However, I don't have any room to talk about 'em, for I don't go to church myself - haven't been on the inside of one in 15 years. I know I ought to go, but there's just so many hypocrites in the churches that I'd just as soon not go where they are. I do despise a hypocrite.
"But we were talking about Miami. There's a liquor store right across the street from one of the finest churches. Some of the people will be going into church while others wait out in front of the liquor store for their drinks. Like as not, I'd be right there selling tobacco to the liquor store. Well, that's just some of the ways of the world.
“The way I was beginning to live in that town was too much for me, so I gave up my job and buddies there and beat it back here, where I immediately got work in a shoe store. I'd starve before I'd work for the man that ran that store again. I don't mind if my employer bawls me out if I'm not making money for him, but when it comes to where he doesn't pay me for my services, then is where we lock horns. The 3 months I was there, I topped the list in shoe sales, and he never paid me over $40 a month. It takes more than that for a man to live on. Of course, if he is out of work and making nothing at all, he is glad to get a chance to make even that little bit. Finally, at the end of 6 months I asked him for a raise. He showed then that he had the worst disposition I’ve ever seen in a man. Instead of giving me the raise he fired me. Men just won’t stay with him long at a time, so he has to hire women. It’s much harder for women to find work than for men, and so they have to take what they can get and like it - or else.
"Soon I got a job as head salesman in an Atlanta shoe store. There was a chain of those shoe stores, and I thought I was going to get on fine with that company. Just as I was getting hack on my fest, dad was taken sick again and wanted me to come back home. He's 82 years old now and won’t be here much longer, so I’ve decided not to leave him again long as he lives. I was lucky getting this little job when I came back. While I don’t make but $50 a month, that beats doing nothing. The man I work for has this store and one other. I worked in his other store until he opened up here and put me in charge.
"Since I came back home this last time I’ve married again. My family got mad because I married such a young girl, but I think that’s strictly my own business, especially as long as we’re happy. My first wife married again 3 years before I did. That’s all right; I’m glad she did. We are still good friends and I’m glad she’s married to a man that can give her those better things of life that I couldn’t provide. Don’t misunderstand me because I have no hard feelings against my first wife. I love my present wife devotedly, and I’m trying to be the sort of husband she deserves. She’s all right.
"No, I have no children. I’ve been married 2 years this last time, and I'd like very much to have at least a boy and a girl, but at my age -I'm already forty-two - I think it would be a crime to start having a family without means on hand to provide for and educate children. Right now I'm not making enough to support my wife and myself, and I surely couldn't support any children and give them the advantages of life I'd want 'em to have. I never did believe in large families. Mother and dad didn't have but three children, and we all live together. All of us help as much as we can and between all of us we get on real well, considering none of us make decent salaries. Going back to the subject of children, would you like to know how I feel about poor folks having gangs of 'em? There should be a law against having more children than you can provide for, and there should also be a law not to let people get married who haven't got good sense, for their children'll be idiots as well. Inferior people should be weeded out like inferior stock.
"You can understand just from looking at me, that I never pay any attention to diet. That goes further back than my grown-up life, for probably if I'd gotten the proper food as a child my teeth wouldn't be so bad now. It's hard for me to eat less food than my appetite calls for. Who in the hell can resist plenty of good snap beans, irish potatoes, meat, cornbread and buttermilk like I find on the table when I come home at night? When I put my feet under our table and look at all those good things - most of 'em home-grown - I feel sorry for the folks in cities that would give 'most anything to have the chance I do to enjoy food grown in our own garden and on our own farm.
