R. V. Waldrep,
Editorial Department
Pink Petree, Postman,
R. F. D.,
Red Bay. Alabama.
PINK PETREE
Pink Petree was sitting on the front porch. He didn't like the idea- much--for visitors to come in on him when he was getting ready to go to Sunday School. He was in his awing, Bible on his lap, and newspapers at his side, and a cigar between his fingers. He was having his early Sunday smoke.
When the coupe drove up, across the protruding limestone rocks before the store, he didn't get up, but his red-faced, pleasant-faced son came down across the front yard, fenced in so you couldn't drive a car up--came down under the tall, old cedar trees. He walked on bare ground, for the cedar trees killed the grass. He left his mule with another fellow. He opened the back door of the house, and unbarred the front door, while Pink Petree looked on from his front porch seat.
The three town fellows got out, while Son Petree opened the door of the store. The store was long as a train box-car, and some wider and taller. It was made of timber that was beginning to gray and blacken with age. It looked very much like one of those old cotton outhouses in Southern fields. It certainly didn't look like a store.
And the town boys didn't think a person should expect to see a store in Pleasant Site; for they had driven mile after mile out of Red Bay. They had driven along roads that dipped and dipped, and never did anything else. A person couldn't see over twenty feet ahead for dipping and for the twelve- foot, or more, wall of green bushes and trees that stuck up on each side of the road.
The store was on a grade, and the house where old Man Petree was sitting on the front porch, was higher on the grade. The fence that went around the yardful of cedar trees used the long store as part of itself.
The boys went into the store, and talked and asked for Coca Colas, and snooped around with their eyes, at the horse-collar on the wall, the pods of red pepper hanging from the ceiling, the canned goods that lined the wall, the table of sacked flour. It looked like a storage room in place of a store. It was dark and looked like no one bad been there in quite a while. Petree didn't have any Coca Colas.
The boys figured they'd go up to the house and they went up there, while the son Petree got his mule again,(first locking the doors, which were like stable doors). He began to show the foot of the mule to another fellow.
The boys said hi-de-do, and so forth, -and they took a seat on the porch. They wanted to hear all about Pleasant Site; for Pleasant Site was here "before the war when Red Bay wasn't even dreamed of, and Petree had been there a pretty good while. He didn't look so hilly as you would expect, however. He had on a clean, blue shirt, buttoned all the way up, but not finished off with a tie. His dark hair was neatly combed, if not prettily combed. He looked as if he had just shaved and washed. His small face was not as dark as most Pleasant Site people. He is a store¬keeper and doesn't work out in the sun so much. He is a small man, sixty-four years old; he likes sports, and never misses a ball game.
Once, so one of the boys' fathers says, they wanted to keep him out of a game because he was too old, but he got in and beat them all. His voice has plenty of spirit and the movements he makes with his hands and legs as he sits, are quick and young. He wants to be young.
One of the boys asked! "How old are you, Mr. Petree?" Pink grinned like a monkey, and slapped the Bible he had laid aside. He got serious and austere when he spoke, a tone a fellow uses when he's telling some lie he wants believed. Forty-nine." They all laughed. So he told them the truth.
The boys began to talk about the people and Pleasant Site, the water mill. Pink told them how he had worked down at the water mill with Dr. Underwood. He told how the mill used to grind flour out. There were three grades; for it had to go through three grindings.
"When Dr. Underwood and me run the mill, we'd take shifts at being sawyer and off-bearer." They were running the sawmill part. "I didn't make much money out of it. The kids got to wanting me to buy them a car, and I wouldn't do it; finally I told them that when I made enough money out of the mill I'd buy them a car. So I put it all down in a book, and pretty soon that told me we had enough money. I bought the car, paying over $600 for it. But that mill never made any more money, and I sold out."
The boys wanted to know about Pleasant Site: He told them: "The Watsons used to own all this land through here; Watson used to own that store I'm running down there. I still have some of his old books. It was after the war they made their money. Then old man Watson lost it all in Iuka. I was down there at Iuka to see one of them fellers jump out of an airplane, and I saw one of his folks in a cafe. She talked a long time about old times, and I had to go because it was getting nearly two, when the jump was to be. I haven't seen her since.
"The old man put all his money in them mineral springs in Iuka, in Mineral Springs Hotel, and he lost it all. One of Ms boys is down at Tuscaloosa now.
"A feller came to see me," he told it but I forgot the feller's name,
"and wanted me to go down there at Tuscaloosa and talk to a boy of his'n in the asylum. I told him I couldn't go, but he says he couldn't talk, and he wanted me to talk to the boy and the doctors. I called my wife for some clothes and took out down there. We went in there, and I told them I wanted to see Watson and this feller's boy.
"They brought them in there, and I talked to them. Old Watson, the Old man's son, was going 'kkkkuhttthhhhh'," Pink made a noise and waved his fingers in such a way you thought about a hen cackling. "He went on like that and never would stop until you ask him his age, and he said, nice as you please: 'seventy-one,' and he'd start that muttering again. Then I mentioned Pleasant Site, and he quit the noise and said something intelligent again, but started the noise right after that."
Petree told me how he was postmaster: "I went in business with old man John Petree 39 years ago. I was postmaster, for about three years." He laughed and shifted his small bulk on the swing, and remembered his fears: "I was scared to death once. I was drinking, and a fellow name of Burman from Kentucky came into the store and wanted to know if I was postmaster, and I told him that I wasn't interested--I was drunk. He told me if I was postmaster I'd better "be interested, and I asked him what he wanted. He asked me if I had approved of a subcontract on the Star Route from Belgreen. I told him I had..."
"I did it one day when I was drunk; bad five bottles in my pocket. Two or three fellows was with me, and they said I ought to do it. I told them I couldn't, but they kept a talking, and I rared back right big, and give him the oath--just the kind you take in Court.
"Then this fellow Burman begin to tell me how sorry he was for me; he pulled out the postal regulations an' asked me if I had read them, and I told him there was so many I didn't have time. He said I'd better take time. I told him who was it had got me in this mess? I asked him did I apply for postmastership. Then he begin to ask me what I had, and I told him I didn't have nothing but a wife, and that old man John Petree owned the store. We went up to the house, in this room." Pink jerked his thumb toward the window nearest the swing.
"I had a shotgun up there on the wall. I told him if he was the fellow that got him to be postmaster he'd reach up there an' get that gun an' shoot the sonofabitch's brains out before he could get out the door. He backed up a little; I guess he knew I meant what I said. Then he got to talking about money, and he said if I'd give him $5 we'd call it off. I got the money, and he give me a receipt. I still have that receipt down there in the store.
"Pretty soon I got a letter from a Judge saying that they understood that I had paid out some money, and that they could fix things up, since I hadn't done anything wrong. I wrote him to drop it all, that it was such a little that I didn't want to start nothing else. Let it die, I told them."
One of the boys was assistant Postmaster in Red Bay, and he wanted to see the books, and after a while the boys and the old man went down there and they turned the pages of the half-rotten records, read about dead-letters, receipts, money-orders. It was interesting: and they went into the charge account books too. They read how in 1872 liquor was charged and marked "Mdse, 4 qts."
But first Pink told how Austen owed him $65, and it looked like he wasn't going to collect the money. He tried but he couldn't get nowhere, he said.
"They was having a revival meeting over in the Methodist Church." Pink indicated the direction of the church, toward the left of the porch, down into the trees somewhere. The church is not there now. "The presiding Elder was preaching, and he was stirring up the people. He preached a right good sermon on death-payment. I liked it so well that I dropped a dollar in the collection plate, and I wished after that I had put in five dollars.
"The next day Austen came up to the store:
"Did you hear the sermon last night?" he asks.
"'Austen,' I says, 'are you trying to pick a fight, or are you really wanting to know what I think of that sermon?
"'I want to know what you think about the sermon,' he says.
"Well, Austen, I think he hit it just right. It's just the way he said it, don't you think so?'
"'Yeah, I think the same thing,' he says, and says 'I owe you $65. You want to buy a mule?' He had a mule with him. I looked at the mule.
"'Yeah, I'd like to buy a mule.'
"'Will you give me $65 for him?' I told him I would, and for him to go turn the mule in the pasture."
Pink grinned, and said: "I wished I'd give that time in place of that $1."
Pink got back on the Watsons, and told how one of the Watsons went up to Wall Street. "He went up there to be a shark, but he got among them sharks, and they outsharked him. They cleaned him out in no time at all.
"I remember when one of the Watsons was a boy. I went down to the spring," he pointed into a thicket on the side of the hill. "I found Watson there with a snake, a small snake about the size of a pipe-stem.
He was playing with the snake. I went up to him. Pink was pointing out with his hands how the boy was playing with the little snake. "I was scared of the snake. Watson called me over, and he said: 'This snake is little now, and he don't amount to much. But he'll grow, and the first thing you know, he'll be a big snake, and dangerous.' He was serious as you please: 'That's the way with sin. First you don't notice it, then it gets big and bigger.' I was scared of that snake and got away from there."
In the store the boys were curious about the books, looking for ones that were old. They turned through the half-eaten leaves, looked at faded ink-writing. "One fellow came in one day and he got to looking through them old books, and he saw where he had been sent after a box of snuff.
It said in the charging book: 'Box of snuff, got by Jack.' He wanted to tear a leaf out, but I told him I wouldn't do that, just take the whole book. Some traveling salesmen came in here, and I gave them a book too. They have just been laying up there for years, and ain't no use to me."
Pink wanted to go to church, the boys could tell; so they got in the car, and Pink said: "If I can find some of them older books, I'll send 'em over to Red Bay for you."
7/20/39
S.J.
