In an otherwise identical version thedate of the interview, "November 3, 1938,"is given on the top of page 9749.
Life Story of the Wm. M. Overtsons, 710, Beech St., Elizabeth City, N. C.
As told to W. O. Saunders by Mrs. William Milton Overton
The Driscolls are not what might be called a typical cottonmill family. Nor is Elizabeth City a typical cottonmill town for that matter.
Elizabeth City has only one small cotton mill, making yarn only, and in its beginning drew its labor supply from homes in town without having to build a settlement of its own. Later the mill acquired ownership of a number of tenement houses which it rentsto its dependable workers at a nominal rental.
The Driscolls live in a mill-owned framehouse two stories in height with two rooms anda kitchen on the first floor and two bed roomsupstairs. They pay renal of$l.00 a week.
Until a year ago the street and the sidewalkin front of their home were unimproved; dusty in dry weather, muddy in wet weather. Along came the W. P. A. andthere is a cement sidewalk now and the street hasbeen given a treatment of gravel and oil. There isbut a patch of a front yard, barren of lawn grass, or shrubbery or flowers.
Until Dec. 23, 1937 Mr. Driscoll had a steadyjob in the warp mill, 45 hours a week at 31 cents anhour. Mrs. Driscoll was a spinner, getting 21 cents anhour. Then they worked full time the pair of themmade $26.25 a week. On this income they fared relatively well. They belonged to a church, the husband belonged to a fraternal order, they carried insurance on themselvesand their one child. They bought a radio and enjoyed the programs nightly and Sundays. They ate beefsteak twice a week, fish' once a week and had aroast, a ham or a hen for their Sunday dinners. Thatwas when the mill was operating on full time and both were working. Occasionally the mill shut down and theyhad to pinch until the mill started up again.
The mill struggled through the Great Depressionwith frequent interruptions to operations and on August 1937 it shut down indefinitely. The mill didnot resume work until October of that year and hasworked on a schedule of only two days one week andthree days on alternate weeks ever since.
On Dec. 23, 1937 the husband was laid offindefinitely and, after weeks of unemployment, threw himself upon the W. P. A., from which he gets a checkfor $14.72 every 15 days, with certain provisionsfrom the W. P. A. Commodity Warehouse.
But with acombined income of $9.70 to $12.04 a week, plus an occasional bag ofpotatoes, sack of flour or other provisions from the W. P. A. Warehouse, the Driscolls barely manage.
They don't go to church so often; haven't paidchurch dues in a year; they have dropped all of theirindustrial insurance and the husband has given up hislodge membership. They play the radio only on Saturdaynights and Sundays now, because the radio consumeselectric current and their electric light bill whichis only $1.20 a month in the summer, when nights areshort, mounts to $2.40 a month in winter when nights arelong.
There is only one heating stove in thehouse and it is used only in the evenings when thefamily is together. Mrs. Driscoll has to be at themill at 6:30 o'clock in the morning; Mr. Driscoll is off on his W. P. A. job or looking for odd jobs in spare time; their one child, William, age nine going on ten, goes to school.
"I went into the mill when I was eleven yearsold," says Mrs. Driscoll; "that was 23 years ago. I have enjoyed my work, always got along with thebosses and reckon I'll have a job as long as there'swork in the mill. But I declare I don't know whatthe world's coming to.
"There's that little boy of ours; I'mworrying about him; I tell him to get all the educationhe can because he's going to need it; there just don'tseem to be any work for anybody that hasn't got someeducation.
"I do my ownwashing and ironing, mycooking and my house-keeping. Having gone in the mill so early and being so early tired when I quitwork at night, I never took up sewing and can't makeclothes.
"We cook on an oil stove; it's quickand handy and its dangerous going off to your workand leaving a wood fire in a kitchen stove.
"Burning coal in the living room is moreexpensive than wood, but when my husband and I wereboth working we didn't have time to bother with awood pile and I reckon we wouldn't know how to startnow.
"Our grocery bill amounts to $8.00 andsometimes $10 a week. We do well to have any fireat all. And I'm telling you those upstairs rooms arecolder than all outdoors in winter. It takes allthe cover we can pile on to keep warm o'nightsand we have to stir around right brisk when we getup these winter mornings."
While she was talking I noticed that Mrs. Driscoll's teeth were badly decayed and twoof her front uppers missing. After seeing how the Driscolls lived and hearing Mrs. Driscoll's own story I didn't haveto ask her why she didn't go to a dentist. Nor did shehave to apologize for the fact that she had snuff in hermouth and went to the stove, lifted the lid and spitevery so often. Old folks tell me that snuff takes the tasteof bad teeth out of one's mouth.
