May 19, 1939.
Henrietta Elizabeth
Sellers, 60
(Colored Cook for
Mrs. H. M. Corse)
3755 Ortega Blvd.
Jacksonville, Florida.
Rose Shepherd, Writer.
HENRIETTA ELIZABETH SELLERS
"Wait ontil I turns my stove down so's my dinner don't burn, and I'll be glad to talk to you," said Henrietta, as she shuffled her 200-lbs with more or less deliberation towards the kitchen.
Directly she was back, standing calmly at attention, her attitude unconsciously taking on a part of the peaceful quietness of the surroundings where she seems so much at home.
"I was born in Georgia," she said, in answer to a question, "and I got an Indian grandfather somewhere back among my people - I don't know how far back. I've worked for lots of people in my time - I'm 60 so J. W. gays (he's my son) and he's 40. He keeps track of things like that - got it all written down in the back of a Bible. I just never did bother. Age don't make no difference, just so's you keep going.
"Most of the time I worked in Atlanta, the last one there was a Jewish lady, Mrs. Creeks. Then Mrs. Corse she hired me and brought me to Florida about fifteen years ago-before that one was born" - pointing to Mrs. Corse's young daughter, sheltering three six-day-old Scottie puppies under the protection of a big rock on the riverfront levee.
“I can't remember when I learned to cook - seem lak. I always knowed - but I did have to learn how to cook seafood, fish, shrimp, crabs and such, after I come to Florida.
"I likes to fish, too, and every week when I get a my Thursday afternoon off, I goes fishing out here on the wharf. Sometimes I catches one, sometimes a lot, and then again I don't catch none - just sets there all evening hoping to get a bite.
“Wouldn't I like to do something else in my spare time? Well, I don't take much truck with these folks that works in the neighborhood by the day, and I spects I'so a better off - at least I knows, I'll so in good company - by myself.
One thing I likes to go to church - I'so always gone to church, and my onliest son, J. W., is a preacher-Methodist. He's pastor of a church over in town on West Ashley street, running down from the colored High School.
“That song you just heard me singing was a 'jumped-up' song I heard last Sunday over at the Yukon Methodist church for colored folks. A 'jumped-up' song," she patiently explained, is when you feel the spirit of the Lord acting on your soul, and you just gets up and sings whatever comes to mind.
"That song runs: 'If you look for me down here, and
can't find me,
If you come up to Heaven,
You'll find me there.'
"Another one goes:
'Lie down, lie down, thy weary one,
Your head upon my breast.'
"And here's another:
'Servant of God, well done,
Rest from thy worldly toil,
The "battle is fought,
The victory won,
Enter thy Master's joy.'
A 'jumped-up' song is sincere, it comes right from a person's heart, and there's more to them than you'd think. If the world is ever saved, it's going to be by just such brings, because the younger generation don't study like the old church people, and they don't got the spirit like they should. And so far as the tune is concerned, they sound just as good to me as any I hears over the radio.
Yes, they have song books at the church, but I don't need no song book - once I hears a thing, I can always remember it, so 1 don't need a book to get it out of.
"Seuze me, I'll have to look after my cooking." Off she trudged to the kitchen, and when she returned seated herself just inside the dining room door, where she could better attend the cooking of the evening meal.
"Do I like Florida? Well, I likes it better for some incidents, and some I likes better in Georgia. You most generally likes it better where you was raised at, she said apologetically, as if not wishing to minimize Florida's advantages. "Since I got my son, J. W., here now, I don't <text not clear> I'll ever live any more in Georgia."
It developed "by close questioning, that j. W., in spite of his forty years, and his ability as a preacher, always manages to locate somewhere in Henriotta's immediate vicinity.
"I took a lot a pains with J. W. to raise him right, and one day about eighteen years ago he came to me and said - Mama, I'se coting’ Tommie, and we'se going to got married. I looked over my big boy, up and down, and I says -"No, you ain't, J. W., you ain't' going to do no such thing. If my boy gets married, I'd like to seem him get a good wife, and Tommie is that trifling she won't make any kind of a wife for nobody much less you. She's selfish and no count. Now, you just let your old mammy pick you a wife., There's Anna Hill, I says.
Anna Hill was my friend, a few years older than J. W., but good and kind, industrious and faithful.
J. w. had never thought of her as a wife, but he dropped Tommie, and started going with Anna, and in a short time they were married. She has proved herself to be as good as I said. She has made J. W. a fine wife, and they have a nice son, fourteen years old.
Tommier Well, she turned out like I said. She married some-one else right away, but couldn't got along with her husband, and she's been married and divorced twice since. She just can't get along with nobody. Yes, sir, I sure saved J. W. a lot of married misery.
"You See I know the beginning's of Anna - I know her father and mother - they was good old people, and Anna and I was friends from girls on up, so I knew she could not help but be all right.
My grandson goes to school in Yukon. No, I don't think he'll be a preacher like his father. Preachers has a pretty hard time. He wants to be a mechanic, and is always tinkering around the garage, learning things about machinery.
I say to my son, the other day, J. W., some of those days I'm going clear away from around you, and he say: “Well, I guess my money will take me just as far as yours will carry you, and I'll find you wherever you go.’
“I used to go to all the Sunday school conferences, and yearly meetings, but it's too much trouble now. The last conference I went to was at Palatka - J. W. had a small church there. It was a big meeting, preachers and church members of Methodists from all over the State. I just went down on the train for one day, and there was such a crowd I could not got into the hall, but stood out on the porch. After I went and bought my lunch, I went back and stood around some more - you see the conference was going to change the preachers around, and I wanted to know where J. W. was to be sent. Finally, I heard his name called over the loud speaker - Jacksonville:, and I didn't wait to hear no more. Sure enough, they give him the little church here on Broad and Ashley, and he's been here ever since.
"Before Mrs. Corse came to Jacksonville the last time, we lived several years in the country near Green Cove Springs, and J. W. get himself transferred to a little church there," she said guilelessly. "Mostly, he tries to be near where I is.
"There was a colored cemetery not far away, and one day I went down there to a man's funeral - he had been a good Sanetified member, but had gone over to the Baptists. The Baptist minister was holding the funeral, but the Sanctified preacher showed up, too. He was standing off to one side, and just before the funeral started, I heard him sing
but:
‘Brother, I wonder if the Lord is
satisfied with you,
In the life that you live,
And the service that you give -
I wonder if the Lord is satisfied with you.’
Yes, them 'jumped-up' songs, sung on the spur of the moment fits in better than anything you can think up most of the time.
Asked if she was superstitious, Henrietta said, "No, I ain't exactly superstitious, but there's lots of old sayings I believe. One is about may rain - if you get good and wet in a May rain, you won't have no cold the balance of the year. And that is sure enought true. I always gets myself wet through in May, and I never, never has a cold.
"Ghosts? No, I don't have no truck with them. I pray the Lord every night keep them things as far from he as He can."