Project #3613
Stiles M. Scruggs
Columbia, S.C.
12-17-38.
LIFE STORIES
Walter M. Hughes
(Negro)
Rear 1428 Taylor Street
Columbia. S.C.
When Miss Lola Johnson, secretary to the Rev. Dr. Samuel K. Phillips, pastor of Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church, stepped to the door of her office and called "Walter," a merry, cheerful answer came back immediately: "I'm comin', Miss Lola!" Walter M. Hughes, a slender full-blood Negro came forward, with the information that he was 'most done' dusting and was ready for the next task.
"Here's a gentlemen who wishes to talk to you about yourself," Miss Johnson told Walter. He smiled at me and said: "I 'spect the interview won't last long, because I've never done much of anything that was of prime importance." By this time Walter and his caller were seated in the study of Dr. Phillips, who was absent. I noticed how spick-and-span the office appeared and spoke of it to the janitor. Walter said he always started the day's work by cleaning up" the pastor's study.
"I shall be glad to tell you about ups and downs along the rocky road of life, but I'm afraid it will not be of interest, because it has been spent from early life to the present time doing common things, mostly for white folks. I am a native of Columbia, being born here on March 3, 1872, and I am now 66 years old. I do not recall ever being out of work more than a day or two since the time I started working. I am very thankful for this, especially for the last ten years, when I have seen many suffer for lack of employment.
"My daddy was John Hughes and my mammy was Annie (Mitchell) Hughes. They both were born in slavery and belonged to white folks by the names they took. Their daddies and mammies were slaves who were set free about 1866, when Negroes generally went free under the law after the Civil War. I never heard them talk much about slave days. They didn't live in slavery long enough to learn much about it, and they prob'ly didn't recall what they know 'bout it with pleasure. Most of the talk I heard between my daddy and mammy was 'bout work and the condition we was then in. They had many white and black friends during my childhood, and they kept busy doing such work as they could find in those years when everybody had to do a lot of scratching or suffer. They set the work plan for me by their example. And it takes plenty of it to secure good food and clothes. I notice both white and black people who keep busy generally live well.
"My mammy was busy washing and ironing clothes for the white folks of quality when I became old enough to begin noticing affairs about our humble home. My daddy was so keen to make an honest living that he would hire out to the big planters in South Carolina, if he could not get regular employment in Columbia. Daddy was a fine trainer of thoroughbred horses, and a good judge of horses, too. He was employed for some years on the big plantation of General Johnson Hagood, in Barnwell County. He trained General Hagood's thoroughbreds so well that they often won races at State fairs and at the Charleston race track.
'From about 1878 until 1880, daddy was employed on the Hagood plantation. He could come home sometimes on Sunday to soe Mammy and the children. It was a happy day for all of us when General Hagood came to Columbia late in 1870 to assume the office of Governor of South Carolina (1880-1882). We were pleased because the new governor had chosen daddy to drive his carriage from Barnwell to Columbia. Daddy met us on the State House steps and hugged and kissed us both. "The General has told me that I am to work in the State House as long as he does, but he hasn't told me what I am to do yet,' daddy told mammy. She smiled and said, 'You just wait. General Hagood is a man of his word, and he will not disappoint you.' 'Yes, Mummy, I am not worried. I just wanted you to know that everything is bright and sunny,' said daddy.
"The next day after General Hagood took office as governor, daddy was appointed head janitor at the State House, and he stayed there as long as Governor Hagood did.
"You pleased ms much awhile ago when you spoke of my use of the English language. I think I might tell you about how I learned to talk as well as I do, which is nothing to brag on. I began to attend Howard School when I was just a little more than six years old, and I kept up my school work there for two years. There I learned to read a little, write a little, and cipher a little. The two years at Howard School completed my school career. But I have kept on with my school books, when I got a chance, to this day.
"For years I've bought magazines, and some of the tales I've read help me be a better janitor. My reason for quitting school was due to the fact that my daddy died when I was thirteen years old, and I felt it was necessary for me to work and help my mammy keep the wolf from our door. Constant reading of books and papers, when I was not working, improved my mind. And since I was pretty regularly employed by fine white folks, I made it a habit to notice what they said, and that helped me to speak better and act right. It also kept me from being puffed up when I was with my black folks.
"My first earning work was in carrying white folks' clothes, which my mother had washed and ironed, to their homes. I was not a big child and I'm not a large man, as you see; and white folks often gave me a small coin for making the trip. Other white friends sometimes got me to carry a note or a package, and they paid am. By and by, this errand work developed, and I was soon earning money by selling newspapers on the streets. I've been proud to know that the newspapers of Columbia, for which I sold papers, gave me a fine recommendation when they found out that I had applied for a job with F. L. Brown & Brothers. big retail grocers of that day, who needed a boy to drive a delivery wagon. I got the job and held it for three years. I quit to take another job, similar to the one I had left, with R. B. McKay & Brothers, because they offered me more money than the other firm was paying me.
"At the end of two years with the McKay firm, I quit to drive for Baldwin & Son, for the same reason, an increase in pay. That firm, in the course of a few years, became the E. T. Hendrix Store, and I delivered goods to customers for Hendrix until that firm went out of business, in 1927. I was not idle long after Mr. Hendrix quit operation of his store. I talked with some of my white folks' friends, and one of them went with me to see about a job as janitor of Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church. I began work here in a few days, and I've never been harshly reprimanded for sorry work or for sorry conduct in the elevan years I've worked here, from 1927 to 1938.
"This 11-year-old job, whioh I'm lucky enough to hold, keeps me reasonably busy. The Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church is not the largest church in Columbia, but it's one of the busiest. There is an average of one meeting a day at the church or at the Sunday School annex. The church and its annex must be swept and dusted daily. Sometimes there's two or more meetings every twenty- four hours. The office and study of the pastor, the Rev. Dr. Samuell K. Phillips, are located in the annex, and I usually attend to these in the morning before the occupants arrive. Then I sweep and dust the pews in the annex and in the church. The annex is built into the church building and, all told, there is a good deal of sweeping and dusting each day.
"For most of five or six months in the fall and winter season, fires must be made in the offices of the pastor and his secretary. The church and annex must also be heated. During the summer season fans must be kept humming, and there is about as much work needed at one season as another. I take a keen interest in the plan to keep the whole church plant in apple pie order.
"From the treatment that I usually experience from the pastor, his secretary, and the membership of the church. I'm inclined to think that my services are appreciated here, and it pleases me. I'm not making a great sight of moneys; but the fourteen dollars a week that they pay me comes along regular. With it I manage to pay three dollars and fifty cents a month house rent end twenty- five cents a week for burial insurance, besides buying enough food, fuel, and clothes for us to live fairly comfortable.
"I've been married twice. My first wife was Ellen Williams. We met at our church social in 1915, and we courted along for most four years. Sometimes I thought I was making great progress in the drive for a wife, but, like as not, at the very next meeting I had to decide I was losing favor rapidly. This courtship was brought to a climax in 1919, when I led Ellen Williams to the marriage altar. Our married life was very happy until she got sick in 1927. It kept me scratching pretty hard to make my wages pay our expenses during her illness.
"Ellen's folks had moved to Ohio shortly after we married. They wanted Ellen to come to them at Cincinnati. They wrote us and said that if she were there they believed the medical attendance and the climate might bring her back to health. I asked her if she wished to go to them at Cincinnati, and she said she would be powerful glad to go. But she smiled at me and added, dear hubby, I sure would hate to leave you behind, and I know we can hardly pay for the expense of a trip for me.'
"I was plain worried. My white end black friends noticed my worryment, and asked me if I was sick. By and by I told them what was troubling me. The quiet, silent manner in which they came to my aid, with dollars, half dollars, quarter dollars, dimes, and nickles, the next few days warmed my heart for all humanity. Ellen and I soon left for Cincinnati. There her folks and me made her as comfortable as we could afford, and I kissed her and came back to my work. Ellen didn't improve at Cincinnati. She made a game fight, but death claimed her in 1930. I last looked on her face out there, and she was buried there.
"I came back home sad and weary. I buckled down to work, but it was terribly lonesome when it came time for me to go home to nobody. I soon met Mary Young, and me became friends. In the course of time, I convinced her that married life was the happiest of all. And I led her to the marriage altar in 1937. We began our home life in a little house in the rear of 1428 Taylor Street, Columbia. We still live there. Mary is a good housekeeper, and she aids me in making a living, when she gets a chance to work at some of the white folks' homes.
"Mary also helps me supply our needs in many little ways that I reckon you wouldn't think of. For instance, in the wee home where we live, the yard around the house would hardly be large enough to plant a row of corn in. Well, in a snug corner of the meager yard, Mary planted an artichoke; in another, a hill or two of Irish potatoes; and close by, a few peanuts. She has attended to them like moat woman attend to their flowers, and it means some good things we shall have to eat this winter.
"My daddy built us a house on Senate Street, just about where the Atlantic Coast Line track is now. It was ready for the roof one day, and workman came there to put it on. Daddy stopped them. 'If you put the shingles on in the light of the moon,' he told them, 'they will ourl up at the ends. Next week it will be the dark of the moon and then we'll put the roof on. It will not ourl up then.' You know I have always kept that in mind. If I ever cover a house, I will follow daddy's advice.
"Mammy told me always to make a cross mark in the sand if I start some wheres and have to go back for something. She said it would drive away bad luck. I never forgot that, either, and I still do it. Mary and I talk about such things sometimes. She knows potatoes and all root crops must be planted in the dark of the moon to produce well."
