<text not clear>
ORIGINAL NAMES: CHANGED NAMES:
Frank Freeman	Tim Summerville
Mary Freeman	Martha Summerville
New Light Town	Lightville
Barton Greek	Hortonville
Wake Forest	Sleepy Hollow
Macedonia	Greasy Fork
Wake County	Transylvania County
Richard	Alfred
Charles	Reuben
Alec	Hezekiah
Bert	Moses
William Henry	Joseph
Katie	Magnolia
Rosa	Lily
Julia	Velma
Vinie	Miriah
Harriot	Molly
Raleigh	Chesterfield
Will Edwards	Mr. Smalley
Cabarrus & Blount	Beacon & Sharp Streets
The name 'Tupper School' is truly the original name for the present Shaw University. The name of the church attended is also The Missionary Baptist Church.
Date of first writing:	22-Jun-39
Person interviewed:	Frank Freeman (Negro)
Address:	12 Tupper Lane, Raleigh, N. C.
Occupation:	Pensioned
Name of writer:	Nancy T. Robinson
No. of words:	About 3,000
AT LEAST WE HAVE A ROOF
Tim and Martha Summerville live in what was once a three-room house, in a quiet and shady lane. Now it's a weather-beaten hut that has been condemned for one and a half of the two years that they have lived there. Yes, they live in this condemned shanty because they don't have to pay rent. They can't move because they have nowhere to go. They can't rent a better house because their income is too small to allow them to pay rent.
The steps have long since fallen in, and a stump serves as a means of entrance. The sides have swayed from age and wind, but the roof is made of tar paper shingles and looks almost new. The house is well-protected from winds and storms by trees and overgrown shrubbery. It's almost hidden.
Inside, the house is clean, but filled with junk from years and years of accumulation. Tim does the cleaning and all of the other work that the kind neighbors and public nurse don't do. Martha is completely helpless, and has been for a long time.
"So you came to see if you could do anything to help me, eh? Well, God will surely bless you. But how did you know about us; I don't know you? Oh, the nurse told you, eh? Well, that was mighty thoughtful of her. She's a mighty good woman anyway.
"Child, I need help if anyone ever did. Miss Martha's been laying just like you see her now for pretty near forty-nine weeks," said Tim, pointing to a frail form on one of the two beds in the room. It was darkened by the trees and overgrown weeds that covered the one window and shut out the much needed sunlight. "She's been feeble for over two years, but now the rheumatism has spreaded all over her body. Most of the time she lays awake and stares. Seldom does she say anything.
"Yes, I do all of the work practically. I wash and clean our little house. It's really a shack, but it's home to us, and it does keep the rain off of us. I cook, too, whatever Miss Martha feels like eating. Now, I don't eat much. I just eat coffee and bread for each meal, and sometimes a little fruit at nights. I haven't tasted meat in four years now. About six years ago, the doctor took me off of meats because my blood was too high. Well, a year later, it got too low and the doctor had to put meat back into my diet. I ate a little for about a year, then stopped completely. I guess I lost my taste for meats of any kind. Then I'm not able to buy good meat like I could enjoy for both of us; and Miss Martha must have hers, so I just eat coffee and bread.
"You see, our only income is the old-age pension that we get and that is only $12.50 a piece, or $25 a month. Being sick, Miss Martha needs most of that for medicine, food and odds and ends that sick people need. Then there's our little insurance that I try to keep going. It's not much, but at least it's enough to bury us on. So, you see, that doesn't go very far. But Miss Martha eats pork chops and chicken and I eat coffee and bread. One thing though, we don't have to pay rent. I don't know how we'd manage if our rent had to come out of our income. The old shack's not much good, but then if it was Mr. Smalley wouldn't be letting us use it free. As it is, he can't rent it because it has been condemned. We've got to be grateful to get it; and I am. It's better than living out-of-doors or going to an old folks' home.
"Miss Martha called me to her bed just last week and said, 'You sure are looking fat; and I'm so thin. What are you eating?' I told her, 'Coffee and bread.'
"Let's sit out here where it's cool and talk a while. It's too hot to cook, and that's all that I have left to do for today," said Tim, with a twinkle in his eye.
"You know, age, weight, and heat is a terrible combination. Weather like this is bad on anyone, to say nothing of it's effect on 300 pounds that are eighty years old.
"Yes, I've been here a long time. I've lived here in Chesterfield for fifty-nine years. Before then, I lived on a farm in Transylvania County with my father. Being one of the oldest, I helped him with the farm until I was twenty-one years old. The day I became a man, father gave me my freedom. That was in 1880. I packed my sack and went to Tupper School, carrying with me $47.75 which represented my savings over a period of years.
"I was hardly missed, though, because there was a large family of us. Let's see, there were: Alfred, Reuben, Hezekiah, Moses, Joseph, Magnolia, Lily, Velma, Miriah, Molly and I. How many's that? There are supposed to be eleven----six boys and five girls. I was the oldest boy of the lot.
"My sisters and brothers didn't have the chance and spunk that I had, so none of them got an education. Only a few of them even went to the elementary school that was in our county.
"I entered the then Tupper Memorial School in 1881. At that time, classes were held at Tupper Church. It still stands on the corner of Beacon and Sharp Streets. It's still in use. While I was attending the school, a new site was bought and the college was moved to its present location. I finished in 1883.
"School, then, was nothing like it is now. Everyone there was anxious for their education. They studied hard, As a result the old school turned out better teachers on the whole, than these modern institutions with their better trends of teaching. Of course the schools today with their new curriculums and new methods of training, are far superior to the old schools, out these youngsters don't seem to apply themselves. Then when they do complete their work and go on the field to teach they are either too indifferent or too lazy to use the methods that they have learned. So few people now are real or born teachers Most of them are mainly interested in the salaries.
"Like my sisters and brothers, very few people had the opportunity to go to school; while today offers so many chances, particularly for folks who want to go to school. There are so many forms of student aid that each institution offers. Besides these jobs, the Government is giving job assistance in the form of N. Y. A. work. These opportunities put education in the reach of everybody.
"For forty-three years succeeding my graduation, I taught. The first four years I worked at Lightville. From there I went to Hortonville and taught for eight year; The next ten years were spent at Sleepy Hollow. Then I was elected to the principalship of the Greasy Fork School I stayed there for twenty-one years and resigned. I had to resign because time demanded better trained workers and higher certificates. So I had to give over to the younger ones.
"My salary stayed the same for the whole forty-three years. I made $25 a month for all the years that I taught. I couldn't save anything on that salary. It took all of that to live on. I taught for the love of teaching.
"Once, while I was teaching, a colored man wanted to borrow $40 from me. I told him that I couldn't let him have it until I got my check the next week; but then he could have it with ten per cent interest. When I gave the money to him the following week, he asked if I knew where he could find a man to do some carpentry work. I offered to do the job and did it. He paid me $10 for the work, just patching the roof with shingles and laying new strips of flooring in some worn places. The money that he paid me, was ten of the dollars that I had lent to him on the very same day. The following week, he paid me $44. I made $54 on the deal with a little service, because I did not mind working.
"I am not particular about my work, either. I'll do any kind that I can, for anyone who needs me, white or colored.
"I didn't stop working because I had to stop teaching. Instead, I found a job at the city market shelling beans and peas. It wasn't much but it certainly did beat nothing. They only paid five cents a quart. Some days, I'd make a dollar; some days I'd make less. I worked there until Miss Martha took sick. If she was well, I'd be there right now, I guess.
"My health and strength has always been good. Even at my age, I can get along much better than some of these young folks. Good health and long lives just seem to run in my family. My mother lived to be ninety-seven years old; and father was just about that old when he died. Mother's motto in life was: 'Don't wait for others to do, but do what you can yourself.' That very policy has been instilled in me through all these years. I never dread a task. I just start doing it, and try to get through with it. I never let my work lag. Then, I try to get a certain amount of rest. I have never kept late hours. I guess my mild nature and lack of bad habits have helped me to preserve my health a lot also. I was eighty years old on Christmas Eve and I have yet to smoke my first cigar or cigarette or use tobacco in any form. I have never drunk any of the strong drinks. Eight now, I don't know whiskey from brandy.
"Miss Martha and I have been married for thirty-two years, but we have never had any children. The good Lord just didn't give us any. For years, we hoped and prayed for one anyway; now I guess it was just as well that we didn't have any. They cause so many problems and heartaches. So many of them are bad. We have trouble enough, with Miss Martha sick and all. I don't see how we could stand any more. But I guess God does. He has taken care of us this far. We could have trusted Him to guide us with a child.
"Long years ago, I put my life in His hand. I asked Him to take charge of me; and He has been my shepherd every since. I carry my every problem to Him. There have been so many that He alone has solved. We were almost out-of-doors, and He gave us shelter. It isn't a mansion by any means, but at least it has a roof and we don't get wet.
"People don't reverence the churches now like they use to. I can remember when our church, the Missionary Baptist Church, use to be full on Sunday morning; and the only noise to be heard was the minister preaching from his pulpit. Now you can almost count the congregation on your two hands; and you can't hear the sermon for the people yelling in the streets and in the beer gardens. The money that once went to support the churches and ministers is now being spent to keep up dance halls and orchestras, or beer parlors. The Bible says that the nations would get wiser and more wicked. I can see the wickedness now; but I am not so sure about the wiseness.
"Maybe if the towns would make everything else close up again during church time they could get better attendance anyway. The people on the whole seem too worldly to support the preachers. Then they wonder why the preachers do other kinds of work to make a living---and then criticize them for trying to live.
"Now, I am not able to leave home much, but I do go to church on Sundays at least one time; and on election days I vote. I never miss a time going to the polls and casting my vote. Now I vote for the man that I think is for the people in general. I was once a strict Republican, but now, since the parties have split up so, I have to split my ticket. I am wholeheartedly in accord with the present administration. I think that Roosevelt is one of the best Presidents that the country has ever had. He, with his New Deal, has done the people a great good. The people were in dire circumstances. He has saved many from complete starvation. With the old-age pension he has saved us. For that I am very grateful. To save humanity, he has sacrificed much of the country's wealth. Many people have criticized that, and have said that he had been so free with the Nation's money that it will take the country a long time to get straightened out. Well, maybe that's true. But which is more important, a wealthy country or a population that has received governmental aid to help it exist? To my mind, Mr. Roosevelt is a great humanitarian. If in some ways he has failed we can at least feel that he and his colleagues have tried.
"Well, it's cooler now; I guess I'll just let you be company this time. I'll cook Miss Martha's dinner. I don't reckon that you'd want to be cooking on a wood stove in the summertime anyway.
"Come back again and you can help me, maybe. I've sure enjoyed talking to you. Maybe the next time you come, Miss Martha will be awake, and you can get her to talk or at least listen to you. I hate to see her just lay there and I can't do a thing to make her well. At least I try to keep her clean and as comfortable as possible. After all, we have a lot to be thankful for. We don't have to be hungry, and we do have a roof over our heads."
LAR
