"Little Eight John," by James Aswell, was published in God Bless the Devil! Liars' Bench Tales (1940), a volume of folklore collected by the Tennessee Writers' Project. Though not a life history, this story was filed with the Tennessee interviews and is therefore included here. It may have originally been filed with the life histories because it was considered related material. The life history was never a strict format closely adhered to by the interviewers. Some materials submitted as life histories are more descriptions of communities, or the recounting of folklore and local legend than the story of a particular individual. Many life history interviewers, such as Aswell, worked on various related FWP undertakings. In this way, work in one area influenced work in the other.
LITTLE EIGHT JOHN
Once an long ago dey was a little black boy name of Eight John. He was a nice lookin little boy but he didn't act like he looked. He mean little boy and he wouldn't mind a word de grown folks told him. Naw, not a livin word. So if his lovin mammy told him not to do a thing, he go straight an do hit. Yes, spite of all de world.
"Don't step on no toad frawgs," his lovin mammy told him,"aw you bring de bad lucks on yo family. Yes you will."
Little Eight John he say, "No'm, I won't step on no toad frawgs. No ma'am!"
But jes as sho as anything, soon as he got out of sight of his lovin mammy, dat ittle Eight John find him a toad frawg an squirsh hit. Sometime he squirsh a heap of toad frawgs.
An the cow wouldn't give no milk but bloody milk an de baby would have de bad ol colics.
But Little Eight John he jes duck his haid an laugh.
"Don't set in no chair backwards," his lovin mammy told Eight John. "It bring de weary troubles to yo family."
An so Little Eight John he set backwards in every chair.
Den his lovin mammy's cawn bread burn an de milk wouldn't churn.
Little ol Eight John jes laugh an laugh an laugh cause he know why hit was.
"Don't climb no trees on Sunday," his lovin mammy told him, "aw hit will be bad luck."
So dat Little Eight John, dat bad little boy, he sneak up trees on Sunday.
Den his pappy's taters wouldn't grow an de mule wouldn't go.
Little Eight John he know howcome.
"Don't count yo teeth," his lovin mammy she tell little Eight John, "aw dey come a bad sickness in yo family."
But dat Little Eight John he go right ahaid an count his teeth. He count his uppers an he count his lowers. He count em on weekdays an Sundays.
Den his mammy she whoop an de baby git de croup.
All on count of dat Little Eight John, dat badness of a little ol boy.
"Don't sleep wid yo haid at de foot of the baid aw yo family git de weary money blues," his lovin mammy told him.
So he do hit an do hit sho, dat cross-goin little ol Eight John boy.
An de family hit went broke wid no money in de poke.
Little Eight John he jes giggle.
"Don't have no Sunday moans, faw fear ol Raw Haid Bloody Bones," his lovin mammy told him.
So he had de Sunday moans an he had de Sunday groans, an he moan an he groan an he moan.
An ol Raw Haid Bloody Bones he come after dat little bad boy an change him to a little ol grease spot on de kitchen table an his lovin mammy wash hit off de next mawnin.
An dat was de end of Little Eight John.
An dat whut always happen to never-mindin little boys.