Spencer Mill Village
Spindale, N. C.
September 28, 1938
I.L.M.
ELLIE ROBERTSON
She lives in one of the better-kept mill house located on Spindale St. Her yard is clean, her porch lined with flower boxes. A lacy, luxuriously-fronded fern graces the front entrance. Not far from it an enormous begonia droops with waxy red blooms. There are petunias and marigolds blooming about her doorstep. A big-leafed vine shades half of her porch. The vine makes a cool nook for the swing in which she she occasionally spends an hour or so during the summer time. She loves her home and she loves to stay in it.
She cares very little for picture shows and she has never cultivated an interest in other forms of amusement. Her husband likes square dances and goes to them. She stays at home with the children. The children, like their mother, have little interest in picture shows except when Shirley Temple is on. The oldest girl became frightened at a terrific fire scene in a picture when she was six years old. She was unaccompanied by an older person, and was with a child from across the street. Badly frightened she ran out of the show and home to her mother. Her mother says it was perhaps a good thing that she got soared then. She has never given her the trouble some children give their mothers in wanting to go to more shows than they can afford.
Ellie is industrious and devotes much of her time to washing, ironing, cooking, and sewing for her family. Now in late September she and the children are digging e pit for keeping the flowers during the winter months.
There are two pieces of furniture in Ellie's house of which she is very proud. One is a big-cabinet radio and the other is a GE frigidaire. She keeps a clean house and a certain amount of order despite the many china cats, dogs, and other gewgaws which adorn the place. She becomes irritated at the thought that the mill company is so slow in repainting the houses, particularly the interior. "My notion is the superintendent is just a cheap guy and he don't won't to spend any more money on the houses than he can help," she says. "He likes to save all the money that's made for the company. They've promised me some new back doorsteps for six months and I haven't got 'em yet. It's been talked that they are goin' to sell all their houses and we'll have to rent 'em at a sight higher rent. If they do that, they'll be bound to raise wages soma or there'll be plenty that caint live on what they make. It would be hard on us and Jack gettin' one of the beet wages in the mill."
Ellie's husband makes $30 a week. She thinks he has done so well because he's stuck to his work, always putting work first and never thinking of such e thing as asking for a day off. And too, he has always been handy with machinery. That, she thinks, had a lot to do with his getting to be second hand in the weave room.
They were married when she was eighteen and he was seventeen. They had been neighbors always, living on mountain farms not far apart up in the Chimney Rock section. Ellie's father owned about a hundred acres of land, a large part of it in mountain pasture. But there were acres down below where they raised corn, beans, potatoes, cabbage — more than was needed for home consumption. Ellie's father took the surplus to market and brought back cash which he saved for tax money.
Everybody worked on that farm. Ellie herself could hoe before she was seven. She remembers long, back-breaking days of fodder-pulling, bean-picking, and hoeing.
In the winter Ellie attended the near-by country school until she had completed the seventh grade. Her father had gone to school two months. "But he's a sight better scholar than I am," Ellie says. "Nobody could fool him at figgers and he always keeps up with what's in the newspaper."
Ellie and Jack moved to the mill as soon as they were married. Jack started off in the weave room and made good. It was 1919 and wages were high. Ellie and Jack boarded that first year and began buying their furniture on the installment plan. They had a bedroom suite paid for when they started housekeeping at the beginning of their second year.
They were married three years before their first child was born. The fourth and last was born during the big strike of 1934. "Strikers from the mills down below come here and took Charge," Ellie explains. "They was against the stretch-out that had just come on. They stopped the mill for awhile and plenty here in Spindale that Joined lost their jobs. I remember like it was yesterday leyin' in there in the bed and watchin' fifteen or twenty Spencer workers march up and down the street carryin' the United states flag and yelling out to the rest of the workers to join in a fight for their rights. They never got no new members and finally they quit. Jim went back to work as soon as the boss men got in charge and opened the mill up agin. He's never missed many days the thirteen year he's been here.
"I've knowed people though that's been willin' to work and somehow couldn't get along. I know a woman that had saved and bought her own house, and took care of her sick mother too. Her husband got out of e job and she was out down to one day's work a week. Her mother died and she didn't have money to bury her with. That was one Friday night back in the summer. Up to late Saturday they didn't know whether they was goin' to be able to bury her or not. Some of the neighbors went around and took up a collection to pay the grave diggers and buy the lot. Then this woman made arrangements with the undertaker and they got her mother buried Sunday mornin'. I heard the other day she was login' her place and I expect she has held it long as she can.
"A collection come hard back then because so many people wasn't gettin' full time. I've been glad that Jim's got to work so steady. Up to now we haven't had to draw any rocking chair money. That's what they call the unemployment money, you know. Of course nobody don't know in these times when they'll be laid off. Jim'll work as long as he can get work though."
JENNIE Robinson
She picks her way slowly along as she walks the rutted paths from neighbor's house to another on Factory Hill. Often she can be seen going to the house of Arthur Callahan, who is her brother-in-law, to borrow a cup of lard or a pan of meal. She makes a handy run-about for her family, and they humor her in the little thing which please her. Her protruding shoulder blade is as a burden which she cannot put down. The leaders in her neck seem to clutch at her head and draw it back with such tightness that her eyes have the perpetual look of one asking for mercy. Her body had grown through its crookedness and its wretchedness to not more than four feet, and one wonders at first glance whether she is still a child with time yet to attain her height. But upon closer view, it is plain that Jennie's face is old and there is no more time in which she can grow.
Jennie is the first-born of Maggie Robinson and she is twenty-eight years old. Maggie says that Jennie's trouble started from a fall she received when she was two years old. Maggie was working in the mill and Jennie was left in the care of an eleven year old Child. She fell off the porch one day and injured her spine. "But it never showed up to amount to anything until a year later when she had the pneumony fever." Maggie continues her story. "I noticed then when I'd take her out of her cradle that her little beck was beginnin' to curve. The doctor said it was caused from the fall and he told me to take her down to Atlanta for treatment. We got together what money we could and Tom took her down there. They wasn't enough money to keep her in Atlanta for long, and he brought her back home. The older she growed the worse her back got and the doctor put a brace on her body. She wore it for twelve years and I reckin hit was the brace that give her a chance to grow what little she did."
Jennie's voice is low and seems to creep out of the corner of her mouth. She turns herself slightly as she speaks so that she can look up into her listener's face. She went through the fourth grade in the public schools of Asheville, and then the authorities stopped her from school. She still feels resentful about it because book learning was r sight of pleasure to her, she says, and there was nothing much left for her to do. She wishes her father had gone ahead and sued the city as he planned to do when she was forced to stop.
There stands out in Jennie's mind one person who has been kinder to her than any other outside person touching her life. She is a former leader of the Girls' Club of factory Hill. "Law, she was one sweet thing, sweet as a angel, "she says as she turns her head to see that you understand her words. "She was good to me was always a smile on her face and it seemed that she us. So good – and so pretty," she finished and pushes her body deeper into the chair.
The Robinson family is always mindful of Jennie's feelings and they succeed in allotting to her a place which is that of an adult except where her physical limitations are a deterrence. She helps a little with the cooking and straightens around in the house a bit. Always when there's company she takes her part in the conservation. The Robinsons believe that it was only a lack of money which kept Jennie from having a strong, straight body and it is no shame to them that they did and accepted the wage that was paid them. Them, pride. Maggie is proud that her father who died at eighty years of age was able to work in the mill until two years before his death. He was tall and portly, she says, and as handsome a man as you are likely to find. Years ago he bought him a little place in the country and from there he drove his own car in to his work. Jennie, too, will join in listing his merits and she remembers good days she has spent at his house. Maggie's daughter, Alma, married Arthur Callahan who is Democratic Chairman of his precinct. That is another point of pride with the Robinsons and they like to tell visitors of the part Arthur plays in politics. Then, Jennie herself can command respect among her neighbors for her ability in quoting scripture.
Church attendance is an important part in Jennie's Life. She goes each Sunday to Patton Ave. Baptist church, and during the week following often quotes from the sermon that she has heard. Revivals are even a greater pleasure to her than regular sermons. She gone this summer whenever someone would take her to hear Rev, Ham who is holding a revival in the tobacco warehouse. "He's deep in the scriptures, "she says "and it does me good to listen to him. A few Factory Hill folks are goin' pretty regular to hear him, and they shorely need to, Not many;around here go to church at all."
She moves her crooked body and tries to bring it to ft better resting position. Her eyes look up out of her drawn-over head, and she Says in creeping, solemn tones, "Why don't they go to church? I'll tell you what's wrong with them. The devil has got a hold on 'em. Yes, he's shorely got good hold on more than one on Factory Hill."
