THE WAITING BOOM IN A BUS STATION
Written by; Miss Grace MeCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited, by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
April 6, 1939
March 27, 29, 1939
Mr. and Mrs. W. T. Sullivan
(white)
Managers - Union Bus Station
170 College Avenue
Athens, Georgia G.M.
THIS WAITING ROOM IN A BUS STATION
The last minute hustle attendant upon the departure of a bus was in full swing, as passengers and station employees mingled in the rush to the huge out-going highway conveyance.
An aged Negro hobbled up to the ticket counter. His ragged coat was worn over faded overalls, and he carried an old cap in his hand. The run-over condition of his shoes probably accounted in part for his unsteady gait.
"Boss," he asked the ticket agent, "what am the price of a ticket to Sparkeninburg?"
"Do you mean Spartanburg?" the agent inquired, and when the old man nodded in assent, he named a sum that was evidently very disappointing to the prospective traveler. The old man shifted his weight from one foot to the other in a panic of indecision.
The agent asked, "Do you want a ticket to Spartanburg?"
Finally the old man looked up, "Boss," he faltered, "I ’spects as how I'se just as well go on back down in Arnoldsvilles."
"The bus does not go to Arnoldsville," was the response, "I can sell you a ticket to the Hub; that is the nearest stop to Arnoldsville."
"Yassir, dats it, dats jus' where I'se gwine," the old man said, "but how much is a ticket to dat place?"
"Only fifteen cents, Uncle."
The Negro carefully counted his change again, bought his ticket, and asked, "Which bus does I git on?" The agent ordered a porter to put him on the right bus.
The space around the ticket counter was crowded for the next few moments and the agent was busy selling tickets and directing passengers. He had just handed a ticket to a young woman, when the old Negro returned in great haste.
"What's the matter, Uncle? Didn't that porter put you on the right bus?"
"Yassir, Boss, but I wants to ax you'se how much is the fare to Greens-villes?"
"The fare to Greenville is $1.20, and if you want to go there you'll have to make up your mind in a hurry for it's time now for that bus to leave." Turning to a porter the agent said, "Ed, tell the driver of that Greenville bus to wait just a minute,"
"Boss, what's I'se gwine to do wid dis here ticket to de Hub?" the old man wanted to know.
"Well," the agent replied, "just give me $1.05 end your ticket to the Hub, that will make up the $1.20 due for the Greenville ticket."
"But, Boss, don't I have to have no ticket if I'se gwine to Greens-villes?"
"Yes, I’ll give you another ticket in the place of the one that you have, but you’ll have to hurry up and hand me the money or the bus will leave you."
While the Negro counted his money deliberately for the second time, the driver of the Greenville bus came to the door and asked impatiently if he was to have another passenger.
"I cain't tell if I can go or not, ’til I sees if I’se got enough money," the prospective passenger said, stalling for time. Finally he counted out $1.05 in small change and placed it on the counter.
"You’ll have to give me back that ticket or else hand me 15¢ more," the ticket agent insisted.
"But, Boss," pleaded the old man, "I’se just ’bleeged for to keep my ticket." After more explaining he reluctantly handed over his ticket to the Hub, the agent hastily gave him a ticket to Greenville and sent him to the bus. As he stumbled out, clutching the hard-gained ticket a general laugh went around the waiting room.
His place at the ticket counter was taken immediately by a youth clad in overalls. His muddy shoes made me wonder if he had found the fields too wet to plow. "Give me a ticket on the No. 15 Highway," he said.
"None of our stops bear the name of No. 15 Highway. To what station do you want your ticket?" The reply was inaudible, end the agent replied, "Oh, now I know what you want. You want one of the 15¢ highway tickets." He gave the boy a ticket and directed him to a bus.
The bus drivers were rushing in and out, making out reports, getting change, and some of them were eating. From their conversation I learned that they only stop over at some main points, long enough to make out and turn in reports and to check in and out.
Things were quieting down and it seemed that the confusion was about over for awhile, when a porter came running in the door. "Mr. Sam! Mr. Sam!" he called. In response a tall, rather stout young man in a driver's uniform, came from the back of the waiting room. "What's the matter?" he asked.
"Come out to the bus in a hurry," the porter urged. Both men ran out the door, followed by the ticket agent, and I decided to see if I could learn the cause of the excitement. A large bus was in front of the station, apparently ready to pull out. A driver, wearing a troubled expression was standing in the doorway. He stood aside as Mr. Sam - as they called the starter - entered and demanded to know the trouble. The porter sheepishly, but earnestly, confided something that I did not hear, and the ticket agent laughed. Turning to me he said: "How just watch them boys."
"But, whet is the matter?" I asked.
"Nothing, except that he has exactly thirteen passengers on his bus and he is trying to persuade Sam to go along so that he will have fourteen. That will not work this time for Sam has to take a bus out himself in just a few minutes."
"Are the drivers actually that superstitious?” I asked.
"They must he," the agent laughed, "particularly about the number 13, for every one of them hates to pull out with 13 passengers on board."
Sam finally managed to get off the bus, and he laughed as it pulled out. "I sure hope I don't draw that luck on my own trip today," he said.
"Do the drivers experience difficulties very often?" I asked the agent.
"Very seldom," he answered. "You can depend on them to get in on time too, unless they do happen to run into trouble. They are as fine a bunch of boys as you will find anywhere. You'd be surprised to know how many of them are college graduates. All of them have to be able to show high school diplomas. They need a good education with all these intricate reports to be made out, and they have to sell tickets on the bus too. They are very accommodating, and will pick you up anywhere on the highway and let you off at any place that suits your convenience. It is that problem of starting and stopping that caused the companies to have to solve the problems of price, by establishing all the little stations along the bus routes so that we could have definite rates to all these points. For instance, I noticed you listening to the old Negro when he was trying to buy a ticket. 'When he said Arnoldsville, I sold him a ticket to the Hub, ’which is a store right on the highway. The bus does not go to Arnoldsville, but it does stop at the Hub, and the Hub is in sight of Arnoldsville."
As no arrivals or departures were scheduled for the next hour or so, I asked the agent to tell me something of his work and his experiences. My first inquiry was, "Do you like your work?"
"I should say I do," he replied. "I don't believe you will find any couple that likes their work any better than my wife and I like the business of managing this bus station. We love it. I had worked for 19 years as ticket agent when I got sick and they let me go. I guess they thought they'd have to pension me off, if they kept me any longer. It didn't seem fair at the time, but it was really about the best thing that ever happened to me.
"My wife and I have managed this station almost from the time it was located here, and we are making much more than I ever did when I worked for the railroad. We open at seven in the morning and close at ten at night. Our hours are long, but we are our own bosses, and one of us can get out at a time, whenever we want to, so we don't mind the long hours. The longer we work the more we make, for we do not work on a salary. We get a commission on all the money we take in and that gives us something to work for.
"We make a good profit on all our sales of soft drinks, ice cream, cigarettes, cigars, crackers and other eatables."
A glance around the room showed large comfortable chairs grouped about the center, while smaller ones extended in a row against the walls. There were also a huge circulating heater, a telephone booth, and a place for checking baggage, all necessary equipment for an establishment of this kind. The large automatic refrigerator held soft drinks and ice cream, and the glass showcase was filled with cigarettes, chewing gum and an apparently endless variety of candies, crackers, and other things in the confectionery line. Plainly labeled doors led to the rest rooms for men and for women. The waiting room for Negroes adjoins the white waiting room.
The office, enclosed by a tall counter holding registers and other equipment, is located in one corner of the waiting room and contains a desk, a table and chairs, a typewriter, a telephone, and all the other necessities of the modern office. One portion of the counter is reserved for use of the bus drivers in making their reports. On a counter a small glass-covered schedule shows rates and hours of arrival and departure at different stations. Occupying a prominent place on the counter, a motto said to have been given to the managers by a university professor, reads:
"You were created with two ends,
One to sit on,
One to think with.
Your success depends on which you use most,
Heads, you win
Tails, you lose.”
The agent and his wife watched me as I read and laughed with me. "Do you know?" he said, "that almost everyone that buys a ticket reads that sign?” His wife took up the conversation.
”You would be surprised,” she said, ”at the questions that people ask us. We come in contact with all classes of people, and there is no telling what they will ask next. One of their most aggravating habits is to ask us first when a bus leaves or comes in, and as you realize that is a question that we answer from the beginning to the end of every day, but no sooner have we answered it than some people say, ’Are you sure that is right?' Things like that are apt to get on your nerves if you do not maintain a sense of humor.
”It is a real job at times to find out where some of them want to go. This is especially so with some Negroes, and the older they are the worse they are about that. The other day I asked an old Negro woman where she wanted to go.
"’Just out to my home,' she said.
"But, where is your home?'
”Oh, it’s just about three miles out on de highway.'
Yes, but you will have to let us know which highway it’s on and where your nearest bus stop is before we can fix up your ticket,' I told her.
"Now, Miss, ain't I done told you I lives just right out nigh de highway?
"But, which highway?' I insisted.
"'Oh, hit’s de one dat passes right by Mr. Johnny's place!'
"Finally I began calling the names and numbers of different highways thinking that might help her to remember. She Interrupted me with a loud peal of laughter.
"'Lawsy, now, just lissen; you'se ain't even gittin' hot, not a t’all.'
"I began calling the names of the various station stops on the different highways radiating from this town, and when I mentioned the name of a tourist camp about eight miles out she said, ’Yassum, dat’s de place. I done tole you’se it was right on de highway. '
"Some of the white people are almost as bad. Only a few days ago a nicely dressed woman got off the bus with quite a bit of luggage. My husband approached her and asked, ’May I check your baggage for you?' She made no reply. Thinking that she had failed to hear him, he repeated the question. Still she ignored him. Again he asked:
"’Lady, if you will tell me where you are going, I will be glad to check your baggage and have it ready for you.'
"'After awhile,’ was her only response. He waited and after awhile he said, 'Lady, it will soon be time for your bus to leave, and if you will just tell me where you are going I will check your baggage now so it can be loaded on the bus.' She refused to answer for awhile, then raised her head and looked directly at him for the first time and in an exasperated tone said, ’Well, if you just have to know, I'm going to the rest room."'
The arrival of another bus drew the attention of all station employees. The bus driver hurried in to make his report, and a porter followed him with a rough looking traveling bag. Holding out the bag he began, "Look what they's done put off on you! I'd just send it right on back to 'em."
"That's just what I'll do,” the driver grinned, "Just put it over there inside the office."
In the ensuing quiet after the bus' departure, the agent began describing the difference between various modes, of transportation. "I'm a great believer in travel by bus," he said, "History tells us that the stagecoach was the first public means of transportation in this state, and that one could make the trip from Savannah to Atlanta in about four or five days at about the same cost that would today provide a plane trip between these two towns.
"The old stagecoach was superseded by railroad cars and the railroads grew to be the most powerful business institution in America. The same old trip from Savannah to Atlanta was made by the train in eight hours, at a cost far below that charged by the early stagecoaches.
"It was during the World War, when all the transportation facilities of this country were taxed to the utmost that automobiles were proven a practical mode of long distance travel, but autos for hire did not come into general use until the 1920's. These vehicles were commonly called taxis or taxicabs - their name being derived from the taximeter, which was the device installed in these autos, for rent, to record the fare due from the passenger. Those first taxis were used chiefly as a means of transportation between trains and hotels, and from point to point within a town, for citizens who did not own a car.
"The first automobile bus that we recall in this town was Cook's Bus and it was operated by the owner, himself, between local depots and hotels. The only trip of any considerable distance that I can remember Mr. Cook making with that first bus was when he took a load of passengers to Columbus, Georgia, to the Georgia-Auburn game in 1920. Due to road conditions and a few breakdowns he was just about three days late in returning home.
"In 1924, Captain Roper began operating six busses between Athens and Atlanta, and between Atlanta and Macon. The highways were awful in those days and it was not unusual for them to spend the night in a ditch by the side of the road. At that time there were no regulations governing passenger-carrying automobiles; they had no insurance and the passengers had little, if any protection in case of accidents.
"Improvement has been rapid as well as steady in the condition of highways, as well as in the systems of bus and vehicle transportation in America. There is frequent connection by bus with almost every point in America end the schedules are convenient.
"The average passenger load per bus is from twenty to fifty persons. Expenses for operating a bus are much less than the cost of operating one coach of a train, and the good roads enable the bus to make better time. It is therefore practical to run them on more frequent trips between the same points, than for an entire train to make repeat trips. The service is being constantly improved.
"With the passage of the Motor Carrier law in 1929; all vehicles for public conveyance were forced to carry insurance for the protection of passengers and all property that was transported, as well as on outside property that might be damaged by the operation of a public vehicle.
"Quite a number of claims were paid to passengers injured because of the condition of the roads, for it was a common thing then for a bus to run into a bad hole in the road, or skid off the highway in muddy places. You have probably been told that practically every farmer living along the highways has loaned shovels and other tools to bus people at all hours of the night, and in many instances have gone out themselves to help get a bus out of the ditch.
"Now the highways are paved, and the bus service between all the cities has been made very convenient. This is best illustrated by the facilities it affords to people in rural sections.
The bus can be boarded in front of their houses; they can come in town, shop, visit, or take in a show for as many hours as they wish, and when they are ready to go home they just take a bus and get off right at their own front door, and the best feature of it all is that they can make the trip so much cheaper by bus than it would cost to operate their own cars over the some route.
"On all sides you hear the hue and cry that the busses are ruining the highways; that the taxpayers have to pay for the building and upkeep of the highways for the use of heavy busses. As far as that goes, it is partly true, but when you ride a bus, the ride is from 25% to 50% less than any other mode of travel, and is not this difference a fair return on the investment in taxes for building good roads?
"Bus transportation has earned its popularity by its safety, economy, and speed. The fare is less and in most instances the time on the road is shorter than any other safe mode of travel.
"Of course, every citizen is entitled to the use of an automobile, if he so desires and can pay the expenses of cost and upkeep. But wouldn't you say that if 40 people ride in one vehicle, it is safer and more economical, and less damage is done to the highway than if each one of these forty persons rode in a separate car. Certainly the one car with forty passengers causes less traffic congestion than would forty separate cars.
"Because it has been proven a more rapid, as well as more economical and convenient mode of transportation there is a greater <text not clear> of freight hauled by trucks on the highway now than by any other carriers. By use of these freight trucks the farmers and the merchants have their shipments delivered right to their own doors instead of having to haul goods from depots."
"I'd imagine your drivers have some very amusing experiences," I remarked.
"I should say they do," he laughed. "Not many days ago an old Negro woman boarded one of our busses and said to the driver, 'Boss, does you know whar I wants to git off at?'
"'No, Aunty,' replied the driver, 'but you just pull that cord you see there and I'll stop right then.'"
"He had about forgotten about the old woman and was going along at a pretty good rate through a downpour of rain, when all at once the old Negro grabbed the cord with both hands, and as the old saying goes, 'She just sat on it.' The driver threw on his brakes so suddenly that the bus skidded a little in the mud before it came to a stop. He turned around and told the woman, 'That's all right now, Aunty. You can turn the cord a loose now.' She was still pulling down on it for dear life.
"A few days later the same old woman was again a passenger on his bus and again she asked, 'Boss, does you know whar I wants to git off at?'
"'No, Aunty,' the driver again replied, 'you just pull that cord when you want to get off, and I'll stop for you.'"
"'No sirree, Boss!' she announced most positively, 'You'll just have to stop dis here bus your own self dis time, 'cause I ain't never gwine to pull dat cord no more."'
"'Now, why not?' asked the driver. 'Don't you know that's the only way I can tell when you want to get off?’"
"'Well, anyhow, you'll just have to stop yourself from now on,' she stated, 'for de last time I done stopped dis here dis, I laked to ditched it."'
"One of our agents is young,” said the station manager, "and the others tease him unmercifully, T'here’s a story about one trip that they can almost make him fight about. Another of our drivers was on his bus and witnessed the incident. They had stopped to pick up a fat old degress that was just about the filthiest and smelliest human they had ever seen. ’Where do you want to to?' the driver asked.
"'Who, me?' she asked, ' I'se gwine on dis here bus.'”
"’Yes, but where do you want to go?' queried the driver.
”'I'se ' down', she answered and pointed down the road in the direction the bus was traveling.
"'But I have to know where you are going before I can sell you a ticket,' the young man explained.
"'Lawsy, Boss, I'se just gwine to ride along wid you,' was all that he could get her to say from then on, and she came on for into town on his bus.. When she was ready to get off, she paid for her ticket,”
Another bus pulled in and the station was soon teeming with arriving and departing passengers. Realizing that there would be no opportunity for any more conversation with the managers of the bus station, I bade them good-bye.
<text not clear>
