Interviewed.
Submitted 8/23/40
Every man has a right to think for himself, act for himself; and to do the things he thinks are most necessary.
With this in mind, Moses Williams, a tall, 42 year old dark boy, who insists that his figure is stream-lined because he is well built, is Ant a religious man and is very indifferent toward certain principles practiced by other men. Because of this he is behind the bars in the Parish Prison, mainly because he cracked two skulls, shot a woman and "pitched a boogey," in a night club which means that he put out all the lights and began throwing glasses at the guest.
Moses states that he isn't a bad man. This was verified by the jailers who made him a kind of a straw boss because his husky voice rolled as if it had extraordinary power. It makes prisoners Jump and help the jailers to maintain order.
Moses does little work, if any, in the jail. He isn't as big a shot as some of the others but Moses enjoys the same previlieges as the others. Having graduated from a dishwasher Moses is very well acquainted with the kitchen in the jail and eats nicely. On several occasions the warden had to let Moses know who was boss of the kitchen by hiting hem on the head with a frying pan. Several times the warden caught Moses nimble fingers attempting to steal out of the huge ice-box that has more ice in it than anything else. Because he is a great pork chop eater Moses is always trying to steal them. "Pork chops is my dose. Doctors say I must have them and I begrudge the warden because he won't let me fill my doctor's prescription, Moses stated with a broad grin on his face.
Moses Williams was born in Edgard, Louisiana, a place where Negroes are classified as either high yellows, blacks and browns. The near white Negroes associate with white people, call themselves Creoles. The brown Negroes exclude themselves from the lighter complexioned ones while the blacks are entirely out of the spotlight and are regarded as inferior.
There were hundreds of kids whose privileges in Edgard are few, but Moses Williams states that he didn't have any.
"The law was against me, the white people was against me, and the Negroes didn't leave me alone," he says. At Christmas time Moses’parents were too poor to buy him toys and the other boys and girls in the neighborhood didn't let him play with theirs because every time he would several of them were missing.
"I went to the second grade, how I do not know. When the teacher felt like teaching the whole class she gave me some time, when she didn't she gave all her time to the other students. I guess it was because she was disgusted with me because I used to take the kids lunches, Moses explained, continuing: The only way I could get anything in Edgard was to take it and I took everything that came my way including bad colds and bad luck.
"I was the only child in the family; everybody used to tell my ma and pa that I ought to be out in the field but I didn't figure I belonged in the field because the work was to hard, and furthermore, I didn't want the sun to make me no blakcer. I was having a hard enough time as it was. Mr. Witherspoon, the boss, said he would have anybody in the field but me because I stole two of the billy goats for thirty-five cents then I went to the pond and took the billy goats back. I guess the sheriff would have put me in jail a long time ago but he was kind of sweethearting with my cousin. Couldn't tell her from white. How she got to be my cousin I don't know; but he was my cousin and she was some gal. She used to win all the sheriff’s money playing coon-an. I used to be a gambler too but they used to always catch me cheating so nobody would play with me anymore. Wasn't la mess?
I started doing all right when I was 15. Told my ma and.pa that they didn't have to work on the farm as far as I was concerned because I found me a Jane to give me some clothes and put some flips on me. Boy, I was really taking life easy. One day the sheriff told me he could put me in jail; said that if I was in New Orleans, they would lock me up because I didn't have any visible means of support. What I wanted was the means, I didn’t, care for the visible or unvisible. I don't know how I got to stealing but I liked it. I never much with the things I took. I didn't take them from people who were poor. I figured like Huey long a man has a right, to share his wealth with me. If he. didn't share with me I took my share. Sho I used to take diamonds, gold, and brass took everything that came my way. I never was looked up for it. Cause aint nobody had no proof that I was stealing from them. They knowd that my woman; Malinda Jacobs, who worked for the biggest man in Edgard they knowd that Malinda was putting them flips on me and I sure didn't have to steal.
I was soon getting tired of Edgard, all the fun they had there was dancing.
