June 16, 1939
Mrs. Lula Spencer
Newton, N. C.
On relief
Ethel Deal, writer
From Part to Pillar
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Jack Thompson	Dick Mullis
Jones Bassel	Larry Kepper
Al Fox	Jackie Means
Alexander County	Legare County
Newton	Whitesboro
Bill Thornburg	Buck Sidberry
Johnny Clarence Spencer	Billie Harold Miller
Mrs. Chambers	Mrs. Haynes
Miss Lentz	Miss Sigmon
Sid Ennis	Ernest Blower
Myrtle Alice Spencer	Ruby Josephine Miller
Raymond	Wilford
Claude Coulter	Ison Gault
Tom Warlick	Jule Taylor
<text not clear>
From Part to Pillar
"My mammy died when I was nineteen years old and since that time I have been kicked from post to pillar. I no longer care much for anything. I never care about anything at all.
"I ain't got no schoolin' only enough so I can read a little, write less. Some people might think anybody like me ain't much. Maybe they're right. But my feelin' is just the same as other folks.
"After my mammy died things was worse at home. They was not good before. My daddy drunk a lot. I guess if I could had a home like other folks and clothes and somebody to be good to me, things would been different.
"Dick Mullis and me had Deen goin' together a good while 'fore my mammy died. He come to see me every Sad'day and Sunday night. We was goin' to get married only my daddy would not let him come after mammy died. He said it was not decent for him to come there and no woman at the house. So I got to meetin' Dick down behind the barn. One night my daddy slipped up on us and he beat me awful and run me off. I went first one place and then another, keepin' house for people.
"One time I stayed on a farm. The work was so hard and I didn't get any pay. Larry Kepper was not much account and had one wife livin'. He was divorced. But I thought it would be better to marry him and have a home so we got married. For two years we got along purty well. At first he bought me clothes and we had plenty to eat. Then he took to drink. After he got to drinkin' up his wages he bought me nothin' and sometimes there was nothin' to eat. I stayed on, though, till he got to runnin' around after women. Every night after supper he would go off and leave me by myself. I got sick and tired of it and one night I followed him. Somebody told me he was runnin' with a girl by the name of Jackie Means. I followed him and he went to her house. I walked in and caught 'em. He got awful mad. I went back home and got my clothes and left. I been driftin' around ever since, first one place and then the other. My people still lives in Legare county. I didn't want to go back there to live and my daddy wouldn't want me, no way. Three years ago I come to Whitesboro and got me a job in the cotton mill. I worked 'bout three months then found I was goin' to have a baby. The man, Buck Sidberry is his name, had said he would marry me but after I got caught up with, he wouldn't do it. Lots o' women think to have a baby is an awful thing. It's worse if you have one and don't know what to do with it. That's why I'm tryin' to give mine away. Buck wouldn’t help me nor give me no money.
"A woman who worked in the mills let me stay with her for doin’ her house work. I done all her work--washin’, ironin’, cookin’ and I tended to her children on up to the time my baby come. My first baby will be two years old next month. I call him Billy Harold Miller. Miller was my name before I married Larry Kepper After Billy was born I was not strong enough to work in the mill, I doubt if I coulda got a job nohow.
"I went to live with a Mrs. Haynes. She had pellagra and her husband drunk and she doped. It was awful the way they both done. Miss Sigmon, the welfare woman, give me some clothes so I didn’t have to go naked. Miss Sigmon gives me now two or three dollars a week. But as I told you before, lady, I’m not strong enough to ’tend to two children and that’s why I wanted you or somebody to find somebody that would take ’em or one of ’em. Miss Sigmon don’t want me to give ’em away, but I got to go to the hospital and I want ’em to have a good home and a college education.
"This second baby here o’ mine, she’s six weeks old. I got caught again, with Ernest Blower. I call her Ruby Josephine Miller. Of course I like ’em, but how’m I to raise ’em? Ernest won’t marry me. I can’t go back to Larry. He’s mean to me. What am I to do?
I was not stayin’ at the Haynes when Ruby was borned. I never did like it there nohow. She was sick in the bed and fussed and quarreled so much and Wilfred, her husband, cut up so much, that I went over to the country to stay. The place I stay now is Ison Gault’s. Him and his two daughters live on Mr. Jule Taylor’s farm. It’s away over close to the river, I guess ’bout four miles from here. Gault come here with me and helped me with the younguns. We walked. I’m just waitin' here at the Courthouse to see Miss Sigmon. Maybe it would been better if I'd stayed on with Larry Kepper, my husband, or my old daddy, 'cause other men don't seem much better than they was. But I ruther be on relief than be with either of 'em. If I can rid myself o' these children, give 'em to somebody that will give ’em a good home and education, I'm goin' to get out and make somethin' for myself. I ain’t ever went to church or Sunday School much. I guess that’s the best place to make a start.
"The folks I’ve lived with don’t take much to preachin'. I do like to go to revival meetings and go when I get a chance. I’ve never belonged to no church. Preachers don’t bother with people like me. All they want is to please the people what’s got money and can go all dressed up. Maybe I’ll try goin’ and see if I like it. I must go home now. The cloud la gone over. I don't think it will rain. Gault won't like it if I keep him waitin' any longer and I can't get the children back home by myself. I just wanted to see Miss Sigmon to see if she'd know anybody who would take one of 'em. Maybe both."
