It was a sunlit day in April, and the front door stood open. I knocked and listened for the sound of approaching footsteps. None came. The woman across the street said that she thought Sallie Jane was at Mrs. Robert's where she usually went on Saturday mornings. Both of them bought checks and they sometimes went to the store together to turn them in. Would I like for her to go after Sallie Jane? Mrs. Roberts lived right there back of the company store, and it would be no trouble at all to go. I thanked her and she started on her way.
The room inside was clean and already in order for the day. Idly my eyes strayed from one piece of furniture to the other, from the two big- blue overstuffed chairs against the opposite wall to the old spinning wheel in front of the east window and then to the cabinet radio near-by. Occupying the center space of the room was an oak veneer dining table covered with a bright red-checked cloth. Just inside the door stood a grandfather's clock and next to it the davenport to match the chairs. The corner near the door leading into the kitchen gleamed with a white washing machine. My eyes had reached the bright blue ship painted on the smooth surface of the cream colored chimney just above the mantel when I heard footsteps on the back <text not clear>, heard Sallie Jane say, "Come over sometimes, Daisy." They footsteps grew louder, heavier, as of a big person walking; they came through the kitchen, into the living room, and Sallie Jane, a massive woman clad in a blue cotton print dress, was asking me in. There was a sternness about her face which did not disappear even with her ready smile.
"I ought to be able to tell you something about this mill," she was saying shortly after we were seated. "I've lived here since I was four months old and I'm forty-nine now. If you're wantin' to know how the mills have changed I've got a picture that'll tell a right good story. Would you like to see it?"
"Yes, I would," I feplied.
Sallie Jane move from the davenport on which we sat, went into her bedroom, and came back with a twelve by eight inch picture in her hand. "That," she said as she handed the picture to me, "speaks for itself."
It was a group picture of one section of a mill taken thirty five years ago. On the front row sat little girls, weary, droop- shouldered little girls not more than six or seven years old.
"At least you don't see 'em that age down there any more," Sallies Jane said after a long silence. "Now, that stringy little fellow in the second row is my brother. He never did like the mill and he worked hard to get into another trade. Papa seen that all of us had a chance to go to school, but Bud learned his trade through a correspondence school. Got a good job now too. He's a draftsman, works for an oil company in Texas. He drew that picture up there above the mantel," she stated with pride, as she pointed to the ship.
Again we were looking at the mill picture. "I bet you'd know without me tellin' you that that struttin' fellow standin over a little to the side is the boss. I think they liked him right well though. He was gone from here before I started working in the mill so I never worked for him any. This girl married a fellow that lived up town. He works in a bakery I think. Sadie was always a pretty girl. Old Mr. Johnson there was a fine fellow, He's been dead a long time though, died before ever I stopped school. Some dead, some scattered here and there. Most of 'em that I know anything about now is still workin' in the mill.'
"The first job Pa ever had after we moved to the mill was managing a farm," Sallie Jane began, as she seated herself on the davenport with me. She grinned broadly and waited for me to ask a question. I asked it.
"Well, the company owned all that land through there," she explained with a wide sweep of her arm. "They raised a lot of truck and sold it at the company store. Raised some cotton too. And hogs. Pa worked a gang of niggers, must've been a good- sized farm. And they paid, him sixteen dollars a month to manage it all. I'm almost ashamed to tell you how much he made, but I reckin sixteen dollars wasn't thought of as such low wages then. Anyhow, Pa managed to give us all a right good education, and that's something most mill folks didn't get in them days.
"We lived in a company house and that's what pretty near killed some of our relatives. Some of 'em stopped ownin' us right then, and we finally stopped Ownin' them. I've got cousins here in this town that I never tell anybody about. I've got a few that's tried to claim me in years gone by when they needed a little cash but I could just smile and say, 'I never knew you.'
"We took in boarders, you might say we packed in boarders." Sallie laughed heartily, then continued. "We lived in a five room house and sometimes we had as high as ten boarders. Three beds to a room and two to a bed. Besides the boarders there was Ma and Pa and the four oldest children. This company was puttin' up the Equinox mill then and it took a crew of carpenters. I reckin as many as twenty eat at our house every day. That may sound funny to you, so many people livin' in one little house but pore folks have lots of funny ways of gettin along. I'd hate to have to live like that now myself.
"Ma said she'd rather keep boarders than put us little ones in the mill. Her and Pa was both determined we'd go to school some. I went because they made me and not because I wanted to. Truth is, I hated it. Going to school was hard on factory children then.
"There's a man up town in business now that I wouldn't buy a nickel's worth from if he was the only man in God's world sellin what I had to have. Whenever he'd see me on the schoolground he'd yell out, 'Sallie Jane from factory hill, yonder comes old Sally Jane from factory hill.' One day I got mad and yelled out at him, 'Yes, you little fool, I'm from factory hill and proud of it. It's good honest work and folks'd have a hard time getting along without cotton mills. Where'd you think that shirt on your back come from? I can tell you. It came from a cotton mill and it was made through honest labor. If it wasn't for the mill and the people workin in 'em you might have to <text not clear> part of your play time helpin your ma spin the thread for you a shirt.'
"For a long time I tried to make myself feel that way about livin' at a cotton mill. But I was a grown and mature woman before I ever got to where I could honestly feel like that in my heart, and feel sorry for the fellow that didn't have anymore feelin' than try to make me feel bad because my daddy earned his livin' at a cotton mill. It stopped hurtin' years ago but it sure made me hate nearly every day I went to school.
"I had one teacher I hated and when she dies there'll be one person in Anderson that won't say, 'What a good woman she was.' I know there must've been a little rotten spot in her heart or she couldn't've done what she done to me. Yeah, they'll write fine pieces about her in the paper and the schoolfolks'll get up and sing her praise. Lots of her old pupils will go to her funeral, but Sallie Jane'll sit right here on the cotton mill hill and say, 'I hated you when you was livin', Miss Russell, and I'll not think different now when you're dead.
"Tell you how I come to hate her. Nobody at school had anything to do with me much and I used to think maybe they didn't like me because my clothes wasn't good as he rest. I will say for my Ma, though, that she worked as hard as she could to have our clothes like the other children, and we never went ragged or dirty. But I didn't have any fine clothes. One day Ma bought the prettiest piece of brown velvet you nearly ever saw, and she made me a cap. I'd been wearing an old wool one, and I can't tell you how proud I was of that new cap. Real nice velvet it was, and Ma took such pains with makin' it. She made it with a bill that stood up and around like this, and when I tried it on I thought it was as becomin' as a cap could be.
"I was a little late gettin off to school next mornin, and I felt so good I played along the way a little too, so I was tardy and all the children werenin their desks when I walked in with my new cap.
"Just before I opened the door I thought to myself, 'They Ill like me now and know I'm good as anybody.' Then when I went inside one boy started snickering. Another took it up and finally the whole room was laughin'. And theywas whisperin' 'Sallie Jane's got on a skyscraper hat, Sally Jane's got on a skyscraper hat.' They'd got the name out of our history book; there was picture of the kind of hat folks used to wear and it was called a skyscraper.
"Do you know what Miss Russell did when the children kept on laughin'? She took my hat from me and put it on first one and then the other as a punishment. Right then I wanted to die. To see the hat I had thought was as pretty as anybody's hat used as a punishment made me feel that after all maybe the other children were superior. I'll tell you it just about broke my heart, and every day I went to school to her after that was just so much punishment to me.
"I went on, though, and just lacked six months finishin' up high school. The people out here used to tease me, they'd say, 'Sally Jane is stuck up, she don't talk like us.' Not many of them had gone any further than the second or third grade and some not at all. Course, I've got awful careless in my speech since then, just sorta drifted in the way everybody else around me had of talking. I wouldn't take anything for the education I have got though. That and my character I'm proud of.
"You know, when I was young some folks thought all cotton mill girls was loose. A crowd of us could be standin' on the fair grounds or some place like that payin' no attention to any man, and some fellow might walk up and say, 'Would one of you girls like to go for a ride?' I've cussed out many a man for askin' me that question. If it wasn't for hatin' to say anything that might sound too rough to you I'd tell you how I turned one rascal's insult back on him one day.
"It was the same way at the skatin' rink. And I did love to skate. Finally Hr. Hurt, he was the superintendent here then and took sort of daddy interest in us girls, asked us not to go up town to the rink again, and I told him we wouldn't if he'd fix us a place out here. He did too, fixed us a pretty good rink and it was used for years."
From the front bedroom came the sound of a young boy's voice. "Uh, Aunt Sally, where's my pants?"
Sally turned her head toward the door and yelled, "I hung 'em in the closet, James. Who won the contest last night?"
"My girl did, of course. Got a buck, too, for bein' the best jitterbug on the floor."
Sallie Jane laughed, and then to me she said, "The young folks had a jitterbug contest over at the Library at Equinox last night. I don't know exactly what jitterbuggin' is but from what James says it must be some sort of dancin'.
"James is my sister attie's child. Me and him live here by ourselves except when Emory is at home. Emory is my sister Maude's child. He's been an ambitious boy and I think will amount to somethin'. Maude died when he was ten and his father left home three years before. So they'd been livin' here in the house with me and Ma anyway and after Maude's death of course the child stayed on. But when he was fourteen years old he decided he wanted to go to Thornwell orphange. It seemed such a curious sort of thing for a child to have in his mind, and when I questioned him about it he said if he went there he could finish his education but if he stayed on with us he'd have to quit school and go to the mill. After I found out he was bent on goin' I talked to three or four masons who'd been friends to the family and they got him in. He finished there and then went to Presbyterian College and now he's at the theological Seminary in Decatur, Georgia. In the summer time he comes home and works in the mill or at anything he can find to do. He said he'd be a teacher or a preacher one, he hadn't decided which yet.
"That one in there didn't care much for school. But he gets along allright in the mill.
"I think he enjoyed havin' the boys in the house with her durin' her last years. It give her somethin' special to do, fixin' little things for 'em and lookin after their clothes. Ma was a good woman, kind and gentle, and sometimes my cussin' worried her. I used to cuss, but I don't now. The last real bad spell I had was with some insurance agents, and I'm tellin' you I got 'em out of this house in a hurry.
Ma's biggest weakness was insurance. Anybody in the world could talk her into signin' up for an insurance policy. When Maude died she collected five hundred dollars, and do you know if I hadn't stopped her she would've turned around and put every cent of that in new policies. Yessir, she'd signed up for some on every one of the children and most of the grandchildren. I had told the agents each one personally not to come to the house and talk to her about buyin anymore because she had taken out more already than I could keep up. But they paid me no attention. They came right on. They knew she'd buy. I talked with Ma but she couldn't seem to understand. I went to our policeman and he couldn't give me any advice. I decided I'd put a stop to the thing in my own way. I had an idea they'd be back on a certain day and I stayed out of the mill. They swarmed in, three of 'em. I heard 'em in the room talkin' to Ma and I went in. I says, 'Damn you, every one, I've told you to stay away from here and I've decided to fix you now.' I let out a few more eaths and then told 'em I was goin' to write to the home office tellin' 'em their three agents in Anderson were bad crooks and lied about my sister's deaths. One of 'em had died with pellagra and the other with consumption but they'd put down other diseases in writin' policies for the rest of the family.' I saw I had 'em scared and I told 'em they were goin' to have to refund every penny she'd paid 'em the week before. They did that, too, and after that I never did have any more trouble with 'em.
"When they'd gone Ma started cryin'. That hurt me. I remembered how kind and gentle she'd always been with me when I came home from school mad because somebody had called me cotton mill trash. She'd always say, 'Why, that person spoke to you like that because they're jealous; you're whole lot superior to any person that would say such a thing to you.' That used to ease my feelins more than anything else in the world. So I looked at Ma then and wished there was somethin' I could say to her to help her feelins. "Ma', I asked, her, 'Don't you know the only reason I acted like I did is because I know I can't ever keep up all the payments. It'd be a millstone around my neck keepin' me from enjoyin' a bit of life now, and I don't want to wait for some of my own kin to die before I have enough to live on decent.
"Ma told me she was sorry about it all and that she hadn't really understood how hard she was makin' it on me. That was the last real bad disagreement me and Ma ever had."
James breezed into the room, nodded at me, told his Aunt Sallie he was going to town, and was soon out of the room. Suddenly he turned around, and framing his face with his hands he pressed it against the screen door. With a grin he said, "Why don't you tell the lady about that piece you read in the Colliers?" Not waiting for Sallie Jane's answer he rushed down the steps.
"The little dickens," Sally Jane remarked. "That piece did make me awful mad. It talked about the coupons and checks the cotton mill companies in the South sell to their workers and made it read just like the companies did it to cheat the people. It's done as an accommodation to the people and it's the people themselves that abuse it. Nobody makes a man sell out his time for checks, and then nobody makes him sell his checks."
"The company store here issues checks, doesn't it?" I asked.
"Yes," Sally Jane replied. "They do it to accommodate the people."
"Do you ever buy any checks?" I asked. "I was just wondering what the usual discount is here."
Sallie Jane cleared her throat, batted her eyelids, and replied, "It's against the law, you know," she said, "either botsell one to buy the checks. Nobody but the store can sell 'em to you, and you're not supposed to use 'em for anything but trade at the company store." With those words she dismissed the subject of the company store and its checks.
"Would you like to see some old books?" Sallie Jane asked. "I've got some that's a hundred and fifty years old."
"Yes, I would, I like old books," I replied with interest, and immediately Sally Jane departed for her bedroom. She returned with three yellowed and dust-laden books. After apologizing for the dust she began at once to blow and thump it from the back of one of the three books which she handed to me. I opened it and read:
The Young Gentleman and Lady's
Monitor
and
English Teachers' Assistant
By J. Hamilton Moore
London: Printed
1794
J. L. Stevenson's Book.
"And here," Sally Jane was saying, "is the old family Bible. It was printed in 1794. It's even got books in it that Bibles these days don't have. I wouldn't take anything for these three. Some of my cousins that's got money has tried their best to get this Bible from me, but I tell 'em I may just be a cotton mill hand but I like my family's things as well as they do.
"I've got a white china butter dish that's awful old too," she continued. "It's square cut and it's got a white hand on top. It's at least fifty years old. I know, because on the bottom of it is, 'Patented 1889.' It's one of the things we got from the Lances when they boarded out their furniture with us. Mr. Lance became disabled to work and Mrs. Lance wasn't in shape to work either and they had one four-year old child. They let Ma have all their furniture <text not clear> and they were at our house when Mr. Lance died. Mrs. Lance got her a job there and her and the little girl stayed on with us for over a year.
"Now, I've got some pearl-handled knives and forks like you don't see any more either. Ma bought them over thirty years ago. some of my kin has wanted to get 'em but they're not likely to."
For ten or fifteen minutes Sally Jane talked on, relating experiences from her childhood, from her days in the mill. She talked of the strike which occurred at the mill in 1929, and laughed as she recalled how both the company and the union who had established commissaries invited her to come to them for provisions. "I was able to carry myself, though," she asserted, "and I called on neither. That strike just about finished the union in this town. Funny thing, a law to allow folks to join a union. No matter what kind of a law they pass they'll always be a loophole the company can slip through. Cotton mill people know that; truth is, they know more than folks think they do, but they don't have any way of helpin' themselves."
And as she talked, a woman bearing calendars in her hand came through the kitchen and into the room where she picked herself out a chair and sat down."Sallie Jane," she said after introductions "I come to see if you didn't want to buy a calendar. Put a dime a week in these little places for thirteen weeks, and were you've got a dollar and thirty cent turn it over to me. When we get all five hundred of 'em sold we'll have a good little bit for our new church. Would you like to have one, Sallie Jane?"
"Yes, I'll take one, Ola, but I'd a heap rather you'd let me give you all the money today. Don't want to be bothered with slippin a dime in one of them little slits every week." With that Sallie Jane reached into her pocket and drew out the specified amount.
"Thank you, " Ola replied, "and I'll write your name down here and put paid beside it."
"I don't want my name down on any slip of paper for the church, Ola. I'm askin' you to put Hiss Anonymous there where my name's supposed to be. Please do, Ola. It's a funny thing, aint it, how I keep on helpin' out with that church when they turned me out of it years ago."
Ola grinned confusedly. "Aw, Sally Jane, you're a sight," she said.
"Well, they did," Sallie Jane persisted. "Some said it was because I staid away so long, but one gal said it was on account of bad character."
Ola arose from her chair, and turning toward me she declared, "Sally Jane's a mess, she sure is. Best thing you ever saw to help us out with the church through. In somewhat of a flurry Ola departed with her remaining calendars.
"Good little woman," Sallie Jane remarked when she was gone. "Got four children but she can always find time to work for the church.
"I wonder what you've been thinkin' about a washin' maehine in a livin' room. Just bought it last week and I've not found a convenient place to put it yet. Wouldn't have bought it but I got a bargain. It was second-hand but good as new. Don't have to pay but a dollar and a quarter a week on it. I bought my frigidaire the same way. A family had to move and they let me have a hundred and fifty dollar box for sixty dollars. Come on and I'll show you my kitchen.
There were in the kitchen a big white oil range, a white kitchen cabinet, a white enameled cook table and the the frigidaire. "I think it's a right nice kitchen," Sally Jane remarked.
"It certainly is a good kitchen," I agreed. "Do you like to cook?"
"Sometimes." Sally Jane was looking about the kitchen, casting an approving glance over each object.
"I've got me a happy little home," she declared, "and I'm proud of it. I might've been better off if I hader married, and then again I might not. I make my own money and have my own way. I'm content with my cotton mill life. I've seen too many folks a heap worse off than I am not to be."