Typist: Nicholas
Date of first writing - April 30, 1939
Name of person interviewed - James Perdue
Address - R. F. D. Rocky Mount, Va.
Occupational status - Country merchant
Name of writer - Essie Smith
Revised by Ann Heaton
It was Monday morning and James Perdue, proprietor of Perdue's General store, five miles west of Stony Mount, Virginia, leaned against his store door as he watched empties being loaded from his front platform to the Coca-Cola truck that had come out from the bottling plant in Rocky Mount.
He recognized me as I pulled the car off the concrete on to the tongue of red clay mud that lay between the highway and the store platform and nudged the brim of his worn felt hat with one finger.
"Good mornin', ma'am. You're out right early this morning. Yes'm, morning' s the best time of day, I always say. That's from me bein' a farmer, I reckon--- up early an' in bed early all my life... You gain' to get out an' come in or maybe you 'd rather sit in the car an' I'll bring" your things out?"
I joined Perdue on the platform and we watched as the driver loaded the last of the empty cases and drove off on his rounds.
"Yes, I sell a lot of Coca-Cola and soft drinks like that. No, there's no money in ‘em--that is unless you sell a whole lot and you can't do that in the country. But the thing is that most people like that kind of stuff--it don't hurt 'em any--an' when they ain't busy or evenin's in the summer they come here and sit aroun' drinkin' an' talkin' an' arguin' about what the government's gain' to do about crop prices an' what the farmer'll plant, and things like that. An' you know when folks get to comin' to a store' trade comes with them. It's like gasoline that way. I don't make but a few cents on a tank of gas, an' I wouldn't bother with it if it wasn't that the fellow that stops to buy gas is likely to need oil an' there's money in oil. An' after he gets in the habit o' stoppin', he'll get to buyin' other things.
"Yes'm, there was a big crowd here Saturday night. The whole fam'ly comes in the car now---don't leave no one at home--just let the dogs watch the place. The women folks bring butter an' eggs an after they've done their tradin' they go to Rocky Mount to see the town sights while the young ones go to the movin' pictures or sit aroun' in cars doin' their courtin'. But the thing is they do their tradin' with me before they go to town... The stores in Rocky Mount ain't ever done me much harm, an' I ain't lost anything to the chain stores yet, even if they do have sales every week and dress their clerks up in white aprons. Folks aroun' this country been knowin' me an' dealin' here for a long time, an' they know I treat 'em right. Them's the things that count."
There was certainly no dressing up or high-pressure sales technique at Perdue's. The proprietor was not easily distinguished by his dress that morning from the two farm youths lounging on the bench built against the store front. All three wore the baggy blue denim overalls and jacket that have become almost a 'work uniform in rural farm areas. perdue's open jacket revealed a striped white percal shirt and dark tie, while the jackets worn by the other two were buttoned tight over what was likely to be only undershirts, and his clean shoes contrasted with their hightopped boots caked with vdnter barnyard mud.
There was almost no sound except the proprietor's voice as we lingered on the platform. The farm youths stared vacantly at cars passing on the highway, and their plowhorse mounts dropped listless beside the iron-pipe hitching rack. Their houio broad backs, marked by harness-rub, sagged beneath the guano sacks that took the place of saddles; and as they shifted their weight from foot to foot, their heavy hooves sank deep into the soft clay.
The store itself looked much like other rural crossroads stores---an ugly, long, narrow frame building, showing dark seams and crooked rows of black nail heads where additions had been made to the original structure. The out-of-plumb walls once painted white, were peeled a mottled gray in huge scabrous patches, and the heavy board lattice below the front platform had taken on a rich coppery hue under years of splashing red mud.
High up on the side that was better seen from the main highway the ragged ends of a once-gaudy muslin streamer advertising gasoline flapped in the breeze, and below this a rash of multi-colored signs told the good qualities of nostrums and anodynes--Nervine, Stanback, Father John's Medicine, and Coca-Cola, Nehi, 7-Up, and Brown's mule, Fish-Hook, Apple, and Spark Plug Tobacco. Close to the highway in front of in front of the store two gasoline pumps topped a litter of bottled motor oil, long-spouted zinc water cans, tire-changing tools, and snaky lengths of red air hose. Fly-specked glass revealed only dimly that the front windows were storage rather than display places. In one were a forgotten-looking jumble of crockery hideously decorated in reds and greens, a few pieces of heavy pressed glassware, two or three bolts of calico and toweling, display cards with men's ready-tied neckties and fancy garters with shiny buckles, a woman's shoe outside its white cardboard box, a placard advertising a soap slogan contest that closed in March of last year, and tall white cones of coarse crochet cotton. The other window had sweet potatoes, golden mounds of oranges and tangerines, and an open basket of ungraded apples. A half-bare, blackened stalk of bananas hung down from the ceiling above, and brooms leaned giddily from a tall rack near the door.
In the center of the store was a huge pot-bellied cast-iron stove, its fat sides burned a harsh red by hot fires, and its rounded top hoary with layers of fine white ashes sent up by shakings of the grate below. In winter he stove is the magnet for loungers who crowd the benches facing it on three sides and overflow to sit on the counter nearby or any place not out of range of the spittoons---sawdust-filled boxes located in strategic positions flanking the stove.
Only the most cumbersome merchandise that arrives has ever been taken to the barn lean-to that served as a makeshift--warehouse, and the store was literally filled with accumulated year-round stock. The dim area that stretched from the a stove to the tall rolls of linoleum standing at the rear wall a welter of farm and household equipment, small pieces resting on the larger ones---brooders, and chicken-house things, kegs of nails, rolls of chicken wire, stove pipe, churns, washtubs, boilers, milk pails, lamps, cooking utensils, chinaware, canning equipment, and stacked-up cartons of fruit jars and jelly glasses; while from the rafters overhead dangled rows of farm lanterns, festoons of rope and binding twine, overalls, work shirts, and bungalow aprons. At one is side a small enclosed space with iron safe---the lettering and colored flowers once bright on its heavy door now almost worn off by daily thumbing at the combination lock---and the tall old-fashioned desk where Perdue's accounts are kept.
Perdue saw me looking at the safe.
"Yes, that old safe's been here longer than I have. You have to have some safe place to keep the books in. I look after all my accounts myself. I started doin' it when I first had the store and kep' right on. I like it. Gives you a feelin' of how things are goin'. Keeps down expense too... You know my customers always say I don't need any books--I can tell them what they owe me or what I owe them without lookin' at anything. Well, when a man's been keepin' as close to his business as I have for thirty years, it's not strange he knows how his accounts stand.
"My wife 'll tell you I know about the stock I have here, too. Once in a while she comes in to help out; an' when someone asks for a thing she can't see right off, she's likely to say we ain't got it. I got so I watch her that way; an' when I know it's right under the counter or maybe on a high shelf, I can get right to it. can you have as much stock as I have, you can't have everything right out where you can see it, but it's not often I disappoint a customer."
Bordering the open space between front door and stove is a fringe of seasonal things--plow points wired together in bunches, garden tools, seeds for spring planting, their cabinets gay with pictured flowers and vigorous-looking vegetables, and paint buckets built into tall pyramids.
Next to the section of shelves filled with shoe boxes, many with the lids gone and the shoe strings hanging down in an untidy fringe, a litter of patent medicines bottles and packages fill a side space. opposite this are grocery shelves with brand-marked cartons, bottles, and boxes containing staples that once were sold in bulk and scooped from under-counter barrels to be weighed in paper bags or poured into containers brought by customers. A survivor of those times is the old-fashioned scales with huge brass scoop and the pile of round iron weights used as balance at the end of its long arm. Cellophane-wrapped bread, pies and cakes are modern intruders, as is the wire net cover that guards the fat round cheese from any but proprietary hands.
Perdue urged me to sit on the bench near the stove, while he stood with his beck against the grocery counter and continued talking. In spite of shoulders that droop a little he looks tall and rugged, and his gray eyes behind silverrimmed spectacles are keen and shrewd. He shows interest in prices asked by town stores.
"Yes, ma'am, I've been getting twenty cents right along for eggs... they're fresh an' they're worth that, but if they can sell 'em in town for seventeen, I can too. I got 'em in Saturday from one of my best customers...Keeps her hens culled out, an' the eggs are as white an' big as ever you saw. Don't have any but white Leghorns. They're fine to lay. I have some mighty nice butter, too...yes'm, it's a little yellow, but it tastes delicate. I put some aside for you, knownin' you always like the best butter an' things...Oranges? ...Billy, come in here an' open up them oranges that come in Friday. Ought to be bettern them that's in the window. Oranges been mighty high, an' I ain't been sellin' many here lately."
Billy, Perdue's 16 year-old son, comes in through the door at the back of the store. While he resembles his father, he seems to lack the latter's energy, apparently taking more interest in what is being said than in opening the orange crate.
"Yes'm, Billy's been helpin' aroun' the store some'. He quit school when I got the new truck, an' he's been drivin' it. I had a nigger on the old truck, but I was afraid to trust him with the new one. He was always havin' trouble o' some kind an' kep' me all the time pryin' for havin' work done on it...Niggers is no good with automobiles. They're all right with a mule where they can use a whip, but they got no business behind the wheel of an automobile. Anyhow, Billy likes to drive around deliverin' orders. Right smart o' my business is in town right under the noses of the town stores. Folks get in the habit o' comin' out to me for fresh eggs an' fryers an' home-killed pork an' things like that, an' then they get to doin' most o' their dealin' with me. why not? I have about the same things the town stores have---I buy from the same salesmen they do---an' I can sell as cheap or maybe a little cheaper, not havin' to hire clerks like they do an' other expenses they have in town. The order I just put up there is for Mrs. Green--you know her. She's been buyin' from me for--must be more than 15 years now. She's one of a big family an' after she got to buyin' here, she brought some of her folks, an' now I have a lot of their trade. She's been sick. Ain't been out here for a couple o' weeks, but she telephones what she wants an' I send it in.
That's where the country store now has it over the old way. Used to be when folks in the country needed anything from the store, it meant takin' a horse an' the day off to make the trip, so they just went without till they made a long list an' then come in an' bought, it all at once. Now they got the party line aroun' most everywhere they telephone, an' if they're not too far out I look for someone goin' their way or sometimes things that don't weigh too much I send by the mail carrier. Not long ago one o' my good customers was goin' to have compony for dinner; an' after she'd been in to do her marketing, she found she forgot to get yeast to make rolls. Now you know how a woman prides herself on havin' hot rolls--a dinner wouldn't be much without them. So they telephoned in to me an' I put stamps on the bag an' the mailman had it out there in time to put the rolls to risin'. Yes, I get compressed yeast fresh every day---comes by mail every morning.
"But Mrs. Green an' a lot o' other ladies like to drive out this way from town---it's a fine drive now they got the new road---an' they stop here. Sometimes they take what they buy along in the car, an' sometimes I deliver.
"That ol' pitcher? Now you got me. I don't know just how old it is, but it belonged to my grandmother, an' I don't know when she got it. I just got it; out to send in to Mrs. Green. She's heen wantin' me to sell it to her fer a long time. No, it wasn't for sale; I had it over here with water from the well one day when she come by and saw it...You know how some folks are about old things. I don't see how they're any better than new ones, We'd kept' that pitcher because it was in the family. But I decided I'd let her have it. She'll be surprised. I ain't gain' to take anything from her for it. She was a Craig. I can remember the craigs as long as I can remember anyone around here. I can see her Pa yet gain' past here on that ol' gray mare he used to ride...Settin' up as straight as any young fellow o' 20 an' he was near to 86 when he quit goin' into the courthouse... He was a fine old man... fine people."
Perdue's movements are slow but methodical---like the movements of most men who have been reared on farms and know days of following patient horses around a field from sunup to sundown. He takes his time when waiting on customers and his wrapping of packages, in spite of long years of doing it" is still a clumsy and prolonged process. Most of the people who come here to buy have been friends and neighbors for years, and their transactions are interspersed with reminiscences and the give and take of homely talk.
Having finished wrapping the groceries I was to take with me, he was ready to talk of his early life.
"How long have I been keepin' this store? Well, that's gain' back a long ways. Just about thirty years---'ll be thirty years in March. No, I wasn't born here. I was born in west virginia a little more than 56 years ago. My father come from over here in Virginia, though. He, went off to war from here; and when that was over, somehow he landed in west Virginia...place called Kimball. That was where he met Ma. She was the daughter of a rich man...that is, he was rich for them times. He was what I call accidentally rich---not earnin' the money he had. He made his first money when coal was found on some land he owned up in the mountains. Then the railroad come through, an' they built a town, an' the whole thing ended up by his ownin' the whole town...site an' all. He made a lot o' money but he died suddenly and left it to his children, an' they soon wasted it all---just throwed it to the winds. None of them's got a thing to show for it now. I was one of the middle ones of ten children in my family, an' about the time I was big enough to start to school we moved back over here to Virginia. There was just about enough o' Ma's money left to buy a farm, an' they bought the one Pa 'd lived on When he was growin' up. That's the reason most folks aroun' think we always lived here, an' don't understand when I say I wasn't born here. The farm was good land, an' the old loghouse Pa liyed in was still standing. It had been built good and solid an' made like it was two log houses put together with an open space between like a porch. You see a lot of the old houses yet that was built like that. The walls inside that open space were sided with planks planed down by hand--the way it was done before they had any mills to do the planting by machinery. The house had a big rock chimney at each end and big open fireplaces, with soapstone hearths that reached out into the floor in front. Then times most of the housework--especially in summer--was done in outkitchens in the backyard. One thing I remember well was the ash hopper. The one we had was made something like a tall box, wide at the top an' tapering down narrow at the bottom, sort of like a cone with corners. It was built on a platform an' was lined on the sides with rye strew, laid up an' down, and another bunch of straw was put into the bottom. The up-and-down straw on the sides kep' the lye Prom soakin' into the wood an' the bunch kep' it from cloggin' at the bottom. Ashes--mostly hickory an' oak--they had plenty of good wood to burn then--was put in the top of the hopper an' packed down tight an' then 'water was poured over. I remember about all that because when I wasn't big enough to help with the farm work one of my jobs was to take a big heavy stick an' keep the ashes down tight so the water would seep through slow and carry the lye off through the bottom into a pipe and on to a big iron pot. Ma'dd save all the grease from the cookin', and that'd be put' with the lye to make all the soap we used. I don't remember how that was done, but I remember about poundin' the ashes in that old hopper because I wasn't very big, and I had to reach for all I was worth to do it. Never hurt me none to work though; everyone worked around the place in them times.
"Here I been tellin f you about makin' soap an' I reckon you know about that better ‘n I do. Lots of people around here make their own soap to this day. They buy their lye here an' don't save the ashes like we used to. Some of the older women like that old soft soap hetter'n any I can sell 'em.
"Another thing we used to make with lye was what we called 'big hominy.' That's still made too, but children now wont eat it like we used to. I can remember makin' my whole breakfast on 'big hominy.' It was made by puttin ' shelled corn into lye till the skins loosened and fell off. The lye softened the grains, and afterward it was soaked in cold water to get the lye out. Ma used to cook it with fat pork, and I don't know anything I ever had that tasted any betters...But I reckon most folks feel that may about things they had when they was little; an' maybe it tasted so good because you know there wasn't so much high livin' then as there is now. All of us children went to an old-fashioned one- room school about five months every winter. Five months was all the terms lasted. Schools didn't have any money then, and they didn't have all the frills they got now. One thing was that everyone had to buy their own books. That wasn't easy, an' like as not there wouldn't be one pupil in the room that'd have all the books he'd need. One would have one kind of a book an' another ‘d have another kind, and they'd lend them aroun' so that they'd all get their lessons somehow. The teachers were likely to be as poor as the pupils then, an' they didn't think anything if some didn't have books...When we went to class to read, the ones that had books 'd pass them along to the ones that didn't have any an' that may we'd all get to read. Them things didn't keep us from learnin' though, an' we learned as good an' maybe better, than lots of young ones goin' to school now, with everything given them and busses to take them an' bring them home again. We walked miles to school even in the worst weather in winter, an' I can't remember anyone thinkin' anything about that.
"When we got to be about 15 or 16 we all quit school to go to work. There wasn't anything to do around here then but farmin', an' no one ever thought any education was needed for that. Lots of people feel that way yet, and there's a good many tenant formers 'd keep their younguns at home workin' if they could.
"I here was a store here then--been a store here as long as anyone around remembers as far as I've ever learned. It was in that old building that's standing yet. I been thinkin' of tearing it down now for a long time an' usin' the planks to brace up the barn in places, but it looks like I don't get aroun' to doin' it somehow. I have a lot of oil an' things stored there and I have to find a place to put that before I begin...Well, I'd been foolin' around that store a lot and when I quit school the man that kept it hired me to help around--open up in the morning, sweep out, clean spittoons, look after the fire in winter, and help wherever he needed me. He said he'd pay me a dollar a week. Cleanin' spittoons was something I hated to do; but after we'd close up Saturday nights and I ' d go home with that dollar in my pocket, I'd feel fine. A dollar was a whole lot o' money to a boy them days. That an' not havin' to do chores at home and stayin' all day at the store where I'd been goin' every time I'd get away from home anyway--everything looked good."
His eyes glowed as he remembered his first job. Even the spittoon-cleaning could not completely dissipate the rosy picture.
"Of course, I never had to pay any board at home, an' I could save about every dollar I made. It was a lot easier to save when I was a boy than it is now. Bein' at the store I got to see everybody who came there, an' that an' goin' buggy ridin' Sunday afternoons an' courtin' goin' home from church in the evenin' was about all a young fellow did when I was young. It ain't like that now. Auto-
mobiles have changed all that. Gas to carry them all over the country an' movin' pictures an' dances an' always on the go somewheres takes money, an' they never save a cent, no matter what they get.
"When I was about 21, the man that owned the store died, an' with what I'd saved I went in partners with a friend, an' we bought the place. It wasn't much then, but we put in more stock an' put up an addition, an' we got along right well. Then when I was about 24 I got married, an' by doin' a little tradin' I bought my partner out. There was a couple of rooms up over the store, an' we went to housekeepin' there. That part wasn't built so well, an' it "was terrible cold in winter, an' when the wind got up it ‘d shake some. It made my wife nervous, and, though I knowed there wasn't any danger, I made up my mind to build us a house;an' after that was done, I put another piece on the store, too. The house we built then is part of the place we're livin' in now."
He nodded his head in the direction of the family dwelling that faces the store from the opposite side of the country road. Its frame walls painted white below a red tin roof and tiny box bushes bordering the brick walk to its front porch, it sits comfortable-looking and complacent behind a white picket fence.
"Yes, it's a big improvement on the way folks lived then, not only in the country but in the towns too. Electricity is the biggest thing that's come in my time. Water pumped into the house and to the barn, lights, refrigerator, washer and iron, churn and separator--not to say anything of the radio and the telephone are things people wouldn't have believed we ever would see on the farm. I been thinkin' some about gettin' an electric range, too. Would be cheaper to run it the way we can get a special rate havin' so many things usin' current then to pay for havin' wood cut. I have some wood on the farm, but gettin' it out is the trouble. I don't have time to look after it, an' Billy's no' good for things like that. He don't run around like some, but boys now just naturally don't take to workin' around the place like they used to. My two girls is different, though their Ma says I favor 'em over the boy. My oldest girl took to education like a duck takes to water. After finishing high school, she went to teachers' college at Radford; and now she has a country school. She boards here at home and is good helpin' with things around the house. Takes after her mother that way--willin' to work an' do her part. My other girl's still goin' to high school an' 'pears to be gettin' along fine. She's likely to go to teachin' too. It's as good as anyone 'd want his daughter to do.
"I've got a good tenant on the farm an', of course, I don't have to do any of the work--just kind a oversee things. We raised 14 houses o' tobacco last year. Tobacco's a lot o' hard work, an' with the market like it is you can't ever tell what it's goin' to bring. I've thought of givin' it up, but the hands like the ready money it brings. It comes in good when you can take a load into the warehouse and get some money to bring back treats and presents for the family and some money in your pocket. The other crops give you a good livin' but the cash that you get for tobacco comes in handy for other things. We didn't get any price for our crop last year on account• o' too much rain in the growin' season. It got up too fast, an' the leaves was big an' rank an' didn't bring anything at all. I have wheat enough on hand now to do us for two years, even if we didn't plant another crop, and corn for longer than that. We have four cows, last year I raised 1,400 pounds of pork. I raise a lot of chickens, too, an' I buy fryers in the spring an' summer when they sell good. We tried raisin' turkeys, but there ain't no pay in 'em. Wild as buzzards. They roam all over an' hide their nests out, an' when it's damp, weather the little ones '11 die off like flies.
"Yes, take everything, the times are right good with me. The store keeps me busy and puts some money in the bank, but the farm's what I really enjoy. Farmers are the best-off people of any in the world--that is, if they own their own places. They can save money, too, if they go at things right, with the government an' the county agent helpin' 'em. Takes a lot of hard work, maybe, but it'd surprise you to see how much money goes from overall pockets to the bank.
"My 160 acres is plenty for me. Some of it is in timber, and some in pasture, and with planning and lettin' fields lay fallow for a year now an' then, we have good crops an' keep the broomstraw down. I'm a Democrat--I like talkin' politics--and a farmer--two things that pay a man livin' in this section. Anyhow, the son of a confederate soldier couldn't be no other way politically. I read the papers an' try to keep up with what is goin' on in the world, though it seems to be in a mess right now, talkin' about war on all sides and spendin' money for guns and battleships, an' people that ain't got work goin' hungry.
"What do I make the most money out of in the store? Well, that might be hard to say exactly, but one thing I do make on when I sell them is women's shoes. Women's shoes ain't made substential. Women always go in for what things look like something different all the time-and when the manufacturers put fancy tricks on a thing they're gain' to take it out somewhere else. It takes somethin' substantial for wearin' in the country, 'specially shoes. Mud'll eat into cheap soles--they're likely to have a layer o' paper in the middle to build them up an' make them look good--an' there's plenty o' mud in the country most o' the year. This red mud we got aroun' here can't be beat for stickin' to your shoes, either…. Fancy things o' any kind just ain't goin' to last…. An' do you know"---and here Perdue's thin face relaxed in a broad grin and masses of tiny wrinkles made nests for his twinkling blue eyes---"I've had some call for them fancy shoes you see in the papers---oh, yes, I always look to see what the Roanoke stores are sellin'. I mean the kind o' shoes that look like the ladies has all turned Chinee women an' got to walkin' up on shoes that look like little stilts---their big toes stickin' out in front and only a fancy little strap to try to keep 'em on at the heel, where they ain't got no counters like shoes ought to have. Makes me laugh even to think about a gal trying to walk in them things, even if she ain't got to milk cows twice a day. Maybe they're for dressin' up in, but somehow they don't seem right to be goin' to church in, either. Showin' their feet plain all aroun' an' high heels an' some with high soles, too; gettin' back to lookin' like the Queen of Sheba an' them women the Bible tells about---none of them was the good kind---havin' their fling among the men, so that it was put down in the Bible to read to this day.
"The ladies been seein' them fancy things in the movin' pictures, too, I reckon. Funny thing how the ladies has changed since the pictures got to bein' shown in the country. Ain't none of them picture stars got anything that the ladies 'round here don't try to have, too---paint on their faces an' red lipstick you could see clear across a field, an' little hats like a cup an' saucer settin' on top of a lot of frizzy bobbed hair, an' no more cloth in their dresses than 'd cover jaybird. An' 'tain't only the young ones that's doin' it. Some that's old enough to have better sense has got to dressin' up, too. Another thing, they've got to wearin' pants e lot, too. Of course, they're callin' them new names---slacks, I think it is ---an' they come in fancy colors. But they ain't nothin' but pants, only made bigger where the ladies fill them out some better than the men do. Lots o' times when they stop the car out front I go out, thinkin' they're gypsies, an' I want to tell them not to stop on my place; an' then they turn out to be someone I been knowin' all my life. But they got bandannas over their hair and tied under their chins, an' I can't get used to them lookin' like them foreigners you read about.
"Not much money in men's shoes. They're plain and they're made for wear---at least the kind I carry are. This pair I got on now I been wearin' for near to three years. They've been half-soled three times already, an' I reckon they'll last for another year anyhow.
"Of course, I make a little profit on everything I sell, even if it's only a penny or two, an' pennies are what count in the long run, if they keep comin' steady.
"This here place---farm an' all---has been my home ever since I can remember, and I get all the pleasure any man'd want out o' dealin' with my neighbors an', livin' among the folks I been knowin' all my life. Maybe the farm does carry the store---as some o' my ol' friends say to josh me---or maybe the store carries the farm--- as I think sometimes myself---but which ever it is it suits me to go right on here. I can't think of a better way o' livin'.
"No, I've never wanted to live in town. Sometimes the girls and Billy talk around that if I'd sell out an' move into Stony Mount I could take it easy. That wouldn't suit me none. I like bein' in the store and seein' people I know and talkin' with the salesmen that come along. I like being busy, too. I go over the farm nearly every day and ride around the place. I go into town on business when I have to; but when I'm through, I'm ready to get back home to the store again. No, I can't see that I'd like to live in a town. Anyhow, I don't want to rest. I like to be busy, and I'd like to die with my boots on if I can.
"You're goin' to take these things with you? I'll have Billy take 'em in right away if you don't want to bother with them. He's got to take Mrs. Green's order in soon anyhow. Well, just as you say…. There ain't nothing to thank me for in what I been tellin' you."
