Approximately 1,500 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
GRANNY PADGETT
Date of First Writing	December 2, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Padgett
Fictitious Name	None Used
Street Address	330 Williams Street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Domestic
Name of Writer	Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #3613
Helen Shuler
Columbia, S. C.
December 2, 1938
LIFE STORIES
"Granny" Padgett, (white)
330 Williams Street
Columbia, S. C.
Mrs. Padgett, more familiarly known as "Granny," lives on Williams Street in the Olympia mill village. The street is well shaded by large oak trees, whose gnarled roots grow up out of the unpaved sidewalk and make walking difficult.
Her home is a large two-family building, painted yellow. The front porch showed evidence of a recent scrubbing, as it was spotlessly clean, and papers had been placed from the steps to the door to prevent tracks being made across the floor. On the right of the door sat a large white Persian cat, washing herself, and, on the left, another had curled herself into a ball and gone to sleep in the warm afternoon sunshine.
A gentle rap on the door brought no response from the inmates. But after the second rap, hearing a movement, I turned the knob and asked permission to enter. I came face to face with an old woman so repulsive that I felt myself recoiling.
Mrs. Padgett is of medium height and weighs possibly 150 pounds. The pores of the skin on her face were large and dirty, and her hands were rough and soiled. Rather high on the left cheek bone and on the right temple were large scabby sores, which had been treated with some medicine that had turned them black. Her print dress and checked apron were badly in need of laundering. The top of one of her black cotton hose was hanging below the hem of her skirt, and her slippers were unlaced and loose upon her feet. On her uncombed gray hair was a maid's cap, badly soiled.
The room into which I was invited to sit was as untidy and dirty as its occupant. The mattresses on the iron beds were each covered with a dirty sheet and the pillows were in cases that were none too fresh. The quilts were thrown, unfolded, upon a chair in the corner behind the front door. In the grate burned a small coal fire, which was occasionally replenished with a chumk of wood. Two rockers and a straight chair were drawn close to the fire, and two more black and white cats were dozing nearby. A soiled white scarf, on which had been appliqued a brilliant redbird, decorated the mantel. On this rested a white china clock ticking the minutes away. There was also on the mantel several pictures of the children, a calendar, a few letters, and several pieces of bric-a-brac. An enlarged portrait of a young man dressed in khaki, the son in Texas, hung on the wall to the right of the door. And a large colored crayon drawing of Christ was nailed to the opposite wall. This picture had been drawn by an evangelist, as he sang a hymn, and had been bought for one dollar.
The scene presented through the kitchen door emphasized the picture of carelessness and uncleanness. The floor, generously spotted with grease, was sandy and littered with papers. The dining table was literally covered with jars, tin cans, and paper bags with the tops standing open. A cat stealthily stepped from the staircase to the table and began investigating the contents of the packages. As I sat visiting with Mrs. Padgett, the son came in the back door and, pushing aside some of the jars, placed more packages on the table and remarked that he had brought oysters for supper. A narrow stairway led from one corner of the kitchen to a small bedroom on the second floor. Beyond the kitchen was a small porch, which one had to cross in order to reach the bathroom. Each room was lighted by a single, unshaded, electric light bulb suspended on a cord from the ceiling.
During the afternoon, there were several other visitors, a daughter-in- law, a granddaughter and a neighbor or two, and each one greeted Mrs. Padgett most affectionately as "Granny".
"Granny" Padgett was born in the village of Timmonsville, South Carolina, in April 1864. Her parents died when she was a very small child, and she went to live with an aunt in a nearby town, Darlington. She attended the village school for only a short time, possibly two sessions, and learned to read a little but not to write. When she was sixteen years old, she began working in the cotton mills of Darlington, earning fifty cents a day. There was practically no time during the busy days at the mill for courting. But when the "knocking-off whistle" blew, the young folks paired off for the walk home. Here she met Mr. Padgett, and, when they had been going together for a year, they were married and moved to Charleston. Both obtained work in the Charleston cotton mills for four dollars and fifty cents a week. Mrs. Padgett continued working there for eleven years, but her husband got a job driving a street car, for ten dollars a week. They lived in one room, for which they paid four dollars a week rent. This mill was closed for awhile; and when it was opened again, the labor was mostly Negroes, and the Padgetts would not work with them. Later, the mill was cleared of all machinery and converted into the cigar factory.
Mr. Padgett's parents were living at Darlington, so the young people went back there to live. As they now had three little boys, Mrs. Padgett did not work in the mills any more. Her Charleston experience was the last work she had done outside of the home.
As the mills of Columbia were so much larger than those of the smaller town, they moved here, after two years, and have lived in Columbia for the past forty-one years. Mr. Padgett has never received more than ten dollars a week, as "he couldn't do much weaving." The years that the mill went on "short time," he worked three nights a week, from eleven until seven next morning, and received six dollars. A part of this time, he was a "section hand" and mended the machinery when "something broke." Towards the last, he "overseed the scrubbers." The Padgetts pay one dollar and five cents a week house rent and an extra ten cents a week for the bath tub.
"I raised three purty good boys; none of them was ever locked up," said Mrs. Padgett, as she spat upon the hearth - which she did at the end of almost every sentence. "They went to school as fur as they'd take it. The one in the Army got to the tenth grade. He storied about his age to join the Army. Said he was twenty, and he wasn't but eighteen. He's in Texas now, and says he's goin' to stay in the Army so he can retire. Then he'll have a good livin'. One of my grandsons is in the Army, too. He's in the Philippines."
The two older boys worked in the mills, beginning when they were about thirteen years old. "Them days they worked children, but they don't do it now." The youngest son began working in the little neighborhood store before he was sixteen years old. He worked hard, and when the store was sold several years ago, he owned a half interest. He was always a good, religious boy and turned out to be a preacher. He preached in lots of little towns. He died August 29, 1937, leaving a widow and one small daughter, who live over in New Brookland. The oldest son, with his two boys, - his wife having died November 27, 1938 - live in the other side of the house, son what lives in the other side pays the rent. And if he hadn't been so smart, he wouldn't a had to do it. They gives old folks the house free. But he was afraid they would put me out so somebody else could come in. He works in the machine shop at the mill, and he works on the outside, too. He's a tinner."
Mr. Padgett died April 10, 1938, just before he was seventy-three in June. For several years, he had suffered with high blood pressure but was not too sick to work until he had an apoplectic stroke. "'A artlemum' (artery) busted in his head, but he didn't have to give up work until he had the stroke. I can't get over havin' to give him up. We won't have much Christmas this year, you know we poor people. Old man was here last Christmas. I ain't ever asked for help, but I been thinkin' I'd ask 'em to give me some Christmas this year. Once, about six years ago, the Goodfellows give me a basket. Old man didn't belong to no lodge but the Redmen, and he had to drop that before he died. I don't know why, he jes' dropped it."
Mr. Padgett left his widow a thousand dollar insurance policy. She paid his doctor's bills and bought his 'tombs'. "It's for both of us," she explained. She has a little left to live on, but keeps up her life insurance, as she thinks "it's a good thing to have."
"My old man was a Methodist, but I belong to the 'Baptist' church. I'm not able to go to church much. They won't allow me to go out much. I has a kidney ailment. But I has good eyesight, never has had to wear glasses. Old man left two pairs real nice glasses, but I can't see outer either pair."
One of her grandsons was standing by the fire and lighted a cigarette. "Boy, don't you know you shouldn't smoke before the lady?" "Aw, Granny", he replied, "most of them smoke now." "Maybe they do," Granny said, "but it jes' don't look nice."
"When my old grandmother was a little child, her mother and father came over from Scotland. They come to Timmonsville. They tell me Scots is good people, if you don't bother 'em. I got right good bit in me. They think I'm smart and good."
Mr. Padgett had voted "whenever voting time come around," but Mrs. Padgett hadn't "bothered"." He had voted for Mr. Blease because "he jes' thought he was a good governor." And he voted for 'Johnson', too. "No, I didn't see the President this week, but the boys did. And they got wet, too. I saw Mr. Taft one time. When his train passed right down there, we all went to see him, and he was standin' on the platform."
