EDUCATION IS THE THING
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Edward Bardin	Graham Louder
Mrs. Bardin	Amelia Louder
Date of first writing:	April 5, 1939
Person interviewed:	Wm. Edward Bardin
Address:	611 S. Factory St.
Occupation:	Wilson, N. C.
Mechanic
Name of writer:	Stanley Combs
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 2,000
EDUCATION IS THE THING
It was on one of those afternoons in the early spring that brings man and beast from their winter haunts out to enjoy the sunshine. Graham and Amelia Louder were in the yard. He was engaged in a game of checkers with a neighbour boy while she applied the fine-toothed comb to her little girl's hair. Frequently this comb was plunged into a nearby saucer of kerosene and lard. Before the child was released her head was thoroughly moistened.
"I declare," said Amelia, "it sure is a job keeping all the younguns clean. I give all these littler ones a bath this morning and just look at 'em now. Sometimes I feel like the work'll kill me. Don't see how I'm going to get along, but I just keep working and worrying and we get along someway.
"Graham and me have had twelve kids, eight boys and four girls. We have eight of them to raise. The oldest is only seventeen, while the youngest is two. With all these kids Graham ought to be on a farm.
"We was both raised on a farm. I was one of the older of five children. When I finished the sixth grade my parents went to town, and I began to work in the cotton mills. Of course, since I've been married I've had work a-plenty to do. Graham was one of eleven children. He is the oldest boy. He never got much schooling; only finished the second grade. His daddy died when he was twelve years old, and he had to stop school and take the family responsibility. We sure want our kids to get as much education as they can.
"Take the old man there across the street, he has a rash on his hands. His folks say it's the seven-year itch, but I don't believe it. I think it's something he eat, or lack of it. Of course, they've plenty of something to eat, such as it is, but I don't think it's the right kind of foods. When these kids were all coming along, I used to be troubled a lot with indigestion, and my doctor used to tell me what to eat. He said I ought to eat vegetables every day and drink at least eight glasses of water. When one notices what they eat and try to eat the right things it helps in more than one way. The kids grow faster, feel better, and there's less doctor bills and medicine bills to be paid.
"Graham has been an automobile mechanic for the past twenty-two years. He can do anything to an automobile anybody else can, even if they have a heap more education. He has learned from doing it so much. Take the oldest boy, he is seventeen years old and in the seventh grade at school. Lots of other kids his age are way 'head of him, yet he knows lots more about work he has done than them kids that's never done any. I really want our kids to finish high school, but when they do I want 'em to know how to work, too. The boy just left for a CCC. Camp. He aims to study there so he can finish this year's work. He'll work there, too. It's a different kind of education from what's taught in the schools here. They teach by doing things there."
A misunderstanding among the children playing nearby required Amelia's presence to settle it. She found that one of the smaller boys was drinking a cold drink.
"I guess it was a nickel he made for going to the store for the old lady across the street," Graham commented. "You know, I gave you the last two cents I had to buy those two cigarettes you just smoked."
"Graham has been out of work now for two week," continued Amelia, "and he can’t draw any Social Security money till six weeks is up. Of course, it's nice to have something like that to fall back on, but six weeks is a long time to get along without nothing. At the Social Security office they figured Graham's earnings had averaged $20 a week. That is not enough for all this crowd. If there was any way he could increase his earnings to $30 a week we could get along pretty well. We could always have food enough and clothes so the kids wouldn't miss school so much. Underfed children are always restless and always more or less in trouble. They seem to take the tobacco habit more quickly than when they have plenty of fofld behind their belts. I don't think snuff and smoking are good for the young kids, but they will dip and smoke if they get a chance. I try to watch and keep them from it, especially the younger boys. I smoke but didn't smoke much along when I was having children. I smoked six or eight a day.
"Graham throws all of his money away on that old car of his. I got so mad with him the other day that I didn't hardly know what to do. He had a certain lady friend out riding with him. I was in another car watching him, and he didn't know about it. I can truthfully say that I have never been guilty, but I will confess that there have been times that I've been sorely tempted. After a few days I sort of got over it.
"It discourages me with this kind of life. Graham will never do anything but work on automobiles, but I feel like that if we lived near town on a small farm we would be much better off. Out there we would have chickens, a hog, a cow, and a big garden that would cut down expenses a lot. I tell him it would give the boys something to do; they would learn to work. You just can't raise a kid here in the town as you would and could if you were in the country. There's too many things bad to do for the lot of them.
"Rent is a big thing in town, too. We have to pay $3 a week for this house, and it's old and no good. It has four rooms and no bath. Of course, water and light is extra. People ought to be ashamed of themselves to ask so much for such an old house as this and in this kind of neighborhood."
The house, bungalow in type, was painted white a long time ago. It is built high from the ground, and a few trees surround it. The porch floor needs repair, and the windows have no screens.
"Well, I think I will be right there to vote in the city elections," Amelia remarked. "The present mayor has been there long enough. I want to see someone else get in. It's against the law for a man to hold two jobs like he's got. Nobody but big politicians and lawyers can get away with such. Politics have got to be something awful. You go to vote, and two or three are there wanting to help you mark your ballot when you are supposed to do it all by yourself. To be sure, there's a lot of people who don't care how they vote, or who for, just so long as they're getting a dollar or a pint out of it. I don't think that is right. If you are not interested enough to vote for someone you want then don't vote.
"I feel like the President is the best we've ever had. He is responsible for Old Age Pensions, Social Security, CCC'S, and such things that help the poor folks. I'd like to see it fixed up for him to run for a third term. He has tried to do a lots about wage and hour laws. I would like to see the time come when all in a group that does the same work receives the same pay. People would feel more free and equal then. As it is, some folks that makes more than their neighbors holds their heads high and hardly notices him when he's outside of working hours. The children from them that has bigger earnings seem to think that they're bigger than anyone else. This is noticeable in the schools and churches. Our kids go to Sunday school when they have suitable clothes, and mostly they go to the Salvation Army Sunday School. If they had better clothes they could go to another Sunday School, and I would like it a lot better if they could.
"Speaking about debts, about the only debts we have is doctor bills or medicine. The doctors are good about waiting for their pay, though.
"Some foods don’t agree with everybody. Take strawberries, they make me scratch and itch all over. Tomatoes make some people do that way, but they are good for you. Some meats, if you eat too much of them, cause an acid condition in the stomach that ain't good. I wish I knowed more about food; it would be a lot cheaper feeding this family and they'd be getting the right kinds.
"Our garden is small, but we always have something growing. Graham and the boys planted some potatoes a few days ago, and they're coming up now. Our cabbage will soon be big enough to start eating on. We'll plant peas, beans, and the like as soon as the weather gets right. If our garden was large enough I'd like to plant enough to can some for winter use, but being as it's no bigger than it is I can't can none.
"Our kitchen is small, too small to do much work in. Unless the weather is bad I do my washing in the back yard. I get the tubs up against the side of the house out of the wind."
The back porch is small, open, and badly in need of repairs. The only articles on it are toys belonging to the younger children.
The kitchen showed signs of having been put in order earlier in the day, but it could not be expected to remain that way. Pots, pans, and sundry dishes were piled and scattered here and there just as some member of the family had finished with them.
"This kitchen looks like I never do anything for it, but these kids never put anything back to its place when they finish," Amelia said. "I guess it’s better than having them away off over town where one don't know where they are, though.
The icebox showed signs of much wear, in fact, more than the cabinet. The chairs were old and worn. Some had been repaired with bottoms made of corn husks. The kitchen also served as the dining room. Its table was of old mahogany, showing much wear and rough treatment. In one corner of the kitchen was a built-in closet which housed the dishes and pantry supplies. It was only about half-filled.
The bedrooms were none too tidy. The beds had been made earlier in the day, but here the children were also allowed to play at will.
The dressers showed long and strenuous usage, and the rug on the floor was worn through in several places. Near one of the beds was a pile of garments left in the morning. The curtains in the rooms were of a used-to-be white but were now hanging limp and uneven over worn shades.
The living room was heated with a small, cheap, wood-burning stove. The settee was one of a cheaper type and showed effects of long wear. On the floor was a rug, also worn, and against one wall on a small table was the radio which kept up its fuss and was much admired by the whole family.
"We had to stop the paper when Graham lost his job," Amelia said. "We don't have any way of knowing what is going on outside except through the news reports over the radio. We sure hate to be without any of the daily papers, even though none of us read it much."
