Anne Winn Stevens Mrs. Albert Farlow
Dec. 16, 1938. 15 Hall Street,
Asheville, N C
THE FARLOWS
Should you walk along Hall Street facing away from Factory Hill, you could pick the Farlow Cottage from the others because of its neat ship shape appearance. Though needing paint, the cottage and the tiny yard show care. The low picket-fence lacks no pickets; the gate hangs true. Inside the fence the low hedge has been neatly clipped. On each edge, the paved walk has been carefully sodded. In the summer there were garden flowers.
On a Monday morning, a part of the family wash might be hung on a cord stretched evenly from post to post on the front porch, as well as on the clothes line in the narrow strip of side yard, but the garments would be noticeably well-washed. So would be the rag rug spread on a clean newspaper where the morning sun strikes the porch floor.
The same order and cleanliness would appear within.
The big, coal heater beside which sit Mrs. Farlow and her widowed daughter, Mrs. Colbox, seems to have been polished recently The blue counterpane on the well-made bed in the corner, though faded, is spotless and unwrinkled. So, too, are the crisp white muslin half curtains at the windows, and the hand-embroidered linen cover on the dresser. The bright red, linoleum square on the floor is as good as new and as shining The furniture though cheap is in good condition and well polished, and few framed prints and mottoes hang, on the wall. The cotton house dresses of the two women are perfectly clean Even the tin cans, one on each side of the stove, into which one woman and then the other spit at regular intervals, are shiny. The Farlows own their home and are proud of the fact.
"Ma worked in the mill for a long time after she was married to Pa," said Mrs Colbox. "She'd drop out awhile when one of the children was born, and then go back in again But the children needed her at home Then she dropped out for good from the mill, and kep' boarders, and her and Pa between them bought this house.
"No, they haven't saved much else, it took all they made to keep up the family; and both Ma and Pa wanted the children should finish high school before they went to work."
"I never had no chance to go to school myself." said Mrs. Farlow "I didn't learn to read and write and figger 'til about fifteen years ago.
"The way I come to learn was this: One mornin' I was workin' in the garden and had my apron full of plants and roots when I see the new night school teacher comin' up the street."
"'Good mornin', Mrs. Farlow, she said smilin' and holdin' out. her hand to shake hands with me.
"I stood up, still holdin the plants in my apron. I'm not fitten to shake hands with you,' I said. I've been diggin' in the dirt.
"But the new teacher said real hearty-like, 'I've come to bring you a special invitation to the night school. You must be sure to come.' Well, I didn't want to go to night- school. I'd been onct. And some boys and girls what was there laughed at my clothes, and remarked on them to each other. 'The old frump,' they said, 'and she can't even read. She's a joke, that's what she is. Don't stand there like a bump on a log, Grandma! Move on."
"So when this new teacher invited me, I thought: 'Here's a sprig of a girl wants me to come to night school, so she'll have somebody to laugh at, and something funny to tell her city friends about us pore mill people.'
"So I said, 'I don't think I can come." But the teacher kep' on insistin' 'til I said, 'I'll think about it.'
"That night I set out for the night school right after supper. Albert, my husband, has a real good education." Albert dropped out of school at fourteen. "He was always amused at me because I couldn't read or write, or figger. When he saw I was goin' to that school, he teased me about a woman of my age, 'settin' out evenings' and he laughed at the thought of me learnin' to read. But I thot I'd give the school a trial.
"When I went in, the teacher come up and called me by name, and shook hands with me, and said as how she was glad to see me.
"She gave me a chair by the table, a sheet of paper, and a pencil, and set me something to write.
"She saw that I was awkward and didn't know how to begin, so she put her arms around my shoulders and tuk my hand to show me. When she put her arm around me, the tears come into my eyes, and kep' cornin', because I had been so mean as to misjudge her in my heart, and to think that she would make fun of me, and her so good and sweet.
"The next evenin' though, I couldn't go back, because Flora here," pointing to Mrs. Colbox, "took sick with typhoid. But every night the teacher sent me my lesson, and when I wrote it and sent it back, she corrected and returned it. I made so many mistakes I got real discouraged, and I would have give up, but Flora said, 'Don't worry, Ma. When I get well from typhoid, I'll help you with your lessons." Flora had finished the fourth grade.
"So between the teacher and Flora, I learned to read and write and spell and figger a little. Albert still thought, it was a joke; but it meant everything to me. Why, before I went to night school, I couldn't even read the numbers on the houses. When I wanted to find a certain house, I'd ask someone where it was. They'd tell me the number. I'd go on along the street as if I understood, but I was that embarrassed. When I learned to read the house numbers, it made me real happy."
"Pa made fun of Ma, learnin' to read, because when she begun to read the newspapers, she kep' up with what was goin' on better'n he did. That's what griped him," interposed Mrs. Colbox.
"I love to read newspapers yet," continued Mrs. Farlow, "When I can afford to buy them. When Albert is sick at night, he has suffocatin' spells with his heart; and I'm afeard to go to bed 'til he's better, I sits and reads the paper 'til eleven or twelve o'clock. If I couldn't read, I'd just have to sit.
"Sometimes I sits and reads a story-magazine."
But Mrs. Farlow's tone of voice implied that she thinks "story magazines" silly and perhaps a little wicked.
"I learned other things too," said Mrs. Farlow. "There was community singing, and sometimes we'd get to act in a play, and even to take it on the road.
"The reason I never learned to read when I was small," explained Mrs. Farlow, "was because I lived a long ways from the school house. My pa was a crippled Confederate soldier. Mrs. Farlow is now sixty-six- "and he lived on a farm at Milledgeville, up around Salisbury. The school house was a long way off acrost the Yadkin River. There was no bridge over the Yadkin, only a high foot-log. Pa was scared to let us children cross the log, for fear we'd fall in the river.
Besides, he needed us nine children to work for him. He put each of us to work on the farm, as soon as we was six years old. I hoed corn and picked cotton from the time I was six years old to nine years. After I grew up, I even split rails. We didn't have much else; but we always had plenty to eat; Milk and butter, beans and potatoes, and other vegatables. We never had to wait for Associated Charities to feed us.
"When I was nine years old, I went to work in the mill at Milledgeville, N.C. I worked in the spinnin' room every day in the week, twelve hours a day. I was paid ten cents a day.
"Yes, the pay is better now, but the work is harder. Workin' in the mill now is just slavery."
"After Ma come to Asheville," chimed in Mrs. Colbox," she kep' on workin' in the Cotton Mills. She met Pa here and married him when she was seventeen."
"Albert was from the country, too," continued Mrs. Farlow, "He went to school until he was fourteen. His parents was renters, and not stout. When he was fourteen, they died.
They had been sick so long they didn't leave him nothing. He kep' on workin' on the farm for awhile, but he wasn't paid much, so he quit and come to work in the cotton mills in Asheville.
"Albert's a loom-fixer," continued Mrs. Farlow, "A part of the time, now, he works four days a week. He gets four dollars and forty cents a day. But some weeks he can't work only two days a week, because he has trouble with his heart. Dr. Morgan says as how he isn't able to work. He has a leakin' heart and may drop dead any day. Albert don't know how bad off he is. Dr. Morgan wants us to tell him. But if we was to tell him it would only bring on a bad spell, and he'd give right up. The shock might kill him.
"Sometimes he can't sleep nights, except sittin' up in a chair," continued his wife, "When he works in the mill, his ankles swell until they hangs over his shoe tops from standin' so much."
"Out of the money he makes, he has to pay three dollars every six days for strychnine and digitalis. When he tries to go a few days without the medicine, he gets so sick he can't work at all. Seems like we can't get along this way much longer, what with taxes, coal, light and water to pay for; life insurance coming due, and medicines and doctor's bills," moaned Mrs. Colbox.
"Flora can't work in the mill," said Mrs. Farlow, "because her eye sight is defective. She's, that nearsighted!"
"And I can't get no W.P.A. job," said Flora, "as long as Pa keeps on his job in the mill. I'm plumb wore out tryin' to get a job. If my son was livin' now, maybe he could help us."
Mrs. Colbox's only son, a boy of seventeen, was killed in an accident, "come six years ago."
"He went to work at fourteen," said Mrs. Colbox. "He worked at the Western Union a while, at the Langren news-stand and at the Postal Telegraph. The people who ran the Langren news-stand liked him so much, they wanted to adopt him and educate him. He had just begun workin' in the mill when he was killed."
"Nobody knows how it happenned," said Mrs. Farlow. "He was ridin' on his bicycle on Buxton Street. He must have been struck down by a car. There wasn't any witnesses. Somebody found him unconscious on the street. He died four hours later without ever cornin' to."
Mrs. Colbox, thin and restless, is subject to rheumatism, and has had "three nervous breakdowns.
"I spent twenty-one days once," she says with an air of triumph, "in the State Hospital at Morganton."
The two women occupy their time when not doing the house work, by making old-fashioned patch-work quilts.
"When we furnish the materials and do all the work, which includes the quilting, we collects three dollars a quilt," said Mrs. Colbox. But a detailed enumeration proved that the material alone costs, two dollars and a half. "But when we quilt the design called the 'Wedding Ring' we make more. We generally make two quilts a week. It takes a day and a half to quilt each one."
Mrs. Colbox brought out two quilts they were making. They were indeed quite colorful and gay.
"I used my quilt money to buy shoes and cotton cloth for two dresses," summed up Mrs. Colbox.
Said Mrs. Farlow, "I haven't had a new dress in ten years."
Like many others the Farlows lost their small savings in the bank failures in Asheville.
"But thank God," says Mrs. Farlow, "we haven't had to ask anybody for anything yet!"
