Savannah Unit
F.W.P.
Georgia
January 17, 1939
George Carter (Negro) 
109 Ann Street
Savannah, Georgia
Ex-slave & stevedore
Morris Adams, Writer
TURNIPS TODAY, TURNIPS TOMORROW
Though he is a Negro the Negroes who pass him on the street mean nothing to him; in his estimation they do not exist. Occasionally be forces his six-foot frame to bow low in acknowledgement to some white friend's "Good morning, George."
I watch his as he approaches me.
He is even stouter than I thought. He weighs at least two hundred pounds. His hair is white and dusty, like last week's snow, though his face is full and brown. At first glance I do not believe he is old. He raises his head I see his eyes. It is in his eyes the secret of his age is hidden; they are cold, stark, and dead. Time has laid a thin gray tissue over the once bright eyes.
He passes me; I follow slowly.
For two blocks he slowly picks his way down an opening that once was a street; its surface is a fragmentary carpet of stones and broken brick; I believe it has been forgotten.
He turns left and enters a gate; it slams behind him.
I wait a few minutes. I look around me.
As far as I can see in either direction the street is narrow, unpaved, and strewn with debris. The houses are close together; they have long forgotten the friendliness of a warm coat of paint; most of them are settled and warped with the discomfortures of old age. Though in time all have had little porches, these do not now exist; the Negroes have burned them for wood. I watch an old woman rip off a board from an old stable; no one else sees her; she hurries into the house; I say nothing.
I enter the yard expecting to find it cluttered with debris; I am mistaken. The only object to detract from its otherwise unusually clean appearance is an. Old warped garbage can. I look in it; for much can be learned of the habits, and welfare of a family by a look into its garbage can. It is half full of pumpkin peeling. Each peel lies loose and open on its supporting peels; I can see the bottom of the can. From bottom to top are three distinct colors of pumpkin peel; that means George has had pumpkin for three days. Today is Tuesday, and garbage is emptied in this section on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
To reach George's house I must climb a long rickety stair that seams to be attached to a sheer brick wall; it leads to an unusually high second story. I am a little afraid.
I climb. I am halfway up; I look at the crack between the staircase and wall; it seems to be giving way; my breath stops; I dash, taking the remaining steps four at a time. When I reach the ramshackle landing at the head of the steps I see several boards missing; I am more frightened; I jump right into the middle of George's kitchen. I think of a thousand excuses for not knocking; none seems to fit. I say simply, "Morning George."
George is already busy. He is peeling pumpkin for dinner. The peelings will make the fourth layer in the can. "Good mornin', suh massa." His face beams. I have given him a cigar.
I too beam, for I am flattered; I have never been called "massa" before.
George seta his pan of pumpkin on a little table. "just a minute, massa. Lemme git yuh a chair," he says.
He leaves me and goes into another room. I have a chance to look around. The room is small though it seems to be a perfect setting for its furnishings which consist of a little "number seven" stove, two small pine tables, and a rocker. The ceiling is low; George's hair touches it occasionally and bits of slate--colored plastering fall. The walls are slate-colored too. The outer coloring has worn off in several places and sundry colors, evidence of different coats of calsomining, appear; one splotch is a bright red.
I look about the walls for pictures. I like pictures. There are none, not even a "God Bless Our Home,". Where pictures ought to be hung, the space is filled with pots, pans, hand-saws, and "rabbit tobacco." I count them rapidly; fifty-four articles hanging on the wall and no two exactly alike.
"Heah yuh is, massa." George returns to the kitchen dragging a chair behind him. I am no connoisseur of antiques; I do not know what period the chair represents, I only know it is mahogany and that it is old. The seat has long been worn away and it has been recovered with goat skin. I sit down in it reluctantly, for I have an idea that most of the goat hair will follow me away, on the seat of my trousers.
George seats himself in the rocker. He does not know whether I am a book agent, an insurance agent, or selling "hair straightener." He only knows I want to talk to him a bit.
He waits.
I have bean concentrating; I conclude that I should break the ice and make a few overtures to him first.
I ask, "George, how have you been getting along lately?" George draws conclusions too; from my question he thinks I am from the welfare society; I have broken the ice in the wrong place. Nevertheless, I can not stop him.
"Ten dollars; ten dollars; who kin lib on ten dollars a mont'? All dese Niggers git mor'n dat. Heah I is ninety-seben yeahs old, an' down wid duh back ache mos' ob duh time, an' all I gits frum dat welfare is ten meazeldee dollars."
I shake my head sadly, wriggle around in my chair, and grunt, hoping to distract his attention. I have heard that one must not distract the attention of an old person while he is talking, for his mind, "comes and goes" and he will forget what he is talking about. There may be a good deal to this psychology, but it does not work with George Carter. He mistakes my sad head shaking and grunting as deep sympathy; he halts suddenly; in his mind he is backing up, he wants to start from the very foundation of this welfare trouble. He raises his big brown hand in order to hammer emphasis into his opening sentence.
I will not have it. I catch him before he brings that big hand down. "George," I say hastily, "have you ever been to school?"
His hand is poised midway in the air. He does not like my interruption. He shows it in his manner. "Hell-ll-1, I ain't nebuh seed de inside ob a school house,", he says gruffly.
George looks at me. His mouth is half open. He has three perfectly good front teeth on the upper right side and three directly under these. There are none on the left side whatever.
"Do you go to the shows, George," I ask. There- I have said the wrong thing again.
George's six teeth snap. I irk him with such questions.
"Duh shows ain't nuffin' but a 'prade groun' fuh duh debil an' Hell." He ushers this sentence in with a great slap on his knee. "Us ain't hat 'em in slab'ry times, us ain't hab 'em atta dub big war, and us ain't hab no 'pressuns 'till duh show come. Duh show is ruint duh worl'." emphatically.
When George says "slab'ry times", and the "big war", his speech slows; I detect a kind of wistfullness in the way he utters these words. I believe I have discovered the topic of his heart.
"George," I ask, "will you tell me about your life?" He has been chewing on his cigar. I get up to light it for him, but he will not let me hold the match for him.
He commences, "'Bout seben yaahs ago I got a job in duh sshh-..."
"George, please start tat the beginning. I want to hear it all," I tell him.
George smiles. He is so likable.
He scratches his head; his hand is gnarled; the fingers do not bend; they are stiff with age. A tense quietness settles over the shabby little room; shadows from a fire in the little "number seven" stove shine through the side grate and play upon its black apron. George's thoughts have gone on a long journey; I am waiting, anxiously.
He begins slowly. His voice is a little husky; I believe it is emotion.
"I wuz born in Vaginee, up dare nearly 'bout tuh Norfo'k. Duh massa who owned me name Carter; dat's where I gits muh name; he owned my pappy an' mammy too. Us ain't wu'ked so hard at Massa Carter's, mos'ly pickin' backer. I 'members when I ain't high as a goat knee I wuz pickin' worms off duh 'backer leaf. I ain't wu'k in duh fiel's long though 'cause Massa make me a house boy. I waited on duh tables an' shine duh spoons, an' fo'ks. Hab tuh wu'k hard sometime though w'en dey hab duh 'ceptions.
"W'en I wuz sixteen yeah ol', Massa sol' me an' some mo' Niggers down Sout'. 'Cose us ain't want tuh go, but us hab tuh. Us wuz chained togedder all duh way frum Norfo'k tuh Savannah. An' w'en us got heah dey put us in a slabe pen right under whar B. H. Lebey's sto' use tuh be. Duh nex' mornin' wuz sale day. Dey brung us heah fuh duh Central Railroad. I wuz de only one not sol' tuh duh Central. Dey says I'se too young. Massa McAlpin he done wants me but duh Pres'dent ob duh road tell 'em dat Doctor Arnold hab duh fu'st pick tuh buy me. Doctor Arnold, he been duh doctor fuh duh railroad. Doctor Arnold, he want me fuh a house boy. 'Cause Nellie, she duh doctor's wife, done spent some time in Vaginee at Massa Carter's home, an' she know dat I'se a fuss-class waiter on duh table."
I am interested in the subject of slavery, so I ask, "George, do you remember where any other slave pens were located at that time?"
"Yas suh, good as if it wuz jist yestuhday." He is animated.
"Dere wuz a pen under duh Pulaski House whar dey lock up duh Niggers w'enebuh dey got heah in duh night, an' duh man what hab 'em in charge done stop at duh hotel. Duh reg'lar jail wa'nt fuh slabs but dere wuz a speck'lator jail at Hab'sham an' Bryan Street. Dey lock up duh slabes in duh speck'lator jail when dey brought 'em heah tuh de auction. Mos' ob duh speck'lators come in duh night befo' duh sale an' stop at duh Pulaski House. Duh slabes wuz took tuh duh pen under duh hotel."
I would like to listen to George talk about slaves and slave pens all day but I haven't the time. I reach for my watch to see what time it is. It is missing, of course; I remind myself that the interest is due.
"George, how did you find your new master?" I ask.
George replies,"I ain't fin' 'im, he fin' me."
I am confused a little. I have listened to lawyers ask leading questions; I must try that method.
"George", I ask, "wasn't Doctor Arnold good to you?"
George grins, I do not believe anyone can beat that grin with only six teeth.
"Yas suh, he sho' wuz." He becomes a little meditative. "Though lot ob times, I wuz beg off a beat'n by Doctor Arnold's madder an' her good fren' Mis' Hab'sham. I 'members duh only time I is ebuh bean whip. Duh massa he done tol' me tuh don't let any dem peddlers an' visitors in duh do' 'less he done tol' me tuh. I done fuhgits dat bery day, an' w'en a man done come tuh sell some wil' ducks, I jist let 'im in wid his muddy boots an' all. Den duh doctor come out ob duh libery an' seed 'em; I know den dat Massa done got it wrap up fuh me. 'George,', duh Massa wuz mad, 'I hab nebuh whip yuh befo', but I'se gwine tuh gib yuh Hell dis day!" He do so."
George talks on; I do not interrupt him.
"W'en duh Massa done fust got me, he come home one day wid a shoe-shina box, what duh head superuntendent done made fuh 'im; he say: 'George, dis box is tuh shine my boots wid.'"
George is motionless for a moment, then he rises from his chair and hurries into the adjoining room. As he passes me he murmurs, "I'se gwine tuh show yuh muh pritty shoe-shine box duh Massa done gib me."
I twist about in my chair and watch him. He kneels beside the bed and begins to fish about under the bed; he has found it. He tries to pull it out. The box is just a little higher than the bed railing and it will not come out. I step into the room to help him; I reach for the box myself. George brushes me away; the box is sacred to him; he does not want me to touch it.
He continues to struggle with the box; I look around.
This is George's bed-room. And what a room, just big enough to hold a double bed. As he struggles for the box George la tightly jammed between the bed and the wall. The bed is unusually interesting; I have never seen another like it, fine grade mahogany, a simple roll-top foot board, and a decorative head board that rises to a great height with graduations of wings. It is decidedly out of harmony with the jumpers, drawers, and ragged overalls that decorate the cold slate walls.
George has fished out the box; he blows the dust away, and rubs the cobwebs off affectionately. He loves this box.
He sets it before me. Indeed, it is a splendid piece of work, heavy big-grain oak sealed with hand wrought nails and copper bound; the foot rest is large and long. It was made for boots. I imagine Doctor Arnold had a large foot.
"Some day, "George says happily, "I'se gwine tuh shine it 'till it shines lik duh sun."
George may shine the copper, but he can never improve the heavy oak. It shines with a natural gloss that comes only after years of handling by human hands.
"Dub bed," he blurts suddenly, "did yuh see muh pritty bed?" "Pretty," is George's pet adjective. "Yes George," I say. "Where did you get such a pretty bed?"
"Massa Arnold, gib it tuh me. Doctor Arnold be done sleep in dat bed all he life, he die in it; I'se gwine tuh die in it."
George grows sentimental. A pathetic thoughtfulness clouds his face; I must draw him away from the tender side of his memories. "George,", I try to put a little cheer in my voice, "I'll bet Doctor Arnold let you have a good deal of time to play, when you were young, didn't he?"
"Yas suh', I 'members play'n wid my fren's Niel Hab'sham, an' Peter Meldrim, an' George Owens, plen'y times. I'se duh younges' oh duh bunch. W'en us saw some Injuns come in duh square I runs fas' is I kin go an' tells Massa. He say I kin go look at de Injuns. De Injuns put up dey tents right neah duh guard house on duh corner ob Whitaker an' York Street. Dese Injuna ain't stay long though, but us boys sho' hung roun' an' look at dem cur'ous peoples an' what dey hab wid 'em. Mos' ob dese ole fran's ob mine hab die out. Duh colored boy what go wid us I lose track ob 'im right atta duh war. He name Williams an' he be a slabe ob duh Woodburys. Jist Co' duh war massa let me fire a enjin on duh Central frum Savannah tuh Macon.
"Ebrybody done heah 'bout de ruckus an' duh shoot'n at Fort Sumter; duh whole town gits 'cited, an' dey dona start tuh gadder tuhgedder. I all time stop muh carriage an' watch 'em march an' drill in duh square. Dey wuz a pritty sight.
"Den one day Massa say, 'Georgs, yuh gotta go be Cap'n potter's bodyguard.' I don't wants tuh go but I hab tuh. We leab wid duh train an' goes 'way up duh coun'ry. 
"I lak dub fust two days; us ain't done nuffin' but sleep an' tend dub horse. Nex' day though I heah some bullets. Dey go P-I-N-G. Den duh horns blow an' Cap'n potter say, George git muh horse quick!' 'Bout dat time I heah a big bullet go ssssh-sh-boom! boom! -- Day gits so loud yuh ain't heah dub little 'uns a'tall. I say, 'Cap'n Potter, I can't stay heah I gotta go home.' Cap'n Potter say, 'George yuh is five hun'ent miles from home, an' yuh gotta stay!' Ha say, 'Yuh gwine tuh see wusser'n dis!' But he warn't talk'n a'tall.
"I run 'way an' jine a wagon train. I see a off'cer I knows. He say, 'Nigger, whar is Tom potter?' I tol' 'im I ain't know. Den he say 'Yuh bettuh by a damn sight fin' 'im.'
"1 drop behind but I keep right on gwin'. Wen it gits dark I'se freaz'n. I go in duh woods an' sea some hogs. I run'em out an' crawls in dey warm bed an' kivers up wid duh pine straw an' go tuh sleep.
"Atta I wake up I starts walkin'. Atta while I comas tuh Jonesboro. I slips roun' an' git in duh coach an' hide under duh bench. W'en duh train git ready tuh leab it is plum full ob folkses gitt'n 'way from dey coun'ry 'cause Shurmen is comm'n. I rides 'til I heah 'em holler 'Macon, Georgia.'
"Den I scoot out from under dat bench fast as I could. Eb'ry-body hollers 'Look at dat nigger! Look at dat nigger!' Dey started atta me but I run fast an' dere wuz so many folks roun' duh station dat day couldn't see me nohow an' dent dat wuz already dere don' notice me. I go down duh railroad track pritty soon I heah whistle blow. I knows dat whistle any- whar, I waits 'til- de enjin starts tuh pass me an' I jumps right in duh cab.I ain't let dat fireman touch a shovel 'til us git tuh Savannah.
"Soon as I git off dat train I go fuh Doctor Arnold, but I ain't gone no whar fo' "Nigger Jones" dona grab me. He know I done run away. He starts tuh put me in duh guard house w'en Doctor Arnold come up an' say, 'Jones, turn dat damn nigger loose.' Den Massa ask me 'bout Cap'n Potter. I ain't know nuttin'.
"Atta dis I dona thought I ain't gonna hab tuh heah no mo' dem bullits; but heah come Cap'n Fetter on fuhlo; dey sent me back wid 'im, tuh Vaginie dis time.
"But dey couldn't hol' George. I run 'way agin, wid anuddar nigger. We follow Wheeler's Calbery tuh duh ribber. W'en dey dona cross duh pontoon duh soldiers start pull'n in duh bridje an' t'row us in duh ribber, an' us hab tuh swim out. Us follow dat calbery tuh duh cross'n an' den slip 'cross dub bridge an' t'roo duh picket line.
"But dey done catched us. Us 'splains dat us is bodyguards an' is los' from our men, an' dey let us go. Us swim two ribbers an' fin'aly us catched up wid duh boat dat carry us from Charls'on an' I hide in dub hol' all crump up, but I git tuh Savannah.
"1 ain't no mo' dan git heah fo' dey done grab me agin. I tol' duh man I b'longs tuh Dr. Arnold an' he loose me right quick. I ain't go tuh duh house though; I go tuh Dr. Arnolds' quarters on Fahm Street an' hide.
"Duh man tol' Dr. Arnold he hah brung a slabe oh his name George from up duh ribber, but Dr. Arnold say I ain't no slabe oh his 'cause I'se wid Cap'n Potter in Charls'on.
"Mis' Nellie she heah 'bout me an' she come an' foun' me. I couldn't talk 'bove a wis'puh, bat she hab me rub all ober. Soon Doctor Arnold seed I ain't gonna be kept in no war, I'se put tuh firin' de enjin agin.
"I done met Gen'l Bragg in Macon t'roo Doctor Arnold. I play fuh him on muh cane whistle. De Gen'l sho' lubs good music.
"I wus still firin' de enjin w'en Shurmen come. Us wuz stop in duh yards an' w'en duh Gen'l stop I come up an' ax him tuh lemme shine he boot. He do. W'en I go 'way I look in muh box an' I fin' two dollas an' eighty cents, good money."
George ceases talking; I must learn more about "Gen'l Sherman." I ask, "George, did many Negroes follow Shurman's army into Savannah?"
"Ooowhee! I ain't nebuh seed so many Niggers 'fo in muh life. Dey jist lak blackbirds, steal'n an' carry'n off ebryt'ing dey kin fin'; dey wuz wors'n duh soldiers. We fin' 'em all ober dead in duh street. I t'ank duh Lawd dat war is done ober."
"What did you do whan you were set free, George?"
George is quick to answer. "I ain't done nuffin but go back tuh Doctor Arnold. He tell me I is done free tuh go, but I tells him I ain't goin' nowhar but wid 'im. I do so, fuh long time. "Den he went an' die, an' Mis' Nellie went up Nort'. I ain't nebuh seed 'er no mo'. Dey lef me my pritty bed though. God bless 'em. I lubs duh bery dirt Doctor Arnold is kivereg up wid. Eb'ry time I t'inks 'bout 'im I go lie down on duh bed dat he die on."
My heart goes out in sympathy for this old Negro. He sits before me, his head is bowed slightly; the corners of his mouth droop and tremble. I can not let this go on.
"George," hurriedly, "after Doctor died I suppose you got a got elsewhere, didn't you?" "George jacks his head up and says: "Huh?" He has bean very far away. I repeat.
"Yas massa, I wuks on duh waterfront, loadin' cotton an' rosum, fuh a long time. Den I ups an' jine a wagon train an' went tuh duh Spanish American War in Habannah. Dat's whar duh wagon done run ober muh back an' dat's what's wrong wid my back now; I ain't much good. I done made forty dollas a mont' in dat war though."
George looks at his pan of half-peeled pumpkin; I know what he is thinking; I must hurry.
"Did you serve in the World War too, George?" I think I may draw a negative answer here, but he answers quickly.
"I sho' did, I stebedored all t'roo duh Worl' War, an' git good pay fuh dat too. I wish times now is duh way day wuz den."
I look at George. At first I do not see how it could be possible for a seventy-seven year old man to do the work of a stevedore. His shoulders are heavy and powerful, his neck short and muscular, like a bull's. I think of the steps he climbs; I believe him.
George has not mentioned any of his family, except his parents. He says his father "went tuh preach'n atta he left, an' day fin'aly sent him tuh Arkansaw tuh duh missum."
"When did you get married George?" I ask.
"W'en I wuz thirty. We hab two chillun but all ob 'em is dead now. I got a granchile in Detroy. She sent me dis las' Chris'mas."
George picks up a box lid and shows it to me. The label on the box tells me that George's grandchild sent him a box of "Well knit Underwear." The lid is red. George holds the reading up to his eyes; it is upside down; he pretends to be reading.
"What did you do after the war?" I ask.
'George is tired. "I done dis an' dat, lib good sometime an' hard sometime, 'til muh back won't lemme wu'k no mo'. Den duh 'presbun come an' I can't fin' no wu'k nohow. I hab tub ax fuh relief, but dey don' gib me much. Sometimes some ob my white fren's brings me sonet'ing though an' takes me fish'n. See muh fish poles?"
George gets up and moves towards the platform at the head of the steps. I hesitate; I am afraid it will give way under our combined weights.
He beckons.
I stand on the porch. I do not look up at George's fishing poles. Instead, I am picking out a decent place to fall.
George says, "Well yuh bettuh go, an' lemme git muh punk'ns on."
I could talk with him forever, but I can see he is tired. I thank him and turn to go. It is a strange place to think of a song but I do-the one about "If I had the wings of an angel."
George watches me. I start down the steps. I believe I should go very slowly. I hold tightly to the railing and try to take some of the weight off my feet, as though that would do any good.
The steps creak loudly; it frightens me and I jump clear to the ground. I am not hurt. I count the steps I have just jumped over-nine.
George chuckles loudly.
Confound him.