March 27, 1939.
Lester Garren (white),
The Rutledge Farm
Fletcher, N. C.
Tenant Farmer
Anne Winn Stevens, writer.
Douglas Carter, reviser.
"ALL OUR FOLKS WAS FARMERS"
Original Names	Changed Names
Mrs. Garren	Mrs. Riddle
The Rutledges	The Middletons
Mrs. Garren	Jane Riddle
Lester (Garren)	Jim(Riddle)
Fletcher	Fielding
"ALL OUR FOLKS WAS FARMERS"
At the top of a ragged hill grown over with scrubbyoaks stands a dingy, four-room cabin. The two rooms ofwhich it consisted originally had been painted green, but except for a few streaks here and there the paint has longsince rubbed off. A lean-to of rough boards has been added. Freight and passenger trains chug along the tracks beyondthe country road leading from the village, and cough upsmoke from their toiling engines. The smoke caught bythe wind swirls over the hill and still further blackensthe cabin and outhouses. Although pleasant, green fieldsrimmed by distant mountains partially encircle the hill, this house near the railroad tracks is as unprepossessingas the shacks in the meanest mill village. It has nomodern conveniences. Stoves heat it, and it is lighted by kerosene lamps. Water is secured from a well adjacent tothe pig sty in the middle of the barnyard.
No attempt has been made to grade the yard, and theonly evidence of care is a gravel walk outlined by bricksset edgewise, which leads from the front porch to the brinkof the hill, where it stops short. At the back of the houseis an irregular clearing muddy in wet weather, dusty indry, and cluttered with small stones. Here stand the barn, stables, and corncrib, patched loosely with rough boards. They have never been painted.
"My husband patched 'em up loose on purpose," said Mrs. Riddle, "so if we move he can pull down his boards and take'em with him."
"Don't the owners keep up the property?" I asked.
"Nought but the big house," she replied.
At first view from the rocky, deeply rutted road theplace seemed abandoned, except that a brood of baby chicks, on hearing footsteps, rushed out from under the house, climbedall over the porch, and narrowly escaped being stepped on. The rough cornfield to one side of the cabin still has last year's stalks standing at the end of March.
On the opposite side of the hill, overlooking wide grainfields and distant mountains, is the red-roofed, many-gabledsummer home of the Middletons, aristocratic coast dwellers, who rent part of their mountain estate to native farmers.
The Middleton homestead is approached by a neatly graveledroad, outlined by trim shrubs. An intervening grove concealsfrom the summer occupants the tenant houses along the railroadtrack.
Jane Riddle, the tenant's wife, is a brawny, masculinetype, about 45 years old, with deeply tanned skin and roughhewn features. Her hair was entirely hidden by a cheap, red and green wool cap; her cotton dress was faded and shapeless; and, although there had been no rain for a week, shestrode along in galoshes.
She was getting dinner. "My husband will be comin' any time, now,"she said.
"What are you giving him for dinner?" I asked.
"Potatoes," she grinned. "Every day it's potatoes;boiled potatoes, mashed potatoes, fried potatoes, potatosoup."
Peeled Irish potatoes in a yellow bowl on the long, zinc-covered table confirmed her statement. A range occupied one end of the kitchen. Rough shelves in thecorners bore coarse earthenware dishes; a few pots andpans hung on the walls. The adjoining room, barely furnished, was evidently the living room. It had faded, large-floweredcurtains at the windows, a coal heater, and a few cheapchairs. The walls were cluttered with a miscellaneouscollection of fly-specked calendars.
"That's a picture of my youngest son." said Jane, pointing to a large photograph on a dresser in one corner. "He graduates from high school this year." Later in theday when the boy came home from school, it appeared thatthe photograph flattered him. He was dark and thin, and stooped badly. He had a sullen, hangdog expression. Likehis mother he was very closemouthed.
The older son, already graduated from high school, works in the weaving room of a rayon factory at $22 a week. He lives with his parents. The older daughter works in ahosiery mill and also lives at home.
"She inspects the work of 100 girls," said her motherproudly, as she drew from a dresser drawer a cheap, light-blue, rayon stocking."This is one of the stockings theymake at the mill," she said. "My dawter inspects the feet, another worker inspects the legs, and another inspects thefinished stockings when they are ready to be packed."
"How does your daughter like the work?" I asked.
"She likes it; but it's hard on her eyes; she complainsof them hurting her, when she comes home in the evening."
The girl makes $12.50 a week. She is pale and anemic looking, and puffy about the eyes. Her expression is sullen, and she answers questions in a curt, monosyllabic style. Neither she nor her younger brother seem to have sharedtheir mother's vigorous health. Although she has troublewith her eyes, she does not wear glasses.
A younger girl, still in grammar school shares thefamily reticence, but is more attractive, with dark, curlinghair and serious eyes. A member of a 4-H club, she workson her project conscientiously. Last year she planted andtended a plot of beans. The vines bore abundantly, butalthough the crop was good the market was already glutted, so that she could sell none. This year she is raising a Hereford steer, a calf whose horns are still mere nubs. On her return from school she went directly to its stall, slipped a halter over its head, and led it out.
Her mother, who was haggling with a salesman over someinsect powder, stopped to say, "Better water that calf'; Iforgot all about him. He ain't had nothin' to eat, or nowater, neither." It was then late afternoon.
The girl led the steer to the three stocks of fodderstanding out in the clearing, tethered him, and let himmunch from one of the stocks. Nearby was a harrow leftin the open to take the weather.
Jane Riddle and the salesman continued their argument. The salesman, middle aged, sandy-haired, and bland, wassaying that Jane's hens needed delousing.
"Give the powder a trial, ma'am," he said. Jane wentto the corncrib - it must have been a chicken coop, originally;it was built of slats and quite open enough to be soakedthrough by rain - and took out an ear of corn, and beganscattering the grains. At her call, some 80 hens, cametumbling over each other. There seemed to be no henhouse, so they must roost in the trees, or in the stables, perhaps. They were a mixed brood: Plymouth Rocks, Rhode Island Reds, games, white Leghorns, and less easily recognizable species.
She ducked quickly and seized a big, squawking Plymouth Rock. The salesman rubbed the yellow insect powder intothe hen's feathers, shook it out into a box lid, and pointedto the lice that squirmed and then lay still. An argumentfollowed.
"That there one," said Jane Riddle, pointing a long, thick finger,"ain't dead."
The salesman smiled patiently and shook the box lid. Heads together, they watched intently.
"It ain't dead yet," said Jane again.
"Now look,"said the salesman triumphantly. "It'sdead, all right. It's the fumes that kills 'em."
The task of delousing 80 hens seemed to stagger Mrs. Riddle, particularly when the salesman declared the process should be repeated several times at intervals of three weeks.
"You could do it this way," he argued: "just put thepowder in the dust hole where the hens are accustomed towallow. That will do as well."
Then there began a haggling over the price. "A dollarand a half's too much," said the farm woman.
The salesman maintained his bland air. Finally, heagreed to take as payment two living hens totaling ll pounds.
"I can sell them," he said, "at the curb market in town."
Mrs. Riddle brought out bathroom scales, which shebalanced precariously on the uneven ground. Hen after henwas caught and deposited thereon, but refused to perch, until at last the salesman solved the problem. He placedthe hen's head under its wing, rotated it vigorously, thenplaced the bewildered fowl on its side on the scales, while Mrs. Riddle and the younger girl squatted beside him toread the dial."Five pounds," announced the salesman, as for a splitsecond the hen lay still.
"No, 'twas five and a half," It said Jane.
Hens were then fed and caught and rotated, until at last two hens were found whose combined weight totaled llpounds. A debate broke out afresh about the price per pound: Jane demanding 16¢, and the salesman contending for 12 1/2¢.
Finally the salesman won, and tucked a hen under eacharm. He handed the container of insect powder to Jane.
"Iain't a-goin' to take that there box," she declared."You done used some of it."
The salesman waddled down the hill with his hens. Hereturned from his parked car with an unopened box of thepowder for her.
Besides the chickens, Mrs. Riddle raises and sellsvegetables, and keeps bees, but the real business of thefamily is raising beef cattle. Jim rents 120 acres fromthe Middletons and pays them a flat sum of $300 a yearfor the house and lot and the farm land. Jane seems tothink this a profitable bargain and, while noncommittal about gains, intimates they are prospering. They have 25 full-blooded Herefords, several full-blooded Jerseys, andother cattle of mixed breed. Those lying in the shade of the trees adjoining the lot looked rather gaunt. Therewere no stalls for them. Evidently they sleep in thegrove.
Part of the land is wooded, part is pasturage, andabout half of it is arable bottom land, already green withspringing grain. They also raise corn, peas, beans, andhay, and although Jim, 55 years old, is small and thin, anddoes not appear to have much strength, he can plow all daywithout excessive fatigue.
"All our folks was farmers," said Mrs. Riddle, "backup in the mountains. No, I don't know when they settledthere, or where they come from. Jim's people and my peoplelived in the same cove. I've known him all my life. Hisbrothers and my brothers all farm. Most of 'emare backup there where we come from. I've got one married sisterliving in Fielding."
"Did you and Jim go to school?"
"Yes, I finished the school - went through the seventh grade - but Jim dropped out. They was only one teacher -it was a little log school - and we didn't have grades likethey got now, but they told me I went through the seventhgrade. I don't know how far Jim got - he's older'n me, and dropped out before I started."
Jim owns 102 acres of land back in the mountains, but, "It's so steep," he said, "it ain't fit for farmin'." Heraises apples on this land, and pastures cattle on thehillsides. He tried renting the place, "But the tenants," Jane put in, "let the cows get into the orchard and breaklimbs offen the apple trees. They run down the property, so we just locked up the house and let it stand."
"We've lived here about three year," Jim added, "butwe ain't brought our beat things here. We sort of feel like we're camping out."
