F. C. John Clark
Rose Shepherd,
March 25, 1936.
Interview 38
II. HISTORICAL
PERSONAL INTERVIEW (Early Jax. & River Transportation)
John E. Clark,
Pearson, Florida.
Mr. Clark's Father, John Clark who was in the employ of Burton and Hayward Iron Works Company, of Baltimore, came to Jacksonville the first week in January, 1850, to install machinery for his firm in a saw mill owned by Mr. Holloway at Empire Point. He also put in a planing machine in another <text not clear>ll at Middleburg.
Having formed a firm friendship with young Holmes, a son of Mr. T. O. Homes, he came again to Jacksonville in July of the following year, with his wife, whom he had just married in Baltimore, and built a saw mill of his own on East Bat St., near Hogans/Creek.
One of the first orders executed by the Clark Mill was having the lumber for the Judson House, erected by A. Judson Day, of Maine, on the corner of Bay and Julia St., the site of the present Everett Hotel. Until 1862, when it was mysteriously burned, this was the largest Hotel in Jacksonville. It contained 110 guest rooms, was four stories in height, with broad plazzas along the sides, and a spacious dining room 80-feet in length.
TRADING WITH THE IN<text not clear>NE
Mr. Clark, Sr., later established a grist mill, operated on a toll basis - that is, farmers and plantation owners, brought their corn which was ground in the mill, one-fourth being retained to cover the cost for grinding. In course of the session, there was quite an accumulation of meal, and <text not clear>Clark loading a row-boat half fall, would go out to "Horse Landing" near Mandarin Point, and trade it to the Indians, who were quite numerous in that section, taking in return aides. These were shipped to New York where they were sold <text not clear>a good price. Most of the dickering was with "Big Billie" a Chief of the tribe, whose limited vocabulary did not add it of lengthy "bargaining," and sales details were adjusted promptly and without difficulty.
IN 1857 - THE FIRST RAILROAD CAME INTO JACKSONVILLE.
The first Railroad, the Florida Atlantic & Gulf central, came into Jacksonville in 1857. Col. Houston was President, and Mr. Clark, Sr., was on the Board of Directors. The road ran from Jacksonville to take City.
EARLY SAW MILLS
There were vast stretches of fine timber in and around Jacksonville, and in this period many saw-mills were built, some of them doing an immense business for that period, as <text not clear>lumber exporting was the main enterprise of the town.
In addition to the Clark Mill, there were: Scott's, <text not clear>penniman’s, Alexander <text not clear>wanocc's, Moody's, Herdee's Mill at Commodore Point, and also the Ch A. Fairchild's Mill.
The Clark Mill furnished the lumber for the Flagler System, particularly for the large Hotels - The "Royal Finciana" and the "Nassau."
CLARK'S LINE OF STEAHERS.
In 1870 Mr. Clark established a line of sailing vessels, king regular trips between Jacksonville and New York. One of these was the "James A. Van Brunt" which carried lumber for the building of the New York Elevated Railroad in the City of New York. The Clark Company's wharf ran from Newnan St., and another at Ocean to the foot of Pine St., which was later called "Main St."
CEDAR STREET - WESTERN CITY LIMITS.
Cedar St., was at that time the West Boundary of the City of Jacksonville, the West side of the street being Duval County. The boys had great fun in those days in playing mischievous prams and escaping to the County line where they were outside the jurisdiction of the negro police officer, Marshall Huggins, who tried to keep the peace of Jacksonville at that time.
In this section was "La Villa" an exclusive residence place where many of the early families had just built new homes. The L'Engle farm was a half a mile North adjoining Pine St., while on the East side was the Dr. Bostwick property.
EARLY SAILING VESSELS.
One of the early vessels of the Clark Line was the "Matilda Brooks," plying between Jacksonville and Spain regularly with cargoes of lumber, one port of call being Cadiz, from which she brought back sherry and other wines in demand then.
Another vessel made trips every three weeks to Nassau <text not clear>th lumber, and bringing back pine-apples, bananas, and other tropical fruits. The first load of grape-fruit, known as "sh<text not clear>" was called "forbidden fruit" by Jacksonville citizens, who refused to take any of it. The shipment was <text not clear>on to savannah, where it was also turned down, and then forwarded to New York, at which point it was sold at considerable loss. These Nassau boats had accommodations for six or eight passengers and the list was usually filled.
Banana roots and pine-apple slips also came from the Bahamas, finding ready sale to the planters of the Indian River section which was known as "Eden."
The Clarks operated the first steam-boat between Jacksonville and Charleston, the "Darlington." It was captured by the Federals in 62, and for the remainder of the War between the States used as a Hospital Ship.
The "Hattie Brock", a stern-wheel Mississippi-type steamer, was operated between Jacksonville and Enterprise, on the North side of the Lake near the present site of Sanford, which was then called "Melonville." A colony of one hundred Swedes was brought into Florida and settled the point on the South side of the lake at the source of the St. Johns River, which later has become known as Sanford.
Mr. Clark speaks of a celebration in the early days of Sanford, when champagne was served from large pitchers and buckets.
The "George M. Bird" was a tow-boat used in the harbor at Jacksonville, later becoming a passenger boat.
Another early steamer between Jacksonville and Charleston their "Katie."
The "Lizzie Baker" was wrecked on St. Johns Bar. The "Maple Leaf" was sunk during the War off Mandarin Point, as well as the old "Delaware."
The yacht "America" winner of the Lipton Cup, also sunk on this wreckage. The "America" was raised after the War, but the "Maple Leaf" was never raised.
The Clark Ships had the Government contracts for carrying the mail between 1867 and 1885, from Jacksonville to <text not clear>, to Enterprise, which 55 years ago was quite a town, and other River points. These mail steamers were the "Gonzales" and the "Mermaid," with later on the "Florence," which was bought from the Harlem Steamship Co., of New York, and operated as a day line steamer with Capt. J. H. Smith, commander.
"Afterwards," says Mr. Clark, "Father made a deal with the "Old Dominion Steamship Co.," operating between Norfolk and New York, for the "Hampton," which he brought down and operated the "John Sylvester" and the "Eliza Hancox" for service down the River.
"We also had the "Lizzie", "Oliver", "Florida" and the "Katie" running between Jacksonville and Savannah.
After the war, we operated small steamers - the "Okahumpka" and the "Lozzie Boy" on the Ocklawaha River. They were of the "Recess Wheeler" type - a small wheel in the stern to protect it from snags. I remember on one of these trips, a large cypress tree blew down and fell across the River impeding the passage of the boat. We stopped and sawed the log down into the water until the boat could "jump" it. At night, we burned pine knots to light up the boat.
"About this period, we ran boats every Saturday to <text not clear? ddleburg with supplies and brought back fresh water to supply the boats on the Savannah Line.
STREET PAVING BLOCKS FLOAT DOWN THE RIVER.
"In 1880 there came a very hard storm with rain from the Northwest, when the wind suddenly changed and a perfect <text not clear>from the Southeast backed the water from the River in<text not clear> Bay St., flooding some of the stores up to the counters, and the cypress paving blocks which had been placed on Bay <text not clear>, at considerable expense, floated away.
"I was always fond of the water, and usually kept my boat - a medium sized row boat tied to a post on a platform <text not clear>side the back door of the store - 200 East Bay St. I took this boat and rowed up and down Bay St., in the flood in great style.
"The lots between this store and the River, where my Father had a wharf, he had filled in and built a bulk-head which was sufficient protection, but during this big flood, the water came up over it.
EARLY STORES.
"In 1867 or 1868, John L. Symonds built a store on Bay St., about the middle of the block, up to the big Palmetto tree in front of the Baldwin Building - halfway up to Laura St. This was a one-story brick building used as a cigar store by J. A. Wild. Then came Dr. John Livingston's office.
"Cohen's first store was a big dry-goods box - where Cohen, Sr., sold needles, pins, and notions on the side-walk.
Furchgott <text not clear>Benedict opened their store in 1870 - the first store in the middle of the block between Ocean and Pine St., on Bay.
"Reed's Store was at the corner of Ocean and Bay Sts., then the Dibble Bank, next door was Pittman's Sporting Goods establishment, the L. Ward Grocery Store, then Furchgott's, John S. Driggs Crockery Store, Rivas & Koopmaw Bakery.
The John c. L'Engle property at the Corner of Bay and Pine St., was occupied by a Drug Store, and next to it was the Book store and Print Shop of Ashmead Bros., backed by <text not clear>Publishing company. This concern printed all of <text not clear>of Lading, Manifests, ect., for the steamboats <text not clear>freighters.
"The Drew Company was located next to the corner of Bay and Laura, moving across the street about a year afterwards.
THE FIRST BANK IN JACKSONVILLE.
"Then my Father first came to Jacksonville in 1851, he was in the nawmill business, which he continued for two years, then took over a first mill, and afterwards opened the first Bank in Jacksonville. This was in a building at the corner of Forsyth and Newnan Sts., right across from where Col. Sanderson had his law offices (now the Columns Apts.) In <text not clear>the Bank liquidated its business paying the depositors in full. The Barnett National Bank of Jacksonville now has carefully preserved in a frame a one dollar bill issued by my Father's Bank, which turned up several years later in Lake City, and which he redeemed at full face value.
"My Father was afterwards in the Grocery business, owning stores - one at the foot of Ocean St., and the other at the foot of Newnan St.
FIRST BELL TELEPHONE OFFICE.
"In first Bell Telephone office was located in this building - 200 E. Bay St., which at the time belonged to my Father, and the first Telegraph office known as the "International Telegraph Co," was opened on the second other of this building, with Tony Canova as Superintendent, a 1868. I was the first messenger boy, riding around on <text not clear>pony and delivering messages at 10 each.
FIRST POST OFFICE.
"The first Post Office in Jacksonville was at Newnan St., and Bay St., then it was moved around the corner on Ocean St., near Bay, in the Parker Building, then to the Mohawk Building on the corner of Market St., and to the Andrews Building on Julla St., after the Mohawk Building was burned.
"Half of this Building - 200 E. Bay St. - was rented to the <text not clear>. S. Government as a bonded - warehouse.
WATER SUPPLY.
"The water for home <text not clear>was supplied by wells in the <text not clear>, there were also public fells on the corner of Adams and Newnan Sts., and Ocean and Bay Sts., also Forsyth and washington Sts. These were not artesian wells, but were dug, walled, and had brick curbs.
FIRE DEPARTMENT.
"There were two companies in the early days, one called the "Phoenix" and the other the "Mechanics." The bell tower for the "Mechanics" was in the middle of the street on Bay and Ocean, which was built by popular subscription. The City Hall as right back of it, and back of that the City Jail or "Jug" as it was called.
"The "Phoenix" Bell Tower was on the site of the Carling <text no clear> and underneath it was a fish pond.
"The "Firemen" were all volunteer, and it was quite a scram ore to see which would be the first to give the alarm. Each had one nose reel.
FIRST FERRY BOAT OUT OF JACKSONVILLE.
THE HATTERAS "The first ferry boat from Jacksonville to the South side was started at the foot of Newnan St., about 1860. It met with an accident and sank, being replaced by the "Commodore Barney" bought from the Fulton Ferry Company of New York, at a cost of $12,000.00. Mr. Harmon was President of the Company.
THREW THE GOVERNOR OF THE WINDOW.
"I remember on incident after the War between the States, then Governor Reed, the Provisional Governor supplied to Florida, tried to deliver a message to the House of Representatives, ad Frank Sanderson - A 'local boy who made good' - picked him up and chucked him out of the window.
ICE FROM MAINE.
"In 1876, the firm of Drew Hazeztine & Livingston, had boat loads of ice shipped down from the State of Maine, which was sold locally at $1.75 to $2.00 per 100-lbs. These boats also brought time.
"The ice was stored in a warehouse at the foot of Newnan <text not clear>being packed in sawdust, and the above firm continued to supply ice until a factory was started on the site of the present Merrill-Stevens Shipyard, for the manufacture of ice in the early 90's. The capacity of this plant was 20 tons per day.
"Later Mr. Wizziam S. Ware stated another factory out on Main St.
"Our line of steamers supplied ice to the "Carleton House" and the "Henderson House" large boarding houses at Green Cove Springs, and the steamer "Captain Miller" carried freight, supplies and ice down to St. Nicholes, where there was another large tourist Hotel.
SALT.
"We also owned the "Volusia" operated from Jacksonville to <text not clear>Lake, about six miles West of Titusville, and on regular trips from Jacksonville to Salt Key, about ten miles South of Nassau, where this schooner picked up cargoes of salt and brought to Jacksonville for the use of the fisherman in this section.
(It is 183 miles from St. Johne bar to Nassau).
MAHOGANY.
"Another schooner made trips once or twice a year to Venezuela for Mahogany, which was consigned to New York to Kuehn, Leob & Co., for disposition.
YELLOW FEVER.
"We never encountered any yellow fever in the Bahamas. I remember there were epidemics in Jacksonville in 1857, in 1877 and again in 1888 - when the old City Cemetery was filled up and we had to start a new cemetery, "Evergreen." The source of these epidemics were traced to vessels from ports in Cupa and Jamaica, where the disease was nearly always prevalent, and brought into Florida in this way. In 1871, 1887 there was a every visitation of yellow fever to Port Tampa, and <text not clear> this time we had small pox in Jacksonville which we very severe, and thought to have been introduced from Georgia.
