Spencer Mill Village
Spindale, N. C.
September 30, 1938
I. L. M [Ida L. Moore]
DESCRIPTION OF MILL VILLAGE
The Spencer Mill is situated on one side of the railroad track which ran through the center of Spindale. The mill, employing about four hundred people, is the only cotton mill in the town, which also has five or six other kinds. It is enclosed with a heavy mesh-wire fence which was erected after the strike of 1934. The lawn which surrounds it is shaded by umbrella china trees and maples. To the right center is a rose garden of 50 or 60 plants, and near the building are rings of cannas. The lower window panes in all the mill windows are painted a royal blue.
Across Spindale Street the mill village begins. The houses, which are located on only one side of the street. are all painted white, and each has four rooms and a small front porch. A big leafed prolific vine, called mile-a-minute, grows on one side of each porch. Here and there shrubs have been planted around the doorsteps and the sides of the houses. Umbrella china trees or maples shade most of the yard.
Spindale St. turns right into Church St. The houses on the right side of the street belong to the Spencer Mill village. Those on the left are owned by employees of several silk: and hosiery mills. The company houses along this street, like those on Spindale, are four-roomed and white-painted. They do not, however, have the same well-kept appearance. The Spindale Baptist Church, a red brick building with attractive shrubbery planting, occupies a corner on the left.
Church St. turns right, remains Church. St. and runs parallel to Spindale St. Along this part of the street one privately-owned house, freshly-painted and in good repair makes its neighbors the more dingy and neglected-looking by contrast. The front porch of one house has been converted into a sleeping porch around which hangs heavy, worn, canvas. A few months ago the women who lived there died with tuberculosis. Her husband is now in a states sanitorium.. Her six small children were sent to several orphanages.
Beyond Church St. several roads run toward and around a tree- shaded hollow. This section of the mill village is known as Happy Hollow. One road running around the rim of Happy Hollow is lined with three-room houses perched high on brick pillars in front and resting on the ground in the back. The road is fronted by strip of woods which furnishes spaces for hogpens belonging to the people living in the village. Back of each house is a garden plot.
The street curves around and down into the vale which serves as a playground for the neighborhood children. Big oaks and stately elms and now and then a maple give grace to the scene, A tiny stream runs through the upper end of the vale and around it the children play. Boys pedal their tricycles and bicycles down the sloping paths to the banks of the little stream. Little girls follow after sad ignore the boyish taunts of: "She tries to be a tomboy but she caint; she tries to be a tomboy hut she aint."
Just south of the playground is a house with a dahlia garden close by. Dahlias of bright red, yellow, bronze, and rose bloom in rich profusion. over the entire back yard. The man who lives there with his wife makes $10.80 a week in the mill. His youngest daughter whom he supports is in a sanitorium in the mountain. But still he buys his dahlia bulbs. "He loves his flowers, his neighbors say, "and they ain't none that can raise prettier ones."
Above and beyond the hollow a road runs up the hillside. The houses here are more gangly-looking than the ones on the other rim, as they stand still higher on their brick pillars. She open spaces below the fronts are used as storerooms for discarded furniture, for wood, and for coal. On almost every porch flowers bloom in and buckets. Occasionally a trimmed hedge fences a house off from the neighboring houses.
The road leads on to the highway which runs through the town of Spindle.