July 12, 1939
S. L. Mullen (white)
Huntersville, N.C.
Merchant
Mary P. Wilson, writer
Seller of Pills
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Huntersville	Willowboro
Mr. Mullen	Mr. Washam
Boyd	De Witt
Raleigh	Colston
Lee	Jack
Sadie	Janie
Charlotte	Riverton
Laura Jane	Cora Sue
Emily	Kate
Jackson County	Sehorn County
Seller of Pills
If you ever walk down the main street of Willowboro you'll probably see Mr. Washam. He's likely to be leaning back in a chair braced against the front of his store.
"I sell pills," he says. Actually he sells nearly anything small enough to put on a shelf.
There's a gasoline pump on the curb in front and the window carries a large and fancy display of seeds, but Mr. Washam says he doesn't sell enough to pay the license for keeping them.
Inside, a full-length mirror smeared with soap-printing covers the rear wall and the shelves are packed with patent medicines. Some of the cartons sport testimonial pictures of ladies in clothes of the 'Eighties.' The floor always looks newly swept but the shelves are sticky and dusty. It's a country drug store.
If Mr. Washam isn't balancing on the chair outside he'll be sitting behind an old roll top desk fingering stacks of papers. Bookkeeping is his "hobby."
"My grandfather came to America from Ireland. I am more than proud of my red hair and Irish blood. My grandfather's mother advised him to come here as this is a free country. Hah!
"I'm one of twelve children, only seven of us lived to be grown. I'm several years past the seventy mark.
"My father was a hard working man but he believed in education and gave us all that was available at that time. He had one of the biggest farms in the whole county. He had less than ten dollars when he married but when he died he owned sixteen hundred acres of land, a store, and a saw mill--all free of debt. Every man then was allowed to work, plant, and do what he could to provide for his family. Now--ph!
"I can easily remember my first job. Carrying my father's dinner bucket. He certainly didn't allow us to be lazy. Christmas was the only holiday we ever recognized except Sunday. A lot of people would take Saturday afternoon off and go to town but we worked as late that day as any other. I don't feel like work has done me any harm. It's given me a good appetite and a long life.
"In the spring we plowed and planted until it was too late, then we worked the crop. We cut wheat after we had everything laid by. We owned a thrashing machine and when we finished our own work we thrashed wheat for our neighbors. My father had a saw mill too and that kept us busy during the winter months.
"I worked on the farm and went to school two months out of the year until I was twenty-two, when I got a job clerking in a store. I have owned my own business since 1906. I used to make good money but I haven't even made expenses since this New Deal. I call it the "New Steal", because the government won't let us live our own lives. America was a free country years ago but it's no longer got any right to claim to have freedom. I had my land plowed and ready to plant cotton this year but the government men came and told me I couldn't plant because I didn't have any last year. I still don't understand it.
"I've sent all my children to college, that lived. I had ten and raised five. Two of the boys died with diptheria, and two more who were twins had bowel complaint. One little girl was six when she caught scarlet fever in school and died from it. I hope God will forgive me if I'm wrong, but I always did believe that disease was brought into the school in old school books that came from other places. I can't help but cry over losing my children. There was never a thought of using birth-control in my home and I love every one of my boys and girls as much as it is possible for any father to love.
"My oldest boy, De Witt, is a druggist in Colston. The youngest, Jack, is a registered druggist too, but he's not had any health since the war. He came back a cripple. He was gassed and shell-shocked and has a piece of metal in his hip bone. He and De Witt both got their degree at Chapel Hill. Jack stays here with me. He's got a fine wife and three sweet children. My three girls went to college in South Carolina. All of them are married now.
"Janie didn't finish college but she served ten years as postmistress here. She lives just this side of Riverton and has one little boy who favors me more than any of my own children, Cora Sue has a diploma. She taught school several years before she married. She lives near here and has five little girls. Kate lives in Sehorn County. She taught school until last year but I guess she won't ever be able to teach again. She had to go to the hospital and have nearly everything taken out.
"I've owned my own home since 1895. One of my boys was a registered druggist before I ever bought an automobile. I would never have owned one at all if it had kept me from paying for my home. A car isn't of much value to me except to go to church and to see my children. I haven't missed but three Sundays in the last twenty years going to church. I visit my wife's grave two or three times a week. She died in 1936. She lost her mind after the war and was on the bed helpless for two years before her death. She was older than I am so I guess she felt too old and tired to bother about living any longer. I kept her with me until the last. She wasn't in such a state that she needed to go to a hospital. I have too much respect for her memory to give any thought to another woman. My grandchildren would never let me do that anyway.
"I'm so glad I have my own home. It's a nine-room house with the nicest bathrooms you can find anywhere. There are five bedrooms for six people so you know we aren't crowded. My daughter-in-law is a mighty nice housekeeper."
Mr. Washam's mouth pulled down a little more. "I don't expect to live much longer," he said. He was tilted in his chair against the store front. Suddenly I saw that he was sizing me up from the corner of his eye. He decided to speak and the corners of his mouth turned impish.
"Look here," he said. "Can you keep a secret? Well, I'm courtin' a gal in Colston. My whole family'd die if they knew it, and me over seventy. But I'm tired of always doing what they want and expect me to. I've got a right to have a little pleasure before I die.
"I drive up to Colston to see her about every other week, and I'm always scared I'll run into De Witt. Isn't that something for a man my age? Don't you tell!"
The following week Mr. Washam's marriage to the gal in Colston was announced.
