FEDERAL WRITERS PROJECT
Miami, Florida
December 14, 1338
John Newton Blair (White)
Rural Route #1
Pembrook Road
North Miami, Fla.
Walter A. DeLamater
Writer
Mabel B. Francis Reviser
THE NEWTON FAMILY
Situated on a little farm near Miami, Florida is the small cottage that is the home of Jack and Margaret Newton and their three small children, Joanne, eight years old, Betty who is five, and Jack junior, two.
The farm consists of seven and one half acres of land, about half of which is fairly productive muck, suitable for the growing of vegetables. Black-eyed peas, tomatoes, corn, squash and okra are the chief crops with a sprinkling of small patches of radishes, carrots, onions, and other necessities for the family table. The planting of the vegetables is rotated as much as possible so that the family has fresh vegetables the year round. The balance of the land, mostly sandy loam, is used for a few citrus trees, papaya plants and for the house, barn and pasturage.
The house, which is a four room frame bungalow with no porch, is well built but badly in need of repairs. The roof leaks in several places and a few of the side boards are somewhat warped. Years ago the house was painted a rich brown but age and weather have subdued the color to a dull, nondescript hue.
Inside the house, which I found to be kept neat and clean, are four rooms: two bedrooms, a living-dining room, and a small kitchen divided only by unpainted studding. The laths for plastered walls have never been put on so the studding partitions offer no privacy and one can see the interior of the entire house from the front door, which is screened.
The furniture is a collection of odd pieces gathered here and there, a few of which are made from packing boxes and orange crates. A few small rugs are scattered on the freshly scrubbed floors and plain white muslin curtains, well starched, hang at the screened windows.
The living-dining room is bare of furniture except a few odd wooden chairs and a large, home-made table, covered with clean oilcloth. Boxes have been utilized to make wall shelves on which linens end dishes are places. There is no radio and although they would like to have a good battery set, Margaret, the wife, said, “We are usually too tired by dark to do anything hut go to bed, so I reckon it's just as well we don't have one."
Cheap, double iron beds and plain oak dressers are in each bedroom, and clothing is hung on nails driven into the studding.
The kitchen is as simply furnished as the rest of the house. A three burner kerosene cook stove with portable oven stands in one corner. In the center of the room there is a home-made table, and two or three mis-matched chairs are placed against the studding "walls.”
A wooden stool stands beside the table end here Margaret sits as much as possible while she prepares the meals. Shelves made of boxes are placed conveniently near the stove and cooking utensils of iron and aluminum hang from nails. A large old fashioned ice chest completes the kitchen furnishings. Once a week an ice man brings a large block of ice.
The house is not equipped with electricity or running water but a pump about twenty-five feet from the back door furnishes excellent water. Three large wash tubs hang on the outside wall of the house and these serve a double-purpose - as a bathtub for the family and for the family laundry.
The only concession to modern household equipment is an up to date gasoline operated washing machine. Margaret does not even possess an ironing board. The weekly ironing is done on the side of the kitchen table. The oilcloth is turned back, and a folded sheet is laid on the table as a pad. Old fashioned flat irons are heated on the oil stove and before they are used, they have to be wiped carefully with a rag to remove soot. There is no fire place in the house and, during cool weather, the oil stove is lighted and the family gather around it.
The live stock consists of two cows named ''Bobbed-Tail” and “Goldie,” respectively, about sixty-five chickens, twelve ducks, two white rabbits, two dogs of undetermined origin, three cats and two pet gophers, the property of Joanne. She keeps them in a little pen so they cannot run away.
Joanne, who is the oldest, is a bright, blue-eyed little girl with golden brown hair. She is very fond of all the animals and has even found names for most of the chickens. She knows each one, too, though how she tells them apart so easily is a mystery to every one.
Joanne spends most of her spare time with her pets. She has set a dented, battered garbage can cover on an old tree trunk. This she always keeps filled with fresh clean water and it makes a very practical bird bath, much used by the birds. Joanne is especially fond of £ small covey of quail which can be constantly heard calling about the place. They have become so tame that they will approach within fifteen feet of the house in search of food. Under no circumstances will she allow anyone to shoot them, in season or out.
During the winter months, Joanne attends school which she likes very much. She gets along very well and likes to meet the other children. When she is not too engrossed with her pets, she enjoys playing with them. At home she is proud of being "such a big girl" and spends much of her time looking after and mothering her little sister and brother.
Betty, the next eldest, responds readily to this mothering. Although she looks very much like Joanne, she is quite different in disposition. She is quiet and retiring and I was unable to get any response from her. When I tried to talk with her, she just looked at me and smiled, then ran off out of sight.
"Don't pay any attention to her,” Margaret said, "She is so bashful with strangers, I don't know what I'm going to do with her. She's just as different from Joanne as day from night. Joanne is friendly to everybody and is a regular outdoors girl, always fussing around with the animals while Betty likes to play at keeping house with her dolls.”
Little Jack, who is very attractive and very mischievous, is just old enough to get into everything and everybody’s way. The family adore him, and as he is the only boy as well as the baby, he is somewhat spoiled. His special delight is to knock over Joanne’s bird bath, then run as fast as he can to hide behind his mother's skirts. His blue eyes gleam with mischief and Margaret smiles tolerantly, "He’ll out grow it," she said, "but, right how, his knocking over the bird bath and scaring the birds away is the biggest worry in Joanne’s life. She begs her Daddy every day to build a little fence around the bird bath so Jackie can't get to it. He has promised to get to it as soon as he can, but men don't bother much with little girl's worries. Besides, he has so many other things to do.”
The morning I visited the Newton farm I found all of the family at home except Jack. It was a rather chilly morning and Margaret did not think that Joanne should go to school because of a slight cold.
"Joanne hates to miss school, but I thought she had better stay home today and get out in the warm sunshine," Margaret remarked. “I gave her castor oil last night and rubbed her chest good with Vick's salve but I don't believe anything is as good for a cold as this Florida sunshine. At least, that's what most everybody thinks.”
Margaret was getting everything ready to do the family cashing and, as I drove up, she greeted me with her usual pleasant smile. I have known the family casually for some time. When I told her my mission, and asked her if she would cooperate with me in giving me a few details of her life, she smiled and said, “Why I’ve never thought much about the things I do in life. I guess I keep too busy but I‘ll be only too glad to give you any information that I can.
“The things that I do, don't amount to much outside this place. I just take everything as it comes along and I figure that we live about the same say as other folks do around here - nothing exciting or unusual - just about the same routine every day.”
As she stood there by the washing machine, Margaret Newton made a pleasing picture. She is a small, well-built woman about thirty-five years of age, rather pretty. Her dark completion, well tanned, blue eyes and brownish colored hair are an unusual combination. She was dressed in a neat simply made cotton house dress of green print, but was bare-footed.
''You’ll just have to excuse ray bare feet,” she said, “somehow I just can’t stand to wear shoes around home and I never put them on except when I know company is coding or when I go to town. I never have liked to wear shoes, and, if I had my way, I wouldn’t even out them on to go to town, but everybody else wears them and a person sort of has to dress as others do. None of my children wear shoes except Joanne and she only wears them when she goes to school. The minute she gets home, off they come. Of course, not wearing them saves a lot, but we don't think about that so much. We don’t wear them because we really like to go barefooted."
Then asked how she spent her days, Margaret said:
"Well, there isn't much difference from one day to another. Jack gets up at five o'clock every morning and feeds the chickens and ducks first. After that, he feeds all the other animals, then he milks the cows. I get up by six o'clock to cook his breakfast end fix his lunch. By the time I have breakfast ready and Jack has finished his chores it’s about 6:30 and we eat. We usually have grits, eggs, hot biscuits and coffee during the week. Sundays, we have pancakes and syrup or honey. That's one morning we don't have to hurry so.
"Jack is ready to go to work by seven o'clock. He works in a lumber yard about six miles front here and goes back and forth in the Ford. Its a 1928 sedan bat he keeps it in pretty good shape and it runs good - in fact, it's the same car that we came to Florida in. After Jack gets off it's time to get the children up and dressed so they can have their breakfast and Joanne can get to school. She has to walk about a quarter of a mile to the rain read to get the school bus.
“After Joanne leaves, if I don't have, washing or ironing to do, I go out and work in the garden, chop a few weeds and gather some vegetables. I work this way, either washing or working in the garden, every morning if its good weather. About 12:30 I stop and fix some lunch for myself and the children. I just can't work outdoors in the heat of the day so after lunch I always tidy up the house and catch up any little odds and ends that need to be done. If I have a little time to spare, I lie down for a few minutes and make Betty and Jackie do the same. By free o'clock I'm at the garden again for an hour or so, then I must stop to feed the chickens and milk the cows. It takes a lot of time to churn and look after the milk. I reckon I could leave the evening milking for Jack to do when he gets home but when he comes about five o'clock, there is plenty for him to do. I start the supper, which is mostly vegetables, right after he comes and he works in the garden, picking and hoeing until dark, for we cannot afford to waste any daylight hours. Then we have our supper, and that's about the nicest part of the day. Jack tells me all the gossip he has heard at the lumber yard and we talk over the day's work and plans. By tine time I get the dishes done, I'm ready to go to bed.
“Most of our days are about like that, even Sundays. Jack works in the field all day usually and sometimes I help him, after I get through in the house. The only time we really do any running around is on Saturday night. Then we bundle the children into the car and go to town. After we get our weekly shopping done, we go to a movie. That’s about our only recreation.
“We do not have very much in the way of ready cash,” continued Margaret, "but I’m sure we are a heap better off than lots of folks. We are all healthy and happy together, so I guess we have about as nice living as the average. Jack doesn't make but $12 a week with the lumber company and we have to do some real figuring sometimes to manage, but somehow we always do. We raise plenty of good substantial food and are usually well, so I say that a person ought not to worry as long as he's well and not hungry. Whatever we have left over in vegetables, we trade or sell to the neighbors or to the local store for something we need. We try to manage our farm so that we always have some kind of fresh vegetables for our table, winter and summer. I preserve all I can and we always store up a supply of field corn to feed the cows and chickens when the grass is not so good. We don't ever have to buy much feed.
"One thing we lack and really need and that's our own fresh pork. Next year, I hope we’ll be able to get us a few hogs but until we do, we don't have so much meat. About once a week Jack shoots a couple of rabbits, and, of course, we have our chickens and eggs. We only eat the roosters and save the hens for laying. Some day, we really hope to have a nice chicken farm, but there are so many other things to be done around here first. We just must make some repairs on the house before it goes to wreck and ruin; in fact, Jack hopes to start on that this coming Sunday. If we just had more time and money, we could do a lot more but we can't afford to hire anybody and, of course, the children are too young to help.
"Besides, I don't want my children, the girls especially, to grow up as farm hands without an education. Jack managed to graduate from high school but I was only able to finish the grammar school. My folks were ailing and I was so badly needed at home to help with the work, I couldn’t go to high school. I want my children to have a better chance than I had and I'm willing to work hard to get ahead to give them a good home and send them through high school - maybe, college, too, if they are ambitious enough to really want to go. I’m hoping a way will be provided by the time they are old enough to go.
"We’ve been here ten years now and we own this farm, free and clear, and don't owe a penny to anybody. We came here from a little town in Illinois and have always beer farm folks. This is the only place that we have lived in Florida. Jack had a little saved up when we got married and he owned his own farm, then he sold his place and we decided to try our luck down here. We've never regretted it for we are contented and happy and the longer we stay here, the more we think there is no place in the world like it.
“Of course, like everybody else, we have our dreams and ambitions and sometimes I get discouraged over not being able to have everything better fixed. We want to have running water and electricity and a new and bigger house," Margaret laughed, “It would be grand not to ever have to fill up a kerosene lamp again and heat an iron on a stove.”
She gave a tiny sigh, then straightened her shoulders, “But we will have it all yet. Each week, regardless of what would like to spend, we put a little something away toward it. It's not much, but we are still young and strong and feel that someday, if we try hard enough, we will have what we went. As it is now, I try to remember that we have good land and good health, plenty of good wholesome food, a roof over our heads even if it does leak a little, and good, sturdy children so I guess the Lord hasn't been so hard on us after all. My, I sound like a regular Pollyanna, but we are thankful for all we have even if I do get peeved when the oil stove smokes or the insects eat the vegetables.”
“Do you go to church?" I asked.
“No, I'm ashamed to say we don't go much. I was raised a Baptist and was a member of the church. Now it seems like we never have time to go to church, you know how easy it is to get out of the habit of going. But I do try to teach the children the fundamentals of our religion, though, and they say their prayers every night. Maybe, someday, we’ll get caught up with everything so we can begin going to church again like we should. It takes more clothes and money, and besides Jack has so much to do around here on Sunday. Maybe, poor excuses, but I'm sure the Lord understands we are doing the test we can." Margaret’s blue eyes twinkled as she spoke.
"Politics? Well, we are not very strong politicians. We are really Republicans but here in Florida we don't say much about it. When we go to register, or when any one asks us, we are Democrats since we came south. Republican or Democrat, I think the present administration has done a lot for poor folks.”
