SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE "BESSIE REED".
Date of First Writing January 9, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed  Bessie Reed (Negro)
Place and Address Carlisle, South Carolina
Occupation  Practical Nurse and Cook
Name of Writer  Caldwell Sims Union, S. C.
Name of Reviser
Bessie has downy feather beds, white sheets, embroidered shams for her pillows and embroidered spreads on the two beds in her room. Her walls are pasted with newspaper pictures cut from the "Miami Tribune" Rotogravure section, of screen celebrities. Bessie wears dresses of blue denim and large white aprons with a bow knotted in the back of her plump waiste. Usually a white kerchief vocers her entire head and ears. A single earring dangles from one ear.
I ain't never see'd no 'oman dat wuz no miller, but me, and I ain't never heer'd of no 'oman runnin' a water mill. Who sed anything 'bout wimmens in Kerlile (Carlisle) runnin' dem? White folks does git the mos' curious ideas when de notion strikes dem. Cose I is heer'd dat 'way back yonder, de Lawd only does know when, dat all de mills wuz down on the rivers. As fer me I ain't never fooled around no rivers in my life, kaise I ain't got no time fer no water. Who ever heerd of wimmens paddlin' around runnin' water mills, I sho' ain't.
When I wuz born it wuz down on Mr. 'Liphus Lyles Stokes' place. Ev'ybody calls dat "Tucker Town" now, Mr. Aughtry Stokes stays in de big house. He draps in 'round Kerlile ev'y week or so. I sees him myself. Ma and Pa had a house on did side of "Tucker Town". Ma and Pa allus said "Marse 'Liphus", But dey won't no slaves. Slaves had done passed. I is around fifty now, somethin' mo' or less. Jes' here recent is niggers gittin' perticler 'bout dey ages. Den dats white folks dat's er gettin' dem on to dat.
H'it wuz fo' of us chilluns to play aroun' de yard. 'Member dat I had three little brothers. I cannot near 'member all that we done, it done been so long and I had been drug around so much 'til my mem'ry done got throwed away, or sumtin. Us lived good tho', I see a hard time now. Don't see how chilluns does these days. Dey even has a hard livin' now. I ain't got no chilluns. When me and my three brothers wux chilluns we had a easy fat time. All good white folks took care of their han's way back thar. Mr. 'Liphus sho took care of Pa and Ma and us too. I ain't so old, but it makes me feel old and feeble to drap my mind way back dat fur.
Pa farmed for Mr. 'Liphus. Ma said he had it tight and rugged, but she staid up to the big house, and when she was not dar she wuz in our cabin with us. Pa died when I wuz small and I never got no educatin much, kaise Ma said gals did not need to know nothin' but sech things as wimmem followed 'round the house. Now ev'ybody struggles to get their chilluns to school. Ah ain't never worried 'bout that, an' I gits along jes' as well as these Kerlile niggers dat is been to school so rotten much. I can boat all of 'em cookin' and I knowns how to nurse the white folks. De white folks calls me a reg'ler nigger, and dat makes me feel real proud of myself.
I lives clean like my Ma did and I keeps my house jes' as clean as I does any white 'Oman's. Dat keeps me in practice. I washes and starches my clothes ev'y week. I puts my pillows and my two feather beds out to air ev'y fair Wednesday. 'Bout three or fo' times ev'y year I takes the tick covers off'n my feather beds and my mattresses and washes them. It ain't nary a bed bug in my house and it ain't gwine to be none dar either. I sets right over dar in dat chair by dat window and makes my quilts, puts frills on my curtains and 'broders (embroiders) my bed spreads. I likes clean beds wid pretty quilts and spreads. Ev'y Sad'day sees me scourin' my board floors and white washin' my hearth wid white mud from the Kerlile spring.
Look up thar on them rafters and see them star patterns and them scallop cuts. I keeps fresh papers to put up new cuts when them thar git yaller. On Sad'day evenin's I heats my comb and uses my 'Poro' to comb out my hair straight for dat night and Sunday when I 'tends Jeter's Chapel. I greases all through the winter wid mutton tallow to keep my face and the skin on my hands smooth. It sho' is hard to do wid so much washin' an' scrubbin'. If you don't keep clean and have pretty hands nobody won't buy no meal from you. I lives dat way from day to day and I has done it all my lift. I don' let no dirty, shiftless, and triflin' no'count niggers come in my house and set on by beds and chairs. I allus bees sumtin myself! Hit's 'ristocratic niggers in Kerlile jest like it's 'ristocratic white folks here too.
When Pa died Ma sent me out nursin' white folks chilluns! She made a leave home clean and tidy. If I come in at night smearched up she sho' did give me a round and she never would let me be keerless. No sir, I sho' can't remember who was the furst white lady I nursed for. But all my life 'til I married the first time. I nursed white folks chilluns. Then come my turn at married life. Since that time I has nursed ailin' and sick white folks. Somethin' jest give me a hand at nursin' white folks, I do not know what it was, but I sho' got the hand. Dats how I lived, nursin' the white folks and dey chilluns. When I was a gal and nursed the little chilluns, I sho' had it easy, kaise ev'y time dem chilluns et why I et too. When my clothes got frayed de lady of the house give me some more. At night when I did not stay in the "big house" I went home to my Ma. I never knowed nothin' 'bout no rugged times till I played fool and took a black man to live wid. And if I had had a mite of sense I would a jest stayed on nursin' white folks and eatin dey rations and wearin' dey ole clothes; kaise dey was far better'n any dat black man ever fetched to me from the sto'.
Dat fust man I marr'ed wuz black as dat chimney back over dar, Heyward Reed was his name. He was a full-grown man lots older than I wuz. We got marr'ed one Fourth of July at a bid break-down. He had been steppin' out wid me some time, but I never had been to no frolic wid him till dat night. I never lef' home wid no aims to git married, kaise I was a nursin' the purtiest lil' white gal a year and a half old and I wuz sho' gittin three good meals a day and her Ma was giwin' me nice clothes to wear. But me and Hayward went to Mr. Oxner's barn to dat breakdown, and I often sets yet, and it runs thru my mind like dis, it sho' wuz a breakdown for dis fool nigger.
De night run on, and Heyward kep' on a bringin' me some red lemonade and I drunk hit till my head started gwine round. Den' Heyward tuck me out into the cool night air and he rid me a right good piece in a buggy he had done borrowed. We stopped at Mr. Aughtry's house and Heyward say "Bessie, I done fetched you up here so as Mr. Aughtry could marry us. I needs a woman like you, Bessie, and I sho' is going to make life fine for you so you won't have to wear yourself out a-nursin' white chilluns no mo!" I never had no mind for nothin' and afo' I know'd it Mr. Aughtry said "Now you is man and wife". From dat very minute on my whole life changed. I hadn't nursed two weeks atter dat 'fo Heyward done gone and told de white folks he needed me to work in his watermelon patch, and day 'scused me from the rest ob dat week. Den I had to cook dat blackman's cornbread and salad far him. Dat had to go on ev'y day. Time to gather crops come around and he went up to the big house and he told them he needed me all the time, and I never knowed nothin' about it till Mistus come one morning and said "Well, Bessie, I sho' hates you got married and can't work no more", I told her I was gwine on working, and she 'lowed, "Heyward is done axed fer you and, Bessie, you know that you are his wife now, and you must make your husband a good wife and help him with his crop." From den on I was jus' a wages hand fer years. Heyward lived wid me till he lef' me about 30 years. He said I never had no mind for nothin' but jest settin' up with white folks. We wuz working wid Mr. Will Jeter then. Miss Maggie wanted me to help wid her chilluns and I told her I would. Heyward didn't like dat, but I laid my foot down on it dat I was not gwine to work as no fiel'd hand dat year, and Miss Maggie had all dem chilluns to nurse and dress. So I tole dat black nigger dat I was a born nurse and I was not a-goin' into no fiel'! Miss Maggie had done tole me I could let him eat in her kitchen and I knowed that would be a heap better than he could fetch to our'n fer me to cook. But you know dat nigger didn't want to eat in Mr. Will's kitchen. He still wanted me to make him a mess of vittels ev'y mornin' and night at our house. I never done it tho'. A young gal of Mike Dawkins' about three shades lighter than I is, started to fetchin' Heyward milk and cornbread afo' I got thro' wid Miss Maggie's chilluns at night. As I went up the front walk I'd see her slippin' out the back way some nights. When I got inside Heyward be settin' dar a wipin his mouf. I axed him over and over what he doin'! He say, "Jes' lickin' out my tongue, kaise I so hungry and tired waiting fer you to come and fetch my supper, you won't never cook me none, you lazy nigger you". Dat make me so mad when I knowed dat it wuz me dat had fixed fer him yo eat from white folks' table rich rations, and he knowed it too. Dat wuz hard livin' den and I had never been used to havin' no man 'buse atter me. So one night I got in and she wuz leavin'. I walked in and axed him who dat wuz I allus seed leaving my house. He looked up real sly and rech' over and pulled me down to him and say; "Honey, you sho' wuz dreamin' kaise I wuz jes' settin' here a-waitin' on you to come and cook me some cornbread". I felt som'thin' on my mouf wiped my hand across it and seed crums on the back of my hand. Dat made me so mad, I got up off'n Heyward's lap. I reached over and picked up my skillet and lifted it over his head and come down. He ducked his head and I jes grated his shoulder. He run on out'n de door and I hollered and tole him if he ever stuck his black kinky head in it again I would kill him. So dat night atter 30 years he jes' wolked off. He's up in Jonesville now wid a family and dey all is fiel' hands. The rest o' dat year I des worked on fer Miss Maggie. Livin' wuz easy fer me atter Heyward left, but at night I seemed to have a cravin' fer somthin' 'nother dat I never had felt befo'.
Jack Sartor had a mill and he lived wid Mr. Jeter. Jack walked wid a stick and he 'plained mi' ni' all the time wid rheumatiz. So one ev'nin' I tuck some cake home wid me and made some coffee and when I went by Jack's house I tole him to step over my way atter dark, kaise I had sumthin' good fer him. He did, and I never felt lonesome and never had no cravin' fer nothin' no mo. Jack kept on a-cumin. He liked fer me to fetch him things from Miss Maggie's kitchen. He bragged on me, and I had got to whar I helped wid the cookin' kaise the chilluns had done got too big to nurse, and her cook had a side ailment so much dat she axed me to take her place in de kitchen when she did not get thar. Mr. Will had to have his six o'clock breakfast no mind what come along. Somehow Mr. Will found out about Jack, I never knowed how. He axed me 'bout it and the sweat broke out all over me. But he broke out in a big laff and lowed; "Bessie you is a baitin' dat nigger to marry him". I 'lowed, "Mr Will I aint' never gwine to marry no mo" black men." Mr. Will say: "Why Bessie, Jack, is black as the ace of spades". Well it kept gwine on Jack got down. I nursed him fer 14 years. I got to whar I run his grist mill atter Mr. Will tuck and shot his brains out settin' on his front porch one evenin' late.
All the niggers got to callin' me "Bessie Jack". When Jack got down to whar he couldn't do nothin' but piddle, he got a gasoline engine fer his mill. I run it. We burn't kerosene in it, dat made it easy fer me. Miss Maggie moved up to Kerlile and me an' jack jes' got us a house near the mill. Kaise I had to look atter him, and so we figured dat we had best be wid one another. I never took Jack's name, no mo' dan' his fust one. Now I goes by "Bessie Jack" Reed. Jack died. I lived on in Miss Ida' house. Ev'vy sadday and ev'vy Monday I run that mill. White and black brung their corn to be ground into either meal or hominy. Arthur English wuz my toll man, When the 'pression come on, white folks say dat dey could buy meal and hominy cheaper and git it quicker. Niggers got whar dey couldn't make no corn. Times wuz already tight and wid me dey got rugged. I never had no toll and I couldn't pay Miss Ida no rent. She live up dar in dat big hotel. She knowed I never had no money, so she say, "Bessie, if you will wash the hotel sheets for me I'll let you stay on in my house. So I done up the sheets ev'y other day fer Miss Ida. Aunt Sarah Medlock fetched them from the hotel to me. Aunt Sarah wuz Miss Ida's maid. Aunt Sarah was as old as Miss Ida. Fact is Aunt Sarah say she and Miss Ida had the same birth. Aunt Sarah would wall her eyes and shake dem gold earrings when she talked about Miss Ida. Aunt Sarah never would let nobody talk 'bout Miss Ida, but she would git mad and bless Miss Ids out to her face, and 'low, "Bessie, I ain't never gwine back up to dat hotel, kaise Miss Ida too demandin' an' it aint' nobody ken' please her no mo'. Den I look up at Aunt Sarah and say, "You says Miss Ida gittin' mean? Well, she gittin' old enuf to be mean, and you been up dar long enuf anyway". Wid dat Aunt Sarah would get up out'n her chair and say. "Bessie Jack, who is you, nothin' but a black nigger, ignant at dat, an' you known nothin' 'bout Miss Ida, and if I hears you say anything 'bout her I is sho' gwine to tell her and she'll have the chief come down here and git you, you hear me?" Wid' them words, Aunt Sarah want toddlin' off on her stick toward the hotel. I watch and seed her gwine in de side door next to Miss Ida's room. I set and study and think how easy Aunt Sarah lived. She and Miss Ida both so old dat dey set and fuss all the time while she fixin' Miss Ida's hair. Aunt Sarah wo' the prettiest earrings and a big gold ring. Her hair wuz white and her skin wuz black as my fust husband's. Dat make dem gold jewels shine out on her. De niggers were all scared of Aunt Sarah kaise she wuz so big and strong. She would hit anybody wid dat heavy stick dat sasses her. Miss Ida give her the stick when Mr. Smith died.
1937 come along and Miss Ida had done tuck down wid a stroke. The banks here and in Union had busted. Ev'ybody said Miss Ida never had no mo' money. Folks drapped off from comin' to the hotel except at night. Aunt Sarah tole me dat Miss Ida gwine to close de dining room and let Ike and Cornelia go. Andrew had done gone caise nobody never rid on the train and had valises to tote no mo'. I got to whar I never washed sheets but twice a week. My mill wuz a settin' up rustin', so one day a junk man come along and I sold him the whole think to him fur three dollars cash. Dat ev'nin' Aunt Sarah come by wid some sheets and said, "Bessie, when you gits then sheets washed, come and fetch them to Miss Ida, my backhurts me too bad for me to be aclim'ins dat hill wid a passel o' hotel sheets." I wondered who gwine to wait on Miss Ida when Aunt Sarah's back give out sho' 'nuff. I knowed dat all the white folks in Kerlile wuz livin' hard but the mail rider and the folks dat had headed de banks, dey peered to be livin' sweller. In times pas' it ain't no folks nowhars dat had things as easy as dese here Carlile folks has. Us lives to ourselves and let other folks be.
All dat done gone from dese parts now. Wid' the two Banks bustin' here and den then Banks in Union, lef' our white folks flat. Folks goes to Florida and the mountains in cars now instead of on de train. All de roads done been paved. Dat done lef' our hotel plumb behind. Them cars don't make no stop dis' side of Spartanburg gwine north, and dey rolls right up on Columbia goin' south. Ain't nothin' lef' for Kerlile now. Of course, us still eats, but den us allus did do dat, kaise we raise plenty on the flat fiel's. Us sho' ain't got no money. I lives a leetle harder now, but it ain't rugged like it was when I had a black man. If niggers ud let white folks have dey way; de niggers would do better, or dats my 'sperience.
One day Aunt Sarah took down wid her stomach, She hollered and woke Net up one mornin' 'bout 3 o'clock. They used all the home remidies on her, but Aunt Sarah fell in a trance. Dat mornin' I went over to the hotel to fix Miss Ida's breakfast. She never et none, but drink her coffee and set dar and shake her head, and then she say, "Bessie go see 'bout Sarah", Then I come back at fo' o'clock and told her Aunt Sarah done fell in a trance an' seein' angels, Miss Ida say, "Well, Sarah is dying". Aunt Sarah died the nex' morning at fo' o'clock befo' day broke, Dey buried her at Jeter's Chapel on the third day, Mi' ni' all de white folks went, Net put one Miss Ida's black wool dresses on Aunt Sarah, She tuck off'n her earrings and her gold ring, Dey fetched them over to Miss Ida, When Miss Ida seed 'em she broke down and cried so hard dat me and Net broke over too, Miss Ida say, "Net you keep them, I don't want them." Net give one earring to her daughter Matt, and t'other one she give me. Here it is in my lef' ear. It done cured my neuralgy. Matt got hers on, and she got one fer her other ear, but it done tunr't brass. Net wears her Ma's ring on her middle finger.
Miss Ida son't to Union and got a bunch of flowers from the shop up dar on Main Street, whar they beeps flowers in the winter. They put then on Aunt Sarah's grave, but nex' mornin' the frost doen kilt them. Aunt Sarah's grandchilluns and the ladies of the African Aid made some red flowers with paper and got pine needles and put them on her grave. The pine needles lasted the longest. I stayed wid Miss Ida, but dey preached de funeral fer two hours and half in de church befo' dey went to the graveside. I sho' hated to miss it, but me and Miss Ida couldn't keep our eyes from getting' wet all day long. I cooked and waited on Miss Ida fer two years. Den Miss Johnnie, her husbands cousin, loss her plantation and house, so Miss Ida took Miss Johnnie and her husband in wid her. She let dm stay dar, and don't charge dem no house rent and dey boards her.
I nursed up in Union on the WPA a year. That lady wanted me to nurse white folks dat never had no quality, so I quit and come back to Kerlile. Arthur English helped me clean out my mill house and put up a partition to make two rooms. I opened the fireplace in it and I have lived here ever since. It belongs to me and I gwine to keep it, and I cooks fer Miss Eva. She gwine to the country on the summer. I gwine down thar every mornin' and cook fer her right on. H'its jes' three miles to walk, but I can make that in an hour and a quarter. I will leave here at five o'clock and git thar in time to git Miss Eva and Mr. Paul they breakfast by six-thirty. I ain't worrin' 'bout makin' my way, kaise it'll be a way."
Bessie has two beds with downy feather beds and white sheets, white spreads and high pillow shams. She gets all the wood from Miss Eva's place free, and he walls are pasted with newspaper pictures of the celebrities from the "Miami Tribune". Bessie wears dresses of blue denim and large white aprons tied with a long string making a bow in the back. She usually keeps a white kerchief over her head completely covering her hair and ears. One earring hangs out from under the cloth.
