R. V. Waldrep
Editorial Department
John F. Davis
R. F. D.,
Red.Bay, Alabama.
JOHN F. DAVIS
The other day I saw a man-made farm, land that had been wrested from erosion, turned and directed to the best interest of John F. Davis, owner of the land, and the only terrace experimenter in Red Bay.
Lying west of Red Bay, Alabama, about one mile, the farm may be reached by automobile, but the road leading through the woods from the highway is little more than one of the old buggy roads used before the automobile; the automobile you are riding in bounces and swerves on the irregular land, falls tumbling into sinks and crawls out.
As you drive through this little stretch of woods, you pass the first terracing on Mr. Davis' farm; you see the snaking ropes of earth about the humps, sinking into valleys. Corn, a few inches high, is green and wholesome. And strangely for this hilly part of the State, you see no washes, no destructive ditches. On the rows of corn and the deeply sloping land you can see that Mr. Davis is in full control.
Mr. Davis has placed along the road signs for the convenience of those who want to know figures concerning the running of the terraces. The signs are on pine boards, marked with blue crayon, and each testifies to the care and study Mr. Davis has used.
Then we were at the house, lost down there in the woods, on a fold of the rolling, tree-filled land, standing white and serene in its place beneath the shade trees. Around the house are chicken houses, barns, gardens, and a well--all those things that add to the jumble, the hominess, and the goodness of real calm and self-subsisting farm life.
The house is hugs, with a long porch, and there can be heard the cries, the chirps, and the songs of the birds and insects. Mr. Davis stands there, and he looks as if he is well placed. He wants you to think that he is peaceful with the world, that he loves the closeness to good, wet soil, the wind in the trees, and the genuineness of sitting on the porch late in the evenings in the Spring and Summer, and the genuineness of evenings before a roaring fireplace fire in the winter when outside the great trees are bare, the birds have gone down south. He wants you to think he has found something in the woods, and he hints that it is himself he has found.
We parked the car before the house, Mr. Davis still talking, only pausing to tell his sister, whom he lives with, to remove the things from his car. We then walked to find the terraces, down the hill, through gates, and into a low place of trees and bushes so thick you have to bend and duck to get through.
"I have decided to give the rest of my time to terraces," he was saying. "I think a man ought to put a fence around certain things in his later life and spend the rest of his time on them. All my life I have been in the search of knowledge, let my interest rove from subject to subject." We were breaking through the trees to the dusk of the shade, finally coming to a spring, neatly equipped with a man-made sink and a glass for drinking.
I took a glass of the cool water as we went on. Mr. Davis talked on with eloquence and passion that you find only in the scholar and the founders of great theories.
He told of studying birds, the trees, and if you asked him what bird that was chirping, he immediately informed you. If you questioned him of his rural mail route when he made it on horseback, later in a buggy, and how he sat with a bird encyclopedia on his lap and every time he saw a bird he would find it in the book, where he would learn its identifying characteristics.
Then he told of sitting under the shades in his yard, where the burning summer sun never reached, and there studying, reading small-print books, read¬ing in Kant, Hagel, and other philosophers, pondering their shades of meaning, going up into the stratosphere of moving ideas, feeling the swell and the rise of understanding, the invigorating tonic of capture.
Along the spring, we were following, Mr. Davis is carrying on a unique experiment; he has been carrying out experiments all his life; and he says he will never grow old, for his mind, is ever growing, reaching beyond, its boundaries, clutching at the things that rejuvenate.
The stream from the spring is not a natural culture; it was spaded by the boy Mr. Davis has to work on his farm. It does not even follow the original stream-bed, but moves in a new direction, and the wonderful part of the thing is that the stream flows on the grade that Mr. Davis desires.
If he wants the stream to go downhill half an inch per fifty feet, it does; if he wants it to go two inches downgrade per fifty feet, it does. Every fifty feet he has a gate which may be conveniently dosed. He wants to find out the speed of water flowing on different grades from 0 to 6 inches.
Mr. Davis took out his gold watch and his pen and gave them to me; he stood on the bank of the narrow, man-cut trench and searches for paper, talking rapidly of the stubbornness of the farmers in their understanding, of the stubbornness of the terrace-experts.
"If I could only convince them that it is wrong to have graded terraces I would be satisfied, but I can't. I have built this experiment for that purpose only, set up these gates, and with instruments established the grade of this stream to the tenth or less of an inch. The engineers tell us that water will flow in the direction that is graded a tenth of an inch or more."
He spoke rapidly, clearly, and concisely, his heart in the matter, his knowledge complete and accurate. He once told me: "I love detail, the things you cm see and feel and hear. I love minute work." He had just finished telling me that he loved the study of everything, and realized the infinite, and I knew that his mind was rounded and complete. He neither lost himself in detail or made himself drunk with the whole.
We dammed the water at the stream, backed it up the bed, made a head of water, and with watch in hand we timed the flow of the water from the release to the next gate. The first time we found it took thirty-five seconds for the water to go fifty feet on a two-inch grade, thirty-seven seconds the next time, and on the six-inch grade, it took only twenty-two seconds. Then we checked and rechecked the timing in order to get a good average. After that we timed the flow of a head of water on a level ditch, and strangely, there was little difference.
"That is my point," said Mr. Davis, pocketing his watch and pen. "If I can only get people to see that I would be satisfied. Why does any man ad¬vocate graded terraces when it is plain as daylight, when the facts knock you in the face--why does any man want graded terraces when it is plain that water flows just as rapidly on a level terrace? Besides a graded terrace is destructive to the soil. Did you notice the way the graded water ripped and swirled, and muddied our stream-well, the same thing occurs on the field on graded terraces. The water tears away your soil, floats it away, when it takes scores of years to add an inch of good earth.
"Now, my terrace is level, has no outlet except in rare cases; it does not permit the water to tear away the soil; it acts as a filter, keeps the water on the field and the soil too. The earth absorbs the water." He was fiery, a-blaze with conviction.
Mr. Davis has been laying off terraces on farms in the locality for five years; he has made surveying instruments to do his surveying. He makes his terraces level, following the contour of the land, one place on a given terrace just as high as the other.
"But they tear my terraces up sometimes because they want to plow long rows, or they want to build fewer terraces per acre, and sometimes they get the idea my terraces are no good. I don't understand it," he said, as we drove among other fields, as he pointed out great washes from the recent rain on those terraces that were graded. Than we saw other farms laid out according to his plan, still wet with downpours of rain, but standing as firmly as the day they were turned up. Mr. Davis gets almost angry sometimes with the stubbornness of others; they refuse to understand, and with his love of soil, it hurts to see the land washed away. The farmers stick by old ideas, old traditions, and when Mr. Davis takes them to his own undulating, hill land they sometimes refuse to see.
His farm was being snatched from the very Jaws of destructive nature; there is not a farm in the county any more irregular; with more ups and downs. Five years ago, washes fingered his slopes like a claw; the farm was unfit for cultivation, the red earth peered out barren and useless. Then he began to work; he terraced the slopes and. valleys; he read every bulletin he could get; his friends sent him books. He went deep into theory; he became immersed in the study. He branched out on creative thought, added to what he had read, and built a theory of his own.
"It is good to see how other terrace builders and experimenters are slowly coming around to my ideas. I can see how their advocacy of grades in terracing is melting away. At one time they wanted seven inches per hundred feet, and that figure is gradually growing smaller, and I confidently expect to see the day when the level terrace will be the rule."
As we talked, I looked at his farm, and marvelled at the uncanny way he had turned this unwholesome bit of hill land into me of the most productive farms in the locality. He had removed every wash, he has caught rich loom on the hillside, and he even irrigates the hillsides. For irrigation he used the spring in the woods; the spring can be diverted to any section of his farm, at any time by a system of diversion too complicated to explain. Suffice it to say, into each row he can run water.
We went on in our walk to look at his corn, which would have roasting ears in the fall; he showed me a fine bed of tomato plants.
We went up the hill to his home, passed the barn where fine cows were being milked. We saw his garden where last year he got fifty bushels of beans, and where now beans flourish. The pigs we passed were snorting and healthy--Poland China, he said. To the right, we saw his corn experiments, where he is testing the distance to be allowed between rows. I saw some of the rows wore wide apart, some close together, some as close as weeds. "I'll weigh and measure the corn in the harvest, and find the best way."
A Summer tanager was calling in the trees, and Mr. Davis showed the bird to me. There was a female, too. The male was red, cocky and flitting. "They come from a stay in Central America," he said.
We passed through the trees, where he pointed out poplar, hickory, oak, black locust, and maple. Be knew the name of all, including the Jerusalem oak weed growing abundantly along the garden fence.
"In a few years, I will be retired from my mail route," he said, as we entered his yard, went beneath the shades. The evening was getting dusky, and there was the sound of people doing night work. The air was sweet and bracing with the soil, trees, and clear water.
"For fifteen years I have taken a day's wages from each month's salary and put it in this farm. When I am retired, I'm going to really get down to it"
7/18/39
S.J.
