In an otherwise identical version, the interviewer ia identified as Welborn Hope and the handwritten note—"Thin N.C. B."—appears on the top of page 11028B. Professor Tom Terrill, of the University of South Carolina at Columbia, has located another version of the "Supply Salesman" in the WPA Papers, in the Oklahoma Historical Society, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. That version is dated July 14, 1939, and while it has the same title as the interview included here, another title, "Supply House Blues," is also given.
SUPPLY SALESMAN
"Nope, there's not much to it anymore," growled Sam Barkley, salesman in the Fitts Field for one of the supplyhouses located in Ada. This supply-house was a large sheet-iron structure beside the railroad, with heavy pipe racked in rows on a half-dozen vacant lots adjoining. Sam and the writer had had coffee this morning at the restaurant across the tracks, and now they seated themselves on the supply-house porch. It was about nine-thirty, and Sam explained he only had time for a cigarette, as he was due in the field to see a contractor in an hour. He was a tall, bronzed man, well past middle-age, but with a youthful look for all the wrinkles at the corners of his blue eyes. His hair was iron-grey. He had hearty, bositerous, devil-may-care mannerisms, and a quick, electric smile that made for a personality immediately ingratiating.
"Too much oil already," he went on, stretching his legs on the floor of the porch, his back against the sheet-iron wall, and lighting his cigarette. "Nobody is getting his neck out now. Just a few holes being cleaned up, nobody drilling. We aren't selling anything worth the mentioning."
"You've been in this business a long time, haven't you?" I said.
"I'll say I have. About long enough. I've knocked around in every field in the country since 1911. It won't be long now until they tell me I'm ready for the house-slippers. I'm expecting it any day. I'm older now than any salesman I know of. This is a young man's game." He stroked the grey hair on his temples.
"Son, when you begin to turn those hairs up there in this game, you can know you're about washed up, no matter what you're doing, the brand is on you. It's a young man's game. Funny about it, too. You work hard while you're young, trying to learn something, make a million mistakes, act the part of a damn fool for twenty or thirty years, and then you finally do get wise to all the tricks. But by then, you've sprouted a few grey hairs, and they fire you, for no other reason but that you're getting old."
He sighed, then quickly reared his chin in pride.
"But I'll tell you one thing. When they call old Samin in on the carpet to bid him goodbye, it won't be "because he can't sell the stuff any longer, it'll be just because he's old. Sam nodded his head in vehemence, and went on:
"They still pay me a good salary, but, God, how they gripe about expenses. They allowed me twenty "bucks last month for expenses, besides the oil and gas for my car, and the Tulsa office bellyached for a week about me spending so much. Twenty bucks! You can't even buy coca-colas for your customers on that. And you can't go out in the field and talk to a man for a half an hour, and sell him the stuff. You've got to get chummy with him, throw him a party in the hotel with plenty of Scotch and plenty of girls, or take him out fishing, or out quail-hunting, some way to get to be his friend. After that, if he likes you, he'll come through with a swell order from your house.
"But you can't do that on chicken-feed. It takes the do-re-me. Supply houses didn't used to be so damned tight about expenses. In the good old days, a house thought nothing of sending you a couple of cases of good liquor a month. And you didn't have to itemize every nickel you spent while you were out getting the business."
Then Sam shifted his position on the floor, and cocked a reminiscent eye at the ceiling.
"I'll never forget the boom at Cushing in 1912. I was just a kid then; I'd had a little experience over in the Ponca field, which was discovered the year before, and I had picked up the supply-business pretty well. The company sent me over to Chshing when the field came in, to manage a store there. The place was on a hell of a boom. Everybody was hog-wild. Every room in town was taken, there was a line a block long in front of every restaurant all day, and the drilling was spreading out in every direction. Of course, I didn't have a scrap of anything on the ground, but I began to take orders right and left.
"I had to pitch a tent to sleep in at the edge of town. I ate in a tent which an old farm-couple had thrown up nearby. They had come in from the country, with lots of canned vegetables and fruit and home-cured meat — they spread a better meal than you could get for two dollars even after you got a seat in a restaurant downtown, and all for thirty-five cents. At first, only three or four of us ate with them, and I dropped a hint to the old man that we wouldn't mind paying at least six-bits for a meal like that. But the old man shook his head, and said thirty-five cents was enough. Pretty soon, he had more business than he could handle, with a line waiting at each meal.
"I found that rig-irons were very much in demand, gudgeons for band-sheels, and other irons used around the rig. As our company specialized in the manufacture of rig-irons, the orders rolled in on me. In one day, D.D. Wurtzberger, Ed Houser, the Shaffer Oil Co., Suppes Oil Co., and R.B. Jenkins each placed an order for 15 sets of rig-irons, and there were smaller orders from others. I sent a wire to our Pittsburg, Pa., office for one hundred sets, to be shipped immediately.
"The next day, a telegram came from the President of the company, which said:
"Mistake in your order for rig-irons just received. How many sets do you want?
"I wired "back:
"I want one hundred sets of rig-irons, and I want them at once.'
"Several days went by, and I heard nothing more from the company, and the drillers began to clamor for their rig-irons. I sent another wire to the Pittsburgh office, inquiring about them. And got this reply from the President:
"Are you sure you want one hundred sets of rig-irons? That made me hot under the collar, and I wired back:
" Hell, yes, I want those rig-irons, and I want them damned quick or you can hire another man.'
"Well, they shipped the rig-irons, but along with them came the President of the company. He came all the way out here from Pittsburgh just to see how crazy the man was who was in charge of the company's business in Cushing. In all his manufacturing experience, the biggest single order for rig-irons he had ever received before, was for 15 sets.
"He was a big, fat, jolly fellow, who had never before been west of the Mississippi, and he had never seen a roaring oil-boom like we used to have in Oklahoma. He got a whale of a kick out of the colorful scene, but he got his biggest kick out of seeing those signed orders for one hundred sets of rig-irons.
"'By God, he said, 'It beats any damned thing I ever saw in my life.' And he went hog-wild like the rest of us.
"That night he could get a room in the hotel at any price, and he had to sleep with me in the tent. The next morning we got up, and drank a quart of whisky, and went down to eat with the old farm couple. Next to their tent, somebody had thrown up a big tent to stable teams in, and the air around the table was full of manure-dust, but the President and I ate that grub, and we both liked it.
"That afternoon he took me over to Tulsa, and we threw a three-day party that I'll never forget. When he pulled out for Pittsburgh, and said goodbye, he raised my salary to a hundred bucks a month. I felt pretty good.
"Well, I stayed with the company in Cushing about three years, until the boom began to die down. Then I had a proposition from another company to take charge of a store in Okmulgee, where the play was now the hottest in the State.
"But I said,
"'No, I don't want to manage a store. I'm tired of indoor work. Give me a job as a salesman out in the field.'
"So the boss, Tom Richmond it was, said that was fine, and for me to name my salary. I said:
"Oh, that don't matter. You know about what I've been getting.'
"There were half a dozen new fields in the region around Okmulgee, and I covered them all, and "believe me, it kept me jumping. But I sold the goods. $12,000 the first month, $42,000 the next month, and $84,000 the next.
"One old bird who was running a string of tools for Clarke Oil Co., was always ribbing me, and playing pranks on me. It took it all good-naturedly, because I was selling him a lot of stuff meanwhile. But he never lost a chance to guy me about something, and he bellyached about everything he ordered, either the price was too high, or the stuff was no good. He took particular delight in getting something on me that he could rub in.
"One day, Al --- Al Lovett was his name --- ordered, among other things, a 21/2-inch manila cable when I called at the lease. He raw-hided me about this, that, and the other, but I just smiled and took it, and went on into town. Business took me into Tulsa the next day, and I took the order with me instead of mailing it, and filed it downstairs, and went upstairs to Tom Richmond's office.
"Well, it had just so happened that old Al Lovett had come into Tulsa that same day. And it had occurred to him that this was a good chance to have a little fun out of me. So he had gone up to Tom Richmond's office to place an order for a 21/2-inch manila cable. I stood just outside the office, as he ordered it. His back was to me, and I heard every word of the conversation.
"'None of your men ever call on me out at the lease, Tom. Ain't it a fine state of affairs', when I need stuff as bad as I need that cable, that I have to leave my work, and come to Tulsa to order it?'
"'Yes, that is bad, Al,' said my boss, 'I'll have to give the boys a good jacking-up about it. Don't you know Sam Barkley? Doesn't he ever call at your lease, Al?'
"'Hell, no, he don't call at my lease. I know him, all right, but he don't know me. He high-tails it past my lease every day, and never stops, as if my money wasn't as good as somebody else's.'
"'I'll take it up with Sam Barkley, Al,' said my boss gravely, 'And you can be sure that from now on you'll get better service from our company.'
"Al Lovett got up to go, and I hid in a dark place down the hall. He was chuckling to himself as he passed me. Then I went on into Tom's office. He started cussing me on sight. I said:
"'Now wait a minute, Tom, and I'll tell you about that old son-of-a-gun. There's an order on file already downstairs for that cable.' And I explained how Al was always ribbing me. Tom winked at me and laughed.
"'Mr. Lovett has ordred himself two manila cables,' he said, and we both laughed and took a drink.
"I took particular pains to be on hand at the lease on the morning the two cables arrived. Old Al took one look, and let out a yell:
"'Goddammit, I only ordered one cable, and here's two!'
"He was really sore. But I quietly showed him the two orders, signed by him, one given to me on the lease, and one given to Tom in the office. I had him, and though he fumed and foamed at the mouth, he kep both cables. In a day or two, Tom sent him out a case of whisky, with the compliments of the company, and everything was jake. But after that, he always shied from putting me on the pan again.
"Well, I've got to go. I could sit here all morning, and tell you about experiences I've had in the fields. And I figure I'll have plenty of time to tell them before long. I don't care much if they fire me. I've never had much time to spend at home with the wife, and now that my two kids are in college, she's kind of lonesome. I've got a pretty nice little nest-egg laid up, anyhow.
"Know what I've always longed to do? It's to get me a nice big farm, and build me a lake on it, and raise bull-frogs. Yes, Sir, I'm going to raise bull-frogs for the market when they fire me. I like their music at night, and I never got enough bull-frog legs to eat. That's a good life for an old man. Well, so long."
