F. c.
Rose Shepherd
Interview # 21
February 19, 1936
II - HISTORICAL
PERSONAL INTERVIEW
Mr. M. A. Brown,
Life-long Resident of Duval County,
1434 Market-st., Jacksonville, Florida.
Mr. Brown says: "My grand-mother on my father's side and members of her family were natives of Mandarin, being settlers since the Spanish occupation. My grand-mother's name was Nancy Bowden. She was a sister of the late Uriah Bowden.
"My grand-father on my mother's side came from Massachusetts, originally as a tutor in the families of the Browards and Eubanks, on their plantations. His name was Jefferson P. Belknap, and his ancestors were English. He married a Miss Eubanks, a daughter of one of the families in which he was a tutor, and moved to Mandarin, settling there on one of the old Spanish grants that was known as the "Monroe Plantation." This immediate grantor was an Oriental traveler named Eveleth. Among the traditions connected with the old home place was the story that Eveleth brought back from his travels in the Orient seeds from the Olive trees of the Mount of Olives and cedars from Mt. Lebanon, also date palms from Arabia. An avenue of date palms was planted from the big road to the house, which was built on the banks of the St. Johns River. There were only four of these within my recollection - one at each corner of the house. One of these bore the bloom, and the other three the fruit, which very frequently ripened.
"The alive tr<text not clear> was very typical in its size and general form of the olive trees gr<text not clear> in their native countries. It bore fruit abundantly, which quite generally ripened. The neighbors and friends who had acquired a trees for the olives annually, gathered them and enjoyed them very much.
"Also on the <text not clear>place there were quite a number of fruits of the citrus family <text not clear>least were not usual anywhere else in Handarin. There were <text not clear>, several varieties of citron, shadduck and bitter-weet aranges.
"I have never heard of any authentic explanation of the name " Mandarin" itself, and here often wondered whether or not it might be a survival of Mr. Eleventh's Oriental travels.
"Another fact which is not generally known is that Mandarin is one of the first incorporated cities in Duval County. Of course, there are no evidences now of this incorporation, and probably very few of the residents of Mandarin <text not clear>that this was so.
"Mandarin in its physical aspect has changed very little since my earliest recollection. The present Post Office is within a few, hundred yards, as far back as I can remember, of the location of the original Post Office, and the present community House is on the original location where I attended my first school. My first teacher was Maria Parloa, who was later on the author of several looks on Domestics, etc., and for many years one of the editors of "Good Housekeeping Magazine."
"Mandarin in the early '80's, when the tourist travel to Florida first began to take on volume, was a regular stop for many of the excursion steamers plying up and down the River. In those days, outside of the regular farming and market hardening, the growing and shipping of the orange crop was the most important industrial feature of Mandarin.
"At about that time there was quite as influx of settlers who bought sites along the River front and built Winter homes. The lure of the orange growing and other agricultural developments, along with the natural beauty of the place, made many of these permanent residents.
"One attraction in these days for the Northern tourists was the home of Harriet Beecher Stowe, where Mrs. Stowe, Professor Stowe, and their family of daughters and sons spent most of the year. Prof. Stowe was a very popular character with the children who resided on the River bank, and l recall him very clearly as he sat in his arm-chair on the porch of his cottage - the porch being built around two very large oaks, which covered the cottage and are still living. One of these had caught in the crotch of the spread of its enormous branches a cannon ball said to have been fired from a Yankee Gun-boat during the war. The old gentleman had snow white-beard-and always wore a little black skull cap.
"Mrs. Stowe was also very kindly towards the youngsters, but never seemed to enjoy them as much as the Professor.
"Later on quite an English colony settled in Mandarin, two of the group owned what is now the "Silver Shore Orange Grove," and also acquired several other orange groves and went into the packing and shipping of oranges on what was then a very large scale. They built the "Waverly Docks and Packing House," and a small line of steamers used to of regularly at these docks and load the boxes of oranges and other produce direct for the Northern markets.
"Around this time, strawberry culture was taken up at Mandarin, and existed for many years before the Lawtey and Plant City centers are developed. Whether on account of the facination of memory or otherwise, it has always seemed to me the strawberries grown at Mandarin were the finest flavor I have ever eaten.
"It seems to be a popular idea that our Winters are growing colder each year, but I remember <text no t clear> boy going to school down the big road when the ground would be frozen too hard to break thru, and I have seen blankets of frost and ice. I cannot be exact about the year, but sometime in the 80's, there was a severe cold which froze the oranges, but not the trees, and was accompanied by very disagreeable Northeast weather. All of the first day it sleeted and that night the margin of the river out for one hundred yards was frozen and at the outer edge of the ice where the water had <text no clear> Ext up during the night, it looked like a miniature ice-berg country. The ice was sufficiently thick in places to support one's weight and we boys had great sport breaking through the ice and getting out the frozen fish along the River bank.
"On the old home place were probably the largest orange trees in this part of the State. There was a grove of probably thirty trees which had come up from the freeze of 1835 and were killed again in the freeze of 1895. Some of these trees were so large that a 60ft. ladder would not be tall enough to permit us to pick the oranges from the tops, and they averaged from 50 to 60 boxes of fruit to the tree. Many of them were at least 18 inches thru at the trunk.
"My father as a young man was a logger and lumberman, and logged the territory in most of Duval County from the old "Tiger-hole plantation" then owned by my uncle, Uriah Bowden, thru the Bayard, Julington Creek, <text not clear>ban sections and into St. Johns County, and up the River as far as Remington park, opposite Green Cove Springs. The logs were cut and rafted down in the old manner.
"The mills using this lumber were all in Jacksonville - the old Fairchild, Hunter and Clark Hills, and possibly others.
"As a rule, in those days they did not out timber that ran more than three or four to the thousand. Naturally, of the old homes built of that kind of material, many are in use today. The old home built by Grand-father Belknap was of white pine, the outside walls of tongue and groove and beaded white pine boards, which had been brought down by vessel from the North.
"When my father built the new home, material from the old house, which had been torn down, was used in building the first barn on/the place.
"After the influx of new settlers from the North and from England, the planting of orange groves spread very rapidly and was at its peakk in 1895 at the time of the freeze. These groves were practically wiped out by the freeze, and many of them were never renewed. However, Mandarin oranges have again acquired a distinctive place in the local market.
"The building of the old J. T. & K. W. Railway on the West side of the River, finally replaced the River transportation and also wiped out the tourist resorts that had developed along the River Valley to Sanford. This change was so complete on the East side of the River that many of these so places became almost deserted villages.
"Of recent years, with the building of better roads and the use of the auto, together with the naturally attractive area surrounding Mandarin, many new people are taking up their residence there and many new homes are being built.
"It is interesting to note that my Grandfather Belknap taught the first public School in Duval County in Mandarin, and I had a good many interesting letters which were destroyed by fire in the Dyal-Up-church building that he had written during the early years of his life in Mandarin. I cannot give the exact words, but in one of these letters, the old gentleman was highly indignant over the failure of the Government to protect the people in Northern Florida from the Indian raids during the Indian Wars. He stated that while he was writing this letter, he was sitting with his rifle across his knees, and that a few days before his neighbor, McCoy, of Plummer's Cove, had been shot by the Indians while picking blackberries along the edge of the Branch.
"From his letters, it would seem that Florida had had considerable of a "boom" as a center for growing mulberries, raising silk worms and establishing a silk industry. He spoke of having 15,000 mulberry cuttings which were all doing fine, and also reported that some planter in the St. Augustine vicinity had refused $50,000. for his mulberry plantation. As a boy, I recall that in practically every one of the old homes and places along the River bank, there were still a great many mulberry trees. These have all long since died out.
"Speaking of these trees, recalls to mind also that there were two very large cherry tree that grew on either side of the road just beyond the present location of the little Post Office. These trees were at least 50-ft high and bore cherries as large as one's thumb. They were the only two I knew of in that locality.
"The whole section covered from Beauclere Bluff, and the plantations up and down the River to Julington Creek, etc., was known is "Mandarin."
"During elections, voters came from as far away as Bayard to vote at Mandarin. I remember in the Hays and Tilden election, I ran away from home and went down to the polling places at the old Post Office, and while, of course, I did not then realize it. I know now the election was an occasion of considerable importance. I recall two boatloads of negro voters brought across the River from Brigham's Brickyard, each carrying a hickory club attached by a strap to his wrist. However, when they reached the polls at the head of the Ian, I believe they did not vote, as they found there not hickory clubs, but rifles and shotguns, coupled with a very determined reception by the white men at the polls.
"I recall the visit of General Grant, or at least the occasion of the Boat stopping at Mandarin, on which he was making the trip up the River. He did not interest me nearly so much, however, as the drum major of the hand with his tremendous "Shako" and his brass-knobbed, gold-tasseled baton.

