January 20, 1939
Prof. W. L. Harris (white)
Macon, Georgia
<text not clear> Clairvoyant
Mrs. Annie A. Rose, writer
Macon, Ga.
A few weeks ago a girl disappeared from her home in Macon. She left the house, apparently in her right mind, to keep an appointment at a certain hour. But she failed to keep the appointment, no one saw her through the day and by night her mother was frantic. Days passed with no news from the missing girl. The newspapers printed pictures and wrote descriptions, hoping that some clue would be given to aid in the search for her. Hundreds of tongues buzzed with gossip. Numerous phone calls to various parts of the country were made, detectives employed and even the F. B. I. men gave their services but all was to no avail.
A few days previous to her disappearance, Winifred, the girl, had attempted suicide. Mrs. Barnett, her mother, fearing that a second attempt to kill herself had been successful, in desperation consulted "Prof." Harris. He told her that her daughter was alive, in a mountainous part of the country and greatly worried. The figure 10 was all around his vision and he predicted that the mother would hear from her daughter in ten days or ten weeks. The days passed with no message but on the tenth day following her disappearance, the astrologist or mind reader called Mrs. Barnett asking her whether or not she had as yet heard from Winifred. On being given a negative answer, he said, "Stop worrying, you’ll hear from her before this day has passed. I’ve seen her again; she's all right and will come home or phone you before the day is gone." That night the phone in Mrs. Barnett’s home rang and Winifred’s voice came over the air. She was in Asheville, N. C.
Just off the highway, a short distance from the city limits, where he lives with his wife and small son to avoid paying license, I found "Prof." Harris, who has been consulted by many men and women in this town. He is a small, very thin man and except for his piercing gray eyes, very insignificant in appearance. His sandy hair is kept neatly brushed, his irregular teeth protrude and his unusually large ears stand out almost vertically from the sides of his face.
"Lady, I've had a funny life," he began, "not funny either, just not like other folks'." He paused for a moment, his eyes gazing into space, then crossed his legs, lighted a cigaret and began, speaking in a very tense, rapid voice. "I'll tell you about my life, I don't care if you write me up; I hope you will because people should know about me so that I can give more service to mankind. I'm just an ignorant, uneducated man, born in Birmingham, Alabama. I grew up in a family of five children. I never studied this except a little about the stars. My power is a gift from God on high. My people are Swedes, my father and mother come over to this country from Swedeland and settled in Alabama. My father's grandmother came with him. She was a reader, you understand, could read other people's minds, but she wouldn't read for just anybody. She would only read for people she liked. Her name was Betsy. She lived to the age of 120. She died on April 7, 1907, in our house, and on June 7, 1907, I was born. Her years on this earth were finished but her work was unfinished. My body is not hers, it's mine, but my spirit and power are hers, and though I'm a man I think of myself as Betsy. Her power was given to me and her work in this world goes on through her great grandson.
"At the age of ten, in the month of March at ten o'clock in the morning, I looked at an enlarged picture of my grandmother. It was over the mantel in the parlor. I had never seen my grandmother because she did not come to America with my mother and father. I looked at her picture and said: ’Grandma's coming here to-day; she’s coming at twelve o’clock.' My me said, ’Hush, sonny, don’t say things like that. Your grandmother will never come here. She’s ’way across the ocean.' That day at twelve o’clock a buggy stopped in front of our house and my grandmother got out. Well, it surely scared everybody. They all thought I was going to die.
"My father was a revenue officer. At the age of eleven, I went to him one morning at the breakfast table and said, ’Pa, please don’t go down town to-day. If you do, you'll get in trouble. Stay here at home.' ’Why, son,' he says, 'I can take care of myself. I'm not going to get in any trouble.' 'If you go down town to-day,' I says, 'a dark man is going to jump at you from behind a post. He'll either shoot you or stick a knife in your back. Please don’t go.' But he wouldn’t stay. After he left I cried and cried and told me I knew we’d never see him again. About twelve o’clock a man came and told me that papa had killed a nigger. When papa came home he said, ’Well, sonny boy, you were right, and if you hadn't told me about it I would have been killed. A nigger jumped at me from behind a post with a pistol in his hand but I was too quick for him and got him first.'
"From that time on they all knew I had the power and people came from all over the state to me for help. And I've helped thousands. I've studied astrology, studied palmistry, but more than anything I've studied the Bible. Did you know that the Bible is the book of science? There’s nothing that you can't find in that book. Daniel was an astrologist, Joseph too. If that power could be given to them why couldn’t it be given to me?
"Edison was a man sent by God. He got his ideas from the Bible. All the people who have helped the world have been led by the Bible. The man that invented T.N.T. found out how to make it from the book of Revelations. The man that made the first telegraph found out how to make it from the Bible."
As may be seen from his statements, Mr. Harris is a fanatic on the subject of religion. He considers himself a prophet sent to warn people of disasters. He is confirmed in the belief that he himself cannot be hurt. If an enemy tries to injure him in any way, harm comes to the enemy instead of to him.
On many occasions he has refused money from people for interviews when he felt that his help was needed. Whether this is done from sincere motives alone or with an eye to the publicity gained is a matter of opinion. He certainly is not averse to publicity and was most anxious to tell the story of his life. He has, in his mind, material for three books but lacks the education to write them. These books, according to his opinion, if written, would convert all people to his way of thinking and bring happiness and prosperity to the world.
"Prof." Harris feels keenly that the United States needs his help in governing the people. Talking along this line he said, "I’ve thought and thought about writing a letter to President Roosevelt. I’d like to write to him and I would if I thought he would read it himself. But I know he’d never get to see it. There are so many people there to read his letters that he never would get mine." "What would you like to tell Roosevelt?" I asked. "Lady, I’d tell him to beware. Something terrible is going to happen in America by the first of May. Our country will either go to war or our president will be killed. I don't know which; it may be both."
On being asked why he was so sure of such a disaster coming to the United States, he explained in astrological terms that it had to happen. Some certain phase of the moon and stars will appear at that period. “The last time the moon was in that position,” he continued, "was in April 1917 when America declared war on Germany. Woodrow Wilson was not assassinated, but his career was ruined, his health wrecked and an assassination would have been easier for him. Lincoln, Garfield and McKinley were all assassinated under the same sign. Either Roosevelt or Mussolini will be killed, maybe both. I'd like to warn him, but my hands are tied."
Mr. Harris has been living in this town for about a year and plans to make this his home for the rest of his life. He feels that his destiny is here. He says that many people have tried to make him leave Macon but that their efforts have failed. God, he says, has sent him here and here he will stay.
"There is a preacher here," he continued, "who preached against me last summer. A preacher is supposed to love people and try to help them but this man got up in church and called me a witch and told the people I ought to be run out of town. I heard about it but it didn’t worry me none. I saw this preacher one day. I went up to him and I says, 'Is this Preacher Jones?' And he says, 'Yes, what can I do for you?' I says, 'Preacher, please tell me what is the greatest verse in the Bible.' He hemmed and hawed and says, 'Well, they're all great, every one of them.' 'Yessir', says I, 'but what is the greatest?' He looked like he didn't know what to say. He rubbed his head and jiggled around on his feet and after while he says, 'Give me time to think about it.' 'You oughtn't to need time,’ I says, 'I'll tell you what it is. The greatest verse in the Bible is 'God is love’. You preach on that verse 'stead of getting up and preaching about witches.' He looked kinder funny when I said that and he said, 'Who are you?' Are you that man that tells folks things that happen?' 'I sho am,' I says, 'and you're talking to a man that knows the Bible, that reads it and studies it and believes it. You quit your talking about me or some'n awful is going to happen to you.'"
Here the "professor" laughed. "You should have seen him," he said. "His face turned as white as that wall and his eyes kinder bulged out, and he walked away kinder slow. That's the last I've heard anything about him at all.
"Once the law was trying to run me out of Tulsa, Oklahoma. I had the money to pay license but they don’t sell licenses to mind readers in that state. They were hot after me. But I wasn’t worried. I wanted to stay in that city and I knew I could. I just opened the Bible, put my finger on a verse in the seventh chapter of the book of Psalms. And I asked the good Lord to eet me stay where I was. Before night a man come to me and offered me a job working for him. I stayed there two years working in the day and reading peoples' minds at night and I made a lot of money."
As he paused for a moment, a rap sounded on the door and the voice of a child was heard: "Daddy, mamma says for you to come right on to dinner cause it's getting cold." Being given this hint I took my leave, thanking the "professor" for a most interesting morning.
