Ila B. Prine
Mobile County, Ala.
Raymond Barbour, Fisherman (white)
Faith Road, Bayou La Barte, Ala.
IT RUINS OYSTERS TO WASH THEM
The wind was blowing, and the day was damp and dreary as Raymond Barbour sat crouched on his knees against a poet that supported the roof of his oyster and crab-meat shop.
Seated in front of him on narrow, low, home-made benches, his wife Cora, and two younger women were opening oysters with sharp pointed knives. One of the women was the daughter of Cora and Raymond Barbour, and the other was the wife of their son, who stood in the door of the shop watching them as they worked.
As my companion stopped her car in front of the shop, they called cheerily.
"Look who's here! Now, what do you want?" and "I know something's up." When my companion told them that she had come to see them and to get some of their fine oysters and crabs, Uncle Ramey laughed and said: "Hurry, Cora. If you don't, there won't be a single oyster left when she'e gone. I knowed this squally weather warn't blowin' up nothin' good."
"Never mind, you can't make me feel bad. I'm coming in anyhow, and I've brought this lady with me. She wants you to tell her how you and your family gather and sell your oysters and crabs."
Uncle Ramey said:
"Well, I'll be damned! Now what's next?"
"Well," she said, "I brought her to you because I thought you knew more about fishing and the oyster business than anybody around here, and you ought to consider that a compliment."
At this, the entire group seemed pleased, and Uncle Ramey said:
"Well, I guess you're right. I sure know all there is to it, for I've been at it all my life. My Pa ahead of me was a fisherman. He lived at Dauphine Island, and that was where I was born, January seventeenth, seventy years ago. Now, you can figger when that was."
When I remarked that it was in 1869, he said: "That's right and by gum! Today's my birthday, it's the seventeenth and you're come to celebrate it. Guess it's a good thing, fer I ain't done much celebratin' so fer. I got up at three o'clock this mornin' and went out and caught these two barrels of oysters."
As we walked under the shed porch of the shop, he said gaily, "Well, it looks like you mean to come in, so here, take this bench and give the lady that thar one," pointing to the one nearest the wall.
There were several crude benches, and all bore scars at one end, where oysters had been opened.
"Aunt" Cora was opening oysters without gloves, but the two younger women each wore a cloth glove on her left hand, in which she held the oyster, while using the right hand to open it. All inserted sharp-pointed knives in the end of the oyster shell, lifting the upper part.
None of the women stopped work, but all talked at once. They were dressed alike in none too clean wash dresses, and dark sweaters. "Aunt" Cora's hair and that of her daughter was straight and untidy, but the daughter-in-law looked as though she had recently had a permanent and a finger wave. She was a smaller woman than the others, and had a more sophisticated air.
The two-room shop is built of tin. In one room is a small laundry stove and a gasoline drum is connected for heating water. The other room is enclosed with screen wire, and in it is a large home-made ice box, in which the oysters and crab meat are kept.
As my companion and I were seated, a fourth woman came from this room, and stood in the door where the son had been when we first stopped. The conversation grew more lively, and he walked out from under the shed porch and stood.
In a few moments three boys, ranging from four to sixteen years of age, came from the side of the shop, stood and stared at us.
Then the oldest boy began to yell:
"I want my football, I told you."
The mother turned and said:
"Shet your mouth, Joe. Don't you know your ball ain't here! It's at home."
With that he yelled louder and started to run, as his mother called, "If you don't shet your mouth, I'll knock your head off! I told you it ain't here." Then turning to her husband, calling him Jules, she said:
"Won't you git his football so he'll go on back to school?"
With that Jules left for his house nearby and things quieted down for a few minutes, but not for long; suddenly the daughter-in-law standing in the door of the shop screamed:
"Look out, Sylvester, you'll cut Dump's toes off with that ax."
Then the mother of Sylvester arose and started towards him loudly threatening a whipping if he didn't let the ax alone. The boy dropped it and ran into the house, where he stayed until Jules came back with the football.
All this time "Aunt" Cora was opening oysters and offering them to my companion and me.
Uncle Ramey jokingly said:
"Now, Cora, didn't I tell you she'd eat all them oysters?"
My companion replied:
"Don't think you're going to make me stop. I'm not only going to eat your oysters, but I'm coming back some day and ask Aunt Cora to make some of that good gumbo for us."
This delighted Aunt Cora, who said:
"You jest let me know what day you can come, and I'll surely make it for you."
"Seriously, Uncle Ramey, do tell us something about your life and work."
"Well, Cora and I was childhood sweethearts down on Dauphin Island, where we were born.
Aunt Cora said: "Yes, we were childhood sweethearts, but I had to keep my eye on him just like I do today. He's like all the other men; likes to look at the pretty girls."
But beneath their banter a devotion to each other was plain to see, and then Cora said:
"Yes, we've seen some pretty hard times together, as well as we've seen some pretty good times. Ramey and I have had to work hard all our lives, and even now we are still working together. When he gets up at three o'clock in the morning, I get up too, and go along with him. It's not very often he goes without me.
"Now last summer, for instance, it looked like we got caught in every squall that come up, fer it rained every day, pretty near it. Sometimes we'd have to pull the boat ashore when the wind would git so bad. Just a lots of times we'd git soaking wet, and when we'd come in, the children would say, 'My God! Ain't you all in a mess!'
"But you know we have to live and we've got to do something. 'Course you think it's terrible because I'm sixty-four and Ramey is seventy, but pshaw! that ain't nothing. People can make themselves old worrying. Plenty of people what ain't half as old as we are can't do nothin' and looks heap older than we do."
At this, Uncle Ramey said, "Yes, that's true. You take me, I ain't had but one spell of sickness and have never been drunk but twice in my life. I wouldn't got drunk then if it hadn't been for Cora's brothers. I've taken care of myself when I wasn't working, and stayed at home with Cora and the children. 'Course, I used to smoke, but I only chew now. Been chewing tobacco all of my life.
"The first thing that my Grandma did after I was born, was shove a pipe in my month. You take little Joe here, he chews and smokes. Cora, his grandma, shoved a pipe in his mouth when he was a baby.
When I asked how old little Joe was, Uncle Ramey replied, "Sixteen years old." Then he continued, "Tobacco, it won't hurt him. I expect to live to be a hundred years old; chewing tobacco might've helped me some, I dunno. Let me tell you I could a-drunk a heap of whiskey in my time for when I was a young boy, about nine years old, whiskey sold fer two bits a quart. To tell you the truth, I seen so many drunk people, it kept me from drinking. "Then, winking at me he said: "Look out there, Cora! Quit givin' her them oysters, for she'll sure be sick eatin' so many." Then turning from my friend to me he said! "Don't pay no attention to my foolishness with Miss Elizabeth, I've knowed her fer a long time. There's another thing before I fergit it. I ain't never been arrested or even summoned to court, nor been on the jury in my life. I've just worked hard. I've done every kind of work there is on the calendar; rafted logs and hauled them, split rails, burned charcoal and hauled it, fished and shrimped as well as ketch oysters. Lordy! I can't tell you all I have done. If I didn't know how to fish, shrimp and catch oysters, I don't know what we'd do. Some days I make two dollars, sometimes three, but then I'll go three or four days without makin' none. It ain't easy takin' all that rain and wind. We moat always get wet to our waists, even if it ain't bad weather, but we go out every day that God sends, 'cause we have to.
You take that relief business, I can't get on it, never have been able to, because I got this here little old shop. Hope to God they'll pull all of them folks and let them make a livin' like we do! They'll see how hard it is."
At the mention of relief one of the daughter-in-laws said:
"If I had lied like most of the other women did, I could be on it now. Sure wish I had."
"But Uncle Ramey shook his head, and said:
"No, it don't do no good to lie, for those that lie, is going to git punished fer it. You just watch and see. 'Course, it is hard to see whole durn families working on relief and getting government money and sometimes we has to sit down to black coffee and a piece of bread.
Well, 'tain't no use bothering about that. It'll all come out in the next washin'. Shucks, here we are going on about things now what we can't do nothin' 'bout. So you want to know somethin' 'bout fishin' and other old-time things. I'll tell you, I've seen my daddy go out and catch flounders at night, when he was livin' on Dauphine Island, and next mornin' bring them to Mobile to get us somethin' to eat. I've even seen my mother go and catch mullet to get grease to fry fish with."
When I said I never knew mullet were greasy, 'Uncle' Ramey laughed and said:
"Yes, ma'm, when times was hard with us that was all the grease we had. Why! in old Grant's time, when I was a baby, plain coffee cost thirty-five cents a pound and flour fourteen dollars a barrel. The way we got meal was to take corn and grind it. Shucks! many times I've gone in the field and got green com and dried it, to grind for meal. We've even parched cornhusks to make coffee. When that big epidemic of yellow fever was, we had a time a-gettln' anythin', then. I often tell these boys here they don't know nothin'.
Ramey continued his reminiscences. "Why, I was sixteen years old," he said, "before I had a pair of shoes. Then they had to be made at home. I never made any myself, but I've seen a many a pair made. They would take a hide and put it in a tub with water, where red oak bark had been boiled, and put in a little lime, and let it stand a month; then they'd take it out to dry, and two men would get a round thing kind a like an oar, and rub over the hide until all the hair came off. Then they'd cut the shoes out and sew them up on the foot, leaving a tip stickin' up at the toe. They called them moccasins.
"Shucks, things have sure changed. You take boats: they have changed too. When I was a boy, we use to pole our boats. 'Course we had a paddle along to row with after it got so deep we couldn't touch bottom with our poles. I remember my daddy had one of the first sailin' boats in these waters; but all that's changed now.
"Lord, yes," Cora said. "Even children have changed and they don't play any more like we used to. Let me tell you a funny thing what happened one day when we was on Pettiboy Island. I saw a big clump of bushes and. I told Pa I was going over and see what was on it. He said I'd better not go; but you know children, they have to see for themselves. So I went on and found a nest of eggs. I picked them up and put them in my apron, and come back to where Pa was. When I opened my apron to show them to him there was a little alligator. I dropped them in a hurry and several little 'gators come out of the eggs, and do you know them things tried to bite me! They'll bits as soon as they're hatched. Pa sure laughed at me. He said, 'I reckon you'll listen to me the next time I tell you not to bother anything.'
"We did have lots of fun in them days, though. Many a time I've rode on a big turtle's back down to the water's edge. Huntin' turtle eggs is fun, too. You know they lay around two hundred and fifty eggs at one time and bury them deep in the sand. Sometimes you have to dig three feet under ground to find them."
"You asked a while ago how many oysters would I get out of that two barrels," said Uncle Ramey. "Well, if they are fat they will make four gallons, but if poor, they won't hull out that much. But you see these are nice and fat. We sell to the National Sea Food Company in Mobile.
The new laws about washing oysters ruins them, Uncle Ramey claimed. He said it takes out all the flavor from them. "We used to sell them in their own water, but now we have to wash them three or four times, and place them on a screen to dry, then pack dry.
"Let me tell you about crabs," he went on. "If you want to eat good crabs, get them on the full of the moon. If they're big ones they will pick from one pound to one pound and a half of meat to a dozen. You see, there's lots of things I could tell you about when I was a boy if I had the time to set down and git to thinkin' and talkin' of them things.
"As for old remedies, they is the beat. We raised our four boys and that one girl with them. We did have two girls, but one died when she was an infant. But we never had no doctors until these later years. The best thing to give babies to make the hives come out on them is sow-bug tea. You know what a sow-bug la, don't you? Well, they are those long black bugs with two horns on their heads, what stays around wet places. Just make a tea out of them, and it'll bring out the hives and cure them.
"Another remedy that is a sure cure fer croup and lock jaw is catch one of these big stink roaches, not the flying kind, and squeeze one drop out of it, and give to the person sufferin' and it will cure them every time. My grandma never used no patent medicines for babies. Take nine bitter weed flowers and boil them in three tablespoons of water. You give one teaspoon full of this at a time and it will break fever and chills, when nothin' else won't. It ought to, fer no quinine could be as bitter.
"Let me give you a remedy fer erysipelas, that an old Indian give me," said one of the daughters-in-law. "I know it's good fer that four-year-old boy of mine, who has had pneumonia four times, and got erysipelas behind one ear. We carried him to two or three doctors, but they didn't do nothin' fer him. It just looked like his head would bust, it was so swollen. Well, an old Indian come by, and told us to take the yaller of two eggs, put a little turpentine and kerosene in it, then put a little quinine and a piece of alum last, and mix thoroughly, and spread this on the place where the erysipelas is, and it would sure stop it right now. That's the only thing that saved my boy."
"Yes," said Uncle Ramey, "If people would use more old-time remedies, they'd be better off; but you can't tell this younger generation nothin'.
"Well, it looks like you ain't a-going to leave any time soon, so I'll just have to leave you and go see how my fire's doing. But don't mind me, stay all day if you will."
Then Uncle Ramey disappeared in the shop.
1/15/39
Washington Copy.
MS.
