Alabama
Gertha Couric
Barbour County
MILL WORKERS.
Nancy Nolan---334 South Randolph Street, said "My old man been dead nigh unto forty years. Them was terrible days fer me. I had three little boys, the oldest nine, the least one, two. We was living on a little farm near Echo, in Dale County. We didn't own hit, jist rented hit. My oldest son, John, started ter ploughing when he were nine.
"We stayed there 'bout five years, then I decided ter move here to work in a Mill. I started in the Little Mill, and fer six months worked all night long fer twenty-five cents a night and my two boys working in the day. Then my wages was raised and I started work in the day. I sho' hated hit that I couldn't send my boys to school. You know, you didn't hatter go then like hit is now.
"Well the least one, he went to school and my other boys learnt their ABC's when he was a-learning his'n. They kin read and write some. Mr. Comer didn't own the Mill then, you know. Hit was bad; had to stop and draw yer water outer well to drink. Then the one toilet was out doors.
"That was the little Mill. After four years there we'ns got jobs in this Big Mill. Hit was better, and I been a-working ever since. I ain't worked fer five years: lives here with my oldest son. He is married and got three boys, they's all go to school. Him and his wife works in the Mill. I cooks and keeps house.
"My tother son lives two doors from here. They gits along good. They both owns their homes. Mr. Comer fixed it so's could.
"My baby boy don't live here. He lives in Columbus, Georgia.
"I'll tell you, when the tother Mills everywheres was er-closing down, these Mills here kept a-running. The Little Mill has three shifts, six to two, two to ten, and ten to six, ain't that fine? I hears he Big Mill is a-going to have three shifts'fore long.
"Yes'um, I had a hard time, but I is got a lots to be thankful fer. All my sons are well and strong, married and happy. I am well, excusing fer a little rheumatics now and then. My grandhildrenis members of the Boy Scouts, the band and the goes to school and kinder¬garten. They's don't work in mills like they's Pas and Mas did. Ain't hit grand? Wish I could think 'bout something else ter tell yer."
Washington Copy
10/20/38
L.H.
