A PATENT MEDICINE VENDOR
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
and
Mrs. Leila Harris Area 7 - Augusta
John N. Booth Area Supervisor Federal writers’ Project Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Georgia
March 14, 1939
February 28, 1939
Mrs. Grace Crowder (white)
250 Baxter Street
Athens, Georgia
Medicine Vendor - Tailoress
G.M.
A PATENT REDICINE VENDOR
"I was just about eight when I met my first husband,” Mrs. Cherry chuckled, "and that’s the truth, even if it does sound funny. I did not dream of such a thing as marrying that old man then, but it just goes to prove that we never know what the future has in store for us."
A customer entered the tailor shop and as Mrs. Cherry waited on him, I glanced around the large room with its several long cutting tables. A large rack at one end of the room held finished garments. Near the windows the sewing table was flanked by an electric sewing machine on one side and by a machine of the old-fashioned pedal type on the other.
More customers came in and I retired to a comfortable chair by the heater at one end of the shop, and soon Mrs. Cherry joined me. "Everybody that comes in wants to know how Mollie’s getting on," she said. Mrs. Mollie Dawson, the proprietor of the tailor shop, had been ill for several days, and Mrs. Cherry, her assistant, was in charge of the business in her absence.
"Isn’t it cold?" she continued. "And all this rain is awful but there’s nothing we can do about it but grin and get wet.
"What was I saying when those people came in? I believe I was telling you about when I met my first husband. We had just moved into a house near the university. He was one of the stewards of the mess hall. They raised their own vegetables then and one of those gardens adjoined our lot. They had cows too and the branch that run through the pasture was a good place to wade. All the kids around our section loved to play up and down that branch.
"I was one of the smallest kids in the crowd, and he would pick me up lots of times and carry me to keep the briers and rocks from hurting my bare feet. I thought he was great, especially as he was always giving me candy, chewing gum, apples, end such like. Why, I just knew he was the best man I had ever seen, and I loved to hear him talk about his own little girl. She was a year or so older than I was and since her mother's death she had lived with her aunt.
"He was good to all the children, but it seemed that I was his favorite. Everybody thought it was because I was the smallest one of them, and then too I played in the pasture alone lots of times when the others were in school. I couldn't go to school much on account of my eyes being so bad after I had measles. And during the time I was sick with measles he never missed a day coming to see me and he always brought me something.
"'I wish you'd give her to me,' he told mamma, and she just laughed at that old widower and said.
"'Why, I couldn't give my baby away; we couldn't do' without her.'"
"'Well, when she gets older I'm coming back for her,'" he said.
"That brought forth a general laugh, and just to carry on the joke mama said, 'All right,' for old as he was they didn't think he would ever think of me except as a kid. From then on they teased me about him, and kid-like it pleased me. He kept right on petting me throughout the several years he was employed at the university.
"When he went to leave town he came by the house to tell us good-bye, and he said to me, 'I'm coming back for you.' I was about eleven then, and again mama just laughed and said, 'All right.' We didn't see or hear from him any more for about a year and one day I got a letter from him saying he had not forgotten me and was coming back for me. Kid-like I felt flattered, I just didn’t have any sense. He kept on writing to me along that line, and when I was fifteen he did come back for me. I didn't realize what I was doing, and thought that I was head-over-heels in love.
"We had a home wedding, and the house was really lovely. It was decorated with large palms, ferns, and flowers. We were married about four o’clock in the afternoon. My wedding dress was gray chiffon and I had gray accessories. My flowers were white roses. I was scared almost to death and turned his hand $loose several times during the ceremony. The preacher kept stopping to remind me that I would have to hold hands. The preacher was my brother-in-law and it was just about a year before that he had married my sister in this same house and moved in to live with us. It did seem to me he would never get through praying after he had pronounced us man and wife. We did not have a reception because we wanted to leave Immediately after the ceremony, but when we arrived in the city where he lived there was a large crowd of people awaiting us with many nice presents. His boss had the house where we were to live furnished and ready for us to walk right in and start housekeeping when we got there, and in addition to that he gave us a check for one hundred dollars. My, but that seemed like a princely gift.
"My husband was working for the manufacturers of a patented Indian medicine. He would stay in the plant until a large supply of the medicine was made up and then would go on the road to advertise and sell it, and we were on the road most of the time.
"The office and plant were in a large and lovely old residence structure that the company had bought. They had remodeled the interior to suit their convenience and had been very successful in adapting it to the needs of the work and workers. Why, they even had a big swimming pool for the use of the employees. They were mighty good people to work for.
"My husband’s wages were $50 a week. He arranged for me to have the chance to learn the business from the very beginning and started me off labeling bottles at $6 a week, and it wasn’t long before I could label more bottles than anyone else there so they raised me to $10 a week. The business grew so rapidly that it was not long before we had to have machines to label as well as fill the bottles.
"Soon I was taken in the laboratory to work where they actually mixed and prepared the medicine. The doctor in charge of the laboratory gave me a thorough course of instruction in preparation of the formula, and I enjoyed this work for it was really interesting, and do you know', no fooling, it was actually a good medicine. We dosed ourselves with it, so you can know' we believed it was all right. I got to where I could make it up as good as the doctor.
"When we had made up a certain supply, or stock, of the medicine we were ready for the road work. I looked forward to my first trip with a road crew for I expected it to be lots of fun. But I soon learned better than that.
"As I said, the medicine was really good, and it was in great demand. It was sold all over the United States. One man who operated a chain of drug stores bought about a hundred carloads at one time. We kept salesmen on the road to make the sales and then' we did the advertising. My husband carried several crew managers who would quickly organize crews of local people to give out circulars and coupons in some of the towns. We carried some complete crews with us, and all of us worked at anything that was to be done on the road.
"Because we were advertising an Indian medicine all the people in our road units were made up as Indians. The crew managers went on ahead with the Indian suits for the men they expected to hire to give out the circulars. The medicine sold at $1 a bottle - and the coupons were good for 35¢ on a bottle of the medicine.
"My chore was to advertise at the drug stores while the crews canvassed the towns. My husband saw that everything was carried out according to plan and schedule. For the first few days I thought it was fun. I wore a soft leather suit all trimmed up in beads and fringes, beaded leather moccasins and a great wig of coarse straight hair topped with so many feathers that some of them hung down over my shoulders. You know how I looked for I know you’ve seen my pictures if you did not see me. I’ve stood at the doors of drug stores in just about every town in this state giving away coupons and passing out advertising matter. We traveled in many states but the majority of our work was in my home state.
"For the time on the road I was paid $25 a week and all expenses, and my husband continued to draw $50 a week. The crew managers received $15 a week. The men and boys we hired locally in the towns we visited were paid $2 a week. My husband and I seldom stayed more than one day in any one town.
"All of our trips were made on the trains, as we had no cars to travel in then. I soon grew tired of it. Standing all day at work end then scrambling to get the make-up off in time to make a rush for the train were just two of the things that turned me against road work. Many’s the time we had to miss meals in order to catch the train and the short rides between the scheduled towns were not long enough for us to get much rest, much less to drop off to sleep. Often we could not get nice places to stay, for this was during the World War and you know how conditions were then. Some times we nearly froze to death in winter. Maybe we would get in about daylight end have to get ready for the day’s work, probably go on the job without being able to take time out for breakfast. When we were on the road, the Job came first. That was ahead of anything, and personal comfort was not considered important. while the company was spending all that money on the advertising. I was the only woman on the road but my husband saw that I did my part. There was no chance for me to do any slacking if I wanted to.
"We didn’t go into towns that could not be reached by railroad. The crew managers took care of them. Hard as the work was, there were many times when I wanted to laugh, especially at the kids. They would stand off and stare at me. They just knew they were looking at an honest-to-goodness Indian woman, and some of the grown-ups were as bad or worse than the kids. Kids and grown-ups asked me all sorts of questions. I was not supposed to be able to talk English, and one day when I did not make any sound in answer to several fool questions, someone pinched me to see if I was real.” She shrugged and laughed at the recollection. "That was one time I could hardly keep still.
"It had been raining for days when we went into one certain town, and I was tired and worn out before we got there. The rivers all over the state were high but especially so at this town. Train travel was dangerous then, hut it was our only means of getting in and out of town. It was late at night when we got in and my husband was as hungry, sleepy, and tired as I was. We left some of our baggage at the depot to be called for early next morning. That was where we made our big mistake, for during the night the river kept rising higher and higher, and by daylight water was standing in the streets and in the depot too. Our costumes were ruined as well as our advertising matter and everything else in the baggage, and worst of all it was three days before we could get a train out of that place. Both of us were sick with colds when we finally did get away from there and we were glad to get back to the home office. They were glad to see us too, for it was time to get another batch of medicine prepared. It was that way all the time - make up the medicine, go sell it, come back and make up more medicine, etc.
"I got to where I hated mighty bad no go back on the road, and would beg my husband to let me stay in the office or laboratory, but he never would hear to that. I never did understand why he was so extremely jealous of me. He did not want me to be out of his sight, and there was nothing for me to do but keep on going with him on the road. I had no choice.
"Keeping up with those Indian costumes used by the crews of boys that distributed the circulars was a troublesome job. They would be shipped in from the different towns to be laundered and returned to the crew managers in some other town and connections just had to be made. There was always something to keep us on the move. We didn’t get any time for pleasure in the evenings when we were on the road, for we were always too busy advertising the medicine, and then too I was always too tired to be interested in fun, and most of the time we were hustling to catch a train that would put us in another town before morning.
"When we were not on the road we worked hard all day and when night came and I wanted to go out to a show or a party, my husband was not willing to do anything but sit around the house reading the paper and discussing the patent medicine business, particularly the Indian remedy that we promoted, and he would not let me go anywhere without him. I was young and got tired of all this. I began to realize what I had done to my life and every day my state of mind grew more upset as my life became more and more restricted to the tastes and habits of old people. I didn’t know what to do, and stood it for three years before we separated.
"At the time of our separation my former husband changed jobs and went to work as a landscape gardener on a large private estate. He kept begging me to come back to him and so I did make another attempt to live with him, but we just couldn’t make a go of it, so then I decided that if we couldn’t make a go of it after three years of married life, the best thing for us to do would he to separate for good. He went to another town then and worked in a paper mill.
"Before I get entirely away from that part of my story I want to tell you about one of the doors in the medicine plant. The girls told me about it when I first went there to work but I didn’t believe the story that every time the door was locked it would come open. I thought they were trying to have fun out of me because I was a new hand, and then I forgot about it. One day I told my husband about how the girls had tried to fool me. He said, 'Haven't you seen that door? Come on, I'll show it to you right now.'
"He led me into an office and told me to lock the door. I locked it and took the key out, then tried the knob to see if I could open it. It seemed to be really locked. I laughed and turned to sit down in a chair as I said, 'Well, I guess it won't come open this time!'
"'Well, take a look at it now and see what you think about it,' he replied.
"I looked. The door was slowly opening, just as though someone were propelling it, but there was no one touching it, and my husband and I were the only people in sight. I tried it over and over again, and every time I locked it, it swung open, but if I just pushed it shut without locking it, it would stay closed. It was only when the key was turned in the lock that the door would voluntarily open. It was that way as long as I worked in that building. It was a real old place and I'm sure it must have an interesting history.
"Not long after we left the medicine company, its owner died. He had made lots of money out of it, and had taken care of his profits. Soon after his death his brother took charge of the business and soon went through with everything and went broke. The plant was sold for debt.
"When I divorced my husband I repeatedly announced that I was through with men for the rest of my life. I was working and felt very independent. The girl that roomed with me then would always laugh and say, ’Just wait, young woman. You are just now getting old enough to start going with the boys and to have really good times. There’s plenty of time to think of getting married. Have some fun and frolic first.’ I was only eighteen when my divorce was granted.
"I didn’t think she was right, for I was determined never to marry again. I surely did have a good time in those days. Almost every evening I went with my roommate to shows, dances, card parties, or some other sort of recreation and it was not many months before I met my second husband.
"He was near my own age, and was altogether different from my first husband. I was attracted because he was so nice and kind to me. We met in May and the following September we got married. He worked in a railroad shop and earned $60 a week. He refused to listen to my plea that I be allowed to keep on working. He said he just didn’t want his wife to work outside our own home, and there was nothing that really troubled me in those days because we were so happy together and got along so good.
"His father ran a blacksmith shop in another town, and when a mule that he was shoeing kicked him, he had to send for my husband to come operate the shop until he was able to work again. He wanted us to stay but my husband and I wanted to get out and live to ourselves again. He went to work for a highway construction company that was grading a road leading toward Alabama.
"He worked as blacksmith and mechanic on that job. Part of his work was to set up the wheels on those old shovels that were pulled by mules. Those big old shovels seemed as wonderful to us then as steam shovels did when they came into use later. They had to be kept in accurate adjustment all the time so they would pick up just the right amount of dirt all the way around. They were apt to turn over and somebody was apt to get hurt if that happened. They paid him a good salary as my husband was the only one of the crew that could do that sort of work."
"We were on the road all the time trailing the construction crew, but it was not hard on me for I didn’t have anything to do, like the hard work of advertising that Indian remedy. However, it was right lonesome for me while my husband was on the job. Most of the time there were only two or three white people and a hundred or more Negroes. We never had any trouble with them. They liked my husband and were nice to me.
"In the meantime, my husband opened a shop of his own in a little town in Alabama, and the construction company sent him a lot of work, for they were so near that he was the only good mechanic and blacksmith convenient to keep up the repairs on their road machinery and to keep their horses and mules shod. As time came for our first child to be born, the construction boss did not want him to go with me to the hospital, but wanted him to stay on in the shop and keep the work going. But he refused to let me go without him. After our baby came, we went back and stayed on there until his father was again kicked by a mule, and it was necessary for my husband to run his shop for him. We sure did hate for him to have to give up his own shop that was so nice and profitable, but his father was old and the family begged so hard for him to come that we decided to do it, but told them we would only stay until his father was up and able to attend to his work again, for we did not like to stay there. This time his father was in such a bad fix that the doctors told us he would probably never be able to work again, but he fooled ’em. He finally got up and after a few months of going somewhat slow, he was able to take full charge of his business again. Ye were delighted to get away again and my husband went back to his old job in the railroad shop. We were both foolish over our baby girl. He thought he had the only child in the world and just worshipped her.
“His old boss kept writing for him to come back to the construction company. We were expecting another baby, and he hesitated about going back, for he said that kind of life was no way to rear the baby we already had. All at once they began laying off men at the railroad shop, and as my husband was one of the last to go to work, he was soon among those laid off. They told him that they knew he was a good, worker and they were going to put him back to work just as soon as they possibly could. He said he couldn’t live on promises, especially now since he had a growing family to provide for, so he decided to go back to the construction company.
"We went with him and lived in a room that we rented near where the gang was working on a big dam. It was close enough for him to come home every night. Soon the time came for me to leave for we could make no practical arrangements for the coming baby's birth out there where conditions were so crude, he came part of the way home with us and said he was a good mind to not let me go without him. He said he had a feeling that if he let us go then he might never see us again. I tried to reason with him that we'd soon be back with the new baby and everything was going to be all right.
"He was right. That was the last time I ever saw him. I wired him as soon as I reached my parents' home, and had one letter from him telling me to be sure and let him near from me every day, that he was uneasy about me. That letter was the last I ever heard direct from him. I knew something was wrong for it was not like him to treat me that way. We had never had any fusses or disagreements. I knew how the gossips were saying, 'Oh, he just wanted to get rid of her.'
"I wrote to his boss, but when the letter came I was so sick they would not tell me anything about it. When my baby was about a month old they gave me the letter. He wrote that my husband was killed in an accident a few days after I left. He said that knowing my condition, he thought it was best to notify my husband's people, as he did not know where my people were. He expected them to let me know about it, but they had let me worry that whole long time, more than a month without telling me he was dead. They had never forgiven me because we had refused to continue living with them. I wrote and wrote asking them to tell me more about my husband's death but they never answered my letters. One of the men that was working with my husband told me that he was in one of the trucks when a train came speeding around a curve and struck it. He said my husband's body was crushed.
"I knew when I didn't hear from him that something was bad wrong, for it was not like him to treat anybody that mean, especially his own wife. I have thought many times since that he must have had some warning from a higher power that caused him to dread our leaving so bad.
"I've had a tough time trying to rear my two little girls. It's still a tough fight. I'm doing my best to get them through school, and for the last few years my responsibilities have been greatly increased since my sister died and I took her little girl to raise. She will tell you today that there is not one bit of difference in the love and treatment given her and my own two kids, for I simply don't make a difference. What one has they all have.
"I do the best I can. My eyes are so bad I can't turn off work like I need to, but I have a feeling that if I keep on trying and doing my dead level best, there'll be a way provided somehow for me to take care of them. I still have my faith."
