NEGRO FRATERNAL INSURANCE
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Athens - Area 6
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Athens - Area 6
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
April 34, 1939
April 13, 1939
R. B. Harris (Negro)
Grand Secretary of Improved Order of Samaritans
Samaritan Building
181 West Washington Street
Athens, Georgia
G.M.
NEGRO FRATERNAL INSURMCE
The central or home office of one of the largest fraternal insurance organizations in Georgia is housed in a modern office building that is owned by this company and bears its name. The administrative personnel of this company is composed entirely of Negroes and the business is operated for a strictly Negro clientele. All tenants in the office building ere of that race.
A plaque bearing the emblem of the order is permanently on the light hand wall of the vestibule. This tablet is in white and gold, and its central figure is a white dove bearing in its mouth an olive branch, the emblem of peace, lettering encircling the dove spells out the words, ‘Love - Purity - Truth.' The names of the founder, the architect of the building, and the members of the building committee are listed on a tablet beneath the emblem.
A wall directory indicated that the offices or the insurance company were located on the second floor, so I walked up the steps and knocked on the first door at the right of the stair landing. The young mulatto who responded to my knock was clad in a dark brown business suit. He invited me to enter the reception room where I noticed a well-dressed young Negress busily typing away with a noticeable display of clatter and speed. But she stopped at once when the man said, "I’m A. B. Henry. Is there anything that I can do for you?"
I explained that I had been attracted by the sign in the vestibule and the praiseworthy motto that seemed to be a part of the emblem, so I had come to learn the purpose and some of the occupational details of the fraternal insurance business as operated by members of his race, A smile illuminated his features as he replied, "You have asked about a subject that’s very dear to me. But first, will you come into my office where we can talk?"
He gave some instructions to the reception clerk, who resumed her typing, and led me into a large office that was as fully equipped with modem appliances and furniture as any place that I had seen in a long while. He placed a chair for me, remained standing until I was seated, and then walked around, careful not to pass in front of me, and sat down at his desk.
After a few moments of silence, he picked up a folder from his desk and handed it to me saying; "This is a picture of my father, who founded this order over 40 years ago. In fact, it will be 48 years this coming August since he organized that first group of our order. My father was a wonderful man, a great worker, and a leader among our people. It seemed to me that he lived only for the services that he could render to others.
"Father saw the needs of our people, and in the founding of this, now great, organization he was the means of helping to provide for numbers of our people who were not able to provide for themselves. The words which you read on our emblem formed the motto by which he lived, and he never stopped his work for it until his death.
"His best years were spent in the service of our order. He brought it into being while he was yet a young man; he was an old man when death took him from it. No day was too cold, no night too dark, for him to do his best to execute what he conceived to be his duty to our membership. No matter what the weather, he would drive for miles to attend a meeting, and I never knew him to tire of his work of helping others. It was more than his hobby; it was his whole life. He took especial pride in giving aid to the man or the woman who was furthest down - who needed help the most. It's significant that his most quoted sentiment was:"Let me live in a house by the side of the road, and be a friend to man.
"My father, as founder of this organization, directed the erection of this office building in 1917. From a small group our organization had grown under his wise guidance until it was necessary to have larger quarters, and then too, he realized the need of an adequate office building for the business and professional people of our race in this city. Father lived to see it fulfilling the purpose for which he meant it. Its three stories are used by Negro physicians and dentists, as well as other fraternal and business offices, in addition to the space used by our own organization.
"Our organization is more than just another insurance company. It's truly a fraternal benefit society, as its name indicates. Our brother members have benefitted from it to the extent that it's the only such, concern in our State which, has weathered every storn and survived every period of depression. None of the other orders of this nature provide so extensive a service for lending money to their members for relief when they are in distress as we do. And our workers are paid higher wages than those of any of the other companies.
"We have issued more than 200,000 policies since our organization opened for business. Dues are not payable on any of our policies for more than 20 years. In other words the holder of one of our policy-certificates is entitled to the full cash benefit after the dues have been paid for 20 years. This is the best kind of insurance, for it enables you to know exactly what you'll get back as compared with what you pay in.
"Our policy-certificates are issued for benefits from $50 up and I think you will agree with me that our rates are very reasonable, as our dues run from 25¢ per month, on a $50 policy-certificate for persons aged from 14 to 45 years, to $2.25 per month on a $500 policy-certificate for persons aged from 25 to 35 years.
"If, after carrying our insurance as long as 4 years, a person is unable to continue payments, the policy will lapse, but it will still have some value left, and this amount will be paid in cash if application is made before the lapse occurs. This protects our members against loss of what they have paid into our treasury.
"We write policy-certificates with, or without, medical examinations. Where the insurance is written without a medical examination, the full cash benefit is considerably modified and, in fact, is limited to one-fourth, if death occurs within the first 18 months; one-half if death occurs within the second year; three-fourths in the third year; but if the insured person lives through the fourth year of paying dues on his insurance, that policy-certificate has the same value as one taken out in compliance with a medical examination."
"What is the amount of insurance carried by most of your members?' I inquired.
"We sell more of the $50 policy-certificates. They’re cheaper for one thing and, as you know, people just don't have the money they once did, and lack of funds in the pockets of our members makes our collections difficult. Now and then some of our members have to let insurance lapse when they get so far behind that they can't pay up. As a usual thing, however, they'll pay just as long as they can, for the people of our race do believe in life insurance. The experience of our institution through more than 40 years has proven the old saying, 'He serves beat, who serves the rest.' And, let me tell you, we have served the multitude.
"Loans made to our members total more than $60,000. These loans have been made for an endless variety of purposes that include: care for the sick and helpless, help for the blind, payment of taxes, building of homes, mortgage payments, clothes, food, and other necessities of life. A large proportion of our loans is used for the education of the youth of our race.
"We have paid out more than a million dollars to the beneficiaries of our deceased members. Every honest and just claim has been cheerfully paid on time and none of them has had to wait for their money. Each beneficiary has received more than was paid into the order by the member.
"Large loans have been made to help our people finance and establish private business enterprises throughout the State. Thousands of dollars were loaned to finance the repairing and building of new churches, schools, and other such institutions in almost every section of Georgia. Our loans have forestalled foreclosure and perhaps permanently lifted many a mortgage on such Institutional buildings as those just mentioned.
"We not only make loans to our people, but we give away many thousands of dollars to our churches, schools, and charitable organizations every year, for that was the purpose of my father in fostering this organization - to look after the sick and the helpless, and to provide for our own members who need our help; that's the mission he left for us to carry on. Have you ever heard the creed adopted by our order?' he asked.
"I didn't know that fraternal orders made known their creeds," I replied.
"Oh, there is nothing secret in our creed," he quickly explained, "and we are so proud of it that we want every one to know of it. Listen!
'OUR CREED
Some twenty centuries ago
Four men went down
From an ancient town,
Down the steep, rough road to Jericho
Now the first one of them
As the story ran
Was just a man,
A certain man from Jerusalem.
'He fell among thieves, it was said
Who mobbed him
And robbed him
And left him by the road half dead.
Cometh a Priest, a Dignitary,
A frothing bubble
For a man in trouble,
Who turneth aside, so on went the story.
‘Passeth a Levite, an orthodox Jew,
With a musty scroll
That he didn't unroll
So there was nothing he could do.
Game a fourth, just an ordinary man,
Chit of his territory
As goeth the story,
The much despised Samaritan.
Down the steep, rough road to Jericho,
Tho out of his bounds
He bound up the wounds
Of the man he didn't know'
He led him to an inn that day,
And without dodging
Paid for his lodging
Till he could journey along his way.
'"Now which of the three," said the Master
To an inquiring youth
Who was feigning the truth
"Was neighbor to him in disaster?'
And the lawyer, a circumspect man,
After some reserve
With an unsteady nerve
Replied, "It was the Samaritan."
Who helpeth "the least" also helps Him,
Tho he beareth no scroll
His creed to unroll
Tho he cometh not from Jerusalem."
Our creed was written "by M. C. Barton," Henry looked up in expectancy for my comment, as he ended the recital.
"No wonder your organization has grown," I told him," and that it has accomplished so much good among your people, for if a creed like that is truly lived up to, then each member must work to be of service, one to another."
Thank you!" he said with a smile. "How my father would have enjoyed hearing you say that, for he loved his creed. I love to recall the things my father said and did, I have never understood how he could accomplish so much. I have 14 people working here in our office right now, and we are busy all the time. Father didn’t keep near the number of helpers that I have, but, Oh, the work he did turn out! We have more than six hundred lodges now, and keeping up with all of their records and payments due, their policy-certificates and other business, makes a good bit of a job. But I don’t guess you can understand this sort of thing as well as those who have had to worry along those lines."
"Perhaps I’m better prepared to understand it that you might imagine," I informed him, "for I was, for years, financial secretary for a fraternal insurance order that has members among the white race in every State in the Union. In the local office, I did all the collecting, made out all the reports, and did all the other chores that seem to be so numerous in connection with a fraternal insurance office. I can agree with you that it’s a very real and enabled me to meet and know a great many different people."
"You are right in all you say," he replied. "Our employees number from nine hundred to a thousand, and many of them are making mighty good money. Our field workers are not paid stated salaries; they work on what we call a key-basis and are paid a commission on the amount of business they turn in. They prefer to work that way, for those commissions can count up quite fast.
"The key officers of each of our lodges are the secretary and the treasurer. They take care of and are responsible for all relations between their local lodge and the grand lodge, or the home office of our company. They collect the dues and distribute the literature, and they make reports on all activities - payments on insurance collected - to the home office. We cooperate with them in every way possible.
"You may think I talk too much about my father, but I must repeat that all of this about which I have told you, all this and more than I'll ever be able to tell you, was made possible by the secure foundation laid by the wise and good man - my father - who originated this order. It's because of his careful guidance that we are in shape to render such extensive service to our people.
"The majority of our lodges have their own local plans for relief of the sick, and this is usually financed by payment of a local sick benefit assessment, made when and as the need arises. Such plans are operated independently by the local lodges, and they have the privilege of handling than to suit the practical needs of the occasion. Sometimes tills fund is supplied simply by free will donations from the lodge members. In most places, however, some kind of assessment is necessary to raise sufficient funds to take care of the sick. We make it plain that none of the members are obligated to pay local assessments unless they are willing to cooperate. In other words, the grand lodge, does not police the local lodge in the handling of strictly local matters. While many of our members may not feel that they are able to pay any more dues than called for on their policy-certificates, there are very few who refuse to pay extra assessments to aid the sick persons belonging to their own local lodges.
"Our collection problem is tremendous, as you already know, since you tell me you have fraternal insurance experience. So many people are entirely out of work at the present time, and those who are working are making barely enough to maintain life, and by that I don't mean that they make enough to pay for what you and I would call the necessities of life. That's the situation with most of our people, - and because of this we are all too often losing policyholders, as well as gaining new ones. Our agents are great workers, and they do much to educate our people to the advantages gained by carrying insurance.
"We make every effort to be a part of each community where one of our lodges is located. Through our local lodges we help each other, and we try not to stop at material assistance, but seek to comfort any distress of heart or soul that may still exist after we have helped to meet needs caused by sickness and financial embarrassment. When one of our members dies, we take charge of the services, in case that is agreeable with the family. We do have a beautiful burial service, and we are having it changed to make it more modem.
"It seems to me that one of the most outstanding of our accomplishments is the fact that no deceased member has ever paid more into our lodge headquarters than was paid out to the beneficiary after the death of the insured. Our records for the month of December 1938 show that in that month we paid death claims of $3,205.48, in amounts ranging from $12.50 to $200, and the total sum that had been paid into headquarters on these policy-certificates was only $1,405.65. Therefore, these beneficiaries received $1,799.83 more than the deceased members had paid on their insurance. Do you know of any other company that can make this claim? We don't believe there's another company with a similar record.
"There’s another remarkable feature brought out in the analysis of our business for last December. The $3,205.48 paid out was on 43 death claims, and out of this number only six had drawn loans against their policy-certificates. This, we feel, is a great record, particularly When you take into consideration the stringency of the times.
"Our Christmas message to every lodge in our organization urged them to do something in their community to cause the people to realize the significance of the anniversary of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ. ’We have found that the best way to win the love and support of the public is to do things for the pleasure and benefit of the community, particularly at Christmastime. A Christmas tree, loaded with gifts for the children of the community, will do more to make the people in that section appreciate your lodge than anything else you can do at this time,' we wrote them, and we continued our message, ’You should also put something on the tree for the poor, the sick, and the helpless, as well as for others that are afflicted in any way.'
"I closed the message to the local lodges last Christmas with a truth that was firmly impressed on my mind by my father, and it’s this: 'We receive the blessings of God in proportion to the services we render to our less fortunate fellow-man. Let every lodge try the Christmas tree this year, and see what blessings will come because of the blessings given.'
"To help the local lodges get established and to attract new members for them, we often go out to the churches, even away out in the backwoods districts, and put on shows, and you would be surprised to know how many people tell us that they have never before seen anything on the order of the show. Sometimes they refuse to attend because they think it's some fake scheme.
"What kind of shows do you put on for them?" I asked.
"Moving pictures, as a rule," he replied, "and it always has to be a talking movie, if it’s any kind of a picture show. The places that we often penetrate are so far from what we call civilization that they don’t have sufficient light available, and we carry along the machine that makes our lights and provides power to run our pictures. Every now and then we find a few people who are afraid of the show, and refuse to come near enough to see it."
"That must be most interesting, as well as educational work," was my next remark.
"You are right about that," he answered, "and our shows are really good. While our pictures are exciting, they are perfectly clean and harmless, and will be acceptable in any church. In churches that object to any other kind we show religious pictures. One at-feature tractive feature at these shows is the seven-piece water set that we give away as a prize, and it’s really quite a nice prize as we pay about $5 for each of these water sets.
"Yes, we charge admission; 10¢ for children, and 15¢ toradults, but the admission fees are donated to the benefit of the school or church in which we give our show, and then too anyone who attends with the intention of Joining our order, is admitted free." "Do you have a Juvenile department in your organization?" I wanted to know.
"Yes, indeed," he answered with a considerable show of pride in his expression, "but we don’t insure a person under 14 years of age for more than $20, and the rate is 10¢ per month. That may seem a very small amount to you, but to some of our people, it means a great deal, especially when they have no other dependence for the expenses that are inevitable after a death in the family. But to return to the subject of our show, it's to the children that they seem to bring the most pleasure. They are enthusiastic over every kind of film we present, and to show you the range from western thrillers to the most sophisticated love stories, here are some of the film titles:"Saved from a Pauper's Grave,' 'Tigers of the Deep,' 'Alexandra's Jazz Time Band.' 'Washington Government Buildings,' and 'Slave Days,' played with all colored actors. We also run films of Joe Louis and his fights, and they always make a hit, wherever we show them"'
"Do you ever put on a show in this city?" I asked, "or are your entertainments just for the small villages?"
"No, we don't put them on in places of this size. They are just for communities where they have never had the opportunity of seeing things of this kind, for in places like that it attracts crowds from an area of 15 miles or more. Much of our most solid new business has come to us as the result of these shows put on in the backwoods, where people are so far away from modem ideas that they still raise what they need to live on right there on their farms, and these are the sort of folks that usually have savings tucked away that make them able to pay for insurance if they want it. They may not have stylish clothes or automobiles of any kind at all, and they may not know much about reading and writing, but they are usually honest and sensible, and once their ambitions are aroused they are apt to go far. We feel that we have been instrumental in bringing new hope and encouragement to the Negro race throughout the nooks and corners of our State."
"I'm interested in your policy-certificates.' I told him. "I want to know if they are always made out to individual beneficiaries, or if they can be made to an estate?"
"We prefer to make them to the individual beneficiary, and we refuse to make the certificate of policy out to the estate unless the administrator of the estate is named in the application for insurance. In case we are able to incorporate the name of the administrator of the estate in the policy-certificate, there is much less confusion and trouble after the death of the insured, if it should happen that some close relative or relatives have other ideas as to the disposition of the insurance.
"By this time you have found out that we are very proud of our organization, and we hope to make it even better than it is at the present time. One of our hopes is that we will never be content to rest on achievements already won, but that we will always be pushing onward and upward toward better opportunities for the people of our race"
"We have one lodge service that's open to the public, and that's our Memorial Service, which is held annually on the anniversary of the day when my father passed away. We open our Memorial Services with the reading of our creed. After that the names of all members of the lodge that have passed away during that year are called. Then follows a program of music, short talks, recitations, and of course the official ritual of our order for this occasion.
"I'm very sorry that I have an appointment and will have to leave now. I thank you for your interest in the occupational features of our organization, and if there is any other information concerning the activities of my race that you desire to collect, don't hesitate to come back and ask for it. We'll be only too glad to help you with all the facilities of our staff and office. Wait just one moment. I'll call our treasurer, Mr. Jones, and if at any time you should come by and I happened not to be here, he will give you information that you could obtain from me, and he will be glad to do it."
"Mr. Jones, will you please come to my office?" he called. A young man came in from the office on the opposite side of the reception room. He was dressed in dark blue business suit. Following the introduction, the secretary said:"Mr. Jones, this lady is recording information concerning occupational activities and experiences of our race, and if she should return when I'm not here, I want you to see that she gets all the information she wants."
"I will be very happy to assist her in any way that I can," the treasurer smilingly announced.
Both men went ahead of me to the door which was opened for me by the secretary.
I thanked them both for their kindness in so readily answering my questions, and the secretary said:"That was a pleasure, for we appreciate your interest in our work, and we hope that you'll come again, for we will be very glad to give you any information that will be of service to you."
