(Real name, confidential: Asheville, N.C.) Writer - Douglas Garter
LIVING ON BUTTER AND EGGS
A Greek Sketch
Charlie came from somewhere in Russia, he said, but he cannot spell the name of the place, or pronounce it understandably. In fact, his English is so imperfect that the average American cannot understand him at all. He cannot read, and only recently did he learn to write figures when it became a business necessity. He makes his living by "writing butter-and-egg numbers," a petty "racket" known elsewhere as "policy" or "the numbers game." The daily receipts of butter and eggs at the Chicago Produce Exchange are used to determine the winning number, and if one wishes to try his luck he may look up Charlie, choose a number (any number from 000 to 999, inclusive), and place a bet that the chosen number will "come out" that day. The number is written on a slip, with the amount of the bet, which may be anything from 1? to $1, and a duplicate slip is turned in to the "banker" not less than one hour before the produce exchange releases the figures showing receipts of the preceding day. It is not a matter of guessing what the receipts were; the totals make no difference, but the winning number is determined by taking a certain digit from the butter receipts and combining it with two other digits taken from the egg receipts. If the "player" has selected the correct number, the banker, who stays very much in the background, pays Charlie an amount equal to 500 times the bet, and Charlie in turn pays the money to the player, less a commission of 10%. Thus, a bet of 10? will yield the player $45, net, if his number comes out. Charlie, in addition, is paid a commission of 20% of all bets turned in to the banker.
For years this racket, locally, has been operated by Greeks, but most of the "writers" and players are Negroes. Many have been arrested, convicted, and fined, and Charlie himself was arrested once, but was given a suspended sentence. He has no regular place of business, but he manages to subsist in a meager fashion, making the rounds of his customers each morning, suggesting numbers, writing slips, collecting bets. Most of his customers are Greeks, Italians, and Negroes, but some Americans play the game also.
Diminutive, dour, and wearing clothes that are spotted with food, and many sizes too large, Charlie plods a weary way, unshaved, apparently uninterested in his surroundings, and usually uncommunicative. He is noncommittal about his reasons for leaving Russia and coming to America, and he does not care to discuss his activities before coming here. However, he indicated that he came here from New York about 13 years ago. His family, if he has one, remains undisclosed, but he gets a letter from Greece about once a year. One of the other Greeks reads it to him.
Charlie plays the numbers himself, and once in a while he has the right combination. Today, though, he was very much irritated because the number came out 774 - he had played, among others, 775. The worthless slip was exhibited with violent and elaborate gestures, and a lengthy expostulation in his practically unintelligible mixture of Greek and English. He had played 25? on 775, so his winnings would have been considerable. He said, however, that he will "hit" tomorrow.
About 5 feet, 3 inches, Charlie weighs hardly 110 pounds. He is 58 years old, and his hair, once black, is graying. His dark eyes are set deeply in his leathery, wrinkled face, and he wears glasses that he bought at a chain store. A smile on his countenance is a rarity. He lives alone in a barnlike space on the second floor of a business building. His rent is negligible, and the owner of the place seldom bothers to collect it. He likes to have Charlie around at night as a precaution against prowlers, but a marauder would probably frighten Charlie nearly to death. His iron bed is piled high with dirty blankets, and there is no sign of a sheet or pillowcase. There is a sort of bathroom, but the tub appears to have been disused for years. Sometimes Charlie eats a meal at one of the Greek cafes, but usually he takes a bottle of milk, a loaf of bread, and some cheese or meat to his quarters. The empty bottles accumulate for months before they are removed (about 200 are in evidence now).
Charlie has no close friends, and does not seem to care for amusements or sports. He has not been inside a theater in more than 10 years. Aside from the butter-and-egg racket, his principal interest in life is the local baseball lottery. When he has the money, he buys a number of "baseball pool tickets," and spends the entire afternoon following the scores as they come in on the ticker and are posted on the scoreboard. His winnings, if any, are put into butter-and-egg numbers and more baseball tickets. Once, however, he saved some money and bought a small lot in a poor residential section, but the taxes, about $3 annually, are a great bother. He can never seem to get them paid. He does not have any idea what he is going to do with the lot, but he does not want to sell it. He hopes to win the Irish Sweepstakes someday.
