Concord, N. C.
September 18, 1938
M. L. W.
THE FIRST CHURCH OF GOD
Location: On the mill section end of Vest Corbin Street, one of the two principal East-West thoroughfares of town.
Building: A small wooden structure painted white outside, but unpainted inside. The walls are ceiled, the floor bare. The small auditorium is furnished with scratched and battered church benches, a piano, a golden oak pulpit. A blackboard on the wall gives information on the meetings for the week, prayer meeting, heart sister gatherings etc.
The People: Probably few of those present would be mistaken for "town people." The men are in shirt sleeves, many of them with collars open, the women are in their summer dresses and do not wear hats because the night is hot; however, it is not merely their clothes which make the people different, it is the way they sit, the expressions on their faces, the way they sing -- and a certain indefinable quality. (By this I do not mean to infer that these people are inferior to "town people," but merely that they are different.)
The Service: Church had been announced for 7:30, when I arrived at 7 o'clock a huge, zealous-eyed brother from the congregation was holding forth in the pulpit, speaking doggedly and earnestly on the subject of giving children a Christian education. He spoke of the influence of the home and the church, thanking the Good Lord for his old Sunday School teacher at whose knee he learned the Word.
While he droned on, people straggled in and out; children became dissatisfied with their locations and moved to other benches, crawling over the knees of their elders. The men listened stolidly to the speaker, but the women were more frivolous. They twirled their fans, swatted insects, fingered their hair (most had permanents), gazed at newcomers, watched the children and indulged in what seemed to be the favorite sport -- baby swapping. It was very hard to know who was the mother of which child until a baby began to cry, then it was passed up, or across or back to its parent.
After the Brother finished his talk there was a general shifting about before the next service began. Young girls assembled in the choir benches at the front while the jaunty looking man who was to direct consulted with them; men who had been standing outside the front door came slowly in and found seats; children darted out and then in again. The women near me at the back gathered up their children and moved up a few benches in order to escape the mosquitoes that came in the open window. "They're so bad here on account of them weeds outside," a woman told me as she advised me to move too. From the choir came a nice looking girl who welcomed me very graciously and asked if I wouldn't "come up and help with the singing," an invitation I declined in spite of my gratitude.
The pianist thumped out the opening measures of a gospel hymn while the choir director dramatically gave the signal for beginning the singing which poured forth in the same shrill, nasal tones and the syncopated time of hill-billy songs. Most of the people in the congregation picked up the paper-bound books and sang with the choir. Four hymns were sung in the same spirited rythm, with time out in between for the choir director to mop his face and announce numbers. A man behind me, who smelled strongly of beer, seemed to have a very difficult time catching the numbers. After each was announced he leaned over my shoulder to whisper loudly, "I beg your pardon, what number was that?"
When the music stopped, the church seemed very quiet. The pastor, a plump, red-faced little man in a gray suit, called upon someone to pray for the sister who at that moment was lying in the hospital. A brother near the front began to pray in a low tone which rose up and up and became more fervent as he continued. Although the words he spoke were smothered by the passion in his voice and were completely unintelligible to me, all over the congregation "Amens" broke forth constantly. The preacher's were the loudest of all.
After another block of hymns, and a hopeful prayer by the preacher, collection plates were passed. When they were returned to the pulpit the preacher scrutinized the contents of both plates and put them away. He did not look pleased.
The sermon was dull and lifeless. A series of generalizations on living according to the scriptures did not seem to interest the congregation, with the exception of the first speaker of the evening who leaned forward to catch every word spoken, nodding his head in approval. He was irritated by the fretting of a small baby near him and by his own child who toddled back and forth on the pew. Most of the children were asleep.
More singing, more prayers and the service was over. It wasn't a very spirited gathering, but after all it wasn't supposed to be a revival meeting (and it was a hot night). The people wandered off, the majority of them walking and turning into the ragged little streets that thread that end of Corbin Street.
The one vivid phrase the preacher had used, and repeated several times, rang in my head -- "I say we have come to the very Saturday night of time."