There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Bob Curits,
2 m. N. of Talladega Springs, Alabama.
Jack Kytle,
Editorial Department
RIVER DRIFTER
Bob Curtis is the kind of man who can disappear from a job and never be missed. He will live quietly in a textile or lumbering community while work is fairly plentiful, but when business slumps, he will be gone. He stays on the fringe of employment, obtaining work only when operations are speeded to a point where a laborer, unskilled and uneducated, may be given a "flunky" job that la never permanent.
He represents a section of Southern life that the average urban resident seldom sees. He, and the many others of his kind, are not known to the welfare departments of cities. When work stops for them they retreat quietly to the rivers, and there they live isolated lives until jobs can be had again. Hundreds are there now, and it has been more than ten years since some of them left their shacks.
Bob Curtis is typical of the hundreds. He is a stocky, sallow-faced little man with a black, wiry beard, and small eyes set deep beneath thick eyebrows. His few teeth are stained a dull yellow by tobacco. He wears tattered overalls and jumper, splashed with sticky lowland mud. A huge, blue-checkered handkerchief is knotted loosely at his throat.
We sat there in the middle of the river, in a narrow, leaky boat, while he baited a trotline with red worms and minnows. It was barely daylight, and a steamy mist floated lazily over the water. At frequent intervals fish rose to the surface, turning over with loud splashes.
Bob said without glancing up from his task, "I've tried time an' ag'in to git ahead a little, so I could do sump'un better fer my folks; but it looks like I never do git nowhar. I ain't never had but one job that paid me mor'n $1.50 a day, an' that was at th' mill in Talladega. They paid me $12 a week up thar, but they laid me off, an' they wasn't nothin' else I knowed to do. I had to come back down hyar, fer it's better to eat a little bit than none-a-tall.
"I may jes' stay this time. It's 'bout as good a place as anywhar right now, fer ain't nobody got no work. Rent don't cost me nothin', an' long as they's risn in this river, we're go'nter eat a little. It mightn't be much, but you see, we ain't never had no God's plenty.
"If I had all th' money I've spent movln', I'd be sittin' all right. My wife was fussin' jes' th' other day 'bout our little bit of house goods bein' broke up so bad, but thar ain't a way to he'p it. When a job gives out, a man can't jes' keep stayin' aroun' with no money. He's got to go some'rs, an' I think I'm lucky as hell to have this place hyar. It b'longs to Sam Winslett, but he don't charge me nothin' fer it. You know 'bout his trouble. He built it fer a purpose, but when th' law got too nosey, he built hisself a place over in Shelby County crost th' river. They ain't no Tom Burkes a-sheriffin' over thar.
"I was right up thar at th' shack with Sam when he met up with Tom Burke. They's a sayin' that no matter how bad a man is, they's a man some're that's badder'n him. Well, this was durin' Chris'mus week, an' Sam an' Sam an' 01' Man Bud Rylant was sittin' at th' table havin' a few drinks. Atter awhile we heard a automobile comin', an' Sam got hot an' bothered. He'd heard that Burke had a eye on him, an' he was purty mad about it.
"We heerd th' automobile, an' Sam got up from th' table an' went an' got his pistol. He was gittin' full, so me an' Bud knowed they might be hell to pay, an' that we'd be mixed up in it. We axed him to put th' gun down--that it was a good way to git in trouble; but he got mad at us an' told us to mind our own damned business. He says, 'If that bastard comes pokin' 'round hyar, I mean to kill him. They ain't nobody go'nter tell me what I can do 'round my own house.'
"Now, Sam ain't nobody to monkey with when he's dead sober, an' he's worse'n ever when he's had a few. He went to th' door an' stood thar spraddle-legged, like he was go'nter keep anybody from comin' in. Me an' Bud jes' sot thar quiet, fer they wasn't no use foolin' with Sam. He jes' as soon shoot his frien' when he's full as somebody he don't like.
"It was Burke in th' automobile all right, an' he was lookin' fer Sam's stuff. I was sittin' back behin' th' wall, so I couldn't see what he done when he seen th' gun, but I heerd all that was said. I heerd the car door slam shut, an' then I heerd Burke say, 'What you doin' with that gun?' Sam says, 'Don't start up hyar, goddamn you, or I'll kill you 'fore you take a step!' Then Burke says, 'Don't be no fool; drap that gun!'
"Me an' Bud knowed then that they was go'nter be some shootin'. We crawled out'n our cheers an' got behin' th' stove. You coulda heerd a pin drap it was so quiet fer a second or two; but then Burke says, 'Sam, I'm warnin' you; if you pull that trigger, I'm go'nter take you with me!' Then it got quiet ag'in, an' I jes'scrouged thar behin' th' stove waitin' fer th' shot. That was th' longest minute I'll ever live in my life.
"Well, sir, they wasn't no shootin' done. Next thing I knowed Burke was in th' room, an' he was holdin' Sam's gun. He wasn't skeered no mor'n he'd a been if he'd took a toy gun away from somebody. He pushed Sam in a cheer, an' he says, 'If you wasn't crazy drank, I'd take you in fer this. You go'nter git killed at that sort of thing some day, an' if I's you, I'd throw that gun in th' river.'
"They's a lot of people don't like law men, but I like that Tom Burke. He comes in hyar ever' now an' then to take a look aroun', an' me an' him has got to be good frien's. He ain't never searched me but onct, an' then he didn't fin' nothin', fer I don't fell with it no more. He poked about in th' bresh heaps a little, an' then he says, 'I ain't never wantin' to fin' none, Bob; I don't like to 'rest nobody. I don't give a damn how much you drink, but jes' don't be makln' an' sellin' none.' I ain't done that, neither, an' me an' Tom'll git along.
"Sam'd die 'fore he'd tell it, but he's crazy as hell 'bout Tom Burke right now. I knowed that th' day atter Tom searched his place. He didn't fin' no likker, fer Sam had it hid 'way up th' river, but he told him that he'd git him. He told him he knowed he was shinin', an' that he'd run him out'n Talladega County if it took up all his time.
"Well, th' next day, Sam an' me 'as talkin' 'bout it, an' Sam says, 'That damn Burke is got more guts'n brains.' Then he got to laughin' like it was a funny joke. But it wasn't no time 'fore he was gone out'n hyar, an' next time Burke come back, he never even axed whar Sam was."
Bob paused in his task of baiting the line, pulled it taut, and lowered his shaggy head as if he were in a deep study. Then a smile broke across his bearded face.
"Big'un hit it then," he drawled. "Felt like a blue, or it might a been a baas hittin' one of them live minners.
"Yes, sir, I can feel a fish bite an' nigh 'bout tell you. what kind it is. Now you take a blue eat or bass; they bite quick as hell. They come up on th' bait fast, an' they don't monkey 'bout to look at it. But a yaller or a drum is diff'runt. They bite like they was so lazy it was all they could do to swaller. Croppies bite like that, too. I jes' as soon lift a piece of wood out'n th' water as to catch one of 'em on a pole an' line.
"Th funniest sight I ever seen was right up thar 'round th' bend. They was a lady an' man from Anniston come down hyar an' hired me to row fer 'em. Th' man knowed sump'un 'bout fishin', but th' lady was purty green. She kep' gittin' her line tangled in th' bresh, an' th' man'd fuss at her an' tell her he never was go'nter bring her with him ag'in. I thought they was go'nter end up in a row 'fore they ever got a fish, but th' lady was good natured, an' she'd jes' laugh when he'd start fussin'.
"Well, sir, I never knowed it to fail. You take a greenhorn an' put a pole in his han's, an' he'll catch more fish'n you. We was up thar clost to whar Cedar runs in th' river, an' th' lady was fishin' with a worm. She kep' sloshin' th' water with her pole, lookin' at ever'thing 'cept her cork. She kep' talkin' too, an' th' man was tellin' her to be quiet.
"All at onct, I seen her cork pop under, an' she wasn't even lookin'. I yelled at her, 'You got one, Miss!,' an' when I said that, she nigh 'bout fell out'n the boat. Th' man didn't say a word; he jes' throwed his pole out in th' river, an' grabbed her'n. She tried to hold on to it, but he took it 'way from her.
"I seen right off that they wasn't no punkin'-seed on that line. I know a big fish when I see it bite, an' I knowed this'n was go'nter give trouble. I knowed, too, that if th' man never had caught a big'un, he was bitin' off a bigger hunk'n he could chew. You can't lift a big fish out'n th' water; you got to pull him to you, an' then sorter roll him into the boat.
"He tightened up on that line, an' --sloosh! That fish started fightin'. I seen he was go'nter lose it, fer he was 'bout to break th' pole. I jumped up thar an' took it away from him, got th' line tight ag'in, an' pulled th' fish to th' boat. He was a big blue, weighin' 'bout 12 pound.
"Well, th' man started jumpin' an' takin' on 'bout what a fine 'un he was; but do you know what that little lady done? She started snifflin', with th' tears jes' a rollin' down her purty face. Th' man seen she was Cryin', an' he axed her what was th' matter. You know what she says? She says, 'Y'all done ruined my trip; it was ay fish an' I wanted to catch it myself.'"
Bob lifted his head, laughing so hard that tears pushed out of his eyes. "Po'r little thing," he said when he had regained his breath, "She never could've held on to that blue, but I guess she thought she could've. Women is like that; they got more sand in their craws than men. You tell a woman she can't do sump'un an' she'll bust her skin a tryin'. I don't know what I'd a done if Christine wasn't that away.
"I want us to go up to th' house an' talk to her when I finish baitin' this trotline. She's been a mighty good wife to me, an' that's why I keep wantin' to git ahead a little. We ain't young no more, an' it'd nigh 'bout kill me to see her suffer on ay account. She's been follerin' me aroun' fer 39 year, an' she's follered me to places I was 'shamed to take her. But she ain't never fussed 'bout goin'.
"They's a lot of women that's too good fer th' men they married. When I git to thinkin', it's a wonder to me that Christine's put up with me as long as she has. When we was first married, I was purty full of hell, an' I done a lot of drink in' an' rowdyin' 'bout. She could a gone back to her Pa then, fer he was doin' well with his own grist mill, but she never did go. Best as I know, she never said nothin' 'bout goin'.
"When times'd git so hard with us that we couldn't tell whar our next bite to eat was comin' from, I'd git terrible worried 'bout it. But she'd allus tell me not to worry none, that th' Lord would take care of us long as we b'lieved in His word. It does look like that is so. They's been some hard times with us, an' I ain't go'nter say we ain't never been hungry, but sump'un allus seems to bob up. I recollect one winter hyar when we didn't have hardly enough to hide our skins, an' some of th' people at th' Springs give us some clothes. I didn't like to take their charity, but it was good of 'em to do it. Christine says that char'ty bread is mighty bitter bread, but them that gives it ia teched by th' Lord.
"Yes, sir, I b'lieve in religion; leastways Christine has l'arned me to b'lieve.
It's a big comfort to me sometimes. You know, th' Lord was int'rusted in fishermen, an' he was po'r, too. Christine read me 'bout that. Th' Book says, 'Blessed air th' po'r---' They's comfort in that.
"You was axin' me 'bout th' work I like most. Well, I ain't never done but three things--sawmillin', cottonmillln' an' fishin'. They ain't much that a man can do when he ain't educated, an' I never did have no schoolin'. I never did l'arn to read or write my own name. Christine useta say she was goin' to l'arn me, but we never did git 'round to it; they was so many things that come up, like th' kids bein' borned. But I wish I knowed how. I'd like to read th' Book more, fer I'm too thick-skulled to git much out'n it by listenin'."
We were at the end of the trotline now, and Bob placed a large, furiously wriggling minnow on the last hook. He said, "I allus save me a big, peart'n fer this hook. Some of th' best yallers I've got out'n this river have come from right hyar." He lifted his right hand and displayed a few angry scratches. "A 35-pounder done that," he said. "I's so skeered I's go'nter lose him that I rammed ay hand down his throat; an' he didn't like that nary bit. He chomped down hard, but I drug him in."
He turned the boat around with a few deft strokes of his cedar paddle, and then dug it deep into the water as he started rowing back across the water. "I guess I know more 'bout fishin' than anything else," he said, "leastways I like it best. I'm my own boss hyar, an' that's what suits me. I never did like havin' no boss man tell me what I could do an' what I couldn't do. I jes' don't like to be at nobody's beck an' call. Course they ain't no money in fishin' on this river, fer it's been fished to death. I don't never make mor'n three or four dollars a week, but we eat on that, an' th' rent is free as air.
"They's too many things 'bout sawmillin' an' cottonmillin' that jes' ain't right. If a human's go'nter starve, they ought'er let him go quick, an' not drag it out. Some of th' cotton mills pay a little better now, bein' that th' union men has got 'em skeered; but th' little sawmills don't pay nothin'. Why, they's a mill over by Fayetteville that's payin' no mor'n 75 cents a day, an' some of th' hands don't git but 50 cents. Now, that ain't a fair wage fer six to six work, an' I jes' ain't go'nter do it long as I can make 'bout as much fishin'.
"If I's a money man, I don't b'lieve I'd have th' guts to ask a man to work fer nothin'. It'd shame me to do it. But they ain't no sech feelin' in Jeff Hanson. He runs that Fayetteville mill, an' he allus has beat his men down to th' last penny. It ain't always he pays 'em on time, neither, fer I seen one of his niggers up at Johnson's store th' other Saturday askin' fer credit or jes' anything to eat. Johnson wouldn't give him no credit, but he give him a onion to eat 'thout any bread. I guess he thought it was funny, but I could tell th' nigger was hungry.
"Jeff was th' one that said they wasn't no sawmiller worth mor'n 50 cents a day. That was when they was talkin' 'bout raisin' pay an' cuttin' down th' hours. Well, he ain't ever give nobody a nickel more, an' that hour stuff is a joke. He lives high an' grand while his hands don't have nothin', an' I'd like to see somebody blow him out'n that damned big automobile. I know I hate him wors'n anything in this world. He throwed me off'n a job once when ever'body in my family was sick abed, an' he didn't give me a hour's notice. I've felt many a time I oughter've killed him fer that.
"Th' best man I ever worked fer was Mr. Ed Thomas over in Paint Creek bottom, an' that was a long time ago. He was sawmillin' over thar, an' he took me on as a teamster at $1.50 a day. Now, that might not seem like much money, but it was a right smart then. I worked longer on that job than ary'n I've ever had; five whole years. But they ain't no place fer a good teamster at a sawmill today. Machinery's done took th' place of mules an' steers, an' it's took th' place of a lot of men. I've been to ev'ry sawmill in this country, but they ain't no decent jobs to git. Mr. Gene Lindsay over in Shelby offered me one totin' kiln sticks fer 75 cent a day, but I told him I'd jes' stick to fishin'. If you ain't go'nter git nothin' noway, you might as well take it easy.
"Speakin' of Mr. Ed Thomas, he done me a favor that I won't never fergit--him and Dr. Woods. A long time ago, when I was workin' at a sawmill over dost to Vincent, I begin havin' pains in my shoulders so bad I couldn't hardly work. I hurt it out fer awhile, but then I went to the bossman at th' commissary an' told him 'bout my misery. He said he'd fix it up, an' he give me a little slim bottle with a red band 'bout it. It had tablets in it, an' they made me feel good as new.
"Course it wasn't nothin' but morphine, though I didn't know it till a good while. They didn't have no law ag'in sellin' it then, an' it got to whar I couldn't do 'thout a bottle in my pocket. I jes' begin eatin' it, an' I was goin' strong when I commenced workin' fer Mr. Thomas.
"Well, I wasn't at his mill long when they put a law in that you couldn't git no more. You don't know what that means, fer I don't guess you ever took it; but I tell you it's hell. When th' little hit I had on hand give out, it jes' looked like I'd go plumb ravin' mad. I didn't think I could stand it, so I got Mr. Ed to let me have a horse an' buggy, an' I went hell bent to see Dr. Woods. I told him I'd die without it, but he said, no, I wouldn't quite die, but I'd think I's go'nter. I said I had to have some, law or no law, but he told me, 'I hate it, Bob, but you ain't go'nter git a dust, not one dust, so you might as well start toughin' it out.'
"It didn't seem like I'd ever git back to th' mill, I was hurtin' so bad. I begin chokin', an' I felt like pins was stickin' me all over. It was so bad I jes' stopped th' horse onct an' begin screamin' fer all my might. Don't never let nobody give you no morphine. They ain't nothin' in hell that's wors'n it.
"I went straight to Mr. Ed when I got back to th' mill, an' I told him what Dr. Woods had done. He says, 'It looks like you ain't go'nter git none this time, but we'll fix it some way. You go on home an' git in bed, an' don't you worry 'bout nothin'. I'll see that yo'r folks git sump'un to eat, an you can work it out when you git well.'
"That was mighty nice of him, but it didn't help my sufferin' none. That night it got so bad Icouldn't stay on th' bed, an' I'd jes' kick th' walls, I's hurtin' so much. I told Christine I's dyin', an' I thought I was. My insides felt like they was comin' out, an' I was gurglin' in my throat. She got skeered so she went runnin' to git Mr. Ed.
"When he got to my place, I was done turnin' cold. He jerked a dollar bill out'n his pocket, an' he told Christine to go git him all th' likker it'd buy. When she got back he started pourin' it down me, all I could git in my belly, an' in a little while I's so drunk I passed out. Ev'ry time I'd wake up, him an' Christine'd give me another swig.
"I guess that likker saved me from dyin', fer Mr. Ed kept a quart thar all th' time. I laid right on my back fer mor'n six weeks, but then I begin feelin' a little better. Atter a few more days I got so hungry I could eat a steer, an' it was all they could do to tote in enough grub fer me. In no time a-tall, I was fat as a buck, an' feelin' better'n I'd felt in years."
We were within fifteen yards of the bank, and he began paddling so fast that the narrow boat slid almost half its length upon the slippery mud. When he had chained it to a stout willow, we turned up a weed-flanked trail that led to a small shanty in a clearing. There were no panes or screens in the windows of the shanty, and its rough pine boards were gray from the beating of rains and the burning of hot suns. The alight figure of a woman was framed in the doorway, her dress blown hard against her body by a wind that had risen on the river. As we approached, she lifted a hand to her forehead to shield her eyes from the bright morning sunlight.
Bob said, "That's my woman up thar. You know her, thought leastways, I guess you do. When I told her you was comin' she said she knowed you."
Around the front steps of the shanty, a scattering of tulips stirred in the wind. The yards had been swept recently by a brush broom, for the markings of its determined sweep were visible in the yellowish sand. On the narrow porch, a water bucket sat on a board shelf, the handle of a gourd dipper extending above the zinc.
Someone inside the house was picking a guitar, and singing in a loud, husky voice. It was a young woman's voice, and she sang:
Whar you goin' Billy Boy?
I'm gwine to see my gal, she's th' fines' gal of all,
She's a young thang, she can't leave her mammy.
Did she ask you to come in Billy Boy?
Yes, she asked me to come in ----
The voice hushed abruptly as we walked across the yard. A door slammed somewhere in the house.
"That was Beatrice in thar," Bob said with a low laugh, "She's 'fraid of her shadder. She'll lie out som'ers till yo'r gone.
"No, sir, they ain't no chanct of gittin' her to sang anythang fer you. She couldn't raise a note 'round company. Now, if Nora was hyar she'd give you some music, fer she can r'ally make a gittar cut up; but she vent up to Sylacaugy last week to be with our married gal."
Christine Curtis walked out on the front steps and shyly extended a small, reddened hand. She said, "I tried to get Bob to let you stay up here in the shade till he had baited out. But I know he likes to talk better'n any man livin'. I'll bet you're tuckered out listenin' to his tales."
She laughed, and her eyes lost their seriousness for a moment. She lifted one hand and brushed a few wisps of graying brown hair from her forehead, while she beckoned us inside with the other. "Take them chairs by the table," she said, "They sit better'n any we've got."
The room was small, and the ceiling was so low that a person average height could have touched it by a stretch of the arm. In a corner by the window, a wood stove, rusted about the legs, sat on four bricks. A table was placed close to the wall, with a long wooden bench lying alongside. The table was covered with yellow oil cloth, but it was frayed at the ends and sides, and a red salt shaker did not quite cover the gaping hole in its center. Flies swarmed thick about the table, and Christine picked a sage broom and struck at them savagely.
"They worry us to death," she said, "Them and the dirt daubers. It keeps me runnin' my legs off try in' to keep things clean. I always like to see winter-time come, because I can stand the cold better'n the insects. Course, the mosquitoes worry us pretty much in the fall, but you can fight them by smearing yourself with kerosene. I dread for one of them to bite me, because I know they're full of poison. You can't tell Bob anything about them, though. He thinks they don't carry chills; but I know they're bad as moccasins for their size."
She pulled up an unpainted chair, bottomed by thongs of leather, and sat down." I got good and tickled at him last year," she said. "Me and Beatrice had been havin' chills, shaking our bones nearly out, and sufferin' with high fevers after they was over. We really needed to have a doctor, or at least some chill tonic, but Bob didn't do a thing about it. He didn't give us an comfort when we was havin' them, and he expected us to be up to cook at meal times.
"Well, it went on like that for a good while, with him not payin' us any mind. Then one day, he come down with a chill, Lawsy me, I never have heard anybody take on so. He shook till the bed like to have fell down, and when the chill was over, he took fever. I was sorry for him as I could be, but I couldn't help bein' tickled; he looked so funny and helpless lyin' up there in bed, groanin' like he was dyin'.
"When I saw how had he was sufferin', I sent Bea over to fetch Dr. Lawson, and he come quick. He got his fever down, but he told him that another hard chill would strike him the day after the next, and sure enough, one did. But I got tickled again that day, too, because Bob wouldn't budge out of the house; he'd just ait and look at the clock like it was goin' to run off someplace.
"I've heard there's good in ever'thing, and I s'pose there was good in him takin' sick. Me or the girls don't start shakin' real good now before he's back with a doctor, and flutterin' around like a chicken with its head cut off. B'lieve me, we made a Christian out of him when he seen how bad a chill was."
She laughed softly, but her expression reverted swiftly to seriousness. "That's the trouble tryin' to live on a river," she said, "'specially a river that's full of backwater. Since the power company built that dam, there's been sickness up and down these banks all the time. But can't anybody lay blame on the power company. They own this land we're livin' on, and they didn't ask us to come down here in the first place.
"I've tried as hard as anybody could to keep my family healthy. I learned from my ma about the things a body should eat, and I try to keep them on the table; but it's not been easy the last few years. We eat a lot of fish, and Bob gets rabbits and squirrels ever' now and then over in the swamp; but people needs to eat some beef and a lot of green things. I tried at first to raise me a garden here, but this land's no good for that.
"When I was a girl growin' up, people didn't ever have to worry about what they would eat and wear. They raised ever'thing at home then, and they even made their own clothes and shoes. I remember how my pa made his own leather. He hated to have to buy anything, and he was pretty well to do when he died. That's the only way to ever have anything--do without and save--but it looks like all we can do is do without."
Bob shifted in his chair, and interrupted her. He said, "I was jes' sayin' not a half hour ago that th' machines has ruint thangs fer a workin' man. They ain't no jobs to be had. I was jes' recallin' while ago 'bout when I's workin' fer Ed Thomas, an' how well we done--"
She spoke quickly, "But we didn't save anything, Bob. We couldn't have saved much, but we could have had a little bit in five years. It scares me to death when I get to thinkin' about what's going to become of us. Here we are gettin' old, and we ain't got one dime to our names."
"What'd we raise children fer?" he demanded, crossing his short legs and clasping his hands over one knee. "We've took care of 'em through thick an' thin--"
She said, "I'll rock in a chair at the po'rhouse before I go to live with one of them." She turned to me. "Wouldn't you feel that way; wouldn't you feel like you was takin' some of their life away from them? I don't want to be like Old Lady Willis. When her gal got married, she moved right in, and she's made it a hell on earth for that young couple. She tries to run the house just like it was her's, bossin' and quarrelin' ev'ry minute of the day. You know how that young man must feel. I'll bet he's sorry he married that girl, no matter how crazy he was about her.
"I just don't want to be livin' all mixed up. When one of my own children gets married, I want her to move right out like Sara done. She got her a nice man that works in the mill at Sylacauga, and they're expectin' a baby. That's why Nora, our other girl, has gone up there. She likes nursin' and things like that, so she's the very one to look after somebody that's pregnant.
"It'd make me the happiest person livin' if I was able to get Nora in a hospital somewhere. She's tried so hard. Why, when we first came down here she walked them three miles to the Springs, where she would get a bus to the Fayetteville school. She was in the eighth grade, and she studied hard for awhile; but one mornin' she said she wasn't goin' back, that she was too big for the other children. I didn't push it on her to change her mind, because she was nearly a grown woman, and I know she felt out of place. One of her teachers come all the way down here to see about why she dropped out, but she's got a mind of her own, and she'd done made it up.
"Nora's the only one of the children who cared much about schoolin'. They can all write and read, and Sara useta be good at figures, but she dropped out of school at the fourth grade. Beatrice won't go a lick. She's a funny sort of girl, timid-like, and I think that's why she don't like to be around people. She's the youngest, and she sorter grew up by herself. I think that makes a child not sociable. Sara and Nora chummed up a good bit, but Bea was left out of it. She's got to where she'd rather be by herself than with anybody.
"I learned to read before I can remember, and I wouldn't take anything for it. I've tried and tried to get Bob to learn how, for I could learn him quick if he'd try. I think it's a sin for a body not to know how. The Lord left Ms Word here for us to read, and it seems like we could at least do that much for Him. If He hadn't meant for it to be read. He'd have give it to us some other way, like over a radio or a phonograph.
"No, sir, we don't read a newspaper. When I go to the Springs, I sometimes go up to Mr. Jackson's and get some of his old ones. But they make me feel bad: they's so much said about murders, and about people robbin' and stealin', and livin' with each other without bein' married. I declare, I don't know what's going to become of us all. We're a pretty bunch to be facin' the Judgment Day, and you know yourself that the Lord must be ashamed of his own. They's wars and talk of wars right this minute, just like the Bible says, and we're all comin' fast to some sort of end.
"Me or Bob's never voted in our lives, but if I did. I'd keep Mr. Roosevelt at the head of our country just as long as I could. It's not his fault that times are so hard. He's got the right idea--givin' the poor people a chance to do something for theirselves; but he won't ever be able to do it. They's too many greedy people in the world. I learned a long time ago that the more money and land a man owns, the more he's going to want, and the more he's going to beat other people out of ever'thing they have. But the Bible says something about them, too. It says they have their reward. That's why I don't hate them, like Bob does. If he'd read the Book, he'd find out that he's luckier than they are."
Bob was shifting in his chair, crossing end uncrossing his legs. At last, he got up and walked to the door, where he stood looking out across the river.
I knew that it was time for him to run his trotline, and that he was a little confused as to how he could excuse himself. I said, "Bob, let's go out and see if you've got that big one. It's about time something hit that frisky minnow on the last hook."
He smiled slowly, and reached for the hat he had tossed on the table. "Can't never tell," he drawled, "They's cats in thar bigger'n I am, an' I could use one of 'em to swap fer a sack of flour."
8/17/39
S.J.
