I GOT MY EDUCATION THE HARD WAY
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall Area 6 - Athens and
John N. Booth, Area Supervisor Federal Writers' Project Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Georgia
June 28, 1939
June 5, 16, 1939 James W. Davis (Negro)
178 West Strong Street
Athens, Georgia
Ex-school teacher
Ex-music teacher (voice, piano and violin)
Bandmaster, orchestra leader Retired mail carrier S.B.H.
I GOT MY EDUCATION THE HARD WAT
Dan Dawson's house was readily located when I asked a Negro woman to direct me to it. She turned on the sidewalk to point out a frame cottage and said: "See that yellow house over there with the hedge 'round the yard? That's his place, and he's apt to be there for he don't have to work." Her tone and facial expression told more than words could express how she regarded the circumstances of one of her race who did not have to labor for his daily bread.
My rap on the door was answered by Dan, himself. "Good morning, Miss," he said. "Come in." The interior of the house is modern in every detail, and the well-chosen furniture demonstrates the result of careful planning and good taste, which is further reflected in the interesting pictures - some of them hand-painted - that hang on the cream-colored walls, The arrangements of nasturtiums and other garden flowers in low bowls and vases could only be achieved by someone who loves flowers and understands the blending of colors. Throughout the house was immaculate cleanness, not of the "touch not, handle not,” variety, but rather of the kind which bespeaks dignity of living and pride of possession.
Dan is a mulatto of medium height and weight, and he has black, almost straight hair. There is an expression of intense awareness in his black eyes that the thick lenses of his spectacles cannot conceal. On this morning he wore a neat gray shirt with his blue woolen trousers, white belt, gray checked socks, and black oxfords.
Just after I arrived his wife came meekly through the dining-room and without a word took a seat in the adjoining living-room. I spoke to her asking her to join us in the reception hall, and she immediately came to sit beside her husband on the love seat. So quietly did she vanish a few moments later that I had not missed her until she returned bearing a goblet of ice water on a silver tray.
”Do have a drink of water!” she said in gentle tones. ”My, but you look so warm! I thought this cool drink would refresh you.” I thanked her, eagerly drank the water, and sot the glass on the tray she had placed on a small table by my chair. She is an octaroon, and she has curly red hair. Her trim figure was clad in a white lace dress.
Dan seemed anxious to give the story of his life, but apparently was uncertain how to start. After several moments of silence, he began: ”Let me tell you about my mother first; of course I called her 'Mama.' She was ninety when she died. Her name was Rosa Dare, and she was a slave in the household of Dr. Frederick Dare. Her sole occupation in that home was that of seamstress - 'sempstress,' they called that trade then. After slavery was abolished she continued to work at the same trade. When she and my father moved into a rented house that stood where the Central of Georgia depot now stands, a row of dwelling houses for colored people extended along there. That’s where I was born in 1871, and we lived there until I was nine years old. Then father bought that two-story house you see across the street from here. My mother was a great admirer of flowers, and when we moved from a rented house into a home of our own, she took great pleasure in beautifying our yard. I couldn’t begin to tell you how many kinds of plants she did set out there.
"The white family who owned my father in slavery time lived in that beautiful old brick house that faces Prince Avenue from the head of Pope Street. Father was trained to be a carpenter and he made a good one. His owner provided him with a very fine set of carpenter’s tools and he did that sort of work until he died at the age of sixty-five. Most of the houses he worked on here have been torn down.
"There were nine of us children, but the only one that did anything worth mentioning was my brother, Caesar, who began as a cook in a local restaurant. The man he worked for had side lines in addition to his eating place. He sold fish, oysters, and ice cream.
Caesar helped him to make the best ice cream that was ever sold in this town, and they made such a reputation for their exceptionally good ice cream that it attracted much trade to the place. Many of the other manufacturers of ice cream were using cornstarch and skimmed milk, but Caesar insisted on pure cream for ice cream. When the man decided to retire he sold his business to Caesar for a mere song. In fact, he almost gave it to him, Caesar did real well with it for a good while and then he sold out and went to Chicago about fifty-five years ago.
"My first recollection of school days is studying the old Blue Back Speller. There's been a good deal of fun poked at that old book, but when you finished with it, you knew something. Soon as I was old enough to work, my time between school hours was spent delivering fish and oysters for Caesar's employer. I always gave what money I received to my mother and she kept it for me, giving me money for Sunday School until I was fourteen. Then I went to work for myself.
"As a very small child I always had to sing and recite in school, Sunday School and church, no matter what sort of entertainment the folks of our race had on hand. At the age of ten I had started taking voice under the Rev. W. D. Johnson, father of the now famous Hall Johnson. A year later he was giving me piano and violin lessons. Rev. Johnson had a great influence on the cultural side of my life. He was a brilliant man, a graduate of Wilberforce College in Ohio. He was an accomplished linguist, and spoke German as fluently as he did his own language. I really would not like to try to accurately recall just how many languages he did know how to speak and write. It was he who used to teach the Jews, that came to Athens to live, how to speak English. Many of the Jews, now known as the first families of Athens, learned to speak English from my music teacher. He came here from Boston, married, and settled here. His wife was a talented and very refined person. She delighted in entertaining her friends in her home by playing the organ end singing spirituals, and hers was an example of gracious living that had its effect on those of our race who came in contact with her. Rev. Johnson's library was valued at $3,000 and it was considered remarkable for a man of our race to own such a collection of books. Although considerably damaged by fire at one time, his library was at the time of his death a remarkable thing.
See that bookcase over there? All the books in it are from Rev. Johnson’s library. My wife got them for me, and when I looked them over and found that every one of them were religious books I asked why she didn’t make a more varied collection. 'Because,' she said.
'I hope some day you’ll become a preacher.' For some reason I never was able to make up my mind to try to preach.
"My employment as organist at the Congregationalist church began when I was fourteen while I was still a student at old Knox Institute. My salary was the princely sum of $1.50 a month, and I served in that capacity for three years.
"At the age of eighteen I entered Atlanta University, where all of my teachers were white ladies. Even the matrons in our dormitories were white ladies. I was working my way through college, and one day the task assigned me was sweeping the laundry under supervision of a matron. She kept watching me so closely that it made me nervous and uneasy. Finally, I said, ’What’s the matter, Miss Black? Am I not doing my work to please you?'
"'Dawson,' she replied, ’you sweep well. I notice you are very thorough. Who taught you to sweep so well?' I told her I had been doing the sweeping for my mother at home. From that time on I seemed to be a favorite with all the matrons and teachers.
"Soon after that someone got the idea I was so pious that arrangements were made for me to prepare for the ministry at Gammon Theological Seminary, in Atlanta, without it costing me anything. The person who took such an interest in me was a white woman, a daughter of the president of the seminary. They did not call the arrangement made for. me a scholarship, but whatever it, was would have enabled me to get a good education free. However, I never could make up my mind to become a preacher, so I got my education the hard hard way. I worked for it.
"At the Atlanta University I managed to make ends meet by teaching voice and instrumental music and by coaching in school subjects. However, I was still considering the offer of a free education at the seminary when my mother’s health failed. About that time I was offered a teaching position in the cloy schools of Athens at $20 a month, so I hurried home to work where I could be near her.
I was delighted to learn that I could add $10 a month to my income by teaching voice and instrumental music after school hours. It was then that I gave Hall Johnson his first violin lessons. I can’t say that I was surprised at his rapid progress, for he had been able to enter third grade in public schools at the age of six.
"Soon I was enabled to add to my earnings by serving as pianist at the Colonial Theater that Mr. Hugh Rowe then operated here. I played there from 1831 to 1396, and during that time I was in regular demand to play for the university dances and in private homes. That $1.50 a night I received playing for dances came in very handy indeed. Certain afternoons after school I devoted to playing for dancing classes. One of the best of the dancing teachers I played for used to come over here from Atlanta to give lessons to some very prominent ladies in Athens. All the ladies that used to dance to my music seem to remember me now. They are married and many of them have moved to various parts of the country. Whenever I happen to be in a city where any of them are living I call them up and they always talk like they are very glad to exchange recollections with me.
"In 1897, when I was bandmaster at Tuskegee Institute, I was supposed to receive $75 a month. However, the most I ever did receive from that job was $15 a month. Booker T. Washington was president of the school and that was the period when it was having its hardest struggle for existence. I stayed on there through the school year, then came back here and opened a studio. Perhaps I was just a little too proud of that studio, for I went too much in debt to furnish it. I'll never forget it. I bought a $450-piano, a brussels carpet at $33.75, and the swinging lamp was $6.50. When time came to go back to college that fall I was so far in debt on my studio equipment and furniture that I had to keep on at work to pay for the things or else I'd have lost them. Then I set out to teaching music in earnest. Right here I'd like to say that among my piano pupils was Juliette Derricotte. 'That gifted woman lectured and worked in many countries in behalf of the Young Womens' Christian Association before her tragic death in an automobile accident. Martin G. Haynes, principal of the city schools for colored people in Savannah, Georgia, was another of my pupils. Throughout the time I was teaching voice and instrumental music I took correspondence courses from the New England Conservatory of Music. My subjects were theory and the technical sciences, and they cost me quite a sum of money.
“I was still working away in my studio and had about as many pupils as I could handle, when the colored man who was postmaster of Athens at the time, asked me why I didn't stand the civil service examination for letter carrier. I thought the matter over and filed my application. I was admitted to the examination and made 85, the highest mark among those standing it at that time. I had received no preparation beforehand.
"I soon received my appointment to report for service at the old post office, where Michaels' store is now, at a salary of $600 per year. A year later I was raised to §820 and worked at that rate for three years. From then on salary increases came more rapidly and for appreciably larger amounts. The fifth year of my service paid me $900, the next $1,000, and then they raised me to $1,200 per year. I worked eight years at $1,500 per year, and nine years at $1,800 per year. The last six years of my active service I was paid at the rate of $2,100 per year, which is the rate now in effect.
"The year they raised us to $900 we began trying to get the government to put a retirement bureau into effect, but it did not begin operation until we were receiving $1,500 a year. At first, to help finance the retirement plan the government deducted 2½ percent of our earnings, but when they raised us to $2,100 per year they began taking out 3½ percent every month. I was glad that my more than thirty-six years of service enabled me to choose the 63-year retirement option without reducing the amount of my pension. Of course, if I had elected to continue on at work until I was 65 on that 3½ percent would have been deducted every month right until I retired. After retirement the government does not deduct anything from the pension. I get $100 every month.
"In the beginning, when we were working for $50 a month, we worked seven days a week and were allowed fifteen days annual vacation. At that time we worked on Sunday delivering mail through the windows at the post office. The present salary of $175 per month, fifteen days vacation, ten days annual sick leave, and the six-day week combine to make the job of letter carrier much more desirable than it used to be.
"People in postal service soon grow accustomed to complaints of all kinds. If they have any basis of truth, these complaints bring down punishment on the offending employee, but many of them come from habitual complainers. They used to pretend they were looking for letters, and when they didn't come they would accuse us of losing them en route to their houses. I tried to be accommodating and courteous to all my patrons and at the time of my retirement I don't believe I'd made a single enemy.
"I have delivered mail from Baxter Street to the city limits north, and from the Coordinate college to the city limits east. It has been estimated pretty accurately from a measure of my postal routes that I have walked more than 228,480 miles to deliver mail. Using the accepted estimate of 25,000 miles as the circumference of the earth at the equator, you will find, if you figure it out, that while on the job, I walked 3,480 miles further than nine times around the earth. I averaged about twenty miles of walking every working day of my service period.
"I was considered the speediest carrier in the local service, and I carried more mail according to my size than any other man in the service. Actually I carried more mail than some of those larger fellows. The average total weight of the two pouches I carried was 75 pounds. Now carriers are not allowed to carry more than 50 pounds. I have carried as much as 65 pounds on one shoulder.
"We reported at the post office every morning at 7:30. Each carrier had his own section of table space, on which rested the frames of pigeon holes where we sorted the mail and placed each piece in its own pigeon hole. In arranging our packs of mail in the pouches, the first mail put in was the last taken out for delivery. There were put 72 pigeon holes to each section, and I got to where I could up from forty-five to fifty pieces of mail in a minute.
"The ’unknown' table was the place where mail was put when the clerks did not find the address among the lists of names on the carriers' routes. If a carrier happened to get a letter addressed to a name not known by him, he would write the number of his route on it and circle the number with red pencil. If his route was no. 4, that meant the piece of mail was not for route no. 4. Then he would throw it on the ’unknown' table. When the carriers had filled their packs and were ready to start, the postmaster would have us line up and would call the names of all the ’unknown' mail. As a rule, by the time he finished, ’most all of it was claimed by one carrier or another. It’s surprising how careless the average person is in addressing mail to people who live on routes. If a person lives on route no. 3, his mail is mighty apt to come in addressed to route no. 2 or route no. 5. A complete description of the ways people find to misdirect mail would fill a great big book, or perhaps a set of big books. Then addresses of 'unknown' mail had been read out, then we turned the key in the time clock and started out without a minute of delay.
"Many's the dog that's chased me, and all too many of them succeeded in biting me. I had my share of odd happenings and minor accidents, most of which were due to freaks of weather, or just plain disagreeable weather.
"As a rule, people were awfully kind to me on my route. They used to offer me sandwiches and iced drinks in summer, and in winter they would have hot drinks ready and invite me to come in and warm by their fires as I drank them. However, there was one time when a snowstorm caught me on Chase Street and, strange to say, not a person invited me in for a hot drink or to get warm. By the time I got back to the post office my hands were so cold it took both of them to turn the key in Old Bundy, the time clock. Now they simply pull down a lever to register on the very much improved type of time clock they are using at the post office.
"The government regulations were very severe, and we had to keep going regardless of weather conditions. No matter what happened, the mail must not be delayed. Postal regulations forbad us to extend if any special favors to patrons, but we had followed all those rigid rules to the letter we wouldn’t have had a friend. However, we knew better than to do anything actually detrimental to the good name of the postal department. But we did extend courtesies that the rules could have been interpreted to forbid. For instance, if old persons sitting on porches asked us to cross the street out of turn to deliver letters they just couldn’t wait for us to loop the block to receive, we didn't have the heart to turn them down, but if some young person grew impatient we wouldn't have considered breaking a rule to accommodate her or him.
"In the beginning we were permitted to carry stamps for the convenience of the patrons on our routes, but it was necessary to stop that. All too often someone would ask for one stamp, and then after we had gotten it out and stamped the letter in their presence, nine times out of ten that person would hand us a one-dollar or a five dollar bill to make change. We weren’t permitted to carry government money, and to have kept sufficient change for the patrons who wanted to break greenbacks of large denominations would have meant quite a load of money. To accommodate them and not delay mailing the letter we would take it along and stop the next trip for the postage.
It was all too easy for them to forget to pay the postage after the letter was mailed. Another difficulty that gave every letter carrier more or less trouble was the delivery of registered, special delivery, or any kind of mail that had to be signed for. If the patron was a contrary person, they would take their own good time to answer the door and sign for their mail, and of course that would retard our speed. We letter carriers made a particular point of accommodating the people on our routes so long as they did not delay us, but we could not afford to be late, as mail carriers work on a very strict schedule, and I can truthfully say that I did keep right in line with the hours mapped out for me to the very minute.
"Christmas mail was always heavy. When there was undelivered mail in the office after our hours had been worked, a supply carrier was sent out with it. Everybody’s mail was promptly delivered. My patrons were very thoughtful of me at Christmas. Why, sometimes I received so many gifts that I had to hire a dray to take them home for me. This mail carrier couldn’t even stagger under the load of his own gifts some years at Christmas, and they not only remembered me but sent gifts to my wife and children, and oftentimes a nice amount of currency was received along with the other presents.
"No, we had no slogan or creed among the mail carriers and other postal employees here when I was in the service. We just did the best we could to keep our end of the work up to the high level of efficiency requested by the several federal and local administrations that came and went.
"Probably the most frequent cause of dismissal of carriers during my time on the force, was 'calling the postmaster's hand.' I remember a case where the postmaster got mad when a carrier carried his point by calling his chief's hand. That, postmaster called in an inspector; they drew up the papers, and had the carrier dismissed from the service. The carrier knew he was absolutely right on the point, so he wrote to the Postmaster-General at Washington and gave him all the facts in the case. This story had never reached Washington, so they sent a special inspector down here to make an investigation. He reinstated the carrier, fired the local inspector and made the postmaster pay the carrier out of his own pocket for all the salary he had lost since dismissal, and it was several months pay. Another carrier was dismissed from the service for a complaint that had gone directly to Washington and his dismissal originated there. There was no way to get that man reinstated.
"The National Association of Letter Carriers is for both white and colored men. The organization meets once a year wherever we vote to hold the convention. The colored carriers have an organization called the National Alliance of Postal Employees, however, we have no restrictions to prevent the white carriers from joining if they so desire. The object of this is to further the best interest of the postal service. This last mentioned organization holds its meetings biennially, that is, every other year. I never have attended one of these meetings.
"While the carrier has the option of retiring at 63 or serving two more years at full salary before retiring on pension, you can still get your time extended for three years of service after you have reached the 65-year retirement age, if you can pass a stiff physical examination they give you. Even after you have passed that examination your service is apt to be under severe scrutiny, and the government is privileged to discharge you for the least failure to maintain your required efficiency, whether it be from the effects of age, health, or other causes. What I mean is, that you are watched closer in those three extra years probably than in the earlier years of your service.
"We have certain rules and regulations that govern what we can divulge of government affairs, and I therefore hope I haven't been so unwise as to carelessly expose anything that would be detrimental to government policies, as such has not been my intention. Any error I might make will not be a malicious one. I thoroughly enjoyed my work while in the service, but when I reached the age of 63, I was glad to retire and ready to rest. When I retired, I weighed 132 pounds; now I weigh 142 pounds, so you can see my four years of rest have done me good.
"What I regret most is that when I pass on my pension stops. and my wife won't get a penny of it. We carriers have been working for the last ten years trying to get the government to make some provision whereby our widows will be taken care of after we are gone. We would be glad if only fifty percent of what is paid us would be given to them.
"I served under eight presidents, six local postmasters, and a number of Postmaster-Generals in the 36 years, 8 months, and 4 days of my service, and in all that time I had a perfect record. When I took up the 63-year retirement option, Postmaster-General Parley wrote me a letter complimenting me on my 'wonderful record,' as he expressed it.
"Politics? I don't commit myself on political questions much. Postal employees are taught from the time they enter the service until they leave it not to become involved in political issues. Anyway, you know we colored people are practically excluded from the business and procedure of politics down here in the South. We do vote in the general election and for bonds for things like street improvements and waterworks, but it's mighty little good we ever get out of those bonds when time comes to spend the money. Civic improvement in the colored sections gets the minimum of attention and expenditure except where they are located very near some well-to-do white community. The city wanted to put that incinerator on the corner here, but we got up a petition and carried it before the judge and got it temporarily knocked in the head. Its quite near the homes of influential white people. No one knows how the courts will finally settle the question of a location for the incinerator. See that church on the other corner? Well, ever since it was built about twenty years ago, almost impassable mudholes would form in the street before it. Time and time again we have gone before the mayor and the city council requesting that something be done about it, and each time the matter has been tabled. After my wife’s sister began cooking for a white woman whose husband is councilman, the street light on the corner by our church was out, and our requests for its replacement were being ignored with about the same degree of regularity as those about the mudholes. My sister-in-law’s influence through her councilman employer managed finally to get the light replaced.
"If the civic organizations among the white people would cooperate with our colored civic clubs, there are some forty-five or fifty colored men of means who would contribute liberally of their substance for the betterment of Athens, regardless of the distinctions now being made between white and colored people. We love our home town and want a part in its up building, and we are not only willing, but anxious to do our part.
"You have doubtless heard that Athens has had two colored postmasters and two colored representatives in the State Assembly.
Matt Davis was one of those representatives and he served as the first colored postmaster of Athens, but let it be well understood that the people of our race did not like Davis because he threw all his influence to the benefit of the white people. He went to them for counsel and advice and did not serve his own race. Because it was just after emancipation, his favoritism was all the more noticeable.
My own personal belief is that he showed rare good Judgment, because he knew the local white men were his real friends, but the most of the other colored people were so confused at that time that they didn’t know, or didn't want to believe, that their former owners were still their friends.
"At the time of my retirement, my ambition was to organize and further the interests of the Mens’ Civic Club. The object of our club is to awaken civic interest and to further the interests of the community, as well as to improve the moral status of those who need better influences. There are two classes of colored people, one with high ideals and aspirations and the determination to live up to them, and the other that lacks these qualities. The second class mentioned is the one that provides the majority of our problems, and so the work of our club is to improve this lower class and train them in ideals of better citizenship. Among our other activities has been the organizing of a Boy Scout group that now has twenty-six boys enrolled, all in uniform. Our club pays at lease three-fourths of the costs of these uniforms and the other expenses of the Boy Scouts. We were instrumental in securing the new annex to the General Hospital, however, we had to work like everything to get it.
"In April of 1935 I addressed the missionary society of the Methodist Church - the white people's church - and I talked on living conditions among the Negroes right here in Athens. The result was the gift of $25 from this society, which was divided between four elementary schools to be used as part payment on book rentals for children who were not able, to pay the rental fees. In addition to our other activities our club has sponsored several forums conducted by prominent colored educators.
"We also sponsored the Etta Morton concert and the performance of the Lincoln Glee Club. Etta Morton sang at Ebenezer Baptist Church, and I would estimate that not less than two hundred white people attended her concert. The director of music at the University of Georgia was there and was accompanied by a good many of his pupils.
"Our sixty-five, or more, members do not confine their activities entirely to Athens. We make annual donations to the Home for Wayward Girls at Macon, to the Red Cross, and for prizes to stimulate ambition and manliness in colored students. We quickly responded to the call for help at the time of the Gainesville tornado, and sent cash, as well as food and clothing for the relief of sufferers.
"As a representative of our club I negotiated for the purchase of the two lots used by the city board of education to build the school for colored children on rest Broad Street. The deal for one of those lots was closed in one day and the other took me ten days. I was proud that I had succeeded where the others had failed, for it had been thought that no one would be able to talk the owners into giving up those lots and my predecessors had met with no success.
"I was president of this club until I was forced to give up the active duties of the office because of ill health. Now I am president emeritus. There never was a salary attached to the office; it was strictly honorary, After my health failed I went to visit my daughter in Bluefield, West Virginia, for several months. The doctor thought the mountain air would be beneficial to me and it was.
"And you say I’ve left out mention of my marriage. Well, it does seem like we’ve been married a right long time. We knew each other from childhood. She was a graduate of Atlanta University and used to teach in the city school system and in Knox Institute. She taught Hall Johnson in the fifth grade, end he was my official messenger boy to carry notes to her before we married. Hall has told me since then that the dime I paid him for each time he carried a note was the first money he ever earned." A shy smile spread over the sensitive features of the narrator's wife as she said: "I was always so glad to see Hall coming, for almost always he brought me a note from my fiance - now my husband." Soon after she had made this remark, she quietly slipped out of the room. Her husband continued his story.
"My wife was the youngest daughter of a well known barber and musician of this city. Let’s pass over the years of our courtship and come to our marriage in April of 1900. There were as many people outside Hill’s Chapel as there were on the inside when Hall Johnson’s father performed the ceremony for us. Our attendants were all students from Atlanta University. We received some beautiful gifts and quite a few of them were from our white friends, chiefly from the ones who had enjoyed our music, - the music of her father had been popular with white people long before I learned to play.
"Groceries were much cheaper at that time than they are now. A few years before then, while I was at the Atlanta University.
I had to stop taking music lessons for awhile after sticking a chisel in my hand, and in that time I did some of the marketing. You could get a 25-pound sack of flour for 50¢, butter for 10¢ a pound, and eggs at 5¢ a dozen, and those large magnolia hams that were so delicious were $1.25 each.
"Soon after we started keeping house my wife told me to buy a 25-pound sack of flour, and when I asked the grocer the price, he told me 65¢. 'Oh, but aren't you mistaken?' I asked him, 'When did flour go up?' He laughed at me as he replied, 'Why, Dawson, are you the last to hear that flour has gone sky-high,' I'll never forget that, I surely did feel important. Head of the house, discussing prices of commodities, trends of the times, and all that. A bachelor can never achieve that feeling, and the married man has the most pride in it the first few times he visits the stores to buy food after he is married.
"We had seven children, but only five survived infancy.
Four girls and one boy are still living. Three of our children have graduated from Fiske University, and one has a degree from the State Normal School at Elizabeth City, North Carolina. After graduating there she went to Hampton University, specializing in physical education and now she has a degree in that. Our fifth child graduated from a college at Dunn, North Carolina, and has been teaching in that same school The two of our children who have been teaching in the schools of North Carolina have been paid $85 a month. The one who taught in West Virginia was paid $200 a month, Quite a lot of difference, isn't there? That was in a rich mining section of West Virginia where the people didn't mind paying enough to get just what they wanted, and they wanted the best. This last mentioned child of ours married a professor of history who teaches in the State College at Bluefield, West Virginia, that and he draws a salary of $250 per month. Our daughter now lives in Texas taught school there until she married the principal of the schools at Eagle Pass, Texas. She got tired of sitting around when she quit teaching after she married, and now she is librarian of the college at that place.
"Our only son is in Washington, D.C., as editor of a magazine called 'The National Educational Outlook Among Negroes.' Two of our daughters are living here now. One of them has married and has one son, who is graduating today from the seventh grade at Knox Institute.
"Each of our children entered gainful employment after graduation from college. One of our four grandchildren lives here and the other three are in West Virginia. Speaking of that part of our family in West Virginia, I might mention that my son-in-law there has written a history that has been well received. It has received excellent reviews and other publicity, and you can find a copy of it over at the university library. His wife, - that's my daughter - and their children are coming the first of next week to spend the summer with us.
"While I carried the mail I continued to utilize my spare time teaching music to help pay for my children’s education. I also paid off the mortgage on my mother's home and gave it to her to live in the rest of her life time, and I helped to provide for her and my unmarried sister. I bought the house next door to this one from the Julius Carver estate and gave it to my wife.” He grinned as he added, "She paid me a dollar to make the transaction legal.
"It was a good many years afterwards that I bought the lot and built this house on it. We have six rooms arranged to give us three bedrooms, living-room, dining-room, and kitchen. Of course the nice, big pantry and the screened in back porch don't count as rooms, but they are mighty handy to have. We can convert the screened porch into another bedroom by putting up a cot. We have a nice, modern bathroom, and two very convenient halls. In this southern climate we did not feel that we needed furnace heat, and anyway that big circulating heater you see before you holds a quarter of a ton of coal, and in winter it heats the whole house very comfortably.
"While the children's school expenses were so heavy, my in wife took sewing to help out. You can judge the quality of her work by the prices people paid her. She got $8 for a silk dress, and the best white people in town were among her regular customers. They never seemed to mind paying what she asked. She also served as supply teacher in the city school system. When I retired, she retired too. Now we are enjoying the blessings of life together with nothing to worry about. I am happy to say we don't have to call on our children for financial aid. However, all of them are kind and considerate of us on all occasions.
They show their appreciation of what we have done for them by showering us with handsome gifts, especially to their mother.
"My only trouble now is my poor health. I have to take life easy or else I'm apt to be back in bed again. Having been accustomed to a very active life, it is quite trying to me to be forced to remain in active. At one time I scrupulously followed the rigid diet prescribed for me and almost starved, so I decided to put that aside and eat according to my own judgment. I am very careful to eat food containing what I believe is the correct amount of calories and vitamins. My wife and I have always been careful of the diet of our family and I think that accounts for the good health and strong constitutions of our children, as well as our own condition, for she and I both enjoy an average of better health than is customary for people of our age.
"My occupation as mail carrier kept me out of doors, and I think the walking was beneficial, although perhaps I did overdo it with those heavy pouches of mail to carry. They promised the carriers first aid kits, but they never had distributed them when I retired. However, we seldom had use for them unless a dog bit us.
"If I could, I'd take the old days for mine now. True, salaries were low, but everything we had to buy was cheap in accordance with what we earned, and then too, there just wasn't so many different things to compel us to spend our money. Standards of living were different and gave a better chance for a poor man to save his money. Since the World War there hasn't been much contentment, for everyone seems to be trying to get ahead of the other fellow. It's not so much trying to 'keep up with the Joneses,' as trying to 'pass the Joneses.' The same unrest and economic problems that first came to our attention during the World War exist today. I think these conditions are the result of the continued wars in Europe and other parts of the world.
"It is said that America’s population will be fewer in 1949 than it is now. One cause of this - perhaps its major cause - will be the spread of birth control propaganda. I believe in it myself to a very limited extent. I think there should be a law against people with impaired health having any children at all, and I think the number of children in a family should correspond with the ability of the parents to provide proper care and education for each child. Many couples are not able to care for more than two, I will not say that there is anyone who shouldn’t be allowed to marry, because that is a law of God and Nature and people can be sappier in married life than in the single state.
"I’ve been a member of the Methodist church for 16 years, and for the past 10 years I’ve served as superintendent of our Sunday School. We have an enrollment of sixty-five. They often urge me to teach a Sunday School class, but my health won’t permit it. I was converted at the age of nineteen, while I was attending the Atlanta University, and came on back home to join my own church. While much pressure was brought to bear on me at different times from various sources to enter the ministry, I have always felt that I could do better service as a layman than as a preacher, because I am too positive with my people. I am sorry though that I had to disappoint my wife by not becoming a preacher, for it was her ambition for me to preach. I do wish I were a better Christian.
"The Lord has been mighty good to me, and I thank him every day for my success, even though I didn't reach the success I strove to attain.
"Since I am free to come and go, I haven't done traveling like I thought I'd do after I retired. My good friend, Hall Johnson, that I've mentioned several times before, keeps on writing me to come out to Pasadena, California, and visit him, and I really think I'll give him a surprise by going. I want to see him working in those moving pictures end hear his choir sing again. I've asked him repeatedly to visit me here in his old home town, but he spends what little leisure time he has visiting his relatives in Chicago and New York. It was right here in Athens he learned the tunes of all those oldest spirituals he has built up and brought back to popularity. Those good old spirituals came from the heart, and they have never been excelled. One fine thing about 'em is the way they use minor keys to express pathos. The newer sacred songs are more of the jolly type. Hall writes songs and composes music for them now, but his best work has been in reviving the old spirituals.
"When his mother died about twenty years ago Hall came from New York to attend her funeral here. A few years later he came to his grandmother's funeral, but he has not been here since."
Sometime before this Dan's wife had slipped out of the room and at this time she returned. "Dan, it's after eleven," she timidly announced, "and if the lady will excuse you you'd better go change your clothes." Addressing me, she continued, "Our daughter is coming in her car at eleven-thirty to take us to see our grandson graduate."
"That's right, Miss Mary, I'd forgotten," he said, and turning to me he excused himself, remarking, "If you find my experiences of any value and desire further information just call on me and I'll gladly help you as much as I can."
When her husband had hurried into another room, Mary timidly ventured, ”Miss, wouldn’t you like to see our flower yard?" When I assured her I would be delighted to do so, she smiled and told me, "I picked some nasturtiums and poppies for you after I saw your admiring glances at those in the vases, for I just knew you liked flowers. Just lay your notebook on the divan and come on with me through the house. It’s nearer.” I followed her into the back yard. The center of attraction was a pool where gold fish could be seen swimming lazily under the lily pads. Radiating from the pool, the flower beds were a blaze of color. Countless varieties of spring flowers were in full bloom. She took a baking powder can from the fork of a slender tree that was laden with ripe red cherries and as she called to the gold fish, began sprinkling food on the water. Soon fish of many sizes were eagerly gulping their repast. ”I call this pool a make-shift, for I made it myself,” she said. ”I had the hole dug, then did the rest of the work myself. The worst part of it all is that I have to clean it out once a week.
”You see I’m president of our garden club. Quite a few of the colored women here are active in this organization. Wow the vegetable garden is my husband’s pride and joy, so I don’t ask for that space for flowers. Dan is so good to me,” she confided. ”I often tell him I hope the good Lord won’t take him first, for I don’t know how I could keep on living without him. He has always treated me just like I was one of the children. He has been husband and father too. When I tell him I want to go first, he says, ’Well, maybe the Lord will be kind to us and let us go together. ’
"Now, I suspect we had better go back to the house, for my daughter will be here any minute,” she said. We retraced our steps, and as I passed the divan I picked up my notebook and was about to tell her good-bye when she called to her husband. "Dan is it all right for us to come in your room now? I want to show the lady the table radio our daughter gave us for Christmas."
"Yes, my dear," was the response, "I'm ready and the room is in order." The door was standing open and Dan was sitting in a rocking chair as he read the morning paper. He put the paper down and strode over to the radio. He was evidently as proud of it as was his wife, for he said, "I told my wife the girl used her head when she gave her this little radio set. Before then, we had to go out in the living-room to the big cabinet set whenever we wanted to hear a program, and if either one of us had company it would seem rude for the other to turn on the radio. This little set comes in mighty handy for us, and if we want different programs at the same time, why one listens in the living-room and the other uses this set." They looked at each other and giggled like children.
I saw their anxious glances at the clock on the mantel end realized I should be going. Mary left the room as, I spoke of leaving, and joined us in the hall, with a dainty bouquet of flowers in one hand and a cluster of luscious red cherries in the other. "I thought you'd like some of these," she said as she gave them to me. "I'm so proud of my cherry tree. We had the most delicious cherry pie yesterday." I was thanking her for the gifts as we walked through the little vestibule at the front of the house. "My mother never did like this little entrance place," Mary volunteered. "She used to ask me, 'Why don't Dan finish, up the house or leave that little cubby-hole off? It's the best place in the world for a burglar to hide and knock you in the head when you come out.' I just laughed at her and told her we liked the vestibule and had planned it just this way, and that besides I was sure no one ever thought of harming us."
I told them good-bye, and as I walked away I heard Dan say, "It's almost twelve o'clock. Time for them to be coming after us if we are to enjoy all of the graduating exercises."
