Professor Tom Terrill, of the University of South Carolina at Columbia, has located another version of "The Pumper" in the WPA Papers, in the Oklahoma Historical Society, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. That version is dated August 22, 1939, and the interviewer is identified as Ned DeWitt.
THE PUMPER
"A pumper's main job is to keep things clean. He's got to keep the stuffing boxes on the wells packed so's they won't run dry and wear out; the engines have got to be wiped off all the time so dirt won't git in 'em; and if oil gits on the rig floor the pumper's got to clean it off. He'd gotta keep the well flowing whatever it's supposed to make, too, and jist generally keep things up to snuff.
"There really ain't much to it, when you bile it right down. Things now's practically fool-proof; a man caint make a mistake if he tried. You see that derrick over there? You couldn't git it up wrong to save your life --- and ever' thing else's the same way. The companies can take a green hand, a boy outa college or an old man that they want a put on a kind of pension, and they can put him out here tending to a gas engine and he can make a go of it, too. He couldn't do nothing to make it run wrong; and if something happens to the engine, all he's gotta do is call in the company office and they'll send an engine repairman out to fix it.
"Stuff's perfect nowadays; but it didn't use to be, by a long sight. When I done my first pumping I had to know everything, how to do it, from fixing up a gas engine to helpin' 'em at the well. 'Nother thing, when I started a man had to know ever' thing 'bout his job, 'for he got it! I mean, he had to be a first-class hand 'fore the companies 'd ever think about puttin' him on. The only way I got my first job was cause I was a pretty good kid, and old Bill Doty, a friend of mine I'd been stayin' with, helped me git on. I went out with him for a month or two, and finally he put me on. But damned if a man could git somebody like a driller or anybody like that ---'specially if they was from Pennsylvania, or a "snake" from West Virginia --- to help him. They jist wouldn't do it; 'fraid maybe they'd help somebody learn how, and the fellow 'd take their place.
"I got my first oil-field job at Lima, Ohio, in 1898. I was 18 years old. They paid me $65 a month. I had to keep the derricks clean and the engines, and help 'em pull the wells --- the tubing and casing and all --- and do a little roustabouting along with pumping. I had to put in twelve hours a day, too, but they only put in eight now. The pay's a lot better now, too; most of the pumpers git around $140 a month. A few companies pay $5 a month more than the rest, but the men's got to do more'n $5 worth of work to make it up to 'em.
"I roustabouted and pumped, together, a while, and then I got a job pumping, three years straight. In 1902 I went to Casey, Illinois, and went to work for the Ohio Oil Company, at $60 a month but they give us all a raise to $66 a month 'fore long. All the wells tip in there was about 550 to 560 feet, not very deep, but they put out oil that was 28 degrees gravity --- darned good oil. I did straight pumping work up there; tending to the engines, oilin' them, and so on. I hadda take care of the Lufton double-plate power unit; that was my biggest job.
"That Lufton was the power for 52 wells; it pulled the rod-lines on the wells. We had a 25-horsepower Superior engine to keep it going; there was a shaft with two cranks on it, one on each end, but opposite each other. These cranks had arms on them that was connected with the two big plates ---jist regular-looking plate kind of things --- which had twenty-six holes in each one. When the cranks turned over, they pulled the plates half-way round; when they went over again, they turned the plates back again, half-way. There was a rod in each of the twenty-six holes in the plates, connected with the sucker rods in the wells.
"The wells being shallow, the Lufton could pull 52 wells easy. They still use the same kind of thing, just a little bit different, today, right here in this field and lots of places in Oklahoma. There was twenty-six 25-barrel tanks there for the oil to go in; nowadays they use tanks holding from 1,600 to 2,000 barrels. But 250 barrels was standard then.
"My main job up there was tending to that Lufton double-plate. I got the hell mashed outa my finger up there one time, too. I was chunking some coal into the boiler one day; I got a big chunk, bigger'n my head almost, and started to heave it in the boiler. But I slipped or sumthin, and got my finger in between the coal and the concrete floor under the belt on the Lufton. I'd of got caught in that belt, it'd of tore me in little pieces. All I got out of it was my finger mashed; the forefinger on my left hand, here.
"We didn't have compensation or workers' insurance in those days. All we had to do was throw a rag 'round it, mebbe daub it with some medicine if we had any at home, and go on back to work. Had to pay our own doctor's bills, too. A man got hurt it was his own tough luck, so I was always careful. Had to be; didn't have the money to be gitting hurt anytime.
"'Nother time I was tightening a nut on the Lufton shaft, the one with the cranks on it. I was using a big S-wrench; it come off the nut and jist smashed the living Jesus outa my thumb. I tore me off a piece of shirt and wropped it up, and doctored it that night when I got home. Four-five days later it got to hurtin' pretty bad, so I went on in to town and got me a doctor to fix it up. He was an old Army doc; tougher'n a 20-penny nail. He didn't do nuthin' but take his scissors and cut off all that there proud flesh, not givin' me a thing to help the pain! I told him I oughta knock him down, but I didn't. He was a good doctor, but he'd jist been in the Army too long.
"That's about all that ever happened to me, accidents, I never did git a bone in my body broke. I jist played it careful, so it wouldn't be nuthin' outa my pocket.
"Well, I quit Illinois and went back to Ohio for three months, and then back to Casey, Illinois, again. I dressed tools there; that was in the spring of 1905, and I worked for old Bill Cribbs and his boy. The oil was down at 'bout 554 feet, pretty regular, and when it was drilled-in that well would flow like a mountain spring; clean up over the casing and on out. Pure Oil Company owned 'most all the stuff 'round there.
"When I quit Bill Cribbs I went to work roustabouting for three months, and then I went out on a big lease, on a fellow's farm and worked there four years, from 1905 to 1909. I went over the fence from Ohio, and got a job pumping; then I went to Bridgeport, Illinois, as pumper for L.E. Lawnce and Company, and worked for them 'bout three months. In November 1909 I come down to Bartlesville, Oklahoma, and pumped 'round there for a while.
"The Kiefer boom had already come and gone, so after I'd been round Bartlesville a while I went on down to Ochelata, Oklahoma, and worked for the W.M. Beasley Company for three months. I come back to Bartlesville for the National Oil and Development Company, and then went down to Osage Junction for Barnsdall, and stayed with them two years. I knowed how to handle wells all right, so I could of stayed on with any of them companies if I'd wanted to. I'd had enough experience that I knowed what I was doing when I went out on a job.
"I worked for Foster and Davis one year at Osage Junction, and then I come on down to Oilton, Oklahoma, and went to work roustabouting for B.B. Jones. I worked at that for 'bout three months, and then they give me a job of pipeline gauging. I worked two years for them, and when they sold out to Prairie Oil and Gas Company I worked for Prairie a year as pipeline gauger.
"That job I had to know how much oil was comin' in the storage tanks and how much was comin' out. I hadda make a report on each tank, on the number of every seal on each tank, and how much oil went in or come out, and then git the pumper to sign it. I had a 'thief' to tell how much B.S. was in the tank, and how much oil and water, too. (B.S. is bottom sediment, but there's another name for it we got out in the fields.) This thief was a square box of a thing with glass in one side so the gauger could look in. I'd let it down on a little chain, to the bottom of the tank I was gauging and there was a sliding door on the bottom of the thief that I had a cord 'bout the size of a good stout fishing line tied on. I'd trip this door thing with the cord, and the thief'd fill up with whatever was on the bottom of the tank.
"The lead-in pipes, the ones that brought the oil into the tanks, was usually 'bout a foot and two inches up from the tank bottom. Say I'd get eight inches of B.S. and water in my thief; I'd subtract that eight inches from fourteen inches and git six inches of good oil between the B.S. and the lead-in pipe.
"They still use thiefs today, but they're different from the square kind I used. But they all work on the same gineral idea. They got to find out how much crap there is on the bottom of the tanks.
"I got $90 a month and everything when I was pipeline gauger for Prairie, I mean, I got $90 and a horse to ride. You see the wells was so far apart, the tanks and wells, and the roads was so rough and muddy most of the time that I couldn't have used a car if there'd been many up in that country, which they wasn't.
"I quit Prairie in 1915 and come down to Shamrock, Oklahoma, for Black, Kinney & Gatrell. I worked for them a year as farm boss at $160 a month. I had charge of all their work on the leases. When they sold out to Barron and Rubin I went with that company as farm boss, and then I come down to Kiefer in 1918 as farm boss for the Lincoln; Oil & Gas Company. I got $160 a month and everything with Lincoln; my house and a horse or car and lights and gas and things like that.
"I left Lincoln for Texas Coal & Producing at Bristow, for six months; and then to Seminole for a year and two months for Atlantic Oil & Producing Company; both places I was pumping. I'd gone back to that because I knowed it better. I went from Seminole to Bay City, a little boom town east of Seminole, for Slick Oil Company --- the feller that got kidnapped a couple of years ago --- and when he sold out to Praire I went to work for them as pumper. I stayed a year with them.
"I worked for Slick at Chandler, Oklahoma, for a year and about four months, and then I come to Oklahoma City in 1930. I got me a house out on Southeast 29th Street, and got odd jobs around in the field. I didn't do much pumping or roustabouting but I did git in some construction work. The last job I had with an oil company was just about four years ago this month; I did some roustabouting for Mattison & Wallack, for six months. When I got laid off that job I told myself I wasn't going to hit another lick for oil companies.
"And I haven't either. I've been 'round home most of the four years since, doing whatever I can find to do. I'm a carpenter by trade; I learned it from Charles Rigdon, a bachelor uncle of mine. I helped him work when I was just a shaver, and got to be pretty good at it. I still git in a few days ever' now and then carpentering, 'bout enough to buy some beans and garden seed. There's just me and the wife, so we don't need a whole lot to live on.
"I kinda wish sometimes I had me some kids of my own. I like kids fine, but somehow we jist never did happen to have any. Mebbe it's me, or mebbe it's the old lady; I don't know for sure which. But I like to fool 'round with kids. I don't believe in whipping 'em ever' time they do sumthin they hadn't oughta. The feller that lives crost the road and down a ways from me has got seven kids, all boys. Ever' now and then they git into sumthin they oughta'n to, but I don't say nuthin' 'cept mebbe they oughta quit that particular thing.
"I was a kid I got whupped ever' day, whether the sun come up or not; they'd whup seven devils in me and ary one out. That's 'bout the way it is with most kids, too. You treat 'em mean, whup 'em and all, when they're young, and you've got a handful when they're growin' up. You jist read the statistics 'bout whose in jail. Most of 'em's kids between sixteen and twenty-five, ain't it? Well, I always say it's because they wasn't treated right when they was kids.
"The oil companies, now; they've seen what was happening, and they've tried to do sumthin' Ibout it. You notice how they put on a bunch of kids during the summer time? They don't do it 'cause they jist happened to git the idee they could git by cheaper, or anything like that; they know that if they give them kids a job while they ain't got nuthin to do, they won't be so liable to git in the pen when they're a year or two older.
"That's one reason, the kids, that I'm not in the oil fields right now working. It's kind of a young feller's business anyhow; the old ones oughta git out when they git a certain age and give the young ones a chance. If the old man ain't got enough saved up, then it's his own fault.
"And the Guvmint oughta help him keep alive anyhow. He made the money for the Guvmint; he oughta git some of it back when he gits too old to work.
