June 23, 1939
Elizabeth Callicutt, (white) Huntersville, N. C.
Mill Worker
Mary P. Wilson, writer
Stage-Straneh
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Nibbie	Libba
Annette	Lucille
Thomasville	Hiltonville
Mahlon	Harvey
They were having late supper and apologized for it, saying that it took so long to get cleaned up after coming from the mill they didn't try to eat early.
Libba was anxious to give me the family's life story but Lucille whom Libba called a "sourpuss", said there wasn't anything to tell except that her grandpa on her mother's side came from Scotland.
"Lord", said Libba, "that isn't the half of it--Daddy is half German and half Indian. His mother only died last year and she was eighty-three years old and was cutting her third set of teeth when she died. She was as spry as any of us the week before she died. She lived here with us and I'll say we miss her helping hand.
"I just got back from New York. I spent five months up there visiting a girl who used to live here. I love the big city and you can bet your life I had a grand time after I got used to it.
"I dated a man who took me to see a lot of the sights, including the World's Fair. The most beautiful thing I saw at the fair was the trylon and the perisphere. I saw so much I couldn't begin to tell it all but I can't forget about it.
"The first time I saw the Statue of Liberty I had the most holy feeling I ever felt in my life. I also went to Chinatown, the Museum of Natural History, and the Aquarium. There were a lot of different kinds of fish, seals, and snapping turtles at the Aquarium. When I looked at New York from the top of the Empire State Building I thought it looked just like a painted picture.
"I couldn't sleep or eat when I found out I was to see some of the movie stars. I didn't miss a chance. I saw Dorothy Lamour, Eleanor Powell, Judy Garland, Lanny Ross, Shirley Ross, Billy Gilbert, Hal Leroy, Henry Bussy and Mischa Auer. If I had known where to go and who to see I would have tried to learn to be an actress. I can't get over it. I want to be one so much I'd be willing to sacrifice anything to get on the stage or screen either one. Perhaps it's only a fever and I'll get over it but it's sure got me down now.
"I went to see Major Bowes about singing over the radio. He gave me an audition but I have to wait until July to broadcast because there are so many ahead of me. I sang "Masquerade Is Over". I expect to go back in July if Mama and Daddy don't throw a fit and make me stay at home.
" I quit school when I was in the ninth grade--I just could not get along with my teachers. Daddy says I've got too much temper hut Mama says I'm just wild and trying to be the black sheep of the family. I'm not, though I want all I can get out of life. I live every day for itself. We've got a car but I'm not allowed to drive it. I guess they think I'm too reckless. Lucille drives it anytime she gets ready but she's a home body. She doesn't believe in having fun like I do. She's only twenty-two and she's already got gray hairs from taking life too serious.
"I guess you know about my brother's baby swallowing a safety pin last summer don't you? They live in Hiltonville. Their little girl was only six months old when it happened. She had to have an operation and it almost killed the little thing. The doctor that performed the operation he sure got a lot of publicity for saving her life.
"There are seven children in our family. Mama and Daddy wouldn't care if they had seven more. They say children aren't near so selfish when there's a big family and they think more of each other. Mama's hair is snow white but she's still young enough to have more children. The baby won't be old enough to go to school for a couple of years yet. He's the only one that's spoilt around thishouse. All of us are home except Harvey. He's the one who lives in Hiltonville. Yes, they're all here, but nobody works but Daddy and Lucille and me.
"Daddy is the night overseer at the mill. He's had to go to the hospital with his leg that he got caught in the card and broken. He's just getting over it good now. He had to walk on crutches for a long time. Lucille and I work in the winding room. We can't make anything since they cut our wages down to twenty-five cents an hour. We never get to work full time any more.
"I hate the mill and everything connected with it. Lord, I don't know whether hate is a strong enough word for it or not. The older I get the more I hate it. How do you think it makes me feel to know that other people look down on us and think we're nothing because we make our living in the mill? I've heard remarks made about the "mill's trashy people" until I can't hardly bear the sight of the place. The sound of the machinery is enough to contend with, let alone gossiping tongues. My family may be content but I am not. I'm going to break away from it or break my neck trying. If you've never worked in a mill you couldn't understand in a thousand years. The mill owners and superintendents take advantage of you. They know it's all we know and we have to take it. I hope to live to see the day when I can tell them all to go to hell.
"It's took about all the money we could get to pay doctors' bills. Daddy and I had to have our tonsils took out. Then he had appendicitis and right after that is when he broke his leg. Mama had to have an operation for female trouble and had to have blood transfusions. You sure don't have to wonder about what's going to happen next when you have a big family. It just happens every day.
"But maybe I'll get out of it all soon. July ain't but next month, you know. Major Bowes--"
