GROCERY STORE
Written By:
Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Research Worker
Federal Writers' Project
Athens -
Edited By:
Miss Grace McCune
Research Assistant
Federal Writers' Project
Athens -
WPA Area 6
September 11, 1939
August 3, 1939
Mr. O. J. Cofer (White)
1220 West Hancock Avenue
Athens, Georgia
Grocerman
Hornsby -
GROCERY STORE
"Beans 10¢; I'sh 'tatoes 6¢; meat 17¢; and snuff 10¢. That makes 43¢ you owe me in all.
This was what I heard Mr. Cofield say to a Negro woman as I entered his store.
"Yar sir, well you'll has to charge hit til ah gits mah wash money Sadday.
"All right lets see that you do 'cause I can't run my store on promises." was the reply of the Mr. Cofield.
"What you talkin' 'bout Mister Jake, you knows.
I've gwine pay you Sadday, yas sir, dat I is sho".
A very young boy sitting tack of a soft drink stand, eating cheese and soda crackers, and ever so often taking a sip of milk from a pint bottle to wash the food down, said, "Say Mr. Jake, are you shore you counted what she bought right? 'cause them packages air powrful big ones what she is tottin' outten here just to cost 43¢.
"Just keep on with your eating boy, I'll do ray own figurating," was the rather short reply of Mr. Jake. He was embrassed when he saw me standing near a show case, and he said; "Yes mam, lady what can I sell you, or have you just stopped in outter the rain?"
After stating my mission, he said, "how much will it cost me?" I assured him there was no charge, and to this he replied.
"Well there must be a catch in hit somewhere, I don't think I care to do it. Cause this country is in such a bad state of affairs right now. The government must be sending you 'round to check up on folks in business, and after they git the information they want, they'll take steps to do something 'bout hit".
I made it clear to him that such was not the case, and then he began shooting questions at me.
"Do you live here, well where do you live, do you have a husband, have you got any children, are you doing this for a living"?
After I answered all the questions, he said; "Well, I don't reckon hit will do no harm to tell what I knows, but you did take me by surprise, for I don't see why anybody would want my life history 'cause I ain't never done nothing but work all my life. And as far as this kind of business is concerned, you make one week and lose the next week.
"I don't live in town, but 'bout four miles out here in the country between Athens and Watkinsville. I won't born in this county though and didn't come here to live til I was a grown man. Did you ever hear of Jackson County? You have, well blow me down, I first saw daylight bout ten miles from Jefferson on a farm, and lived in that county til I was a grown man. I done pretty nigh everything that come to hand, called hard work. All farmers has to git up early and work late. The only money I ever got til I got out on my own was what my pa give me, and that won't much. I have worn my clothes till the pants was almost half-way my legs, end coat Sleeves way up my arms and the coat struck me almost to my waistband. When I think now how my clothes looked, I must have looked like a scare crow. You know in the country a fellow didn't need but one good suit of clothes, cause all they needs is a pair of overalls and a blue shirt.
"Just to tell you the truth I ain't got much learning. The reason I ain't, sometimes we lived nigh a school, and most of the time we lived three and four miles from a schoolhouse, and they won't nothing to brag about. When I had a chance to go I wouldn't, I don't reckon I went pass the fifth grade, now I see my mistake.
"You bet I believe in gitting an education, it has come to a time if a fellow don't have an education and ain't got no money neither he is up agin it. But if a fellow has money he can git by most anyway, That's why I have to work so hard, I don't mind working, but a fellow can do a sight "better if he has some learning, but tain't nobody's fault but mine, cause when school time come ma and pa done their dead level best to make me go to school and I wouldn't. The schools won't good as they are now.
"After leaving Jackson County and moving to Clarke, I farmed for myself, and during my spare time I worked at a sawmill. Sometimes I made from $3.00 to 3.50 a day.
I farmed six or eight years, I got tired of the farm and decided to go where my brother was, in Middle Georgia. He owned a sawmill, but I didn't want to work in his'n, so I looked around for one to buy with the money I had made on the farm and saved working at the sawmill. I couldn't afford to build one our right, so I finally bought a secondhand one that cost me between twelve and fifteen hundred dollars.
"Even if the machinery had been used it cost a heap of money. We sawed building material, but didn't dress it, I just kept it one year, there won't no money in it so I decided to sell it before I lost what I had put in it. As I could make more working for the other fellow than operating the mill myself. After I sold it I went to work for my brother and worked off and on for him about two or three years.
A customer came in and asked, "Mr. Jake, has you got applesauce in cans"?
"Yes, I think so," was his reply.
"How much is it?"
"Ten cents a can."
"Good Lord, Mr. Jake, I can git two cans for 15¢ down town,"
"Then, the place to git them," was the rather sharp reply of Mr. Jake's.
"Huh, give me a can, I wants it for mah dinner cause I'se hongry." After the argument the customer left. Mr. Cofield turned a bean basket upside down, doubled a news - paper in several folds placed it on top of the basket and sat down.
"Now where did I stop off at? The Negroes 'round here argue 'bout everything they buy even to a 10¢ box of snuff.
Oh, yes, after I quit working for my brother I come to Athens, and went into the painting business to learn the trade. I worked for three different men, two of them was in business for themselves. I don't believe I ever made less than 35 to 60¢ an hour.
"Naw, I didn't save none of the money after I sold my sawmill in Middle Georgia and come back here. I blowed hit in as I made it, having a good time, or at least thought I was having a good time. Most anybody can make money, but it's hard to save hit. My advice to a man young or old these days is, to save at least 75 or 80¢ outter every dollar he makes, cause we're going through a great change of some kind. Times are different from what they were twent-five years back, and no telling what the next twent-five years will bring.
"You take that boy what was in here when you come in, talking so smart about my figurating. That boy is my nephew, he works over here at the Hosiery Mill and makes from $15 to $20 a week. He don't give his mammy but $5 or $6 of it, the rest he blows in on himself. I lows how he ought to be saving part every week. But that ain't none of my business, that is twixt him and his mammy.
"Well, I ain't got no time to be preaching 'bout folks saving, when I ain't never done it myself, but I see my mistake now. Anyhow after I left the painting business, I hired out to a man, running a grocery store for him. I made plenty of money for him for about seven or eight years. He was a traveling man, and he got tired of traveling and decided to take the store over himself. There won't enough business to keep me on, so I had to git out and hunt me a job.
"After hunting ana looking for a job I finally landed one at Mallison, Braided Cord Mill Company. I done everything what come to hand, run braiders, twisters, night watched and worked in the shipping room. Most of the workers gits 30¢ an hour some more and others less, I got 35¢ an hour for most of the work I done. There is where I made the money to buy out this business. I have been here a year ago this past May. I felt like I wanted to go back in business for myself because there is more pleasure working for myself than the other fellow. And I can make a living outten it.
"I have a heap of white trade, but being as I have ray store in a Nigger section most of my customers is Niggers. But their money is as good as anybody's as long as I can git it. And they pays up better than heaps of white folks.
"I try to keep a little of everything in stock. And a penny is as good as a dollar but I rather have a customer to come in and buy a dollars worth or more at one pop. But the pennies soon add up. You would be surprised to know how many of them I get from children during the day, buying blow gum, candy or an apple or banana, but very few apples and bananas can be bought for a penny these days en times.
"And as to how much I make here I couldn't very well say, for some weeks I make more than others. You would think that folks spend more on rainy days, but they don't, I reckon it's because the Niggers, most of 'em won't work when it's raining. And when they make money they spend it. Just as soon as my business gits a little better I am going to add more shelves and have a bigger stock, for the bigger the stock, the better the store will look and I'll sell more.
"The funniest thing about Niggers buying soft drinks is, they will buy the biggest bottle drink on the market, tut when it comes to buying drinks for a chaser they don't care what size bottle they buy. Another thing I have to contend with is Niggers coming by pulling bananas from the bunches hanging outside the store, therefore I had to bring them inside. Niggers and poor white trash will steal your eyes out if you don't watch 'em.
A large Negro woman came in ashe’ing "Mr. Jake, is you got any string beans what ain't shucky"?
"I think so, these are right fresh for I Just got 'em in this morning", he said.
"But how much is they"?
"Twenty cents a gallon".
"Twenty cents a gallon, My God man, 20¢ a gallon, this time of the year when everything is plentiful, anyhow gimme a half-gallon of 'em; fo' roas-in-years and a small can of milk. 33¢ good lord ain't that somepin' it tuk all my money". She took the purchase and left the store mumbling to herself.
A boy came in, Mr. Cofielif asked; "What can I do for you this morning son"?
"Gimme a nickles worth of bologna and a bottle of sweet milk".
"Can I git up anything else for you".
"Naw, I'm in a bad humor today", the boy answered.
"What's the matter", Mr. Cofield asked?
"Plenty is the matter, I have tried all morning to sell my produce, and I have sold only 'tout one-third of it", the boy said.
"Take it like a man, Bud, we all have good days and bad ones".
"That's so, and folks don’t to pay me nothing for my stuff, it's hard", the boy answered him.
A customer came in and the boy went back of the counter selected a box of soda crackers, took his seat on a box of cabbage, opened the crackers and milk. He ate at least six of the crackers with every bite of the bologna, washing it down with a sip of milk.
Mr. Cofield finished with his customer, sat down and the boy began to talk. "Did you hear about the shooting last night? You know that boy had been living with that woman three years, she got to going with one of his buddies, they had a fight over her, and he killed his buddle.
"That's what I say about folks living that kind of life, no good ever comes of it", Mr. Cofield told him.
"That's the truth", said the boy, "Did you know he is your kinfolks"?
"No, I didn't", answered Mr. Cofield.
"He is your second cousin my pa said. Well, everybody has good and bad folks in their family, mine ain't no different from nobody elses."
The meal finished the boy went out, got in his truck ana drove away, and Mr. Cofield continued his story;
"How many children do you have? Two, well, I ain't got none and ain’t never had none. I know they are a sight of pleasure when they are little, hut when they grow up and tables turns, 'cause when kids turns out to be respectable men and women, they are mighty fine, but hits awful when they go wrong. Hit takes a lots to raise 'em this day en time. More clothes, more everything, the school advantages are better now than they was when I went to school. I have seen so many sickly looking children in the section where I live. Their ma and pa working in the mill, and leaving the children with a Nigger to look after 'em, or after themselves. Just to tell you the truth, I ain't never been crazy 'bout having none of my own, living where I am, the old lady don't want none either.
"I arried in 1929, my wife was practically raised in Clarke county. I met her while following the painting business. The men I worked for had a contract to paint twenty odd houses out at the mill where she works. And among 'em was her'n, I saw her most every day, finally I decided to ask her for a date. That was in May of 1928 and we married in August of 1929, we didn't have no wedding at all. All we done was just went to the preachers house and got married.
"When I asked my wife's mother for her, she looked at me real hard, went to the sitting-room door, closed it and put the organ stool aginst it, then she tuk her seat on the stool and leaned aginst the door. I thought my time had come and glanced around the room to find the closest place to escape. She saw how scared I was, and laughed in my face, saying 'taln't no need to be scared, I ain't going to hurt you, cause I don't have a stick or notning. I told her what I wanted, and she blessed me out, I argued with her, after a while she consented to us gitting married.
"My wife wouldn't give up her job at the Cord mill, 'cuase she has been working there every since she knowed what work was. She makes 30¢ an hour, we put our money to gether, I means that is what I have to save after all my bills are paid. We are planning for her to quit work real soon, as we wants to build a house. I want to build hit nigh town and she wants to build close by the mill. And if we do, she'll never give up her work, for shore as I'm living I would go home from the store and find her working at the mill. The day she gives up her job I don't went her to work there no more. I want to git one of them twenty year government loans to build the house on so hit won't make a hardship on us to pay for the house in a few years.
"As far as we live from town, and my store, seems like I just can't git on without a car of some kind. I have a 1935 dodge bought end paid for, 'cause anybody what wants to git ahead had rather have a house of their own to live in, than own a car to ride over the country in, for they are soon wore out and if you have a house you have something to show what you do with your money,”
Mr. Cofleld was busy from time to time with different salesmen, for bread, soft drinks, and other supplies that one needs to run a grocery store. He would pay one and ask another to charge what he bought that day. Mr. Cofield is a tall, medium sized man, and perhaps nearing. forty. He was wearing a pair of gray trousers with large patches on the seat of them. A white shirt, Boiled bluish tie, straw hat yellow with age, and black slippers and gray socks. It seemed he was never without a cigarette in his mouth.
He settled down again and began: "I meant to have this store cleaned up today, but as I told you Niggers won't work when it's raining, and when I read my newspapers I have a habit of throwing 'em on the floor instead of picking 'em up. I know it's nasty, and I reckon it's laziness in me not to clean it myself, but the ice box needs washing out too, that ain't a man's Job, and I'm just naturally lazy when it comes to cleaning the store.
"As I done told you this country is in a bad shape, and a fellow just don't know which way to turn for fear something will happen and he'll lose what he has got. And as I told you I want to add some more shelves and put in a bigger stock. But some how I'm just 'frald to 'tempt hit. The country shore is in a bad shape. Mr. Roosevelt wants to help the poor folks and the rich ones won't let 'em 'cause hit takes their money in taxes to help 'em. I remembers on Sunday the preacher said something 'bout paying taxes to Caesar. Even the folks back there didn't want to pay no taxes. The Lord said, Pay unto Caesar that, that rightfully belongs to him, and to the Lord also. That may not be the way hit goes exactly, but hit kinder brings out what I'm trying to say. I don't take much stock in politics, but I read 'bout what's going on.
"My wife and me both belong to the Methodist church. I didn't join til I was in my twenties, my wife Joined younger than me. She 'tends pretty good, but I don't go none much cause on Sunday I'm too tired to dress and go, and if I did go I would go to sleep and not hear a thing the preacher said. My wife told me not to go any more til I could stay awake. I ain't been since, so she does the going for both of us while I stays at home.
"I believe I has told you 'bout all I knows and that ain't been much, 'cause a fellow what don't git 'round ain't got nothing much to tell.
Thanking him for what he had told me I started to leave,' he said: "You had better not go out in that rain, the store will keep you dry". Several customers came in at that time and I left him busy waiting on them.
