"WE HAVE NO SLUMS"
by
Loretto Carroll Bailey
"WE HAVE NO SLUMS"
On September 6, the Board of Aldermen of Winston-Salem, North Carolina, rejected a government alums-clearance project of a million dollars with the startling announcement: "We have no slums."
The local newspapers responded by printing beneath the aldermen's proclamation a picture of one of the neglected Negro districts in town. This was the end of a long battle for slums-clearance, with the newspapers and the Chamber of Commerce on the side of the government project, and the aldermen and many real-estate owners against it. Once more the property owners won a victory over those who sought public improvement. The battle in Winston is particularly interesting because it raged not over the wisdom of the government’s plan for slums-clearance, but over the existence or non-existence of slums in the city.
Winston-Salem is best known as the home of Camel cigarettes, Chatham blankets, and Hanes underwear. It is also the home of some 33,000 Negroes who make up nearly one-half the population. In Winston, as elsewhere, the renting of small, unimproved houses to the poorer Negroes has always constituted a profitable investment. When these investments become slums, it is difficult to prove to the middle-class townspeople that they are not only dangerous to the Negro population but a menace to the health of the white. It is not often, however, that city aldermen, responsible to the public, openly deny the more existence of such plague spots.
I lived for twenty years in Winston. As a child I was warned to keep away from "Cocaine Alley" and the streets of North Winston that front the railroad tracks. Here lived black monsters who stole, begged, smuggled dope, and lived by choice in poverty and filth. Whet matter if here lived also the servants who washed our clothes and prepared our food?
Reading the aldermen's proclamation in one of the state papers, I decided to revisit Winston, after an absence of nearly ten years, to discover whether or not the town had cleaned house. In company with a photographer, a newspaper woman, and a Relief worker, I revisited the forbidden plague spots -- and found them little changed.
We bumped along an unpaved road between ramshackle, unpainted houses, and stopped at sight of an open toilet fronting the street. The door, sagging on rusted hinges, revealed the single discolored commode to the most casual passer-by. Next to it was a single water spigot, with a puddle of slimy water around it. Noticing the sign of a prominent local real-estate dealer on a neighboring house, we made inquiries of one of the tenants.
There is no plumbing in any of the houses on this street. Six families use two outdoor commodes, and a single spigot supplies all of them with water. The houses are double, two rooms to each family, and rent for $1.50 a week.
We were allowed to enter one of the houses, two rooms of which were occupied. In the lived-in portion, the walls had been tightly plastered with newspapers, which keep out the cold and cover the rough lumber of which the partitions are made. There was little space to walk around the double beds in each room, but the floors were neat and the beds clean. In spite of its shoddy making and leaky roof, the place showed that the people who lived in it had made every effort toward cleanliness and order.
The vacant side of the house showed all too well its cheap construction. Hare the boards of the walls allowed too much daylight between them to have made the place fit for a good barn. A lack of proper partition between the two parts of the house had been remedied by nailing a large sheet of cardboard over an old door.
The kitchen door looked out upon the back of the ill-smelling toilet, from which flowed a stream of water that collected in stagnant pools wherever there was a depression in the ground. Hot under its tin roof in summer, cold with its ill-fitting boards in winter, the house was not one from which a humanitarian could have collected his $1.50 a week rent.
The sun lay warm on the little row of houses. It was not so bad in warm weather, the tenant said. But in winter the plumbing froze. You had to walk till you found a spigot that wasn't frozen to get your water. And the sewage? Luckily, said the tenant, there was a little creek running behind the house.
When we asked some of these Negroes if they knew of the aldermen's decision to reject the housing project, they nodded. When we asked if they had joined in the protests, they shrugged their shoulders and laughed.
"Folks ain't goin' to fix up these here houses lessen they can't rent 'em."
We circled about the streets, stopping to get a view up a creek bank and to notice the signs of the real-estate men. The signs were numerous and different, showing that no one company collected rentals for any large block of houses.
On another street we found a group of houses owned by a Negro landlord. These were, if anything, worse than those the white real-estate men had to offer. Here three outdoor toilets and a single spigot served six houses. Water stood about in stagnant pools. Large families were crowded into three rooms for which they paid one dollar a week. The houses were falling to pieces, the roofs were in need of repair, and most of the inhabitants were on relief.
As we stood talking to one Negro women, a ragged, barefoot Negro man came out of one of the houses and stood over us menacingly.
"I want my share," he shouted. "Yesterday the town got a million dollars from the government. Saturday they got twelve million. I been on the chain gang. I been on relief, too. I want my share." Another Negro man came out of a house, stepped up, and pulled him gently to one side.
"He's been on the chain gang," said the woman. "He ain't right in his head. He can't work for the Relief no more and thinks he ought to. He's crazy on the Relief." We talked on. Sometimes the man interrupted and the woman answered him soothingly. "I wisht you could do something for us," she said. "Wisht you could get him (the landlord) to put a spicket in the house so it wouldn't freeze up in the winter time, and maybe mend the roof."
We were interested to know what the tenants did when the plumbing froze. "We walks up the street to a house that's got a spicket inside and draws our water."
"And what about the wastes?" we asked. "Sewage -- dishwater?"
"They's the backyard -- and that creek handy."
That was the second time the slum tenants had mentioned the creek. We were interested in that creek. It flowed conveniently along the edges of backyards in Negro-town, draining wastes from the lands slanting toward it. Later, we discovered, it joined another creek, and eventually it flowed back of a fashionable girls' school, and so on down the hill behind one of the new white grade schools, looking very pastoral and inoffensive as it passed in close proximity to the tennis courts.
Not satisfied yet, we drove to another Negro district, entirely across town. We found the same real-estate signs repeated, with new ones added. Here the houses were larger, although they were still flimsy frame buildings, with leaky roofs, no screens, no paint, no inside plumbing. Rents differed, ranging from seventy-five cents to $1.50 a week for half a house. Here too, we found one outdoor toilet and one spigot serving ten families.
The inhabitants of this neighborhood had followed the newspaper campaign for slums-clearance with interest, but they did not expect it to do them any good. Only the children were hopeful. They crowded around the camera, asking to have their pictures made. "Are you going to put a spickst in our house?" one questioned eagerly.
Some of the women were angry and sullen. “Come on and look," they said. "Here's where I put the bucket to catch the water when it rains. Him (the landlord again) -- he ain't going to do nothin' to these houses. Not him. Else he'd have to rent to somebody can pay more. We can't pay no more."
The little houses here had small patches of corn growing in the front yards by the railroad tracks, and beyond them was beautiful view of the new Reynolds' skyscraper, ten minutes' walk up the tracks.
While we were making pictures, a neatly dressed colored man stopped on the tracks to watch. “Come down to ray street," he said. "We've got twelve families using one water spicket and three toilets." We talked to his a while. He was intelligent, well-mannered. He had followed the slums-clearance campaign, but he had no anger against the aldermen. “Colored folks got to live where they can."
"Why didn't you write in to the papers when the fight was going on for slums-clearance?" we asked.
"They won't pay no attention to what we say," he said. "Better keep our south shut."
We circled around the main streets of most of the Negro sections, discouraged and depressed by our findings. We decided to go to see a real-estate man who had first advocated slums-clearance and afterwards joined the "we-have-no-slums" faction.
The young real-estate man whom we called upon is a graduate of the state university and usually takes the stand of a liberal. When the Chamber of Commerce began to boost the slums-clearance project he, along with others, endorsed it. Later, he changed his mind and joined with other real-estate men who turned against the project, and fought it as hard as they had previously fought the school supplement, the burden of which fell on the property owners. Public opinion which owns no property and which fought for alums-clearance says that the real-estate men at first understood that the government would buy their slums, rebuild them, and sell them back at a fairly low price to the original owners. When they found otherwise, they fought the project.
We asked our real-estate dealer why he endorsed slums-clearance and then changed his mind. In the first place, he said, the project would injure property owners. The government would re-build the slums, but the houses would not be available to the lowest class of renters, the dollar-a-week renters. These undesirable tenants would move into the better houses of local property owners, while the desirable tenants would move into the government houses. Locally owned property would thus be turned into new slums and rents would have to be reduced for the present slum-renters. Furthermore, the cleared slums would then be federal property and pay no state or city taxes. This last was a serious encroachment on states' rights.
We pointed out that the battle had been waged in the newspapers over the existence of slums, and not over the efficiency of the government's method of clearing them. The aldermen, our real-estate man told us, would be forced either to accept the government money or declare that Winston had no slums. (They chose, we suggested, a ridiculous prevarication, and one which they themselves knew was ridiculous. Our real-estate man was not so sure.)
We asked him point-blank: “Do you believe Winston has no slums?"
"Not in the real sense of the word," he said. “Undesirable housing conditions, yes. Every city has them. But not real slums."
We described some of the conditions we had found and photographed, gave street numbers and the names of dealers who had the houses for rent. Our real-estate man declared that he had never seen such places. If they existed, certainly something should he done about them. What should be done about them?
Neither the city nor the property owners could afford to make a concerted effort to re-build these places, he declared. Not that it would do any good. The tenants were responsible to a large extent for the conditions we had seen. That class of tenants you can do nothing with.
It was the old story we had heard all our lives. "You just can't do anything with niggers. They ruin property."
We had heard that the Buildings Inspector in Winston had made things uncomfortable for the owners of some of the slum property, and that he had lost his job. We asked if this were true. We were told that he had lost his job, not because he did his duty, but because there was not much building going on in the city and the administration had decided to dispense with his services as a means of curtailing municipal expenses.
We made an effort to discover the owners of some of the slum property we had seen. Ownership was shrouded in mystery. No one, apparently, was anxious to claim these houses. Certainly, during the fight for slums-clearance, no one publicly announced ownership of Negro houses or justified the condition of his property.
A prominent woman in Winston who has often proclaimed her friendship for the Negro was one of those who declared loudest and longest that the town had no slums. In the Public Opinion column of the newspaper, she invoked Webster's dictionary to prove by definition that the town had no slums. She is known to toe a property owner, and was one of the bitter opponents of the school supplement. When she was accused of owning slums property, she did not deny it. Neither did she affirm it.
A labor paper in Winston joined with the dally Journal and Sentinel (Jointly owned) in their valiant fight for slums-clearance. The newspaper people say that there is a large but furtive labor vote in Winston, and call attention to the fact that the labor candidate for the state legislature won his election recently before the opposition realized the strength of that vote.
There was little demonstration for the slums-clearance on the part of the Negroes themselves. In Winston, Negroes voting for the school supplement were intimidated at the polls and given impossible challenges, while illiterate whites were allowed to vote -- when they "voted right." Winston has had one race riot, which speedily quelled by the army, as a preparation for overseas fighting in the World War.
As a ludicrous finality to the whole story of the battle for slums-clearance, the Board of Aldermen recently announced that if the city budget could be stretched to sufficient proportions something would be done toward clearing the alums -- whose existence they had previously denied. But the budget's condition is not hopeful. The aldermen were moved by the ridicule of the state papers to throw a sop to the half-hearted reformers. The real supporters of slums-clearance know that the property owners stand in the way and that the only chance for improvement lies in persuading these property owners that their own health and well-being is menaced by their good investments in slum property.
