Mill worker
Durham, Worth. Carolina
May 10, 1939
LR[Leonard Rappart] <text not clear> No revision made
CLYDE THOMPSON, MILLWORKER
A man will think a long time before he'll speak out when he's got nine little children about his knees. But now that they're getting grown and able to look out for themselves and the oldest to help the others coming on I may start something.
If some people knew the things I've thought, the things that are in my mind, the bitterness I've felt - I'd been run out long before. In the Parrish strike I fought right on down to a frazzle - until I didn't have a decent bed to lay down on; we liked to perished to death. Garland Wiley bought milk for my children they were so hungry. It was Garland and some of the others from the College at Hilton who got me here. There was a lot of hard feeling among the people in Parrish after I left. I know who spread those rumors; they said I'd taken eight hundred dollars from the mill and some from the union and got out, and I didn't have even a penny to buy a postal card to write back there with. They've come to their senses and every now and then I'll hear that they're asking where I am; they know the truth now. I want to go back and talk to these people; now they'll be glad to hear me I know those people, I know mill people - and when I talk I can really stand them on their heads, I want to go out and talk for a better order of things.
I got fired from one job here because they said I was a communist. I wasn't no communist. I asked them, 'Tell me what communism is - what is it, anyhow? Is it something that lies between the River Jordan and the Red Sea? Just tell me what it is.' They can call me anything they want but I'll speak out for what I believe. They say communism and socialism means free love and atheism. I don't guess there is a more moral man than I am, and there's a big difference between religion and Christianity. God never meant for his Bible to be interpreted the way a lot of these preacher do today.
I don't see no way out for this country except for the government to take over the public utilities and the railroads and such and run them for the people. We've either got to do that or turn everything over to big business; this halfway pump-priming ain't getting us nowhere. Now, they may try to do something in the foreign countries by lining us up against the dictator nations. If the democracies go to war and win we'll gain new lands; not so much the earth itself as new markets and sources of raw materials. If we lose they'll have killed off a few million unemployed. 'From when'e come wars and fighting among you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?'
I started in the mill when I was just a little thing. I never got more than four grades of schooling and that in a two months school. That's one reason they can't fool us as much now as they used to could; we're getting more education now, and we're seeing the light. I've educated myself by reading. I read all the time; I buy books, I get them out of the public library. I've made a careful study of the Bible and I've decided there's a difference between Christianity and religion. Religion the way it is today is a racket just like relief is a racket. Webster says a racket is where you pay a certain amount and do not get an equal amount in return. I go to hear a preacher, D. D., LL. D., Ph. D., I don't care what degrees he's got, and if he's not interpreting the scripture right I'll know it. If Christ was to come back today he'd be a radical. He was a working man.
There's a book in the library here you ought to read. It's called CHRIST, AN ALTERNATIVE TO COMMUNISM (? LR) by - Jones. Jones is a missionary in India - he's from Maryland originally - and I've always had a feeling he's holding back something that he's not quite convinced about what he's saying. There's another book along that line in the McGregor University library a fellow was telling me about that I aim to get out and read. Preachers are like college professors; they say things so people can't understand them; they just won't stick to the Gospel itself.
My daddy was one of the first men in his section of Robeson county to raise tobacco. We raised cotton too. Tobacco was dirty but I liked it better than cotton - it paid better. My daddy had seven children. We owned our own farm but we couldn't make a living on it and we couldn't make a living in the mill, so we worked at both. Many's the day I've worked on the farm until four o'clock in the afternoon and then gone on to the mill. And then gone down to get two weeks wages for four of us and have them had me all our names on one slip of paper and come back with twenty or twenty-two dollars. I've seen my mother working between the plough handles, and my sisters. We'd take our tobacco to town and the companies would take it for what they wanted to give. We raised most of what we ate and my mother would jump out in her little orchard and can peaches and put up fruit and vegetables for the winter. My sister's husband owns a tobacco farm down there now and he does right well, yet he probably ain't got anything to speak of more than his land.
My daddy's name, Thompson, is English but I've got some Scotch and maybe some Irish, and one of my grandfathers was a pureblooded Indian so that makes me a fourth Indian. One of my little girls has a dark skin and copper-colored eyes like an Indian and I tease her - call her my little squaw. It makes her just as mad as can be. My youngest boy has the disposition of an Indian. He's just as touchy as he can be; if anybody hurts him he'll bear a grievance like an Indian will. I named him Norman Eugene - after Norman Thomas and Eugene Debs. I guess I've sold or give away a hundred copies of Debs' BEHIND PRISON BARS. My boys feel just like I do - they hate capitalism. The oldest will be twenty-one soon - he works in a Pender's store. He quit school about the ninth grade and travelled all over the country; he's been to California and just about every part of the Union. He does a lot of reading, too. Another of my boys is in the CC's. I've got four boys and five girls, and there won't be any more; my wife had an operation after the baby was born.
One of my brothers is superintendent of the mill in Eddington. He started in at the botton and had some pull and worked himself on up.
You know, Indians aren't any different from any other folks. Down in our country there's lots of hwat they call Croatans and they're just as industrious and hardworking a people as you'll find. They're crazy about religion; I went up there once with another fellow in my department at the mill and we went to one of their preachings. They got me to talk a little and afterwards we went home with one of them and had as good a dinner as I ever ate. They're a fine looking people though they do droop some when they get older. There's a class among them they call skins, just no-counts - but you'll find some like that anywhere - and when they get mad with one another they go out and bushwhack and the bloodshed gives the whole bunch a bad reputation.
I don't look for the political parties of today to do much good for the working man or the farmer. A few years back we had a Socialist Party in this state and I was on it, but it's not active anymore. The Socialist Party make their mistake by not going in on a united front with the Communists. Last time they could have gotten enough labor backing to have won out. What we need is honest labor leaders, men who can start in at the bottom and come out at the top and still be for the working man. I've seen time and again right here men who were big in the union but were always facing out. When we had the strike at the Bruton mill where I'm working the AF of L boys come around and tried to get me to join. 'Join what?' I asked them. 'Get something to join and I will. This strike won't be broken by strikebreakers; it'll be broken by your own leaders.' and it was. When they come around and told me they were going with the CIO I joined. We're strong there now.
Bruton is on half-time now which means we work three days a week and draw about nine dollars instead of twelve. But twelve dollars isn't enough for a man to live and raise nine children on with five dollars a week coming out for rent. Things would be better if I was making forty dollars a week like a silk-worker or thirty to fifty dollars like a tobacco worker. I could walk in a store and buy things and spread good times around instead of doing without. They're trying to run out the chainstores; they're not much help but they do let you stretch your dollar a little further, and they've made the home merchants cut prices and fix up some.
The President says the South is the nation's economic problem number one; the textile worker is the number one problem of the south, so I think the government ought to put aside so much to bring the textile worker's wages up to that of the other workers. That's what makes it so hard now; the prices in stores are geared to the thirty or forty dollars a week of the tobacco and silk mill workers and yet we don't make half what they do.
The government ain't ever helped us textile workers. As soon as they pass something the mill figures some way to get around it. I'm tending four machines now but they're so speeded up they do a whole lot more than they used to - they're faster than we can rightfully tend. And one of the reasons we're on part time is that the mill is getting its cloth from South Carolina where there's no union and they've got them tending eight machines.
If I had my say I'd go through the mill and I'd slow the machines down. Then I'd call in the mill policeman with his little badge and send him home, and save his forty dollars a week. Then I'd lay off some foremen they have and spread their work around. Then I'd go to the front office and call in the twenty and thirty - five thousand dollar a year men and say, 'If you want to stay here you can, for five thousand dollars a year and live like other people.' Then we could share that money and make enough to live halfway decently.
I got two big foremen fired in Parrish when I was there. There was one man who'd been there thirty years and another one Mr. Locke had raised himself. When I told Mr. Locke this fellow had been forcing himself on women in the mill, taking them out and making them do what he wanted them to, he said, 'That's impossible; I've raised that from a baby.' I said,' All right, you see for yourself and if you find out I'm a liar come back and tell me so and I'll quit.' Of of those men shot himself last year and the other one's doing time on the roads now for something he's since done. Think of it - both of them at one time big men, almost the biggest in the mill. 'Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold and silver is canckered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud' - the Weymouth edition says 'cheating,' I think - 'crieth; and the cries of them which hath reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabath.
The politicians come around and get some of our union leaders to stand up and talk for them in our meetings - tell us how we ought to vote. They don't do anything for us. We've got to get the power ourselves - the Constitution says the people have a right to overthrow their government. You know, Job said, 'Even today is my complaint bitter: my stroke is heavier than my groaning.'
NOTE: Since the subject did not know his story was to be recorded I do not think it should be used without obtaining his permission.
LR
