Mary A. Hicks
Steve Loomis-----------311 W. Hargett St., Raleigh, N. O,
THE LAND OF PROMISE
"In my old country, near Sparta, Greece, the farms lay broad and level like they do on good land in Amerioa. we raised grain and vegetables mostly, but there were miles and miles of vineyards with all kinds of grapes. Those grapes were used to sell fresh locally, to ship fresh, to preserve and to make wine. We make fine wine in the Old Country. There were also miles of orchards containing orange, lemon, grapefruit, lime, olive and other fruit trees.
"Our cities had factories too; cigarette factories, clothes factories and many other kinds. The difference was that there was not so many people and not so many factories. We had trains, subways, street oars end other modern conveniences when I left there twenty years ago. It's got a lot better since then, I know. "My father was a farmer but not a peasant because he owned a little farm. There were eight of us children but two of them died when they were little. We worked hard, but no harder than in A merioa. We had a home and food and clothes and they weren't so different from America.
"When I was about six months old my oldest brother came to America with my uncle. When I was six years old another brother came with two of our cousins. My father came soon after that and until I was twenty-seven he came back and forth about once a year. My mother and we children farmed and my father sent us some money. He worked in a clothing store in Chicago.
"From the time I could first remember I heard about America, about the Jobs and the kindness and that there weren't no men that could make you pay fines or go to jail. I heard about the big country and the millions of people that worked. My father said that everybody here was busy and that the bustle was pleasant. He won't no farmer and he didn't want to farm but there won't nothing to do but work in a factory or on the farm, and Greeks made better farmers than they did factory workers.
"I went to the public school for five years but at the time I decided to come to America I couldn't speak or write a word of English. My uncle said that he could find me a job and he wrote my father to sand me. Father was old and worn out from much work then and I was twenty-seven and no job but to farm, so he decided to let me come.
"I kissed my mother good-bye at home because it showed that a person was low-bred if he cried on the street. Father went with me to Athens and bought me some clothes that looked more American and he shook my hand when I got on the train.
"I got on the boat at Liverpool, England, on the twelfth of April with a ticket that allowed me to travel in the steerage. I folt lonesome because there won't nobody I knew on the boat but there were two or three Greeks from Athens and we soon got to talking. The trip was long and tiresome to some of the people on the upper deck but to us down below it was short. We talked and sang songs of our native land and we hoped that we'd hurry and get to New York, and yet we dreaded It. We had heard about the promises of America and like all Greeks we were suspicious.
"I will never forget when we docked at New York. All of the Greeks on the ship had somebody to meet them. I felt lonesome enough to cry as they left me, but pretty soon a gentleman came up and said that he was my uncle. With him was my brother that I didn't recognize. We walked along the street and laughed and talked, then we went to see some friends of theirs and we all talked until midnight. The next day we got on a train and went to Chicago.
"My uncle was as good as his word. Ha got me a job in a little mirror factory. The owner was a Jew from the Old Country and he couldn't understand me, nor me him. My uncle had to do all the talking. He didn't work me mighty hard and he paid me 10 a week. We made the little mirrors that ladies carry in their purses. My job was silvering the mirrore and it wasn't hard. I worked eight hours a day. I worked there for two years.
When I got the chance of a job in a pool Troore in Chloogo at $12 a week I took it. I was across town then from my folks and I couldn't speak English hardly at all. I got embarrassed many times. I'd go in stores and couldn't ask for what I wanted. I'd have to look until I found it and point at it. I couldn't understand money very well either, but I was learning at the poolhall.
"When I had been in America for three years my cousin came from Athens thinking that I could teach him English. I couldn't speak it myself and with no more education than I got I couldn't help him. When we heard a word he'd say look it up in the dictionary. I'd look it up and he could pronounce it but I couldn't, he'd understand it and I wouldn't but neither one of us could speak it. He could understand and not speak and I could speak but not understand.
"I worked in the poolroom for eleven years and I learned a lot during that time. I got me a dictionary that gave the Greek and English and I studied it hard. I learned about simple words first.
"I had a friend that worked in the Majestic Radio factory and he helped me to get a Job there for $20 a week. My Job was to see that they were put together tight and that every radio played right before it was shipped. I had a lot of odd jobs to do but I liked the work fine. One year I stayed there and then I got laid off.
"One day my friend asked me if I had saved up any money and I told him that I had a little over $500. He said that he had a little more than I did and he was going south and open a eating place. He asked me to go with him. We thought it over and decided to come here because we both had relatives here. Greeks are like that; they like to stick together.
"It was in 1933 we opened this place and everybody said we'd go broke because we were right in the middle of a depression. We managed fine, though, because Mr. Roosevelt was president and he saw to it that the people had money to spend. We made as good then as now. We sold more but prices weren't so good.
"I didn't know a thing about cooking. Most folks think that Greeks were born knowing how to cook, but they weren't. Greeks have always been good cooks, so they think, 'Greek out of a job; where to look?' Then, 'people must eat; Greek good cook.' See they just put two and two together. I had to learn to cook just like anybody else, but my partner knew how to make weiners, barbecue, and all the other things that a joint is supposed to serve. I got started off right and now I know.
"You know what my biggest ambition is? It's to be like Americans, to be just an American. I can't, though, no more than the other old Greeks can. Now the young generation will be Americans and lose their nationality after awhile in spite of the old people and the church. The old folks say that the old home is the best and they a lot more difference in the two countries than there is. They Say we're Greeks with a civilization of thousands of years before Christ and that America is a new raw country. They want to keep the Greek blood pure.
"The young Greeks feel different. They marry the Americans sometime; they go to school with them and play with them. The old people don't like it, the church don't like it, but it's working out fine, I know a Greek boy educated here who married an American girl and they are happy. They want through and years of school together and she knew his people and his ways. They were married in the Orthodox Church and she goes to church with him. The Greeks have accepted her as one of them and she is trying to get them to be more American: I don't think that marriages between Greeks and Americana usually turn out well. It is embarrassing for the American to be in a Greek gathering and she usually don't like Greek food. When they have Children they're not clear blooded and therefore have no nationality. I hear that no American has a nationality except just being an American and Americans are. composed of all races and tongues, but I think that a person shouldn't lose all sense of his nationality, Fifty or a hundred years from now, when the Greeks have become Americanized, marriages with Americans will be all right but until then they stand a mighty good chance of turning out bad. They are yet too different. Our church allows it if the couple married in the church and if the American changes to our faith. Of course no Greek marriage is legal to the church unless the marriage is performed there. Divorce is strictly forbidden by our faith.
"Our church might sound stern, but it's really not so strict as some of the others. I can dance, sing, go to see boxing and wrestling matches, go to theatres or anywhere I like. I can shoot pool, play ball or do any of those things. My religion hasn't a thing to do with the way I treat folks. don't steal, lie, rob or murder simply because I don't want to, even though I do believe in hell and heaven. I was baptized when I was about five months old and that was really when I joined the church.
"We fast during Lent and eat no meat at all, not even eggs. All the rest of the year we eat what we please. Easter is celebrated by Greeks in all countries and so is Christmas. Over here we observe all of the national holidays, like the Fourth of July.
"I think the Americans are right about celebrating that day and Washington's birthday. We have our heroes too. We love to talk about Homer, Xerxes, Lysander, Cyrus, Alexander and others. Their histories are forever talked in the old country. We in America haven't forgotten.
"The Greeks made Democracy hundreds of years ago, but the Romans captured Greece and kept the Greeks in subjection for many years. They forced Greek teachers to be servants to them, teaching their children. One goes to Rome now and admires the things made by Romans. They didn't make them, the Greeks did, but they get no credit for it. Greece was free for a hundred years and then Turkey overthrow it. Our people have now been in subjection to Turkey for 500 years. Our history is great and sad.
"The Jews and other nationalities have been treated badly too; worse than we have, and we are sorry for them. We do not associate with each other. I hate Negroes, and I wish that the Government would give them a state by themselves and make them live in it. They are planning to rule the white man someday. I nearly killed a Negro once because of it. He said that the Negroes were climbing and that they would someday rule the white man. I held a sharp butcher knife to his neck and talked to him, then I kicked him out of my joint.
"Some people have to cater to Negro trade but not me. I make around $30 a week clear and I don't want to get rich. I'm not married and so I live cheaply in one room in a Greek home. I eat here mostly, too. I can get by on $4 or $5 a week easily. Sometimes I wish that I had a family to work for and some fine children to become Americans. I wish that I could be an American citizen all the way.
"I've been in the United States for twenty years and I'm not a citizen yet; that is, I haven't got my papers yet. I applied once but my application must have been lost in Washington, I've sent another one now and I hope to become a citizen. I love America, but I love my native home too. Greece is the land of culture, the land of peasants and few opportunities; America is the land of promise, the land of freedom and equal opportunities. There are poor people here, but no peasants.
"Before I left the old country I did well to have one poor suit of clothes every year. I never had spending money and we ate coarse food. Now I can afford two or three suits a year and eat pretty much what I want to. I pay $3 for my room and eat out. Sometimes I eat here and sometimes I eat at other places.
"I like rooming with the Greek family I live with. If I were to get siok they'd take care of me like my mother would. Some think that I need a wife whether I love her or not, but no love no marry's what I think. I would like to have maybe two children, though. I believe, with the other Greeks in America, that small families are best. In the old country everybody believes in big families.
"You wouldn't believe it, but the Greeks are not superstitious. They do not believe in goblins, ghosts, witches and other things like that. We are nearly as bad about hero worshiping as you Americans.
"We have nearly the same games in Greece that you have here. We play Drop the Handkerchief, only there's no kissing, London Bridge, The Farmer in the Dell, and a lot of other games I see played here is played there. I know some Greek songs but I can't say them or write them in English; they don't make sense like that. They are beautiful in Greek. I mean the old Greek language the one used. for thousands of years. The modern Greek has changed somewhat from the old."
Steve clasped his hands and his brown eyes roved along the shelves with their rows of beer, ale, tobacco, cigarettes, chewing gum and tomato juice, A fly lit on the bald spot on top of his head and he brushed it away before he said huekily, "Yes, America's fine, but sometimes I get homesick for the old country and my mother that I haven't seen in twenty years. I'm going back one of these days, too. Not to stay, but just on a visit."
by

