December 10, 1938
Henry Clay Abernathy (Negro)
Carpenter.
1605 16th avenue North
Nashville, Tennessee.
Lillian Love, Writer
Revised by Lipscomb and Aswell.
NOTHIN' TOO HARD FO' THE LORD
"The Lord says, 'He that fear me and walk upright, no good thing will I withhold from him, "said Henry clay Abernathy as he rubbed his long flat nose.
"The Lord try you and you must try the Lord. I begin the day with the Lord. First thing I do in the mornin' is read a chapter in the Bible. That why I ain't never without work. I got fo' houses to build on now. Remodeling a house out on Elm Hill Road for a woman and she live in Chicago. Been doin all of her work for years. I got a house to build out in west Nashville and one out near the tuberculosis hospital Buildin' another one on Cockrell street now, too. Two men works fo' me on that job and I got a house to build out in Bordeaux. All because I loves the good Lord and he love me.
"I had to turn a man down today. He wanted me to build him a house but it would be the first of the year befo' I could git to him, so warn't no need promisin'. If'n I promise a man anything I aim to do it.
"I ain't ask fo' a job but once since I been in Nashville. That was when I went out to the Powder Plant and asked for work during war time. I did carpenter's work out there till it closed. Yes, always got work to do, and if it ain't a lot, it's a little, and that's work right on.
"I was born in Davidson county, out here at Bordeaux in eighteen sixty one. Pa's name was Henry Abernathy. He was a minister, carpenter, and farmer. He didn't own a farm. He just rented a piece of land my mother, Sarah Abernathy, kept house. They was four of us chillun. Mary, my oldest sister been dead forty year. Mammie Summers was my half sister. Now let me see. She died the year befo' me and Jennie married, bout thirty-six years ago. Brother Joseph been dead some-where 'bout seven year. He lived in That house on the corner of sixteenth and Cockrell. We Moved from Bordeaux to New Hope, 'bout four miles from Bordeaux. Pa died when We lived at New Hope. Then we moved from New Hope to Jordonia. I went to school in the country and went through the seventh grade and I been married twice. my first wife was Maggie Patton. we lived together six year and then she died. We had three chilluns, two girls and a boy. The boy and one girl died. My other little girl lived with me until eighteen year ago. She married now and lives in Indianapolis, and do day work up there. I sho' was disappinted when she quit school and married, for I wanted her to finish school. Wanted all my chillum to finish school. Look like education all we can give our chillun, if'n they II just take it.
"Jennie here was from Paragon Mill. 'That's out on Nolensville Pike we married thirty-five year ago the seventeenth of this comin' December. She was a teacher in Davidson County for six years. she went through all the grades at Paragon mill and she took private lessons from a graduate of pisk University and then she went to Fisk model School awhile. In all, I guess she finish the eighth grade. Back in them days you could teach if'n you had that much education.
"I was livin' in Jordonia but when we married we moved to Nashville. We married five years befo' any babies come. when we did git started, we had six befo' we stopped. Louise, my oldest girl, hain't give me one minute's trouble. Only mistake she made and I don't reckon that such a big mistake, was when she got married. She was teachin' down in west Tennessee and married a fellow down there.
"she got a little boy for year old, and he a lot of company to us. He named for me, but he a bad little rascal, too. why, he got mo' temper than any little fellow you ever see. But his grandpappy is crazy 'bout him. He got mo' sense than Carter had oats. But he been mighty sick here lately. Doctor say he had a colitis and fo' eleven days he didn't eat. Just looked like he would gripe to death. Then he just started to eat all at once. Louise would have to git up in the night and cook him somethin', oatmeal or eggs, or most anything she had in the house. He'd call her and say just so pitiful like Mother dear, if you just fix me somethin this time I won't ask you no mo' 'He was just saying that to git by her for about two hours after that he'd be callin' her agin.
Now it look like we can't fill him up. He fell off to skin and bone and he look like he is swelled. He got spoiled, too, while he was sick. It been awfully hard on Louise she nursed him and before she had time to rest she had to go open her school.
"She teaches near Cookeville. I want to go to see her. I went when she taught there before on blue Ribbon Day. Her school took the blue ribbon, too. I was mighty proud of her. Her little one room school beat all the rest. she a hard. Workin' gal and she always succeed in whatever she try. Sometime she gets discouraged and I have to boost her up. I tell her that man's extremity is God's opportunity. Nothin' is too hard fo' God. Just trust in him. She like about two quarters of finishing A. & I. State College. I wish she could stayed in school this year so she could finish in June. If'n her school close early enough, she can go this Spring. Went all last year and even went to summer school, but she felt she just had to stop and teach. I want to see her finish school and get a steady job She deserve it.
"Anderson, my oldest boy, he a carpenter, so he work with me most the time. That boy, my wife say, he just born for bad luck. Loses more money! He lost five dollars Saturday a week ago and six dollars Tuesday. And Saturday night he was riding out in one of them seven cents cabs and somebody took his pocket-book right out of his hind pocket. He didn't miss it till he went in the drug-store and started to pay for somethin'.
"Fannie, she my second girl, she married and live in Antioch. She had every chance in the world to finish college. I guess she a junior by now. She's been out and in so much can't tell what grade she in. She ain't never satisfied. Ain't satisfied where she is now. Kenneth, my youngest son, is in Cleveland, Ohio. He a carpenter, too I taught both them boys the carpenter trade.
"My wife say I expect too much of my children and that I never let them grow up. I just don't like to hear them use curse words Me and Anderson had a little argument the other day about by-words. Practice makes perfect. I want them to be Christ-like Anderson is a right good carpenter. Interested in his work my wife think he do better if'n I didn't keep him with me so much. Sometime he gets jobs and I get jobs countin' on him. If'n I make him go with me his mother say I'm makin' a child out of him.
"I been a carpenter thirty-five year. Yes, I do brick work, cement work, and plasterin', too. When I was in the country I was a farmer. I never worked a day as apprentice in my life. when just a little boy on the farm, I love the hammer and saw. Pa taught me some, but the most I learned myself.
"God helps me to solve my problems. I had an experience back in 1895. I was workin' on a governoent job, quarryin' stone. A picnic was bein' held twenty mile away and I laid off and went. 'The next day I was on the job workin' when the boss come by and told me I could be off that day and go to another picnic. I threw my tools in the box and say, 'From this day I'm goin' fo' myself. I never work for another man. 'That man done me a favor when he laid me off. I've done carpenter's work ever since 'cept the seventeen months we lived in Indiawpolis.
"We moved up there in 1920. We went to live there all the time because we thought we could do better. I got there on Sunday and went to work on Monday for the packin' company and worked until the day we moved back to Nashville. My mammy got sick and they was nobody to wait on her so we moved back and moved her here and waited on her till she died. After that Jennie didn't want to move back, so we've been here ever since.
"We own this house, and the lot across the street where we have a garden and a lot on White's Creek Pike. We raise hogs and chickens, both. My wife she crazy about flowers and she got the yard full of flowers. I he'p her with them sometimes. I got a lot of work to do on the house. It needs it got eight rooms, six down stairs and two up stairs. wash tub suits me. But they's lights, radio, telephone and a washin' machine. It take about twelve dollars a week for us to live off of.
"we take the Banner and the Globe in newspapers. When Louise is here, she take different magazines. we got all kinds of books because Jennie like to read. When she starts a book she don't stop till she finish it. when Louise was in school, she would brig books from the liberry for her mammy to read.
"Ever since I got old enough, I been votin'. Don't have much respect for the man that don't. It's our privilege. Some say going in the army to a war is a privilege. They's goin' to be another war same of these days. we don't need no mol war. Folks need to pray mo' and get closer to God.
"The church at cedar Grove where I pastor was the first school I went to when I was a child. In them days the church was the school house, too. I have pastored fo' churches. I pastored Cedar Grove Church three year, Hermitage church twenty year, and Donaldson Church six years I pastured them at the same time. I was called back to Cedar Grove and have been there eleven years.' we had a big celebration last year celebratin' my tenth anniversary as pastor. I pastured Hermitage church twice, too. My wife hasn't moved her membership from cedar Grove, for she been belongin' there thirty two year. The children belong to Pleasant Green Baptist church and I joined there when I come back from Indianawpolis in 1922. Always at my post. Sometime Methodist ministers invite me to preach for them and I freely do.
"I feel awful bad tonight. Jim dropped a wreckin' bar on my head this evenin'o I reached it up to him and it slipped out of his hand and hit me right on the head. My head ached the minute it hit me and I felt dizzy. I worked on until quittin' time, though. Now it hurts all down my neck. Carryin' on a revival out at my church too, but I don't believe I'll be able to go tonight. We've been goin' on a week. I mean to run it as long as the folks is interested. I don't think I need a doctor. Maybe I be are right in the mornin'o I II just trust in God."