
PREFACE
The following character cannot speak for himself; he limits his speech to sentences, never breaking into long narration. So it has been necessary to depict him in an historical manner. It would be impossible to handle such a character without a long acquaintance: an interview would not suffice. To bring him clearly out, gossip, long acquaintance, and sundry information must be used. I have not attempted to present him in a single, unbroken incident, but in a broken, descriptive fashion.
R. V. waldrep
July 18, 1939.
R. V. waldrep
Lord Loafer
Red Bay, Alabama
LORD LOAFER
There are many Massays in Red. Bay, but none of the Masseys claim kin to Lige Massey. They like him, they laugh at him, but there is no claim of kin.
It was after the War that Lige Maesey appeared in town, much the same in appearance as now. He saw war-service of some kind, people think. Perhaps it was active service on the front lines----Lige dosn't say. No one appears to be interested in the particulars. They don't gossip about Lige Massey.
Lige is easy to find, when you want him; he is around, all the time. Be is in the drugstore, at Dr. Waldrep's office, and at practically any other place you. look for him. But you wouldn't find him at church, in the pool room, or in a card game; for he dosn't hang-out at those places. You will find him in the Mason's Lodge, held in the Mayor's office. And. he's smart on the Mason business, especially smart on its administration. You can't fool him on that. And he can tell you all about Solomon's Temple and many other things in the Bible. Yet he's never seen studying the Bible.
Just the other Sunday the Methodist people were studying Solomon's reign: it was in a Sunday School lesson. Lige Massey got wind of the discussion, and he told a fellow down on mainstreet, without the fellows asking too, just how many years and months and days it tokk to build that Temple. Lige went on to enlighten the fellow about the number of Solomon's horsemen, horses, stables, servants, and. a few other similar items.
Then he has a sense of humor that is appreciated; people snicker over his remarks. They repeat them, and they always give credit to Lige: for the remarks, if not tinged with the flavor of Lige's personality, would be worthless. You've got to hear his voice, feel the flatness of his tone, and see the dull, gray colorlessness of his eyes to understand and get his jokes.
Down in the pit of his personality there is something that makes you laugh. There is something incongruous, laughable, and ridiculous. He speaks his jokes in a calm, deliberate, and restrained voice. Invariably he begins: "You know?" and then he makes some perfectly inane observation that sets you on your head. You laugh all over, not hoorawing and a-whooping, but gently and through and through. It wouldn't be a bit funny if wasn't Lige saying it.
But the sense of humor does dampen the respect he gets. They tell, on the streets of Red Bay, that that fellow can get mad plenty. They tell that he is the devil himself sometimes. There is no proof of that; no evidence has been offered.
And there is not a more honest man in town, they say. As to that, there may be some troth, but the fact is Lige has never asked for credit. He has not been known to borrow a dime.
Undoubtedly he has some income, which is probably a pension from his war service. People don't mention Lige's pension, at any rate, when they are cussing veterans' pensions.
The lack of concern results from Lige's humbleness, his freedom of put-on, show, and display. There is not an ounce of conceit about the fellow. There is no envy.
Of course, there is no passion, except you might call passion that look he darts at a pretty girl's legs after she is ahead, but few persons have noticed that. Ask anybody in town) "Does Lige care about women?" And they'll laugh, and wink, knowing that Lige gets all that out of his system at intervals. When you see the boy catch the Dude for Corinth, Mississippi, you know he's itching for a whore. And that means he doesn't care about women; he doesn't make any snappy remarks about the girls of the town. Yet he is the worst gossip you ever heard tell of. He will tell you where everybody is, what everybody is doing, and why everybody is doing what he is doing.
On the other hand, he is not a man to talk on and on. He says his say, and that is that. His sentences are never over a dozen words in length. He speaks in a tone that is so restrained and reined you feel that he is short of wind and can't spare any air to use on his vocal cords. He holds back that mind of his like a man fighting a pair of wild mules.
Lige doesn't stay in a boarding house. No one would expect him to ask for board and lodging any more than he would expect a stray hound to follow him home. He sleeps in Dr. Waldrop's office, if he sleeps; he's there a good deal of the time and makes a few calls with the doctor. Sometime Lige holes up in the seed house, he used to do that especially before he got in with the old doc. In the summer God only knows where he doesn't sleep.
"That fellow has money, all right." You hear that remark, and you hear how the remark is substantiated. It seems that a few years ago Lige's brother died-out in the West. Lige got a telegram Baying that he'd better put up some money to bury his brother or the brother would be turned over to a doctor's school to be cut up by the boys.
Lige got money---not out of the bank, but from somewhere. He sent the money. Then a few days later Lige snagged a freight into Tennessee, and across Arkansas into Texas he went to the town that his brother had died in. There Lige got himself a pick and shovel, and went to the graveyard; he dug into the earth one night, and he lifted the lid of the coffin to make sure that it was his brother that had been buried. Assured he came back to town. Tor months the town talked about this escapade. When Lige was mentioned, somebody would tell the yam.
As far as digging graves, Lige had had some experience. Just as you go through the underpass, leading to Russellville, there is a graveyard on the hill by the railroad. When there is a funeral scheduled, you'll find Lige in the early morning on the hill, among the white marbles, with a pick and shovel loosening and shovelling the damp red clay. Sometimes you'll hear old man Ashmore, talking loud as a preacher, up there on the pile of red clay Lige has lifted from the grave.
Nobody knows whether he charges anything for this work or not, probably not; only the persons' family for whom he digs graves knows. Yet the changes are he does charge the funeral home that put up in Red Bay a year or two ago. It would be hard to think that Lige would charge his friends.
Lige is a good man for sitting up nights with sick people. When somebody is needed for that purpose Lige never says no. He likes it. He likes the long, quiet, funereal talk of long waits. Lige is never impatient, never with ants in his pants.
Lige moves up the street smoking a hand-rolled cigarette, holding the usually tiny butt carefully and meticulously between thumb and forefinger. If you want to, he'll atop and talk. Again he will pass a nickel to the grocer, walk back to the shelf of canned goods for a tin of sardines, grab a handful of crackers from the open box on the meat table. He will go to the rear of the store where there are sacks of feed on which he can prop; there he will remove the lid from the tin, and poke whole fish and crackers down his throat faster than he can shred them with his teeth. His bearded cheek works up and down like a hinge of haired leather.
He comes "back to the front of the store with a remark: "I saw a cat with a funny look in her eyes, bet she's looking for a Tom." Everybody laughs, for Lige said it. His breath of sardines nearly knocks you down, as he says: "Jim, shoo the cats from following me. I'm going to see the dentist." Jim says: "God help Doc Jordan!" and sniffs the sardine-air. Sardines are not the only thing that stink about Lige in the summer.
On summer days, he is up at the iceplant sometimes with his tub and. his rub-board. While the water cascades fron the plant's cooling pipes and the gin whirs with sucking and pressing of cotton, Lige bends over the tub of overalls and jumper, Stiff as they are with dirt of a month's wearing.
After he has scrubbed the overalls and jumper, he carries his tub and rub-board in the blacksmith shop at hand, and goes to town. He will go to Dr. Waldrep's office, loll on the divan, listening to the doctor discuss bellyaches, child-birth, and husbands at forty. Sometimes he will crawl into the ford and dash into the country to some farmhouse to help the doctor with a sick person.
In the night, after people have gone to bed, he'll be found in the. alleys, strolling around, appearing out of nowhere, disappearing into nowhere. He'll pop up around the cotton warehouse, snoop around the depot, and in the lumberyards.
After a fire has taken place, he will be up and about next morning, telling all the details. Tor he will have been there sure as shooting.
And no merchant opens his store to catch the early risers too early to beat Lige on the street. Vuin Epps may get down to his store early to meet the beauty shop girl and to fool his wife, but Lige will be ambling around in the silent streets looking on.
On Sunday nights, people coming from church see a light in the doctor's office, and they know that Lige is sitting there alone, maybe sleeping. The doctor will not be there; Lige has a key.
Lige has a hobby, caring for bees. One of the grocers at one time became interested in bees. He bought a hive, another and another, putting them under his fruit trees. Lige dived in to help, uninvited, but welcome. He catches bees in his bare hands. He glories in his immunity from sting. No one need ask him to help with bees--he's there already. Some days he turns up, saying:
"I want to look at your bees," and away he'll go to the orchard, to lift the lids of gums, poke around, tap, and watch. His dull, gray, colorless eyes will be bright in their flat way, eager in his keen watch of the bees, eager in his search for the queen.
Then he'll come and get your smoker, pop up in your back, screened porch calling: "Hello, hello." When you come to the door, he'll already have the smoker down: "I'm going to rob Joe Sykes' gum, and I want Gene's smoker."
Lige knows he is king of his domain. He knows he is respected and trusted. So he plays his part, takes all his authority to himself, and. Uses it as far as it goes, but makes no step over the line. He considers himself above the farmers who come to town, and never associates himself with them. Dressed as he is in overalls and jumper, he has much more in common with the farms, but he doesn't take to their company--he is a town man. Lord-Loafer, he walks the streets, drifts into stores, never bothered with: "Something for you?" and "Can I do something, get you something?"
He will say: "Clyde Young won't sleep with his head to the West and his feet to the East." Clyde is a Higger, working at the hotel, and living over the bridge.
"No!"
"He says," goes on Lige drily, "that is the way people are burled, East and West. The other night it rained, and he had a leak." Lige lowered his voice and slurred with restraint: "He set the dishpan on his belly to keep from changing his bed around."
Quick as a flash, Lige leaves the store; for when he tells something he gets going just as soon as the last word has come from his mouth.
While there is bickering, jealousy, and hard-feeling in the town, Lige takes no part. He takes no side. He has no particular buddies or chums to stick-up for.
Out of somewhere he came, where it makes no difference. He came, has become a harmless fixture. What he believes, what he knows none of these people know. People aren't prying when it comes to Lige.
7/18/39
MS
