"MY W. P. A. MAN"
Marguerite Clark says she is a good woman. She attends Zion Travelers Baptist Church regularly, and prays on her knees. You won't find Marguerite's name on any of the church's executive boards nor will you find it listed in the church clubs, but Marguerite is an influential member and is a "hoping soul." She is hoping that Zion Travelers' members are praying with her, and she is hoping that her galloping, slue-foot, light-brown, lazy husband, Buster Clark, will soon find a job.
"Marguerite better hope that Buster quit looking at that brownskin gal who lives around the corner," said a neighbor. "That gal ain't giving Marguerite any trouble with Buster yet but she has her mind on it."
"You could describe me as a chocolate black," said Marguerite. "I'm forty-seven and weigh two-ten. Any man ought to be able to keep his mind on me and on nobody else. I know how to treat a man, everybody says that. What makes me so mad is that even the church says it. And the church says that Buster ain't treatin' me right. That's why he don't go to church no mo', and that's Why the church is prayin' fo' me, I hope!"
Marguerite says she isn't superstitious, but you can't pay her to mention the name of the girl Who is offering her competition. "I reasons that it ain't good to be callin' womens names 'cause that helps mo' than anything else to make 'em take your man," Marguerite said. "I hates to think of her with her arms around Buster's neck. And she must be doing just that, 'cause there ain't nothin' better that Buster likes than havin' some woman runnin' her hands around his neck. He's she weak fo' that. Old fool!"
Buster had just left the house When we called. "If he was here he wouldn't talk. He ain't sociable," Marguerite said. "All he wants to do is bom in the streets. He won't look fo' work fo' nothin'. He must think that work is goin' to come to him."
Marguerite is a cook by heart and by profession; she works on Saint Charles Avenue for Mrs. Jacobs. Marguerite likes to be seen walking in her madame's palatial door in the early morning and out of it in late evening. "My madame lets me walk right through her front door in the mornin' and in the evenin'," she says, "and I'm a proud sumpin'. She likes to see me walk but she don't like to hear me talk. She says I talk too much about my troubles."
Marguerite has been working for Mrs. Jacobs about ten years; she lives in one of her houses. Her room is very shabby and crowded with furniture. Clothes hang on the wall, and there are several pairs of shoes under the bed. Marguerite has many excuses for her untidy room.
"It's a hard thing to keep this room clean. Excuse it. There's so much dust in this neighborhood. And there ain't enough room to take care of things. I'm goin' to fix it up as soon as I get a little time. Buster should be cleanin' up but he's in the street somewhere. I'm ashame of him and I'm ashame of myself fo' lovin' him. Son, I got troubles with that man. You don't know what it means to have a man on yo' hands who won't work. Do you know that Buster ain't had nobody's job in three years? I calls him my W. P. A. man 'cause the last job he had was on the W. P. A. He come sayin', 'Baby, don't call me no W. P. A. man, call me yo' stomp digger.' I can't call him that. He ain't diggin' no stomps. Old fool. He's waitin' fo' his W.P.A card agin. And if you ask me it ain't comin'. I keep tellin' that fool that, but he won't listen. Old fool! "When they laid him off, the man particular told him to find a job 'cause they had to out the rolls. Instead of him lookin' fo' a job he went to all them offices and fussed with the people. Everywhere he went they told him to find another job. He makes me mad, 'cause he ain't got nothin' on his mind. He done even wrote to the President. I was just wishin' the President would of told him he ain't had no time foolin' wid him. But the President wrote him. Was he happy. That fool got that letter in his wallet, and his wallet is empty. I don't talk to him no mo' about work. 'Cause when you wants to make Buster real mad just talk to him about work. Never seen a man gets so mad.
"I'm tellin' you I don't know how we make it. After I takes my insurance money out my salary and pay a few bills I ain't got nothin'. Do you think he'll ask questions? Huh! All he wants to do is sit around till I bring them white folks' pots home. Mrs. Jacobs done asked me how many mouths I'm feedin'. That Buster is got three I feel like tellin' her sometimes. But I'm scared she'll get mad and run him plum out of this room. This is her house, you know. And you know how white folks is. They'll run you clean away from 'em When you ain't doin' what's right.
"And people wonder Why I pray. Shucks, I got troubles. Just like I say. After a few things come out of my salary it looks like a silver dime. Worse than that even.
"I'm local. I was born right here. Born on Sixth Street. I ain't had no pa. Don't guess my ma had time to keep up wid that. She told me I ain't had no pa. I didn't argue, she ought to know. Not me. I'm here by the hardest. I don't knew why but I'm she glad of it! I betcha that! And I ain't askin' too many questions about it 'cause somebody might find out that I ain't got no business here and send me on back where I come from. I hear 'um talkin' about Senator Bilbo wants all the cullud people to go back to Africa. Africa ain't did me nothin'. I don't see why I got to go back to Africa. I'm doin' all right here. I don't need nothin' in Africa. Who started that, anyhow? Them people can think of some of the worse stuff. I thought Buster was bad enough, but I reckon some white folks is just as bad.
"My ma raised me all the way. She was cook and wanted me to be one. My ma could make any dish put on the table. They used to call her 'Toot-it Tot' 'cause when she turned loose a pot it was Toot-it Tot. That means it was ready. My ma had me workin' wid her. No, I ain't had much schoolin' but I got good mother-wit. I can read and write. Ain't nobody can beat me out a dollar, I betcha that. I been around the white folks. When I was little I used to run on errands fo' white folks. Used to eat in their kitchen, mind their chillun and things. Facts was, that was the first job I ever done got. School? I went to the third, did all right too. I didn't like school much. If it wasn't fo' 'rithmetio I would of done all right, I reckon. That's what used to whup me. Just couldn't make it go, that's all. I was a bright child fo' everything else. Got my readin', spellin' and stuff. I went to McDonogh number 24. Mr. Priestley was the principal. He sho could use a strap. That man ain't had no pity on you. He use to fold that strap and slam you across the hine wid it and almost knock you crazy. I 'members one day he caught me in the hall fo' bein' late, and he came dow on me wid that strap. Did that hurt!
"I can 'member that my ma went to work early every mornin'. Her name was Marguerite Wilson. She was a short brownskin lady. She says my pa was brown skin too. I used to ask her why I'm so chocolate and she used to laugh and say, 'We plucked you out of a dark cloud that was hangin' low one day.' Fo' the longest I believed that. Me and my ma used to live in room just like this, only hers had a fire grate in it. We used to sit down in front of that grate and make popcorn and eat 'um. Mamma used to tell me about her old days on the farm. She was from Harahan, used to work for some rich white folks when she was younger. Yes indeed, me and my mamma was good friends.
"Yes, mamma went to church. That's where I got the habit from. She took me to Church every Sunday, didn't miss a Sunday. Mamma thought all the world in goin' to church. Used to say, 'Divinity is the word. Pray fo' what you want and want what you pray fo'.' Them was her true words.
"There was nothin' stylish about my ma. She was just a plain woman. She didn't do no runnin' around neither. I ain't never seen my ma wid no man. I tried to grow up and be just like her. She was a hard workin' woman, and she brought the pans right home. Then we'd sit down and eat out of the pans, and she'd tell me all about how them white folks like her cookin' and what they said. That's sumpin' me and mamma sho like to do, make them white folks talk about our cookin'. You is cookin' when you can make them white folks come pat you on the shoulders and say, 'Marguerite, that dinner was sho nice, child.' That's the way they say it, you know. Sometimes they give you tips and things. My people does that all the time. They is always sayin' sumpin' nice about my cookin'. It makes you feel so good.
"Well, things went well. Then Mamma commenced gettin' old. I was hittin' around sixteen years old and gettin' kind of lively. There was a heap of fellows comin' around tryin' to get me but I kept my head up and my mind on mamma. 'Cose, you know I was scrapin' around. Gettin' some washin' here and there, makin' a lil' sumpin' and puttin' it right in the house. Well, mamma got sick and she put me in her place. I was workin' fo' Miss Graves. It sho was funny. Miss Graves says to me, 'Honey child, does you think you can do my cookin?' I says yes'm. Shucks, in two days I had Miss Graves sayin', 'Honey child, I want you to be my regular cook.' She give me five dollars a week fo' cookin' and cleanin' up the house. It was some house, a two-story house. The only thing I didn't like about Miss Graves was that she always messed around the kitchen. She was always sayin', "Honey child, is you got enough seasonin' in the food?' I wasn't no sassy thing, you know. I always says yes'm. But I ain't paid her no mind. Just says yes'm. You got to say sumpin', ain't you?
"I worked fo' Miss Graves two years all by myself. Mamma was home sick. We had some scuffle. I took care of my mamma off of five dollars a week. Talkin' about makin' a dollar stretch. Cose, I nearly go blind lookin' at my lil' money, but I been makin' them dollars go fo' a mighty long time, son. I don't know how it would feel to have some big money. Don't guess I could arrange it much. Cose, me and my ma didn't wear no stylish clothes, But our clothes was sho good enough to go to church in. I wasn't no high steppin' gal, 'cause I loved my ma too well and I wasn't rightly fixed. But if I'd known then what I know now I'd been a solid mess. Don't you know that our preacher had his stuff and he used to keep his eyes on me. Used to tell me all the time, 'Sister, I got my eyes on you.' I didn't say nothin' much, but I did a heap of thinkin'. You see in them times I didn't know them preachers was ronnin' around.
"Things went on mighty bad wid me pushing here and pullin' there fo' a long time. Mamma was gettin' no better. I was gettin' up in years and the boys commenced comin' around. All of 'um wanted me to pull up my dress. That's all I could hear. 'Pull up yo' dress. Pull up yo' dress.' I commenced wonderin' What would happen if I'd pull up my dress. That's what you get. Some nice boys used to ask me that. And does you know one thing, like a fool, I waited till old Buster came along and then I pulled up my dress. That was the finals. What Buster didn't put on me, Lawd! I told that nigger he'd hafta marry me 'cause I liked it. He did. Both of us loved each other. But a heap of womens loved Buster. My ma used to tell me all the time that Buster wasn't the kind of man fo' me. I know, I used to hear people talkin' all the time, sayin', 'Don't let find nothin' out fo' you, find it out fo' yo'self. So, boy, you got to 'cuse my talk, but I got me two or three mens but they ain't satisfied me none. I was right. Old Buster is the man fo' me. That's the only thing my ma was ever wrong about!
"Yeah, Buster did all right then. He used to work down at the cotton warehouse. But I didn't get too much of his money 'cause he had to take care of his mamma and his papa. Then, old Buster spent plenty money on his back. He like to look fine, you know. That's what's hurtin' him now.
"We was livin' in a three-room house. The rent was ten dollars a month. I was still workin'. Did Buster eat them pans, like a goat eats paper. That man used to fall in them pans sumpin' awful. Man, pans is good eatin'. Ain't you never ate none? You get all that comes off the table.
"But let me tell you how I got Mrs. Jacobs to give me her pans. When I went there I says I slung pans. She says, "What's that, Marguerite?' I says I slung pans, Mrs. Jacobs, that's all I knows. She commenced laughin'. Oh, she got a big kick out of that. Finally, she says, 'I don't know what you is talkin' about, slung pans, but I give my cook all she can eat here, and I don't allow her to take anything home because I use the food the next day.' I ain't said no mo'. I just stood there. She says, 'What's the matter?' I says nothin'. She ups and asks me if I wanted to work under them conditions and I says, 'Yes'm, I'll work fo' you under any conditions. Missus Jacobs.'
Well, I went to work. Buster and my ma started worryin' me about the pans. We was in a bad bix then. Lil' money comin' in, mama sick, and lil' food. Went on three months like that. I don't care if Mrs. Jacobs asked me to climb the house I did it. Just do what them white folks want you to do... no matter what it is, do it. Man, I was doin' everything round that house. I was only suppose to cook but I went to washin' and ironin', took the maid's job. Made my dinner. Sot down and asked Mrs. Jacobs to read to me the new recipes in the book.
"I was nice with Mrs. Jacobs but Buster and my ma was givin' me hell. Buster told me that if I didn't quit that job he was goin' to quit me. My ma told me I was an old fool to be workin' fo' people who didn't give her cook the pans and pots. I ain't said nothin'. You know, son, white folks think niggers is crazy anyhow. So you got to be crazy sometimes to get what you want from 'um. Well, I did all this work and mo' besides. So I gets myself together one day when Mrs. Jacobs givin' a big party. The house was goin' to be flooded with people. She was fixin' things here and I was fixin' things there. I folds my hands and I walks up to Mrs. Jacobs. I says, 'Missus Jacobs, I got you a fine dinner today and I done done all my work.' She says, 'Yes, Marguerite, everything is finished.' Then I walks away from her and I says, 'Missus Jacobs, I'm quittin' less you let me slung some pans to my house.' She says, 'When is you quittin', Marguerite? Would you be dirty enough to leave me now?' I says, 'No, mam. If I was goin' to be dirty I'd left you b'fo' all this was done. But is you goin' to make me lose my husband by not givin' me some food fo' us. The only thing we cullud people can do is get home and eat a little sumpin' you white folks can't eat. Has that ever crossed yo' mind, Missus Jacobs? Is you humanity? I could see the change on her face. She says, 'You know damn well I'm humanity!' I says then give me them pans and pots. She says, 'Why, you Marguerite. I got a mind to fire you.' But she only had a mind. She wasn't goin' to fire me now. She looked at her watch and then she told me, 'Get back to that kitchen, Marguerite, and never talk to me like that again.' I says no mam Missus Jacobs, I'm sorry. And I cried 'cause I was sorry. She says, 'I'm goin' let you take home my pots and pans, but I want you to come and go out my front door, 'cause I don't mean fo' you to take home my whole kitchen.'
"The party was fine. I heard all them people talkin' about my cookin'. They wanted to see me. Missus Jacobs, she likes that, you know. I met them white folks. Was I happy! Well, let me tell you. Boy, it's no word of lie. Buster was packin' his clothes to leave me. Come tellin' me, 'I Ain't seen a woman yet who couldn't get the pans from her white folks. The trouble is you ain't askin' fo' no pans." Don't you know I asked fo' them pans just in time. If Buster would-a left me What was I goin' to do. He did run around but he was some consolation at night. No, Buster ain't had much education, but he's got a heap of sense.
"Then around 1925 my ma died. I bury her. That was the first time I ever missed work. Man, I been workin' fo' Missus Jacobs so long I'm on her dead list. I hope she dies befo' me so I can get seme of that heiress money. I ain't the only one waitin' fo' that money neither. She's got a nephew there who is layin' in the hole fo' that money. She'll leave a heap of thousands. But, that old wonan is goin' to outlive all of us and leave that money to Hotel Dieu or some place. That's where them White folks leave that money. They never gives it to po' folks. Lawd, what is Buster goin' to do then! Come askin' me was I sho that Missus Jacobs got me in the will. I says yes. What you reckon? He says, 'I just want to know, that's all.' She tells me she's goin' to give me some money some day and look at me circulate it. Lawd, she won't see me circulate it, but she'll see Buster circulate it. There's only one thing worry in' me. It's that cool-lookin' brownskin gal. Oh, you got to give it to her now - she's cool. I think she's got Buster. But let the fool go. She's a young gal, she'll wear him down one day. If she don't the Lawd will.
"Buster's people all dead, and mine too. No, we ain't got no chillun. Don't guess we had the right system. Can't have none now 'cause our joints done got too old. Sho, I likes chillun. Wouldn't want but two - boys. Maybe they could help me out of this storm. Be my social security. I thinks people ought to have chillun. But they ought not to have mo' than they can take care of. Now, what would I do wid three or fo' kids? We'd starve fo' true then. I got a W. P. A. man I tell you. That's the only work he wants to do. He gets in with the foreman and gets one of them easy jobs. But I guess Buster needs an easy job to have an old and young womens. Poor Buster! I don't know where his mind is but it sho ain't on no work. And Buster sho can't be thinkin' he's no pimp or nothin' like that. Talk to him? Man, Buster gets blood mad when I talks to him. I just let him be. He's raggety, ain't got nothin'. I got to mend his pants and sew mo' buttons on his shirts than anything in the world.
"About this education. It's all right but where is the cullud goin' to use it? There ain't no good-payin' jobs in this part of the country fo' us. I say learn a trade or get good porter jobs. Work fo' good white people. They is wantin' intelligent cullud people now. I heard a lady say the other day she wish she knew where she could get a good college cullud girl to nurse her baby, 'cause them other gals is too dumb. Missus Jacobs says them college gals is too damn smart. There was one aginst the other.
People should marry young and belong to church, 'cause when you got a Christian heart you can do no wrong. Missus Jacobs says I'm right on that. She always tellin' me, 'Marguerite, you is glad you is black and you is so happy.' I says yes'm Missus Jacobs I'm what I am. And I is proud of it. I got what wants. A lil' home, a good job. And to tell the truth, I done got used to a triflin' man. If he'd change now I'd be sorry.
"Me and Buster ain't never been sick in our life. A little cold, yes, but nothin' else. We go to church sometimes. But, son, I spent most of my time foolin' wid Buster. He gets half-drunk, drunk, and re-drunk, and I got to make him sober. Got to feed him and fix him up. You know, I'm goin' get tired of that man and kill him. Might not do it 'cause I love him. Ain't that a shame? What can I do?"
- Robert McKinney
My WPA Man (Negro) Louisiana Excellent
Wife talking - relief nominally-worthless man, common-law wife got some education - mother a good woman- cook - got incapasitated - girl had to support family-solicited by boys, finally surrendered to Buster-made him marry her - how she came to "sling pass" home request when mistress dies - Buster will "circulate" money she gets - education don't do "cullud" folks no good - would kill husband, but what can she do? - she leves him.
