Nettie McDonald Alabama
Edited by. Jack Kytle
Editorial Dept.
I'M CRAZY 'BOOT RATS
It was just before daylight when the timbers started crackin'. You could. hear 'em way down there in the dark, like firecrackers poppin' in a croker sack. The men stopped diggin' all of a sudden; they didn't say nothin'--just cocked their ears and listened. A rook plopped down some'ers close by.
"At first, nobody, moved a step--just stood listenin' with their mouths hangin' open. Then. when th' poppin' still seemed a good piece off. somebody yelled, "Here they come! Let's get th' hell out!'
"And they was comin', ma'am. You've heard of skeered nice Well, these was big rats--but they was skeered, too. They knew as well as any man there that the roof was startin' to cave. I've always watched 'em mighty, close, for they, can spot danger a mile off. They're th' best friends a coal digger ever had, and I wouldn't kill one for anything in th' world. Folks outside cuss 'em for the trouble they cause, but I tell you, they've saved a flock of lives. When th' crackin' starts, th' rats hear it first and come scurryin' out like hell fire. And they usually come runnia' in plenty of time for the men to get out. Me, I'm crazy 'bout 'em!"
Bennie Amerson chuckled, and shoved his cap back on his graying head. He is a. wiry, souch-shouldered little man, with a face made pasty by long hours underground. But corded muscles on his forearm, revealed by rolled up shirt sleeves, show that his thin body has strength. He says, "I've been sinkin' picks in coal a mighty long time."
He stood near the begrimed mouth of a long-used mine, running his fingers idly along the surface of weathered timbers. A few hundred yards away, over by the commissary was the drab, gray house where he lived with his wife, Mary, and the two boys. Other houses, similarly built and just as drab, lined the side of a hill made rough by blackened outcroppings of rock. At the foot of the hill, the railroad curved off into more distant hills. Deep ruts, left by trucks and autos, marred the beauty of roses and tulips planted by, some of the community's women in their front yards.
Bennie Amerson reached down for a rock and tossed it away aimlessly. "Mine accidents are terrible things," he said. "you've always got to watch for cavin' timbers, and you've got to watch for gas. An explosion can ill men like they, was flies. Now, in this mine, we don't have much gas. I'm happy 'bout that, because th' rats can't help out much when th' gas starts risin' and formin' in pockets. They're like us men--sometimes they feel danger, and then ag' in, they don't.
"There ain't as many terrible accidents now as in the old days. That's because men have learned better how to keep off the tragedies of nature. You take this mine; we've got air course runnin' on a parallel with th' headin's and th' entry, and fresh air is fanned in through then all the time. That wasn't th' case away hack yonder. Why, I remember as if 'twuz yesterday when the convict mine over at Banner blew up several years back. Th' explosion was so awful that it shook th' top of our coal stove. There was 125 convicts and eight guards killed in that one.
"You know, ma'am, time sure does fly. I've been diggin' coal over since I was seventeen, and now I'm gettin' along in years. You can go up th' read a piece and find th' first openin' I ever worked in, but they quit diggin' there a long time ago. After I'd come here to Republic and worked about fifteen years, my boss went over to Walker County and opened up a new mine. He took me with him as a partner, and paid me a pretty good salary besides. I cleaned up a thousand dollars over there, but th' lease played out and he brought me back here and made me a foreman. But I never liked runnin' things so much, because they's a lot of things to worry about. These payrolls have got to be met, even if the foreman don't eat. Them, I'm always uneasy 'bout havin' some sort of accident."
He extended his hands, palms outward, toward the mouth of the mine.
"Just feel how cool that air is that's comin' out of there. The temperature stays at 'bout 65 all the year around. That's th' way it is with all mines that's got natural air for ventilation purposes, but when a mine's got th' artificial sort of air, a body nearly freezes.
"This here mine is what you call a slope, because it goes in on a gentle downward drag. Th' track's laid all th' way down through th' main entrance, and then into th' headin's. Inside there, th' rooms are so low that mules can't get in, so we use little tram cars that hold 'bout a ton of coal. Wo'm, you can't even stand, up to dig. You've got to stoop over real low, and lots of times you've got to dig while you're layin' flat down. Sometimes rocks falls, and they hurt pretty, bad. Three years ago I was hurt when one of 'em fell smack on my back, but I've been mighty, lucky, all told.
'A man's got to be mighty careful all th' time. Course, props of pins timber are supposed to be placed every four feet in a room to keep the roof steady. They's a law requirin' that, but lots of times it ain't carried out. Another thing that helps hold th' roof is th' coal that's left for pillars, and th' rock and slate that's thrown back or "gobbed." Sometimes when you go back in th'mines to pull th' pillars there ain't enough support, and then you have a 'squeeze.'
"As I say, I've been mighty lucky. I'm lucky even 'bout my boss. He's He'S fair to every one of his workers. In some mines where a man loads too much slate or cock in th' coal, they dock him a good amount; but Mr. Jones don't never do that. When a man gets to loadin' slate and rock here, Mr. Jones calls him out and warns him friendly like. Then, if th' man does it ag'in, he loses his job. That's fair as it can be, because a miner knows damned well when he's loadin' slate; it's a lot heavier than coal.
"In a good many mines, they're tough on a man who loads rock slate. He has to lay off a full day, if he loads twelve carbide cans full. For every other can he fills out of three tons of coal, he has to lay off for three days. You see, men'd get careless if you didn't watch 'em. They'd just load everything as they come to it--slate, rock and all.
"To watch a lot of miners, you'd think they're as ignorant of their jobs as the folks outside. It's right funny the ideas some people get 'bout this work. We've got lots of water here, and we pump out plenty of it to run th' washer. That washer washes all th' coal that we get out of this mine, but you don't wash coal to got th' dust off it. like some people think, but to clean it of slate and rock. The other day a man come down here to buy some coal for his furnace, and we told him we couldn't sell him any, because th' washer was out of order. Then he skinned his ignorance by sayin', "Ah, that don't make any difference. Send it on out, and I'll wash it off with the hose before it's unloaded!"
"But we won't be sendin' much more coal away from here. This mine's just 'bout through. That's why we still use mules to draw th' coal out, instead of puttin' in. modern machinery. We're working now for th' reason that we ain't called a commercial mine. The big mines are all shut down 'til they sign a new contract, and most of the fellows are out on strike.
"What do I think 'bout unions? Well, ma'am, I believe that every miner has th' right to join one if he wants to. Th' operators have got a union, you know, and they really stand together for everything that's comin' to 'em. Th' main trouble that I can see with th' unions is that they need some real, honest to-God leaders.
"Plenty of money was bet on whether th' CIO or th' A.F. of L. would do th' negotiatin' for th' United Mine Worlers of America. Th' CIO was the bunch that won out. but I don't think it would've made much difference which way things went. Th' big bugs at th' top got all th' money anyways. But it's a good thing it was settled, because in Alabama th' boys who was strikin' couldn't go on relief, and couldn't draw no compensation, either; and didn't many of 'em draw union benefits.
"A whole lot of folks think that to join th' United Mine Workers, you've got to work inside a mine, or around it. But there ain't a word of truth in that. When th' chapter here was organized, half of th' charter members never had worked 'round a mine, and never even expected to use a pick or shovel. All they had to do was join, pay their dues, and be initiated.
"The benefits they pay now is a whole lot better than th' way it used to be. Way back yonder when miners'd go on strikes, they'd hand out what they called 'Esau' instead of benefits. This 'Esau'was navy beans, side meat, potatoes, flour, sugar, coffee, meal, and compound lard. It was handed out accordin' to the size of the families, and if my memory serves me right, th' last 'Esau' was passed around during th' strike of 1922.
"I guess I love a coal mine better'n any place on earth. It sort of gets a fellow when he follows it awhile. Over at Westfield, a T.C.I. place, they won't give you a job if they find out you've worked in a coal mine. They know good as anything that after they've fretted away time and money trainin' you, you'll go back to th' mines sooner or later. And I wouldn't deny that they've got us down 'bout right."
Bennie chuckled again, and looked up toward the house, where two young boys dressed in overalls were playing catch in the narrow front yard. "Le's go up there and see my old woman," he said. "I'll bet she's beginnin' to think we've forgotten all about her."
When we were almost to the porch, he paused. "Be careful here," he Warned. "That middle step is off at one end, and if you don't watch yourself, you'll get your neck broke. All of us know where th' dangerous places are. but we have to tell our visitors how to get around 'em." He glanced up at the slanting roof. "This old place ain't so much anymore," he said someonly. "Th' screens are all out, and, when it rains outside, it pours inside. I would fix up that roof, but I never seem to get enough time. You can't blame th' owners for not wantin' to fix it, because th' mine's nearly worked out."
Inside the house, there was a sound of chairs scraping the floor. A moment later, a woman was framed in the doorway, the lines of her heavy body emphasized by a close-fitting cotton dress. She said, "Well do come in. I'd begun to think that Bennie was goin' to keep you down there at th' mine. He ain't got any hospitality at all when you start him talkin' about that place."
She shoved a chair forward for her guest, and then walked over to a quilt that swung on a frame in the center of the room. She pushed a needle into its cottony depths, and then drew up a chair for herself. "I've been wishin' somebody would come and stop me from workin' on this quilt," she said. "My back's so tired now it's about to break. "She smiled, and tiny wrinkles played around her brown eyes.
Mary Amerson is a strong woman, straight-shoulddred, and with a determined lift to her chin. Her face is tanned by sun and wind; her hands look as strong and as capable as those of a man. Wisps of gray are beginning to show in her dark brown hair, but her slow smile is contagions, and her eyes are youthful behind thick lashes.
Bennie said, "I'm goin' back to th' mine while you women-folks give us men the devil. I catah enough of it with just one woman around, let alone two." He laughed softly at his joke, and then walked out the door.
Mary Amerson smiled and shook her head. "It'd take a block and tackle to keep him away from that mine," she said. "He stays down there whether he's supposed to be working or not. I don't know what he'd do without a coal diggin' to puddle about, and I guess I'm about as bad. We've lived here 25 years, and you get to foolin' close akin to a place after that long a time.
"I don't ever go to the mine now, but I remember a time when they had trouble keeping me out of one. Why, many a time I've woke in the dead of night and gone down there. I always bad to sneak down, because if any of the miners saw me, they'd come scootin' out. You see, a woman's bad luck--else the men say they are. I don't believe a word of it. Women always do more good than harm. But the miners say that if one of 'em enters the mouth of a diggin', there'll he an accident. They'll just pick up their tools and get out of that shaft. Some of 'em won't ever go back in the hole again.
"When I first married, I just couldn't seem to stay away from the mines. He was down there--Bennie, I mean--and he was on the night shift. You know, when you love a man you're always worryin' about him. Sometimes I guess them that don't love get by easier. Anyway, I'd wake up, and when I'd get to thinkin' about him. I'd get so lonesome I wouldn't know which way to turn. Then I'd. fix up some sandwiches to give me an excuse for goin', and go down there to him.
"Oh, he'd scold me sometimes, but then he'd laugh and tell me I was the beaten'est woman he over saw. There ain't a mean bone in Bennie's body, and he'd be the best man in the world if it wasn't for old liquor. That's his chief trouble. When he puts whiskey in his insides, the devil gees in with it. Bad as I hate to tell you, he's just now gettin' over a three-day, spree.
"That old stuff's caused all the fallin's out we've ever had. I wasn't goin' to tell you this, but I'd as well go ahead. One day several years ago I saw a bunch of men with guns at their hips pass by the houses. They was headed toward the mine, and at first I didn't know what to think. Then it hit my brain that Benny'd been smellin' mighty loud, of old wildcat the last few days, and my suspicions got up. I just threw down everything I was doin, got down my shotgun, and. started runnin'. I followed a little path to the side of the hill and run right into a brush heap. Well, I stopped just a second to kick the limbs to one side, and what do you think I found?-- Some boards that covered a hole loadin' into the mine!
"I jerked those boards off like fightin' fire, and then I slid down through that hole. I landed right in front of Bennie, almost in some of that slop he was stirrin'. Sure, that's what he was doin'--makin' whiskey! There wasn't any, time for words. I yelled at him that the Law was on its way, and we got everything hid before the officers got there. They sniffed around a little, and the place must have smelled mighty rank, but they never found any of the whiskey. When they left I gave Bennie a piece of my mind that he'll remember to the Judgment day. It must have done some good, too, because he buys all his liquor now."
She tamed for a moment to her quilting, her tanned fingers resting upon the frame. "I think I'm goin' to have a mighty pretty quilt here," she smiled. "There's nothing in this world that I'd rather do, because a body can't have too many of 'em. But this one belongs to my girl, Margaret; she pieced it herself. That's one thing I taught my girls to do--make quilts. In summer when school was out, I had my girls workin' instead of runnin' about Lord knows where. Margaret had four finished when she got married, and she keeps wantin' more and more.
"Margaret's a mighty young thing to be keepin' house, but at that, she waited longer than the other girls. She's nineteen, and she's got a head full of good sense. Mr. Jones, the man Bennie works for, said he'd give her a set of silver if she'd finish high school before she got married. Well, she got it. She got a good man, too--a miner over at Hamilton Slope, about six miles from here. They're goin' to have their first baby in June.
"It makes me sad and happy at the same time to think about my girls havin' babies. My oldest girl, Mattie, was just fifteen when she was married, and she died when her first baby was born. She was gettin' on just fine when all of a sudden she took a high fever. They never did know just what was the matter--else they never would tell me--but I always believed it was childbed fever. I guess we waited too long about callin' the doctor. I never did have any trouble bearin' children, and somehow or other, I didn't expect Mattie to have any. We took the baby and kept him until his daddy married some other woman.
"I worry a lot about my girl Imogene. She was just fifteen when her first baby came, and he's almost a year old now and full of life as a 'coon. It's her man that gives as me my trouble. He's nineteen--old enough to know how to behave--but he's already started to run around with girls. He ought to have listened closer to his marriage vows, because they're mighty sacred. I believe he tells the girls that he's not married, for they're nice-lookin'-- not the painted up kind that get in automobiles with married men. I guess the old saying is true that 'when children are small they step on your feet, but when they grow up they step on your heart.'
"Everywhere I turn these days, it seems that I run into babies. My second oldest son married last July when he was seventeen and his wife was just fourteen, and they're expectin' their first baby in June. Margaret's will come about the same time, and I just don't know how I'll manage to be with both of them at once. I'll have to manage somehow, though, because my boy's mother-in-law is blind and can't do anything helpful.
"Of all my children that get married, Alice hurt me worse. She was the smartest child I had, and she's just fourteen now. I didn't know that she cared a thing about boys, because she never even mentioned goin' with anybody. I guess that's why it was such a shock. She always said that she was goin' to finish high school, and then go on to college; but she let the love bug bite her. She was double promoted twice, and could make circles around every other young'n in her class. She told me about lovin' this boy just two weeks before she married him, but hurt as I was, I didn't raise a hand. It just seemed to be a case of 'marry she must, or die she would.'
"When she was a little thing, she'd talk about bein' a school teacher, and I'd always hoped she'd do that. I suppose I was tryin' to live my life over in her, for I was always sorry that I didn't teach. I went through the tenth grade, and back then I could have got a third-grade teachin' license with that much learnin". But I did what I wanted to do--I married Bennie Amerson. And I know my girls are doin' what they want to do when they get married.
"Bennie and me just have two little boys left at home with us now, but the married children can come home any time they want to, because they don't live far away. Our smallest boy is ten, and the other is twelve; and I know it won't be many years before they'll up and fly the coop like the others.
"I can sit and look back over my life and know that I raised good children-- thank the lord for that. Not a one of the boys drinks or gambles, and none of the girls 'went wrong'. But I'll have to say that not a one of them belong to the church. That won't seem me strange when I tell you that we've never had a regular preacher out here, 'though it's only a fifteen-minute drive into Birmingham. There ain't no preacher that's goin' to preach without money, and I, for one, don't believe in payin' anybody to preach the gospel. I belong to the Hard Shell Baptists, and lots of my beliefs are taken from that teachin' of my church, 'What is to be, will be. '
"One of the girls did talk a little once about joinin' up with the Missionary Baptists, but she was only ten years old, I told her it was scripture that Christ said to 'let the little children come unto me, ' but then I told her that I wished she'd wait till she know her mind better. That was a mistake, I guess, because she never has even so much as mentioned joinin' up with any church ag'in. Bennie don't belong to any church either. I hate it, but he don't like to talk about it.
"If we'd a had a good live church here, I don't reckon we'd a been so hell bent on keepin' our school, for a long time the county board has been tryin' to consolidate our school with some others. and send the children on buses. They said they could do better by the children that way. but we don't think so. Sometimes it seems the board is goin' to win out despite us, but we always come back at 'em with enough arguments to be good for another year.
"Why, I don't see how we'd get along without our school. We'd never get together in a bunch if it weren't for the P. T.A. and school meetin's. you've just got to have somethin' to work together on if you ever feel at home in a place.
"We just got two teachers for six grades, but we got the best F.T.A. in the county, with 35 good members. I won't have a single child in school after this year, but I won't stop fightin' for the others. I promised if they stuck by me, I'd stick by them.
"My religion comes in right here about the school business. I say that if a young'n wants to learn. he'll learn no matter how many grades are in one room. If he don't want to learn they could have a hundred teachers, and still he wouldn't know a blessed thing. "
There was a sudden sound of noisy footsteps on the porch outside. The two boys, who had been playing catch with an old baseball in the front yard, filed into the room, caps in dust-stained hands. For a moment they stood insilence. glancing in uncertainty first at their mother and then as the visitor. But at last, the youngest of then took a deep breath. He said, "Ma, ain't we ever gonna have any supper!"
6/19/39
S. J.