Worker: W. B. Sedberry
Interviewed:Mr. and Mrs. A. T.
Stewart, 116 Halifax St., Raleigh.
Written: December 1, 1938.
[North Carolina]
A. T. AND RACHEL
"So, that's your idea of a happy life--to change wives."
That is what I heard, expressed in a high and angry voice, just as I knocked on the door of the room occupied by Mr. and Mrs. A. T. Stewart. When I knocked everything quieted down, and a man's voice told me to "come in."
Mrs. Stewart was picking up a picture frame and pieces of a picture of her husband. In her anger she had torn the picture into many sections. Her husband was standing in a corner of the room with a sort of silly grin on his face. Their baby, a boy, was crying rather loudly in his crib, as if the argument between his mother and father had just about broken his heart. Even from across the room, one could see he was badly in need of a change of diapers.
A. T. and Rachel (that is how the Stewarts are known to their intimates) had been living in Raleigh for about a couple of years, moving in conformance to their prosperity or lack of it, from furnished rooms to apartments and back to rooms again. On several occasions, when A. T.'s jobs "Played out." they had been force to accept shelter in the home of Rachel's mother.
A. T. only a week or so before had landed a job with a Raleigh bus company. He and his wife and baby had moved back to Raleigh and found quarters in a rooming house on Halifax Street. That is where they are now. The room they had was quite large. They had a private bath but it was dirty and ill kept. The double bed was crumpled, as if several people had been tussling on it. They rather shame-facedly invited me to have a seat.
"What's the trouble?" Mrs. Stewart repeated my question with almost a shout. "Why, that so-and-so, A. T. has just come in from the park where he was supposed to be giving Bobby (their baby) an airing. Instead of that, he's been spending the time with that woman he married before he did me, and I'm not going to stand for it. He ought to have sense enough to know that she ran off and left him and married another man before they were divorced. Now that she's tired of her new husband, she's trying to break up my home. I'll wring her neck if I ever get hold of her! No! No! He can go back to her if he wants to, because I'm through. I'm going home to my mother."
"Now, listen, baby," A. T. broke in. "You've got things all wrong. I was sitting on a bench in Capitol Square watching Bobby try to play with the pigeons and squirrels, when someone sat down beside me. I looked around and saw that it was my former wife. I hadn't seen her in a long time and I don't care if I never see her again. I couldn't chase her away, from a public place like that"-- turning to me--"and I couldn't keep her from talking, although Rachel seems to think I ought to have done both."
A. T., apparently anxious to end the argument, and also seemingly glad of the timely interruption, said: "Well, it's time for me to go to work. You-all can stay here and talk as long as you like."
After A. T. had rather hurriedly picked up his cap and left, Rachel turned to me and said:
"You know, I reckon I shouldn't have torn up that picture but I was mad clear through. And I knew that I had another one even better than the one I tore up. There it is over there on the mantel, see?
"I just wanted him to get a pretty good idea of how I felt about his first wife," she continued. "She's afraid of A. T. because she thinks about her getting married again before her divorce from him was illegal and thinks he might want to do something about it.
"I haven't had an easy time since I married A. T. You see, my father made a good living for his family until he started drinking. I was born in 1911 just three miles out of Henderson where Daddy ran a grocery store that his father had been running at a quarry and farm village. Soon after, though, he persuaded Mother to move into Henderson where he opened up a wholesale candy store. He sold the store in the country. He made money at first and gave my older sisters a good education. I have seven sisters and two younger brothers. They were all born out in the country. But when my twin sister and me and two brothers got old enough, that is up in high school, Daddy started drinking so badly that he lost his business. That kinder hurt Mother for she wanted us to have as much education as she had: she finished high school and studied music under a private teacher in Asheville.
"My mother was born in Black Mountain where her father ran a hotel and owned the first stagecoaches in the state. She said that they had everything they wanted, saddle horses and buggy horses. But one day a man who worked for Granddaddy fifteen years took all of his money--about $80,000--and skipped into Canada and to this day he's never been heard from. So Granddaddy got him a job as overseer for the quarry at Greystone just about six miles from here and that is how Mother met my daddy.
They were, both Episcopalians and went to the same church. Mother said as far back as she could remember both of the families had voted the Democratic ticket.
"I was born out there in the country but ever since I can remember I've lived in Henderson. I remember one time when my twin sister and me took a trip to Raleigh. We wasn't but five years old. Mother put us on the train in Henderson and I was plenty scared because it was the first time I'd ever been off without a grown person I knew along. But Mother said, 'Well, you just as well learn young to stand on your own feet and have confidence in your own self.' That has always been Mother's way--take care of yourself because no one is going to take care of you. She is really boss of her family right to this day.
"Daddy made good money when he first went in the wholesale candy business and he and Mother bought the home they're living in and paid for it outright. But by the time I got to the tenth grade in high school, Daddy was drinking so badly that Mother could not trust him out on the trade for he was sure to get drunk at the first or second stop. That put a stop to the money coming in to run the house on and so Mother would get a load of candy in the old Dodge she had and sometimes she would go with drunk Daddy and sometimes she would leave him at home or drunk up street and go out and sell to his customers. I've been with her lots of times and the customers were just as nice to her as they could be. Well, she would make $3 or $4 a day when she could work all day but so many days she would have to stay home and tend to her household duties.
"The worst hurt I ever saw Mother, though, was when my oldest brother was brought home to die with tuberculosis. They'd kept him in a sanatorium for months and months just hoping for the best for he was a swell young man and was the best one of my brothers or sisters to me. Well, one day Mother told me Maitland was coming home to stay. I was glad in a way although the doctors had given up all hope of him ever getting well and Mother was bringing him home where she could nurse him the last few days of his life.
"My oldest sister had taken a business course and had gotten her a job in the Navy yard, at Norfolk and that paid pretty good, I reckon. Then my next oldest sister, Viney, was finishing a business course at King's Business College and she came home and got a job in the bank. And just as soon as my next sister finished high school she got married. That didn't suit Mother at the time, for she couldn't stand it for her children to leave her and Viney didn't know the man she married for very long. He had a job in Washington, D. C. and of course she had to go up there and live. But the boy she married turned out to be all right. He works for the railroad and makes plenty money.
"Then everything went along smooth at home except for Daddy who was still drinking. One night we were sitting around the house and my sister next to we twins came in and told Mother she had run away and gotten married. Well sir, Mother didn't like that kind of marriage but there wasn't nothing she could do about it. So they moved in the house with us. Her husband didn't turn out so good. He would work some around the stores in town clerking and things like that but now he don't do anything. They've had to put him in Dix Hill for drinking, once or twice. And let me tell you something funny about that: Daddy carried him over to the Hill. Daddy has been there for drinking, I don't know how many times. When he carried Slick over there they thought Daddy was coming back and you should have heard everybody welcoming him, even the keepers. But he fooled them that time and Daddy laughs about that right to this day. While my sister's husband was in Dix Hill she got a job with the W.P.A. and that pays her $60 a month. Well, they have a little girl that is in about the sixth or seventh grade now and you know how much money it takes to keep up a kid like that. I think that baby is the only reason my sister has put up with Slick's sorriness. You know there isn't anybody that wants a drunkard working for them.
"My two oldest sisters had big church weddings and married good men. Tatty, she lives in Winston-Salem in a nice apartment, and her husband buys tobacco and makes a good salary. They drive a new Buick sedan and don't have any children. They just go around and have fun. They're mighty good to Mother though. My other sister works up street there in Henderson; does the buying for the jewelry store. Her husband has part interest in the store and does the watch repairing. They have just built them a new home out on Country Club Drive. They borrowed most of the money from the government and their payments are not any higher than the rent on a house in town.
"My brothers are getting along all right. Frank, the oldest one, went to college for a year, then decided he'd quit and go to work because expenses were so high and we couldn't hardly make ends meet. Frank started drinking a little bit and got down and out even after he was married. He married a beauty parlor operator, a nice sweet girl. But Frank has quit drinking and is really making good. He's working for John, my youngest brother.
"John quit school about the ninth grade and went to work for a rich man in Henderson and got a break. He deserved it, too, because he has never touched a drop of whiskey or caroused around like most of the boys. He has some stock in the company now. It is the only job he has ever had. He just told Frank that if he ever took another drink he was fired. John got married last spring to the Baptist preacher's daughter and they are doing all right. Mother hated to see Frank get married for he did more for her in helping around the house than any of the rest of we children, but she said she couldn't always deprive him of the pleasures of life. One night before Frank was married and living at home, Daddy came home drunk and threatened to kill us. He was raising all kind of a fuss. Frank had grown up to be about twice the size of Daddy, so he just grabbed hold of him and held him down until the police could get there. They took him down and locked him up in jail until they could put him back in Dix Hill. for another stay. I never will forget how Mother just broke down and cried like a baby that night.
"My twin sister met a man that worked on a newspaper in Henderson, and after some courting they had a nice church wedding. They got along fine for a few months. Then her husband had to change jobs on account of him selling some kind of a printing apparatus and they put him out of the union far some trouble. I never have understood just what happened that caused him to lose that job. Then they moved around from place to place, her husband getting a job where he could but not supporting her. So she came back and filed separation papers so she could get a divorce in two years. While she was staying home a politician came by the house one morning and asked her if she would like a temporary job in Raleigh with the State Revenue Department. She accepted and she is still here on the same job. I think she is making about $90 a month now.
"During the time my oldest brother was in the sanatorium, things got so bad that Mother and Dad had to put a mortgage on the home. Just when the bank was about to foreclose the government let Mother get a mortgage from them instead of the bank mortgage. But for awhile things looked bad. We didn't want Mother to lose the for home for she and Daddy had bought that house when they first moved to Henderson, and believe me she took some pride in it. Well, after begging and persuading and figuring around my sister and me stopped school and went to work. I went to Washington, D. C., to visit my oldest sister who was married and lived there. While there I went in training in a alcoholic hospital. My twin sister got her a job in a ladies ready-to-wear store in Henderson.
"The work I did in that hospital sure did tear me down. Those patients were hollering and screaming for whiskey and dope all the time. One night I was on duty right by myself and a patient--a great big man--tried to grab me. I ran as fast as I could, yelling, 'Help.' An orderly saved the night for me. He just happened to be on the next floor and met me at the head of the stairs with the patient about three feet behind me. He put the man back in his room. I resigned soon after that and came home. But I had a good time up there.
Some nights we could get out and have dates. When we did we would go out to some of the roadhouses that were not too expensive and dine and dance and make up for being pent up in that hospital.
"When I got back home Mother wanted me to go back and finish high school but Daddy didn't give a damn. All he wanted was more whiskey to drink. I was tired and worn out when I got back from Washington because I always was the smallest and weakest one in the family. I expect I would have gone back to school but because we had the mortgage on the house and were pretty hard up I thought I'd better look for a job. Then, one Saturday morning, the store we had traded with for years had on a sale and needed some extra clerks. They phoned me to come down and help them out. I surely was glad to get that job, for my spending money was all gone and I hated to ask Mother for every little thing I needed. After the sale the manager offered me $10 a week to work regular. I accepted because I knew I could help Mother with the house expenses and pick up my hose and clothes at a ten per cent discount which he gave to all of his clerks, and pay for my lipstick and all of the little necessities we ladies need."
The baby began crying and Rachel said: "It's time for me to feed him." When she got up off of the bed--she had been propped up on a couple of pillows, with a lightweight spread thrown over her--I noticed that she was extremely thin and it seemed to take all of the strength she had to move. Her face was pale and thin but she was still pretty with lovely blond hair uncombed, and light blue eyes. She wore a faded house coat and her slippers were right where she could step into them. She went into the bathroom where she had the bottle of prepared milk sitting in the wash basin.
While she fed the baby she talked on. "You know, A. T. and I are already figuring on how we're going to send Bobby to college. I know it'll be a long time, but time flies and we do so much want him to be a Duke football player. You just ought to see A. T. playing with him and always teaching him tricks. But right now I don't see how we can send him anywhere for we can't hardly pay for his milk." Bobby grabbed his bottle and started nursing it as if he had never had any milk before. When he was through with the milk she did a quick change of his diapers. She did this without embarrassment and with efficiency. Then she went over and took a seat in what looked like a very comfortable rocker and started talking again about Henderson.
"You know it was because of that job I met A. T. He kept coming in the store with his sisters to shop, and one night my twin sister had a date and her date asked if he could bring along a boy friend for me that had a car, and we'd all go out to Hilltop. That's the place we went to drink beer and wine and get a sandwich, and some of the people would take a nip of whiskey. They had a nickel Victrola in there and a small space for dancing. The booths were private and bordered around the space for dancers. Well, we had a party sure enough.
"When my date arrived it was A. T. Stewart. I recognized him right off as the boy I had seen in the store several times. We went by and picked up Sally and her date, Sally happening to be my best girl friend, and more fun than any person I've ever met. She can cut the fool all the time and out-dance Ginger Rogers. Well, I figured I might need someone like that because Sister was in love with her date and a blind date ain't so hot generally. A. T. got me in the booth when all of the rest was dancing and started telling me all that stuff about how he had wanted to meet me and never could get an introduction before, and could he come back to see me the very next night. I told him maybe, because I wanted to see how the rest of the night was going to turn out. I had drank a couple of beers and there was a pint of whiskey on the table. I knew if he got drunk on the very first date it would be his last, for I'd seen the effects of whiskey on my own father. We had quite a nice time.
"A. T. stayed sober because he said he had to drive and he didn't like whiskey anyway. On the way home he asked me again about that date for the next night. He had his arm on the back of the seat and pulled me over toward him gentle-like and I moved over a bit because I had really enjoyed the evening and A. T. was plenty nice looking; just as trim and neat a fellow as you've ever seen. He had a fair complexion, light brown hair and real blue eyes. So when we got home I told him O. K. he could come over if he wanted to.
"That next day at the store I was telling about what a nice man I had met and what we did and all when one of the girls said 'Why, that man is married!. You could have knocked me down with a feather. The rest of the day I spent thinking of all the terrible things I was going to tell that boy that brought him by to see me, and what I was going to tell A. T., if I saw him at all.
"That afternoon when I got off from work I went right straight to the soda shop where Sister's boy friend worked but he had gone to a ball game out of town. I was so mad and upset that I ordered a Coca Cola with a dose of ammonia, wondering all the time what Mamma was going to say to me if she found it out. When I got home Sister was there and I called her in the back room and told her. She said, 'Don't be so upset about it; he don't mean anything to you and if if he did he will be divorced in six more months. I've been knowing A. T. Stewart for several months and what's the difference in him having a date and your own sister. Ain't I getting a divorce just like him on two years of separation? So shut up about it and let's see if he'll come tonight. And listen, if he will, let's go back out to Hilltop, because I had a mighty fine time last night.'
"Well, I felt some better after a talk like that, but I was still feeling funny about dating a married man. It sure is peculiar how twins can be so different. Sis didn't think a thing of it. She just takes life like that. Well, sure enough A. T. came at eight o'clock just looking fine. We got a crowd and went back to Hilltop. Just as soon as I could get him away from the crowd and in a booth I asked him why he didn't tell me he was a married man. He said he did not have a chance last night, and in six more months his divorce would come through all right on the two-year separation plan.
"Well, he kept coming to see me, and about the sixth time my mother found out who he was, and did she raise Hell, Oh boy! She forbid me ever seeing him again and all that, but we would meet up street and in different friend's homes. After awhile Mother consented to let him come back to the house to see me.
"A. T. told me all about his family--that his mother and father died when he was real young and his twelve sisters had raised him up on the farm that his mother and father had left. It was about 1600 acres and it was left in the will to be shared and shared alike.
"After A. T. had finished the community high school they sent him to a military school. His sisters all had finished high school and most of them had a college education, and they thought it was right for him to have one. I'd met three of his sisters and they were school teachers, just teaching around in schools nearby. The rest of the girls had married and lived in different parts of North Carolina and Virginia.
"They sent A. T. to a military school when he was seventeen. That was in 1927. That's where he met his first wife. He thought she was more important than an education so when he was only nineteen he got a job in Norfolk and got married. A. T. says they were so young they didn't know what they were doing. The girl was only seventeen. And they just didn't seem to be able to get along together. So, his divorce would be through in just a few more months and we could get married and live out on the farm in the Stewarts' old home place, as his sister and her husband that had been living there had already moved out. He painted me a mighty pretty picture of how we could live out there and have our friends out for parties and have chickens and pigs and everything we needed.
"I'd fallen in love with him but about this marriage I didn't know because he still didn't have his divorce.
But I was tired of the life I was living; going places all of the time and some company over at my house all of the time and country life seemed ideal. 'Well,' he told me, 'go and ask your mamma.' We went together. Boy, that was a time. A. T. was pale and scared and so was I. After he stuttered around awhile it came out and Mother didn't look much surprised. She told me afterwards that she could read it in our eyes and by our actions what was coming. She told A. T. he was already married and it was not to her baby girl, and to go get his living wife, or something about like that. I was so nervous. You know I've always been a nervous sort of person.
"Next thing I knew A. T. was saying 'Well, my divorce will be through in a few weeks and we want to get married the next day.' My family was split up over it just about fifty-fifty between my sisters and brothers, and Daddy didn't care because he was in Dix Hill's alcoholic ward. There was no serious break in my family over it--just a lecture from one about what a fool I was and turn around and congratulations from another. That's just the way it was at home all the time, but I was happy a-plenty.
"The Stewarts didn't take it any better. A. T.'s sisters made quite a few remarks but he didn't care. We were just rushing along to get things ready for a quiet church wedding. Everything went off all O. K. The church was full of people and I was plenty nervous. I'll bet I walked fifty miles down that aisle. Just as soon as the ceremony was over we took off on our honeymoon. We went up to Richmond and Washington for five days. And did we have a wonderful time. What did I do? Oh, get married, you'll see.
"After we got back from our honeymoon we stayed at Mother's at night until we could get the Stewarts' old home fixed up. Honestly, it was in a mess. The people had moved out quite awhile back and they certainly didn't think anyone else would move in because the mess they left inside took me two months of hard scrubbing with a Negro helping to clean it up. The outside needed painting bad but we couldn't afford to do it right to start. The house sits way back from the road among a lot of trees, and I could see all kind of dreams for the future; how I was going to fix everything just like I wanted it.
"Everything went along swell. A. T. was running the farm all right, 'tending to the cow and he had some pigs and chickens, too. We would go into town real often to see everybody. Then time came for the crops to be planted. Well, that worked A. T. plenty hard. I never got much chance to see him and we couldn't get into town much. His sisters started wanting him to run the farm a different way from what he wanted it run. We had one Negro tenant living out there and he was working on shares.
"Well, A. T. stayed so busy I began to get lonesome for some of the hubbub and bustle of town or else some attention from A. T. Well, he had everything to look after, even to see that the tenant got enough to eat until the crops came off. Sometimes I'd just stay in town with Mother several days at the time. But my husband would come in every night that I stayed there. Just about this time I found out that Bobby, my baby, was coming along. I told Mother, and she gave me a lot of advice. She should know about having babies. She had nine without any trouble, all of them living but one and he lived to be twenty-one years old and then died with T. B.
"Well, when I told A. T. about it you should have seen him strut. He was the proudest man I've ever seen. I didn't come into town as much then, just occasionally to see the doctor for treatment and see how things were getting along. Then the trips had to be more often. I was getting to have sick spells, and getting pretty nervous and Mother seemed to be getting worried over me. She didn't come right out and say so but I could tell.
"One Sunday afternoon we were sitting there at Mother's and she asked A. T. if he didn't think a trip to Florida would help me. Some of that Florida sunshine might do me some good and bring back my color, she thought. I was rather pale, and you can see these white places on my hands and neck now. Well, they are all over my body and at that time they were whiter than ever. A. T. said he would call the doctor and ask his opinion. About five o'clock that afternoon we got in touch with my doctor and he said he thought it would be all right but he would like to see me for a good examination before I left. I stayed in town that night and the next day he saw me and said he thought it would be wise for me to go; just use precaution against over-excitement.
"The following Sunday, Mother, A. T., Helen, one of my older sisters, and a cousin of mine left at six o'clock for Miami in the same Ford that I took my honeymoon on. You know, I have a older sister in Miami We were going to visit her and Helen wanted to visit Daytona Beach to see a very dear friend of her's. We took three days and two nights going down. We went by St. Augustine, the regular route and saw all the sights. I felt rather bad going down but I really think it did me good. We went by Daytona Beach and let Helen out. I felt so bad while I was there that I couldn't go with them on a lot of parties, but I let A. T. go because I thought holding him back wouldn't help me any.
"We stayed in Miami five days and then started back. Mother and my cousin was having such a good time they said for us to stop by and pick up Helen and bring her on back and they'd stay a week or so longer and come back by train. So, that's what we did, and I really enjoyed the trip back more because I had enough room to kinder lay down on the back seat. I had a nice trip but I was sure glad to get back home again.
"A. T. had to work hard then to make up for the time he lost going to Florida. I think his sisters were actually jealous of him taking me down there because they started fussing about every little thing that happened. Mother soon returned home and I was spending most of my time there with her. She sure was a mother to me during this period. She nursed me more than I ever remember being nursed before.
"We called the doctor one night and he said, 'Let's get her to the hospital at once.' I was in labor for thirty-six hours and they couldn't give me a bit of dope on account of my heart. Boy, I went through with something.'
"In a week I was able to leave the hospital and go to Mother's. We had hired a old Negro mammy to help Mother attend to the baby and me because I was not able to be about. I stayed at Mother's for three weeks, getting better all the time. Then I went back to the farm carrying the old Negro with me. I needed her worse there than in town because out on the farm I had no heat, no water or anything. I tried to get along out there but more trouble was always brewing among us and A. T.'s sisters.
"The crops had been harvested and most all of the tobacco sold and the money was low. There were still bills to be paid off, and nearly all of the cotton had been plowed under by orders from the government with the promise of a check to cover the amount of acres plowed under. Then here comes along all of A. T.'s sisters wanting their part of the profits from the crops. They hadn't done a thing to help with them. They would come out there and help their- selves to everything they wanted whether it was hams or vegetables or a piece of furniture out of the house. So I just got so damn tired of it that I told A. T. I was going to move into town with Bobby, and he could stay there and slave hisself to death for his sisters if he wanted to but I was not going to. I told him we'd have more money if he'd get a job clerking in a store in town. We just managed to pay out on the farm expenses and the baby's bill as it was. So he gave, in and we moved into town.
"In three weeks he had a job with Southern Dairies in Raleigh, driving a ice cream truck. The route was through Henderson, so I stayed on there at Mother's until he could get a raise because to begin with they only paid $15 a week and a small commission and at this season of the year--in cold weather--the ice cream business was not much good and his commission was hardly anything. As spring opened his business picked up but he was spending too much money on bus fare or gas for the car to come over to see me, and we wanted to be together.
"We decided that with what he paid for room and board in Raleigh and what my twin sister who had got a job here paid, we could make the grade if my sister would pay us what she was paying where she stayed. Of course she was delighted because she knew she could use our car every evening that A. T. was working and the Sundays he worked. Well, that suited me because she could drive Bobby and me around, too.
"I made three trips over here before I could find an apartment. I finally got two rooms on Maiden Lane, a kitchen and a bedroom. The kitchen was large enough to cook and eat in and we put a cot in there for Rebecca to sleep on. The bath was down the hall a-ways. That was semi-private; there was another couple living across the hall that had to use it. We paid $35 a month for it barely furnished. The lights were furnished but not the gas and that gas bill sure can run up.
"We lived there several months and the money didn't seem to go anywhere. We got in debt to the and milkman and the groceryman and was behind several payments on the car. Just as I was ready to give up and go back home and live with Mother again that government check for ninety-odd dollars came in. We decided then to pay up on the car and our back bills and get a cheaper place. I found one out on the three-hundred block of Polk Street. That was nice--it had a large sitting room, a bedroom, kitchenette and private bath. That only cost us $30 with heat and water furnished. We moved there and bought a studio couch for my sister to sleep on. We put that in the sitting room. That surely did give us a nice place. We were getting along fine there but in a little while things began to slip again, and there was an argument where A. T. worked about some money that was short and he resigned.
"We went back to Henderson to live with Mother. A. T. loafed around there for a long time and then he got this job he is on now with the bus company. He has been working there four or five months and has had one raise already. He made $25 to start and now he's making $35 a week. He's working the extra board and makes more money than he did on the regular run. My sister moved out in Hayes-Barton with one of the girls she works with. She comes over to see me every now and then, but not as often as she did when we had a car. You see, we had to sell our car while we were in Henderson and A. T. was out of work. We also had to turn in the nice crib--it cost $35--we bought for Bobby when he was first born, because we were behind three payments. I told Brother when he got married to take the crib if he'd take up the payments and he did. That crib over there's all right. I bought it from a friend of mine in Henderson when I moved back over here. Her baby has outgrown it. We are going to move from this place just as soon as I can find a cheaper one because we're paying too much. She charges $55 dollars a month for the room and my board and charges twenty-five cents extra for every meal A. T. eats here.
"You see, what I've to do just keeps me busy with the baby. I bet I've jumped up a half dozen times for him the last half hour picking up his rattler. That's some boy though. You see, I don't get time to go anywhere, not even to my church. I've not been to church since I've been in Raleigh. Isn't that a shame? I think Christ Church is the prettiest I have ever seen. We're both members of a church in Henderson and Bobby was christened there."
The door opened and A. T. came in. "Hello, everybody, and how are you feeling, Honey?" he said.
"Some better since I've had someone listen to me tell all my troubles to," Rachel said.
A. T. picked up Bobby and began playing with him: "Mates, this is the finest baby in the world," he said. "Rachel, honey, don't you think I better call Dr. Herring before it gets too late? He might be gone."
"No, A. T., I don't. You know"--turning to me-- "doctors' bills for Bobby and me just keep us strapped right down to the last dollar."
"Don't go yet, I want you to see some of Bobby's tricks." He told Bobby to make a face at me, and Bobby responded by twitching his little face into a madsnarl. "Now, shake your fist at him...Now, thumb your nose at the man." Both of them smiled proudly. It was the first time Rachel had smiled that afternoon.
