[North Carolina]
Date of First Version: Feb. 14, 1939.
Person interviewed: Mike Solokopis (<Text Not Clear>)
Occupation: Restaurateur.
Address: (Formerly of Chapel Hill) <Text Not Clear>
Writer: Claude Dunnagan.
Revisor: None.
"Totalitarian Jetsam."
Nick Kansatokos grinned and flapped a steaming hamburger over a hot plate. He wiped the sweat from his face and turned to me from behind the cafe counter.
"You want to know what a Greek Immigrant thinks of these United States? Well, I'll tell you. They're like Paradise compared to the old countries. You can make an honest living here, and nobody bothers you.... you can say and think what you like.... tell the President to go to hell if you feel like it, and nobody does anything about it; they either agree with you or laugh at you. They don't grab your property and slap you in a political prison like in Germany and Italy. How do I know? Because I was in Italy when this stuff started. Say, you wouldn't think I used to own a ten room villa at Milan, would you? Not to look at me now, greasy and gray-headed at forty-five," just another hamburger hawk, you'd say. But wait a minute, I'll show you." He rummaged under the counter and came up with a grease stained photograph. It was the picture of a magnificent Italian brick villa, with terraced lawns and multi-colored awnings over the windows. In the background was the calm expanse of the Mediterranean Sea.
"That was my home in Milan, where I first took my wife, and where the babies were born. What did I do for a living? I had one of the best jobs in the city...I was assistant master at the International Post Office.. ten years I'd been there, doing my work honestly and well. But that didn't matter to II Duce. I was a Greek and that was what counted against me, because my class doesn't believe in Fascism. One day I made a slight remark to Antonio, one of my helpers, that Mussolini wouldn't succeed in making Italy Fascist because the people didn't want it. I never had any suspicion that Antonio was already a member of the Fascist party, and the next day it was a big shock when an armed policeman came to the Post Office and placed ne under arrest. I was taken to the government court and questioned by the Officer in charge.
"You are under arrest for speaking slanderous falsehoods against the government. What have you to say in defense of yourself?'
"Before I could explain myself, the officer who had arrested me handed the head officer a paper and stated. 'Here are the charges, sire. Sworn to by a trusted member of the party, Antonio de Valzetti.'
"I had no chance to defend myself, not even with a lawyer, because, you see, all the law men had either joined the Fascist party or fled Italy. I lost my job and the next day was ordered out of my villa. I moved my family to a cheap rooming house, and taking the little money I had left, set up a small sandwich shop. In three months I had saved up a considerable sum of money and was thinking of expanding my business. When I went to the bank, the cashier refused to give ne my money. I was so mad I insulted him, and the next day I received a letter stating that I had 48 hours to get out of Milan, on penalty of imprisonment or death.
"That evening I sold out my business for almost nothing, gathered my family together and left Milan. From there we went to Naples where we secured boat passage to America. The ship was a freighter and was bound for Miami, Florida. On the way over, Helene, my wife died from pneumonia. We buried her at sea.
"When we docked at Miami, we had sane passport troubles but finally managed to get by the customs officers and left immediately for Trekas, Florida, a Greek colony on the Gulf Coast. When we got there, we were overjoyed to find many of our old friends there.... they too had been persecuted and driven from Italy by Mussolini.
"With the money I had left, I bought a small home for the children and opened up a grocery business. I believe those days were the happiest of my life.... and for the children too. In the late evening, when we closed up the store, we would rent a little dory, or small fishing boat, and row out to sea several miles. Then we would let out a troll line behind us with corks holding the hooks up. Many times we'd come rowing in after dark with so many fish that the boat was almost foundered. What we didn't eat, we sold at the store, or used for fertilizar around the house. At night, all the neighbors would come around.... in fact the whole colony....and we'd build a huge bonfire on the beach and roast fish far into the night. When we were finished eating, we would gather around the fire and sing songs....songs of the old Italy and Greece we remembered before Mussolini came into power.
"Some years later I had saved up enough money to return to the old country, in hopes of seeing my old mother....she lived on the island of Capri. I took nil the children except Michael, the oldest, whom we left to look after the store business till we got back. He was to go later. After several weeks of rough sea, we finally reached Capri, only to find that Madre Kansatokos was dead. She had been dead for some time, but the island officials, who were under the control of Mussolini, had not taken the trouble to inform us. I found the little house we had been born in had been destroyed and a large, brick army barrack in its place. I could find none of my old friends or relatives. They were all either dead or "missing". I took the children quickly and left that island with tears in my eyes....tears of helpless anger. I hated that man! I hated him worse than any tyrant has over been hated. Every time I heard the name Mussolini I wanted to curse and fight. I was grateful that there were places like America for us, the oppressed minority, to flee into.
"When vie finally reached Florida again, I found that Michael had been drowned when his boat was sunk in a Gulf Storm. The store had been closed and I immediately sold what was left of it. Elixes, my daughter, got married shortly and my other boy got a job on an oil tanker plying between Galveston and Buenos Aires. Every one was gone now, and I found myself alone with no work and very little money.
"Then one day I caught a ride on a fruit steamer heading for New York. I walked the streets of the big city for weeks until I finally got a job at the immigration office on Ellis Island as interpreter. You see I can speak seven languages pretty well....Greek, Italian, English, French, Spanish, Portugese, and Turkish. I got good pay for my work and was advanced several times. I guess I was just beginning to get back on my feet when Congress passed some immigration laws and a bunch of the Interpreters were laid off. I took what money I had saved and went back to Trekas, the Greek colony. All the people I had known had moved away and it seemed like a strange place. I was standing on the dock one night when I saw, in the dim light, the oil tanker my boy had sailed on a couple of years before, I hunted up the captain and asked him where I could find my son. He couldn't remember him at first, but finally he recalled him, 'Got killed in a two-bit revolution near San Quantos the first trip he sailed,' he said.
"I finally found Elixes In Jacksonville....her husband had died and she had a baby. That's her back in the kitchen, now. We finally cane to North Carolina and put up this restaurant, and it seems like business is pretty good.
"Yes, sir, this is the greatest country I've ever lived in and I've seen a lot of 'em. From now on it's good old U. S. A. for me. What'll it be, Sir, two hot does? Onions and mustard?"