Oscar Falkes
Huntsville Road
Birmingham, Alabama
R. V. Wald rep. Jr.
Editorial Department
MY BOYS AN' ME DIED IN THE WAR
I met Oscar Falkes in Wilcut's preaching and singing service in the Municipal Auditorium. I took a seat by him, and we sat close together; for Mr. Falkes leaned my way to whisper in my ear. He put his hand over his mouth and whispered with a lot of sibilant noise that sounded like a windstorm in my ear.
We were sitting close to the stage, and Mr. Falkes had many comments to make on the crowd, and the preacher. His old eyes stayed on the stage, his old ear was turned when the quartettes sang. Except for his shispered? comments to me he was quiet and solemn during the full three hours from 1:30 to 4:30 When the Negroes in the top balcony sang and shouted, he did not turn to look back, when the testimonies were being muttered, whispered, and shouted throughout the auditorium, he did not seem inclined to show any signs of sympathy or antipathy. His face continued to droop, hang-dog fashion at all times. The mouth dropped, the corners of his eyes pointed down, his eye-brows, the wrinkles of his forehead. Even the white, downy hair on his head did not part, was not combed back, but pointed down like the hairs on a fox terrior.
I felt the downy white hair against my cheek; he whispered with a terrific rush of air: "These people---"he breathed--- "come in here for no good. They're all country people. If this service was in their community wouldn't a one turn out. They just wanted to come to town." He jerked back to attention. His hands were interlocked in his lap, resting on the thighs of his gray wash- pants. His hands were browned as if they had been painted with walnut varnish; the skin was loose like an ill-fitting pair of women's gloves. The sleeves of his shirt, made of soisette, were turned to his elbow. His forearm was naked, bare of hairs---due to his age.
I told him I was a Methodist, knowing that the service was a Baptist service, and hoping that I could get some words from him. I said my say and put my ear to his lips. "You don't need to worry," he hissed and whooed in my ear. "I'm a Baptist--myself--but you don't need to worry. We're all headed for the same place. Brother Wilcutt won't make you mad. There's just enough difference in a Baptist and a Methodist to cause confusion." He said his say and I drew my head away, and put my attention on the singing on the stage. People were coming in, people were leaving. There was whispering, loud-talking. On the front a lady stood up to kiss another lady who had just come in. "They'll "be coming and going from now on," whushed! the old man in my ear.
After the service was over, we walked out together, and I had to walk slowly for the old man took short and cautious steps in his black, soft, kid-leather shoes. "I ought to have gone long ago," he said. "I didn't know it was going to last until 4:30. I thought for a while they were going to change it into a singing school, with all them quartettes."
"I thought they sang well."
"If they couldn't have, they wouldn't he up there. They wouldn't have no business being up there." He scratched his white hair, through which I could see the clean pinkness of his scalp. "I ought to have left."
We poked our way through the crowd of walking, pushing, scrambling people. We crossed 8th Avenue and stood next to Woodrew Wilson Park. On the grass people lay in the cool of the shades; there were several boys and girls standing around talking. I had seen some of them inside the auditorium.
"I have my car down near the bus station," I told the old man, as we stood there, "I'll be glad to take you home, if its not too far."
"I tell you, son," he said lifting his head, and making a motion to get nearer my ear, "I appreciate that, but I couldn't put you to the trouble. You don't know me and I don't know you--we'd both be taking a chance."
"That's right."
He hesitated for a while, his white head bent. I looked at his clean, washed-looking clothes. I wouldn't be taking a chance with this man. Finally the temptation got the best of him, and he looked up smiling, and soon we were going across the street, on down 8th, and then we turned down 19th to the bus station. I helped him in my car, went around, and climbed in. I started the motor, as he caught a firm grip on the door.
He told me he lived passed Tarrant City. I drove in that direction as we talked, mused, and asked each other questions. He was alert and sensative to? my driving. His eyes followed my shift of gears, he studied the speed I drove, and the nearness by which I missed jamming cars that back from the curb.
Some times he tilted his head and chewed at some imaginary cud, his eyes dropping with sleepiness or passivity. He would say "huh?" to my queries, but didn't seem to be concerned whether he answered them or not. I learned that he was born April 1869. "That makes me 70," he said to keep me from figuring, I suppose. "Born, raised, educated, married, bred, and---pretty soon died at Village Springs. I don't live at Village Springs now, but I'm going to move back; so I can be buried in the Graveyard where all the other Falkes and Simmonses are buried. The Simmonses is the family I married into. My wife was a Simmons, We married in June of "95."
"That was a long time ago."
"To me it seems not long ago, but I guess you weren't born. I guess my boy is about your age." His eye lids rose slowly and the ball of the eye rolled down and up slowly. "Maybe Ranny is a little older. He was born in 1911."
"That makes him 28."
I told him my age. He shook his head.
"Ranny thinks he's an old man, but he don't know what years are yet. When he sees the years go by that I have seen, he'll look back and say: 'How young I was!' But I don't mind them being by at all. In a way I'm glad. Some of the things I would not want to do over. I wouldn't want to lose two-thirds of my boys, again. You wouldn't think a person could stand doing that, and I don't know that he can. I guess just about two-thirds of me died when my boys were shot down in France. I've been a Republican ever since that war. I was a Wilson Democrat. I talked Democrat. Then Wilson lied; he lied; and he killed my boys. The Democrat Party will never get another vote out of me." As he talked he, he didn't make a speech. It might add up to a speech, but his talk was angry snorts and muffled exclamation. He seemed stored with an old hate that ate into him, penetrated the walls of his heart, and he hated with every beat of his pulse. "A Christian ought not to feel the way I do. A man my age, I always thought, until I got to be my age, ought to put away human passions, and turn his face toward eternity. I tell you it is hard to do."
By now we reached Tarrant City, and were going slowly out on the highway that goes to Oneonta and Guntersville. We swept around a curve, and to the right, he indicated was his home. I turned up, threw into second, and climbed a black, narrow little road up a slope to the house that looked down on the highway. The house was white, square and one-storey.
I looked as a girl came out on the porch. She was about twenty, and wore one of those red, pin-check dresses. Her sleeves were short, and her skirt was short, falling loosely from a red belt around her middle.
I parked the car under a china berry tree near the porch. It thrust its limbs out over the roof to make an arch under which I drove.
"Take a chair!" He looked at his niece, the girl in pin-check, and said "This is Mary Lou." Then went inside. I looked after him, into a parlor. It had flowered paper on the wall and there were two windows, a divan, and two easy chairs. A radio was against one corner, and an aerial went out the window, and climbed a pole. The copper wire of the aerial extended in a shiny line to another pole, down the hill on an outhouse. The room, next to the parlor and on the other corner of the house, had a stove in it and a cabinet, as I could see. It must serve as kitchen and dining room. Apparently the other two rooms, one on each of the other corners were bed-rooms or sitting rooms; for it was into one of these that Mr. Falkes turned to his right and entered. I thought I could hear him in the one remaining room.
His niece looked at me, but turned her eyes from mine after a brief second. It was easy for her to blush; for the color came to her cheeks and forehead as she looked down. "You live here with your uncle?"
"Ye-ss," she hesitated in her speech, and seemed unable to add to what she had said. I looked at her interestedly and expectantly.
"I met him at Wilcutts' preaching. Do you like preaching? "
"Ye-ss."
"You are religious? Your uncle is a good man."
"Ye-ss." I turned around, and took a chair. I sat, and looked down on the highway where the cars were slipping by with quiet little zips. I looked at her out of the corner of my eyes, and I saw that the pink had left her cheeks and forehead. I didn't bother her, but turned my attention to the surroundings. On the right was a garden. One half the garden was in corn that was already matured and was now drying to a cured state. The rest of the garden was in beans and tomatoes. I could see the red of the tomatoes from where I sat. On the left of the house some chickens scratched, and a cow looked across the fence from her lot. The barn was small, about half the size of the house, But it was painted and cared for.
"This place," I said to her, turned on one leg of the chair, "this house and yard is taken care of. Clean as anything I've seen."
"Uncle Oscar," that was my friend, "keeps things clean and fixed," she said. She went on after a moment. "My father is Uncle Oscar's brother; when Uncle Oscar's wife died ten years ago, he came from Village Springs to live with us. He takes care of things."
"I see."
Mr. Falkes came out of the house, and he had on a pair of overalls and denim shirt. The shirt and the overalls were washed to a cleanliness that must have taken a great deal of boiling and soaking. He brushed at the soft, white hair that fluttered so easy in the little, hot breeze.
He had a fruit jar in his hand, and two glasses. He went to the edge of the porch, and slipped down on the edge with his feet hanging over. He unscrewed the top of the fruit jar and poured each of the glasses he had on the floor halfful. He extended one to me, and I said thank you, and tasted it a little. It was persimmon wine.
"I made it myself."
"He makes it all the time," said the girl coming forward with more bravado. I dropped down on the edge of the porch without hesitation; for the porch was as clean as if it had just been scrubbed.
"I like good wine, and I don't think it is a sin to drink it. I've been studying the Bible for twelve years. I was 58 when I began, and I guess I know it as well as anybody. It talks about strong drink, but I don't think itsays: 'Don't you drink it,' straight out. I ain't fool enough to make a hog of my self drinking it.
"You'll stay for supper?"
"No."
"Well, you'll have to come out and see us some more." He lifted the glass in his hands and poured it down his throat.
I drank and said; "Tell me more about your self."
"Sure I don't mind, but... I told you I was born in 1869." His niece took a seat, and she cupped a cheek in her palm. I leaned against one of the post that held the roof of the porch up. Falkes took my glass from my hand, and filled it half full.
"My two boys, J. H. and Sam were just the right age to die in the War. My wife died ten years ago, and I'm going to soon. My age is not the thing that makes me think that. 70 isn't too much. I know that. But I have the feeling I'll die---"
"Ah, Uncle," said the girl. He shot a glance at her.
"I don't have much to live for. There's nothing but misery in this life. I wouldn't swap all the wealth, happiness, joy, or nothing for a second of over there. I believe. I read the Bible, and I believe it. I believe it is true, and I believe it is inspired."
"The Song of Solomon?"
"I saw you at Church, and I know you're not mocking; so I'll answer that. David was Solomon's father, and David wrote some Psalms I don't approve of too. It was because part of David was wicked; that's the reason he wasn't allowed to build the Temple. Solomon was a wise man, but he was loose too. He had wives--- outlandish women. You know what outlandish means---" he looked up at the girl, and she looked into the garden, as he reached over and whushed in my ear... "whorish, that's what it means..."
"Then The Song of Solomon was written by Solomon in a wicked moment."
"Yes." He paused and went on, and the girl in the pin-check dress cupped he 'brought that dog to the ground with a flop, dead as a hammer. I told him if he didn't want to get in trouble he'd better drag that dog off, but we didn't.
"We went on to Oneonta, and put up at Mrs. Cox's for the night. 'Bout an hour after supper we was in out room shining our boots when the Depity came around, and Ben Amberson was along. I knew we was in trouble.
"The Depity said; 'We'll have to take you fellers along.' I got my hat and Armstrong got his. We come along without no trouble. I saw there wasn't any use. Ben seemed mad, and he was all right. We went down to the jail, and he pushed open the door, and Armstrong put himself in there. I stopped, and I said to the Depity and to Ben. I said: 'You're having me put in jail.' 'That's right, Oscar,' they said. 'What for?' "For killing my dog,' said Ben. "Ben," I said, pulling him off, 'you got any papers for me?' 'No, I ain't,' he says. 'You'd better not put me in jail with no papers,' I told him. 'You may be right.' He turned me loose, and he said he'd pick me up. I told him I'd be there at Mrs. Cox's.
"The next morning I went down there to stand trial. I saw right away I didn't have a chance. The Judge was the Mayor, and I didn't have no standing with the Mayor at all. I knew I wouldn't get any mercy, and I think the highest fine was close to $50. I jumped up, and I said: 'I'm not going to be tried by on the food. I come along. My boy sends me money along, and I'm in good shape."
"You listen to Wilcutt a lot?"
"Every morning. I listen to him at 6:15 through the week, and 7:15 Sundays. Today was the first time I went to see him in the flesh. He's a great man; he's filled with God if ever there was a man. But none of the rest of the preachers like him, 'cept the country preachers. City preachers called him a holyroller. He holds revivals all the time and preaches over the radio everyday.
"I study religion a lot these days, religious magazines and suchlike and I know he's a good man. He's helped me out a lot."
I got up to go, and he stood up, and the girl did too. He said: "If you'll stay for supper you can eat cornflakes and sweetmilk with us. We always eat that at supper."
As I got in my car, an A-Model Ford drove up, and the girl's father and mother parked on the other side of the China Berry tree. The man was 60, and the woman 52, according to what Falkes had said.
They came over, and I took my foot off the brake, and got out to shake hands with them, "We're just farmers," said Oscar Falkes' brother, "but we'd be right glad to share our corn flakes with you. I see you've tasted some of Oscar's wine, Good?"
"Fine." I got in my car, and the old man, his brother, the faded, milky- eyed wife, and the young girl raised their hand to wave, as I braked down the slope, and went back to Birmingham. In my hip-pocket was the pink religious tract the old man had slipped into my hand.
8/15/39
MS