Elizabeth Henry
7419 Garfield St.
January 11, 1939
Life History
ONCE WAS BUT AINT NO MORE
Elizabeth Henry used to be the belle of her neighborhood. She was the sparkplug of frivolity, which had no beginning or end. Her friends called her "Queen of the fish fries;" that was because she knew more about frying fish than a monkey knows about "poking his tail at people he dislikes." She could make a cat fish melt in your mouth. What about potato salad? Why Elizabeth had a special seasoning for potato sald. "Had a special season fo' man tato salad....used onions, parsely, garlic, celery, mayonaise made out of vinegar, eggs and salt,” Elizabeth will confidentially tell a friend, "Ah done fried plenty fish to git niggers out of jail." Folks. in the neighborhood used to excitedly run to Elizabeth yelling, "Lizzie, fry plenty fish. Jim Bailey is in jail and we need two six bits mo' to git him out,” Did Elizabeth fry it? Did Grant take Richmond?.
Unfortunately, Elizabeth doesn't fry fish anymore. In fact, she ins't doing much of anything save cooking for Mrs. Fryles who is giving Elizabeth work to keep her from starving. You see, Elizabeth is sixty-six years old and is suffering with high blood pressure. "Mah days is numbered, Ah guess. But Ah'm goin’ to keep goin' till de Lawd takes mah hand," she softly said.
Elizabeth is a dark person; she is as affable as she is dark, which means she is very affable. Her face is wrinkled but open. She blinks her right eye, not in pain but in habit. When it is cold water runs out of this eye. Elizabeth wears a brown stocking piece on her knappy head as a "skull cap;" she also wears a brown bracelet on her left hand. Her clothes are as wrinkled as her face and have seen better days. She was contacted at the present address where she lives in the second room of a comfortable three room house with her ex-common-in-law husband, Mauel Hopper, and his common-in-law wife, black Alice Moore. This is a very strange situation but Elizabeth doesn't seem to mind it. "What can Ah do? Manuel don't want no messin' er round...he wants action. Ah'm an old umman," Elizabeth bashfully says.
The life of Elizabeth Henry is as spotted as those varigated skies above us. She was born in New Orleans, reared in New Orleans and "raised hell" in New Orleans. "Ah'm strictly a N'Awleens umman," Elizabeth demurely says. "Ah was born rite hyar on Hillary Street sixty-six yars ago. Member dat two story buildin' dat was er round dere? Dat was de buildin'. It used to b'long to mah grandpa and grandma. Mah grandpa was a bricklayer....mah grandma didn't work. What was dere names? Ma grandpa was named John Henry; mah grandma was named Sadie Henry. Both, mah grandma and grandpa died was Ah was a little girl. Mah grandpa took wid pneumonia and grandma died wid de. disease de hart, or sumpin'."
"Mah ma and pa raised me. Dere names was Abraham Henry and Sarah Henry. No, none of dem was named after mah grandma and grandpa. Ah don't know how mah ma and pa met...Ah used to hyar dem talk er bout dat soemtimes, dough. Pa said he was waiting for one of dem horse and buggy street cars and up comes mah ma. Dey used to do lak dey do nowadays, De ladies git on de Street Cars furst. Well, mah pa stepped, aside and let mah ma git on de car. She looked at him and he looked at her. Den dey spoke when dey got on de Street Car and when both of dem turns around dey was loving each other Ah reckon. Anyway, dey got married.... it wasn't no shot gun weddin' neither. Mah pa was a gentleman and mah ma was a lady. No, she aint teached me nothin' er bout fish fries. Ah picked dat up mahself. Mah ma and pa got along fine till Ah was seven yars old...den dey broke up. Ah don't know why...dey just broke up. After dat mah ma started takin’ in washing and ironing Ma pa died when Ah was in de fourth grade. Mah ma died ten yars ago.”
“Sho, Ah think people ought to git all de education dey can git. But Ah couldn't git no mo' den Ah got cause afta mah pa left mah ma /wasn't makin’ enough money to send me all through school. She had a bundle and didn't make no mo den one dollar and fifty cents per day De most dere make makin' washin’ is four or five dollars a week. Ah left school to do day's work and make me some money. Ah was gittin’ to be a big girl den and was runnin' er round some. Dats when Ah met Eddie Lawrence and Charlie Scrivvens. Ah had two chillun for Charlie Scrivvens...one was named Charlie. He died at five yars old. De other was a girl; she died at child birth. Den Ah gave up...don't want no more chillun. Dats enough fo' me. What er bout Lawrence? He aint did nothin'...he wasn't no baby maker. How Ah know? He aint done nothin’. How can Ah tell? Didn't Ah birth dem chillun?"
"Sho, Ah members Ah was cookin' fish in Fisher's Row on Cherokee Street. Dere was an argument in de place. Ah think some people was argument er bout seventy-five cents. Eddie was in de argument. He was drunk but kept arguin’. Ah told him, 'lissen old black nigger if you don't stop dat arguin' Ah'm kick you in damn pants.' Oh Ah was bad in dem days…used to boot niggers rite in der britches. Wouldn't take nothin' off nobody...dat went fo' everybody. Well, Eddie says to me, 'Yeah, if you do Ah'll knock your damn head off.’ For Ah looked around Ah done hit Eddie over de head wid a pitcher of water His head started bleedin' and he started hollowin’ Dat nigger was hollowin’ like a chicken wid his head cut off. He said, 'you black bitch. Ah'm goin' to git if its de last thing Ah do.' He got me alright...got me in de bed de next day. Shucks, dat nigger turned a two dollar trick wid me and stayed wid me twelve yars after dat. Did Ah like him? Ah aint seen nobody yet to outfuck Eddie. Yeah, he's dead. Did Ah kill him? No! He died a natchel death...he had consumption! What Ah did afta Eddie died? Ah went on sellin' mah fish lak Ah did fore he met me. Oh, Charlie Scrivvens? Well, he was comin’ er round at de same time Eddie was comin’ er round. Eddie was a workin' man..he worked on de riverfront...Charlie wasn't a workin’ man..he jest hung around me. Sometimes Ah got lonesome in de day time and Charlie was always around School? Man, We was out of school den. Der Only school Charlie had was knockin’ me up....dat man could sho make babies. Whew! Ah used to tell him, ‘Man, does you think Ah’m a baby hatcher?’ He would jest laugh…but not me!”.
"Eddie was nice to me...he put me in de Tulane Society. Dat was twenty-seven yars ago. Ah, been in. dere ever since. Better stay in dere now. Whose goin' to bury me when Ah die? Dese people dont want nothin' to do wid you when you die. Dey is lookin' fo' somebody else to bury you. When Ah close mah eyes Ah want mah soul to rest in peace.....Ah don't want to be worryin' who is goin’ to bury me. Ah members it well. Eddie says to me one day, 'Lizzie....he called me Lizzie and Pinchey...you got to git me and you in some society cause we aint goin’ to live forever.’ Yes, Lawd. Poor Eddie, he's gone. But he was a good man. Never did start no disturbment afta Ah hit over de head wid dat pitcher. Dats what dey says...if you want to git a man your way jest hit him over de head wid sumpin'”
"Ah'm a Christian now..b'longs to Zion Travelers Church on Adam Street. Elder Heywood is.de pastor. Sho, Ah members when Ah got religion. Ah was a lady. What er bout fish fries? Ah sold mah fish. Well, can’t you sell fish and be a lady? Sho, Ah had mah fun..can't you have fun and be a lady? Ah did! Anyway, Ah was sittin' at mah Ant Emma's house..facts, Ah was heatin' in her kitchen. Well, Ah been prayin' for de longest…prayin’. Askin’ fo' religion. On dis day…..It was on a Thursday evenin. All of a sudden mah stomach got full and Ah was hungry. Ah felt a chill come over mah hart. It went Whiz. Ah looked b'hind me and dere was de Lawd standin' dere. He says, 'date all rite sister, you is got religion. Go to yo’ church and tell dem dat Ah sent you.’ Ah was scared...Ah went a-runnin'. Ah told mah Ant Emma..she told everybody. Everybody was so happy dat Pinchey had got religion! Ah went to de head Stewardess House, Miss Brown. She told me, 'Darlin' Ah'm sho is glad dat you got religion durin' our drive fo' sinners....now you can fry us some fish.' Den Ah started fryin' fish fo' de church....aint fried none for sinners..or niggers out of jail. Jest fried it fo' de church. Elder was happy…said Ah was doin good by de church. Well, Ah told mah testimonies and got de blessin' of de oldest sisters in de church...got de blessin’ from everybody.
But Ah figures dat Ah done done enough fo' de church so Ah went back to fryin' mah fish and makin' mah own money. Found dat Ah had fell way b'hind so Ah told Eddie Ah was goin' to make it up. He says, 'O.K.' Sho, Ah made it up. But Ah took sick and Ah had to git Doctor Heydel. He treated me fo' three months...dat was in er bout 1921. Ah got better. He told me to take it easy. So, Ah figures dat Ah better not git b'hind no mo' Aint been b'hind since. Don't sell no fish for de church or nobody else…aint worth it!”.
“There is an old saying that "you reap what you sew"....well..."Ah was doin' all rite after Eddie died Mah fish was goin' good and mah bed room money was goin’ good. Whats dat? Mah furnish rooms money.....now do you know what Ah means? Well, Ah was doin' fine..had gave Eddie a nice three hundred dollar funeral and everything. Lo and b'hold up pops black Manuel. He had plenty money on him…he came hyar from Donaldonville. Sumpin' told me not to fool wid dat nigger. Well, he says to me jest lak dis: "Say, what you gin' do fry fish all nite. Ah done bought some homebrew and Ah wants to be be’d wid.' Ah says, 'You cheaky black bastard....how much you got.’ He says, 'You name Lizzie.' Ah names it....and Ah got weak to dat black nigger. Stayed wid him ten yars. Ah commence gittin’ old and he started kickin' me around...wouldn't give me his money no mo'. Ah couldn't do nothin cause Ah weak. Jest lak Ah hit Eddie on de head wid dat pitcher Manuel used to hit me. Sho wid de pitcher! Ah did git rid of it..but what good did it do? Manuel would hit me over.de head wid anythin’ he could git has hand on, makes no difference what it was! Used to ask me couldn't Ah do no better den Ah was doin’….Ah told him Ah was gittin to be an old umman. He says he didn't want no old umman...Shucks, when Ah looked er round Manuel was havin’ black Alice rite smack in mah bed. What could Ah do? Was Ah weak? Yeah, and Ah was old too? Dats worse? You said it. Son".
"All mah people done gone, Son. Ah'm rite hyar on Manuel's hands. He and black Alice is doin' de best dey can fo’ me. Yeah, Manuel knows dat Ah did mah best fo’ him, dats why he wont put me out. Lawd, AH'm glad Ah was good to dat man when Ah had mah money, Son. If it wasn't fo’ dat Ag be right smack in do Streets. Good Gawd a-mighty! Ah’m by mahself. Ah'm tryin' to do mah utmost to git to hebbin. Whats its lak? Ah dunno but Ah'm tryin’ to git dere!".
Ah’m doin' some cookin’...but Ah wouldn't call it cookin' neither.....for Mrs. Fryles..she lives on Hillary and Commercial Streets. She gives me two dollars a week and three meals a day to help me, dats all. Ah eats breakfast, lunch and dinner dere. Sho, Ah eats whatever she gives me, but she gives me de best of everything, sshe aint stingy wid me, no indeed! If it wasn't fo' dat white umman and Manuel Ah don't know what Ah would do!. She says she's goin’ to put me on de W?P.A. Hope she does! Do Ah pay mah dues out of dat….Ah payes mah dues every month, fifty cents. Got to pay. Ah tell" you Ah don't want no corporation to bury me…Ah wants a respectable funeral. Ah'm goin' to scrap and scrap till Ah can't no more. Ah done tried to find a better job..but de white folks don't want you when you is weak and not able…wish Ah could git on de Welfare. When Ah dies de people aint goin’ to say, 'Whars Pinchey at? Who's goin' to bury Pinchey. Aint dat a shame!’ Ah'm goin’ to keep mah society up, Son."
"Who me? Whats de matter wid him? Aint Roosevelt well? Oh, Son, Ah don't know nothin' er bout President Roosevelt or politics. Dats mess! I aint never read nothin' bad er bout Roosevelt. No, Ah don't bother er bout radios...Ah aint no mo' belle. Got to take what comes now. Ah stopped readin' de papers five years ago...mah sight got bad den. Do Ah shout in church? No indeed! De spirits hits me but not lak dat. Plans? Ah dunno, guess Ah'll be dead when dem white folks decide to give me sumpin. Ah aint nothin’ now, Son, But Ah was! If Ah could only recall dem days. Sho, Ah would fry fish..but Ah wouldn't mess er round wid nobody lak Manuel. Well, let me go now...got to go back to work. Come er round agin soon.”
