"I and my Daddy and about all our kin I knowed about was always renters, share croppers, or worked on somebody else's place for wages. Reckon us never found any place we wanted. Seems like come next we'd find the right place to suit us, but we never did."
"Was my folks Georgy folks? No, sir, leastwise before I was born they come over from North Carolina and rented a place in Pickens County. Course it was a long time after I was born before I come to remember moving so much, but I reckon I got things all straightened out in my mind from time I left Daddy, so I can tell you how many times we've moved and if you want to ask me any questions I'll try to answer them.
"No, I wasn't the only kid in the family. Oldest of seven, all living. Don't know much about them - scattered here and yon. Seems like folks now-a-days don't hang together like when we was boys and girls. I remember I was always strong for a kid and laid off com ground for Daddy when I wasn't but twelve years old. Wasn't long after that I was doing a man's work along with Daddy and I stayed pretty close around them parts where I was born.
"Yes, my first wife was born and raised close about there too. Her folks was tenant farmers too."
After pausing a moment to part his voluminous mustaches and spit in the fire, he straightened back in his chair and resumed, "That was in '96. Reckon we was like most young folks, wanting to get away from things, so we went a piece further south and I got a job running drill in a gold mine. After I'd been there about two years, pay dirt played out and the mine shut down, so we moved a few miles to south of there and worked in an ochre mine. Won't a driller there; did most any kind of work. Reckon we stayed there two years more. Yeah, that's right, because it was 1900 that we went back near where I come from and got a job as handy-man on Mr. Shield's fifteen-horse farm. Suppose you heard tell of Joe Brown, used to be Gov'nor? Well, he lived not far away, and folks sure liked Joe Brown. That's Joe M., I mean. Don't remember much of Joe E., but I do remember seeing the big WELCOME sign painted on the front of his big barn. Yolks used to tell about him feeding all the folks around those parts, because he had so much corn he didn't need it and just handed it out -to anybody who'd ask. I never seen nobody turned away from Joe Brown's place neither. While I was with Mr. Shields he loaned some of his hands to Joe Brown to help survey the place and build a fence around it.
"Man, that was some farm; seemed like a thousand acres. And that was a fence, too., let me tell you. The posts was all concrete and just miles and miles of wire. Reckon Joe Brown kinda took a liking to me because several times he borrowed me from Mr. Shields and had me haul big loads of corn down to Harietta where his home was. Our first boy was borned there-- (the first one was a girl) so we calls him Joe Brown. We had another girl besides them. Guess we must have had moving fever all the time, because we went back to the ochre mine section, but couldn't get any job. That was nineteen-two and my first wife died. Worked on a small farm at day wages not far from the mines for nigh two years. Spring of nineteen-four we went over into Spalding and got a job in a saw mill. Met a gal from over in Milton County and took a liking to her - guess the kids did too, anyway we got married. Her kinfolks was farmers too so she was used to it, and we stayed there nigh four years and had three more kids borned there. Them young ones is all growed up and gone by themselves long ago. Don't see them often since times got bad because we can't afford a car. Anyway we move around so much sometimes maybe they don't know where to look for us."
Here Dave paused long enough for each of us to take a good big chew of "natural twist" with which I am usually supplied, and Dave remarked that it was "mighty good chewing tobacco." Having again manipulated the mustaches to his satisfaction he quietly resumed.
"I got tired of saw-milling, and spring of nineteen-eight we went on a farm a short peice west of the saw mill, and worked on halves for three seasons. Didn't do so bad there, but you know how it is; when come time to move, about all you got is a little furniture and maybe a little corn and fodder and mighty little cash. Anyway, we moved back over nigh Sulphur Springs in spring of nineteen-eleven, and cropped on hal ves two seasons. Didn't do so good there, so we went back to - Spalding in spring of thirteen and took a little bigger place on halves for two seasons. Didn't do so bad them two seasons, but late in 'fifteen my wife died, and we just didn't feel like staying on there, so come spring of nineteen-sixteen we went back over by Sulphur Springs and I bought a small team of mules and a few tools and paid standing rent on 25 acres of good land. That's where Betsy and I got married. Didn't seem like we wanted to stay too close to her folks right then so I sold my stock and we went to a big farm about seven miles further north nigh the mountain and worked a one-horse crop on halves. That's in 'seventeen. Made pretty good that season and felt like I could do better by myself, so I bought stock and worked a one-horse crop over by the 'Springs' two seasons - that was in 'eighteen and 'nineteen. Didn't do so good that last season so in spring of 'twenty we moved over to a small place not far away. Still had my stock and worked a two-horse crop. We stayed on just the one season that place. Done pretty good though in the spring of 'twenty-one we moved to the Lawrence farm, not far from the 'Springs." That's a fifteen-horse farm and. I worked forty-five acres with my own stock. Didn't do so bad the first season but we stayed on in 'twenty-two and didn't do good; so next spring, that's 'twenty-three, we took a smaller place, two-horse crop, and settled down there until late 'twenty-six. We'd come out clear that season and maybe a little better than that. About decided to try a real crop and bought more stock and tools and moved back on the big place I cropped once before near the mountain. I had a five-horse crop there three seasons, 'twenty- seven, 'twenty-eight, and 'twenty-nine." Here Dave paused and studied for a moment, which gave me an opportunity to refresh our supply of "twist," and after throwing a fresh chunk on the fire he sat down and resumed.
"Don't know as you know about things in the farming line, but seems like things started going down hill fast about that time. The first season I didn't do so poorly, but guano and feed-stuff was getting high and it just seems-like there wasn't anything left. Second season I just about broke even. In 'twenty-nine the boll weevil just about eat us up and cotton didn't bring more than enough to pay for guano. I was sure enough cleaned out. Stayed on until crops was gathered, and Betsy and I moved in with daughter Nell over to Oaktown. We stayed on at that place until the spring of 'thirty-one. Had a few little piddling jobs around town but just couldn't find any steady job any place. That spring we heard tell about good farming down in Dalton County, so Betsy and I went over there and found a likely looking place and rented a twenty-five acre crop on thirds and fourths. Stayed there through thirty-two and again we got ready to move- off, all we have to move was our furniture. Seemed like that wasn't any place fit to crop on where it wouldn't take more than cotton would "bring to pay for guano.
Betsy and I moved to a little house over in "Socktown," a short piece from where her folks used to live, and I got odd jobs around town. We just about managed to eat that year. I went to the relief folks one time and they give me twelve pounds of flour and a little sack of dried milk but I didn't take it. Guessed we might as well starve to death all at once as to teeter along on the job. We ain't been on relief yet. Well, in 'thirty-four I got a farm-hand job not far off and we stayed in Socktown until spring of 'thirty-five. Got back farming - three-horse crop I rented - and didn't pay out. Come spring of 'thirty-six we moved to another saw mill town and I worked two, three months. About time we got settled I put ad in the Farmers Market Bulletin asking for work on a big farm. 'Grannies', I got a stack of letters a foot high! Betsy read them all and she wrote for a job bossing farm hands on a big orchard farm up in north Georgy. It wasn't long before we were sent for to go up there, and I got the job. Nice place and I liked it fine. Got fifteen dollars a month and keep for both of us. Feller what owned it lived in Savannah. He come up frequent and he acted like he was pleased the way I done things. We was getting along fine until come spring of 'thirty- seven, He come up and we traded for another year and he said he was pleased the things I had done and planned, but after he went home I got a letter from him cussing me out for the way I done things. Made me so mad I quit. That was in July, 'thirty-seven, and we moved back to where I used to work in a saw-mill. That mill had been moved a long time, but a small mill was there and I got work in it. There was a farm house off a piece from where the mill stood and the man what owned it let us live in it for clearing a piece of land. We stayed there until March 'nineteen-thirty-eight, when Mrs. McDonough, the lady you met up on the hill come after me. We been here ever since." -- And with these words David relaxed in his chair with the air of one who had finished a job, and considered it well done.
Long before he had finished Betsy had returned and quietly seated herself in a chair near a side window, apparently so she could watch the little girl playing out in the lot.
Thinking perhaps she might be feeling slighted I asked her if they attended the church not far away, up on the big road. She said, "No, we ain't been to church yet. You know we kinder got out of the habit long time ago. Like enough it's because we was always on the move. Didn't live long enough in any place to get acquainted with folks. We like it here though, folks just seem like homefolks. When spring gets here maybe we'll get to go to church."
I asked David if he had a car and he said, "No, I only had a couple of cars in my time. Ary one wasn't no good. The last one just fell to pieces under me and I won't no mechanic. Disgusted me so I didn't try to fix it up.
I asked him what he thought the prospects were for farmers in the future. After studying for a moment he began: "Well, I reckon it's about all some of us can do. There ain't any chance to get in a mill now-a-days. Seems like we've always got some kind of a living off the land and I reckon it'll always feed us again if we try hard enough. Some folks blames owners and some blames tenants for the way farms has gone down now-a-days. I reckon they're both to blame. Leastwise, some folks seems to be able to build up the soil on places what has got tenants and some places what has got no tenants let them go down the branches as if it didn't make no difference. I've always tried to get folks to plant cover crops. Some of them tries to one season and just because they don't do wonders they say it's no good. Worst part of tenanting is after laying-by time. Landlord looking for a new hand and tenant looking for new land. Ought to be so a landlord could afford to keep tenants full year and then like enough they'd get more fall plowing done and maybe more covercrop and winter pasture tended to. If I ever get me another place of my own I just don't believe I'd plant a stalk of cotton. Like enough I'd starve, but look at that feller nigh the top of the mountain; he's made a living this year on two and a half acres of tomatoes and the land's so steep a mule can hardly stand up. Us Georgy farmers never learned to rotate crops like in other parts. We've just cotton'd and corn'd the land to death. No wonder the government has to pay us for cotton. Now, there I go, talking politics. Reckon I'd better go up the hill and feed the widow's mules before it gets dark. You going back that way I'll go along with you."
After saying good-bye to Betsy, Hildred and the children, we went out the door to the porch and were about to step down to the yard when Dave said, "wait a minute," and went back into the house. He returned almost immediately and handed me one of the hammer-handles, saying: "Like enough you need one of these for your hammer. If you don't right now maybe you will later and you can lay this one by to season, and it will sure be a good one."
We toiled up the hill to the widow's place and I went with him to the barn so he could show me a new bed and box which he built one rainy day for the "converted Ford" wagon. The workmanship was eo fine that I had to compliment the maker. Visibly pleased, he replied: "Aw shucks, that ain't so good a job. That's one trouble with a lot of farmers. Don't take care of their tools and things. I've gone to places in the spring and had to hunt around in the fields to find a plow to start with."
The Widow McDonough was approaching with her milk pail and evidently caught the drift of our conversation for she immediately said, "I've ordered a gallon of good paint for him to paint that wagon box and the plow stocks and a few more things around here. Dave is the first man I've had around here in a gong time that took an interest in anything but the regular work. He's sure done things to this place in a few months." This seemed to be more of a compliment than Dave could stand for he blurted out, "Aw, shucks, here it's plain dark and I got to get down the hill. Please to have met you and any time you're around these parts glad you'd come and see us again."
"Dave sure is a good man," said Mrs. McDonough. "He has patched up a lot of the old buildings here when the weather wasn't fit to do other things, and when the ground was too wet to plow good he moved a lot of rock piles that had been out in the middle of the fields for years. Put them in the washes and gullies where they'd do some good. I can't afford to pay him more than fifteen dollars a month, but I got a good old cow I'm going to let them have for her feed, and sometimes we have a little something extra in the way of eats. They don't care much for meat so they didn't have a pig this year. I've some kin folks in New York that send me some real good children's clothes they get from folks in the big flat where they live, fine clothes that sometimes are just a little soiled, so I'm going to be able to fix up his daughter's children with some real good things for Christmas. Sounds as if that cow was about to tear the barn down so I'd better get busy and milk her. Glad to have met you; drop in when you're in the settlemint.