July 10, 1939
Jennie Chambers ( Housewife )
Newton, N. C.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Newton	Bakerton
Junior	Ted
Thelma	Tessie
Mrs. Chambers	Mrs. Casey
Dr. Long	Dr. Lane
Dr. Cochran	Dr. Coxe
Miss Lentz	Miss Long
Hickory	Holden
Dr. Frye	Dr. Fox
Bud	Sam
Mrs. Long	Mrs. Short
Dr. Glenn	Dr. Good
Mrs. Price	Mrs. Plunk
Come on in lady, Ted git up and give the lady that chair. Do you want me to smack yon? Move I say. Here, sit down. I declare these younguns is enough to drive me crazy. Ted yon and Tessie take that baby and go play. I tell Bud sometimes I wish I had never seen a youngun."
“You have pretty children, Mrs. Casey “I said, seating myself in the low rocker Ted had vacated.
“Pretty enough if they’re clean. I declare there’s so much to do on the farm, I don’t have much time to spend on the younguns, “Now what is it Ted, a boy of five, fat and chubby had come back and was standing in the door.
“We want some beans”, he said shyly, one bare foot crossed over the other.
“You don’t get a bite till dinner, go play fore I beat you.” Ted went.
Mrs. Casey now let herself down slowly in a big porch rocker that stood inside the kitchen door. It was the only one there that would hold her.
"Have you lost any weight since you went on a diet?”
“Lord, no, I can’t diet, makes me sick.”
“How much do you weigh now?”
“Three hundred and forty, did the last time I weighed. Like I told Sam. I don’t eat as much as he does. He just weighs a hundred and twenty four pounds. I work hard, too hard and the harder I work the fatter I get. I’m not going to starve myself for looks though. Bud’s health is bad. That’s why we had to move on this farm. Dr. Fry said the farm would do him good. They been doctoring him now close to five years. Dr. Coxe, and all of them says it's T.B. of the bone. It's in his face, had all his teeth pulled one time. It didn't help. I declare if it wasn't for Miss Lane helping I don't know what we would do. Then there's the baby, she up and had a spell with her head. I ferget what the doctor at Holden said that wuz. We had to take her up there every few weeks to doctor Fox. Course Miss Long had to pay fer that. Sam's smart, he works every day. There's not a lazy bone in me, but we have so much bad luck.
"We been living in Bakerton, working in the mill ever since we been married. Don't know which I like the best. It's nothin' but a livin' any way you take it. We got a few acres of cotton, and some corn, garden and 'tater patch. It's not much, the man who owns it will git part of it, but it beats nothin! Sam didn't much wanta come down here, never knowed nothin' but a cotton mill. I tole him it's no use paying out good money for doctors bills and not do what they tell you. I never did hanker after a cotton mill so much myself. Course, I worked before I married, ain't had much chance since. If I ain't big and gonna have a baby, why it's so little I can't leave it. Seems like all pore folks has is younguns. Then after they git here, you got nothin' to keep them up. When my last baby come, I had sich a time, I tole Sam when 'twas over, he could sleep in one bed and led deep in the other. Well, she's two years old now, nothin's happened yit. I ain't goin' to say it won't though.
Mrs Casey got herself out of the chair and started preparation for dinner. “Bread is our main thing” she said as she sifted flour in a bowl. "We eat more bread than anything. Fifty pounds hardly runs us a week. Sometimes they give us some when we git commodities. When they don't Sam has to get a day's work here and there so he can git some. I been tryin' to git berries canned, they'll taste mighty good this winter. I’ll tell you.’ Mrs. Casey said, as she rolled and patted her biscuits in the pan, "this thing of pervidin’ fer a family means somethin'. I uster take in washin's in town. I could do three or four a week. I got fifty cents apiece. I miss that money too. I never cook but once a day. If it's 'taters we eat 'Taters. If it's corn we eat corn, pushes me to git enough though. I got beans today. The beetles about took the patch though. Miss Long give the younguns some clothes. I told her I needed some dresses, she didn't have none to fit me. Guess I'll have to git some cloth and make me some. The rough pine floor in the kitchen was thin and every time Mrs. Casey took a step it would give beneath her tremendous weight.
"What church do you attend", I asked presently.
"None", she said, “My people is Methodist. I joined fore I was married. Sam ain't nothin'. He uster drink so much, I never tried to get him to join. Then I was big, soon as we got married so I couldn't a-went noway. I broke him from drinkin' though.
"How did you manage that?"
"You mean how'd I make him quit? well, I fussed and quarreled till he stopped. I've been told that it makes them worse. Don't you believe it. I raised the Devil, he was glad to quit. I guess I'll get them younguns in here and give them a good washin'. It'sa about time fer Sam to git here. Spreading a big white cloth, made from a flour sack on the old oil cloth table, she went to the oven and pulled out her biscuits. They looked good, almost as big a saucers. "I make big biscuits" she said, "Sam's got no teeth much, crusts hurt his gums. After wrapping up the bread, she went to the door and holered "Ted, come here, I say” Soon the children appeared. Filling a large tin pan with water, she got a cake of soap and wash cloth. Seating herself in the big chair and placing the wash basin on the other, she began on Ted first. He squirmed and twisted but didn't cry. She rubbed and scrubbed them so hard, I expected to see some skin come off. When the baby was finished, she said, "Now go comb your head".
"How about your toilet here? I asked.
"We don't have no toilet, we go to the woods?
The beans were now dished up with a saucer and put in a great milking pan. On top of the beans was about a pound of fat back. The pan was set in the middle of the table. The bread cloth, with the biscuits in it was placed between her and Sam's place.
Sam now came in, his face shiny from soap and water. He took his seat, and the others followed. A place had been laid for me, but I declined with thanks. The dinner looked good, everything was nice and clean.
I asked Sam which he liked better, the farm or mill? "Well," he said, “When you have been used to drawing a check for ten or twelve dollars a long time, you miss it. Some times twas awful little, sometimes it was a right smart. I worked in the old cotton mill at Bakerton. They been running bad, when they ain't plum shet down, but for the last couple of years they been fussin' sumpin about income tax. Some company up north bought it, and it ain't done no good since. Even a couple of dollars comes in handy with a family to feed. On the farm you can manage to scrape and live somehow but you need a little money. This jaw of mine gives me trouble. The doctor said I had to git out of the hot mill in the sun. My woman here thinks every word the doctor says is law and gospel. Guess I'll have to go back when I git well”.
"Course, we'll go back when you git well, I miss the neighbors a sight. I like to be where I can stand and talk to somebody, while I'm washin'. Here you can't hear nobody but yerself."
"Have you received any aid from the churches? I inquired.
"Lord, no”, she said "We did”, said Sam. "Oh, yes we did, they sent the children a treat Christmas, 'twas nice too. Then there's Mrs. Short and Doctor Good's wife, she heads a thing at school, what do you call it? The P.T.A.? The P.T. something; she always sends them a box of toys, candy, oranges and things. The ladies at the hut, they give them a treat, sides the basket they send oat for Christmas dinner. Bakerton's a pretty good place after all.
"Did you vote this year?" I asked Mr. Casey.
"I sure did, a straight Democrat ticket. I believe in doing the right thing."
"Me, too," said Mrs. Casey, "like I told Sam, women's place is to stand by her husband and vote. Where'd we be if this relief was cut off, and all these younguns to feed? Sam's not able to work and maybe won't live long nohow. I tell you we got to look ahead. These younguns are growing up. Ted will have to go to school next year. Where will his books and clothes come frost, if this relief stopped? I never had much education myself, had to stop school and go to the cotton mill when I was in the fourth grads. Sam there can't even write his name. He tried to learn from them teachers what come around, E.R.E. or E.R.A., whatever the name of it was. I couldn't make heads or tails of it."
“I never had a chance to go to school. Sam said, "My mammy and daddy didn't care. I went to the will when I was twelve. They told the boss I was fourteen, though. I mean that my younguns has got to go to school if I have to hide and tallow them."
The children had climbed down from the wooden bench behind the table, their appetites satisfied for the time being with bacon and beans.
"Git yourselves out and play, while I clean up this kitchen." So saying she took the big bowl; put the remainder of the beans in the pot for supper, wrapped the biscuits up, and put them in the old-fashioned cupboard with tin doors. "My supports cooked.”
"Have you ever tried a balanced diet for your family?"
"Lord, no, I ain't got no time to fool with diets. If I had them to fool with, I wouldn’t know what I was doing."
"It's very simple" I said, "and it might improve your husband's health. Try it tomorrow. In your garden, you have some nice lettuce. Bo you have eggs?" I asked. "Yes, a few." I proceeded to tell her how to make salad dressing. I told her how to use it on various combinations of vegetables. She was tickled and said she would try it. I asked what she was going to have for supper and she replied 'taters'.
"Do you have cream, canned cream?" I asked. "We git some at the welfare." I explained to her how to cream the potatoes after boiling them with the skins on, and asked her if she had anything for dessert. I found she had apples and blackberries and suggested a pie. "Lord, it'll take me all day to do that, I'll try it though. You teached me how to can; guess you can learn me how to cook.
She took me over the house. It was three rooms. The sitting room contained a bed, dresser, one rocking chair and two straight chairs. "This is my company bed. Mrs. Plunk at Bakerton give me this counterpane. She sure is one good woman. I done all her washing. She paid me regular. If I needed a little money for medicine, she’d give it to me. I wanted to start Ted and Tessie to Sunday School. Tessie had a dress, but no slippers. Mrs. Plunk went to town and bought her a pair of black patent leather ones. They were pretty too, no cheap things. That’s what I call the Christian spirit."
In the narrow hall was an old-fashioned ice box and one chair. The family bedroom was next. It had three beds. Two of them were made nicely with white counterpanes on top. The other one stood open to the breeze coming in the window. "I’m ashamed for you to see this room," she said," seems like my baby won't ever quit wetting the bed. I have to dry it every day." In one comer was a little table with bed clothes piled neatly. A cord stretched across one corner of the room, contained the family wardrobe. "Tain’t much," she said, "but if Sam gits well we can git along somehow.”
The garden was small, but well planted; beans, peas, lettuce, corn and tomatoes. There were three rows of cucumbers. The onions had been pulled up and the space was being prepared for turnips.
The children were still playing under a big oak in a sand pile. "You have such quiet children." I remarked.
"They’re pretty good. Sam says I fuss at them too much."
I waved to the children and bade Mrs. Casey goodby, after thanking her for her story." I’m mighty glad to help you if I can. I’m always ready to join in anything that comes along. How you come again. I’n going to stop and see you sometime when we come to town.”
"Don't forgot to make your salad." I said.
"I'll make it if it's never eat."
