In an otherwise identical version the following handwritten comments appear on the top of page 12578: "Excellent To typist WTC."
Leander Huskey
Pigeon Forge, Tennessee
Interviewer: Dean Newman
Revised by L. Lipscomb and
Aswell.
SAVED AND SANCTIFIED
"Yes siree! I feel pretty good this morning." Leander tilted his split-bottomed chair against the weathered clapboard wall of the porch. He arched his chest, thumped it lightly, then wagged his head. "It sure feels good to feel good, don't it? Anyhow, that's the way I look at it."
Thoughtfully he fished a sweetgum twig from a pocket in the bib of his overalls and began chewing it. "Sure is warm, for October, ain't it?"
Suddenly his large feet slipped from the rungs of his chair, banged against the loose floor planks. "I don't know what's wrong with me! You must be thirsty walking all the way up here from the Forge. Jist tarry where you set a minute and I'll fetch you some of the finest coldest water you ever drunk."
Nodding vigorously, he stretched out a long thing leg and raked to him a tin bucket in which a dipper rattled.
In an otherwise identical version, line one on page 12580 reads: "The three maltese cats moved bonelessly out of his ..."
The three Maltese cats moved slowly out of his way as he clumped down the steps with the bucket. On the bottom step he paused and twisted his head around. He squinted his dark eyes, scrubbed his fingers through the wire-like bristles on his chin, and pursed his lips. "Yes, siree! Worth the walk, jist to take a sup of that water!"
He stamped one foot, made a lopsided circle in the air with his hand, and started down the bare slope of the yard toward the spring-branch.
The hounds lying in the shade of the porch didn't move. Grizzled muzzles on forepaws, they rolled sad eyes after his lank figure. But the chickens Sighted the bucket. They came clucking and squawking around the side of the house and trailed him.
Leander turned on them. "Shoo!" He tilted the empty bucket. "See, ain't nothing here for you. Jist going for some water. Git on back there. Quit pestering my heels. Declare to my soul, chickens is got less sense ..!"
Threatening and sidestepping chickens all the way, he went on to the branch, dipped up the water, and returned.
"Now, don't this cold water taste better than any ice water you can git anywheres?" With a flourish, Leander replaced the rusty dipper. He took his place in the sun and wrapped his long legs around the chair post. He sighed heavily. "My old woman will be 'back after awhile. She's in the field hoeing her winter cabbage right now.
"Me, I can't do much. God knows, I would work and work, jist as hard as Myrtle if I was able. I know what the neighbors all say. Say I'm lazy, say I never done a good day's work in my life. But the Bible says judge not and I jist hate to think what's going to happen to them long- tongued neighbors. None of them's a whole lot better than they ought to be, either, I can tell you!
"No, I never could work. Because as soon as I git up I git a terrible headache. It's a plaguing thing! The doctors never could tell what's wrong. Once an old German doctor said it was migraine, whatever that is. He couldn't holp me none. It's like this. I start cutting wood, I git to hoeing corn, or anything else. Then in a little while the sweat breaks out all over me - even it's winter time. Soon as my head gits hot the headache begins banging at me. I git almost blind. That old headache will endure on me for two or three days, if I keep trying to work. All that will cure it is to stop working the minute I feel the signs. No, I found out years ago that I can't do no hard work. I can walk, though, and like to fox hunt. It's almost like medicine, a fox hunt is. I can have the worst sort of a tearing in my head to where it seems like I'll go crazy, and the minute I call up the dogs that aching gits better and starts leaving me.
"I can git to thinking about some day maybe going down to Knoxville and that holps any headache, too. I been to Knoxville only one time in my life. Went to a circus and to the fair. Thirty- two miles is too far to go to such things. I was plumb beat out when I got home. I hear they had a good fair this year. They say tobacco's going to be higher than a cat's back this fall. I sure hope so. Myrtle only makes a small patch. Jist enough to be sure of tax money. little left over.
"Talking about Knoxville minds me of something. See that old dog laying there by the step. He was a smart fox hound in his day and I lent him once to my cousin in Knoxville. He wanted him for some fox hunters' convention or other. Well, blamed if that dog didn't git out of that fenced-in yard in Knoxville and come home. Took him thirty- six hours and he was jist about wore out. His feet was that tender he jist picked along for a week like he was walking on eggs. I guess them brick pavements and concrete highway almost wore his toe bottoms off. I was jist like that old hound dog when I got back from Knoxville that time. Never been back. Maybe I will before long.
"I'm pretty satisfied where I'm at. My pa give me this sixty acres of hillside land thirty-five year ago, that time me and Myrtle got married. The old man was civil war pensioned. He drawed sixty dollars regular from Uncle Sam and he had a lot of mountain land handed down from his pappy. By the time he divided amongst all us boys and girls none of us got very much. But I got enough for the old woman and the six kids to make a living on."
Leander clucked his tongue and motioned down the hillside. "Here comes Myrtle."
Her face was hidden by a huge poke bonnet, her back was bent - humped almost - and she moved her feet as if they were weighted. A basket was slung over one arm.
"I vow it sure hurts me the way that poor woman works," said Leander. "Oh, I tell you, what wouldn't I give to be able to do the workl If the good Lord in his mysterious moving way jist hadn't made my head so's it tears up jack every time I try to do a job of work, I'd work like nobody you ever heard of! I bet I'm the hardest unable worker ever was, jist about!"
Myrtle came up on the porch. She stared at Leander who shifted his position, coughed, and murmured, "Company."
"Howdy-do" The woman nodded. She passed into the house.
Leander rubbed his jaw. "Fine woman and hard working, he said. "But she looks like she's in one of her states this morning. She gits that way sometim when she's been fooling around in the field. Women is like to be that way. Go out to the field as peart as they make them. Come back all sour and full of sass. The good Lord give me an understanding heart and so I don't never let on that I notice, though it is a sore trial on me sometimes."
His wife stepped out on the porch, placed her basket which contained string beans on the floor, and re-entered the house. She came back dragging a chair. Letting herself down in it, she began hulling the beans. Each hull she tossed into the yard where it was swooped upon by half a dozen noisy chickens.
"Them shelly beans makes mighty good eating in the fall when garden stuff is gitting scarce," said Leqnder. "They don't sell so good, though. We do sell some wild blackberries and huckleberries in the summer. It gits mighty hard at times but we ain't never suffered from want. Our garden gives us something to eat almost every month in the year. 'we manage to make enough corn for our year's supply of bread. 'we keep a cow and usually raise a three hundred pound hog on the slop and grass we cut for it. That cow is the. salvation of us. We git plenty of butter and there's enough buttermilk left after we drink what we need to holp feed the hog.
"Yes, we do pretty well, I guess. Don't have to buy much from the store., That is, notmuch to eat. "We can heaps of fruit and vegetables every year. About all we buy is coffee, sugar, salt, soda, and soap we used to make soap with the lye from the ash hopper but then was when we had to wash all the clothes of our six children and our own. Now since all is married we can buy soap to wash for the rest of us cheaper than we can make it.
"Of course, we buy flour sometimes to make cake and hot biscuits for breakfast. All depends on how well our chickens is doing. If limberneck or the pip or hawks and polecats don't git them and the hens lay good we git a right smart of money. We have to sell cheap, though. Eggs only bring fifteen cents a dozen and you do mighty well to git twenty cents for a fryer and thirty- five cents for an old hen that's quit laying. When the cow's fresh I can sell a few pounds of butter each week. Then Myrtle makes money during the summer working at the cannery. This buys us new clothes and shoes.
"Our hardest times always comes around when something happens to the cow or the shoats. The cow dries up and quits milking sudden -like in some years. Pigs sometimes git their legs broke and we kill them and can't save the meat. When we have to buy a new cow or some new pigs we sure have to scrimp."
"Leander straightened up in his chair. "But even then," he said sternly, "we don't suffer! No siree! In them times I always find some walnut trees on the place that bring good money. Or I cut enough chestnut or locust poles that the rich valley farmers would buy for fencing posts to buy new stock. It raises sand with my head, but I grit my jaw and go ahead. One time, though, we could only git together enough money to buy a yearling and had to wait over a year before she brought a calf. I sure missed our butter and milk that time."
Leander lowered his chair to the floor and crossed his right leg over his left. He said, "I use to bring in some hard cash once in awhile, too. Ain't that right, Myrtle?"
Myrtle didn't say anything.
"Use to do lots of things I don't do now," said Leander. "Once in life I fairly ate old Bruton Snuff and I drunk moonshine liquor, too. Neighbors all wondered where I got it. Myrtle sure wouldn't let a still come nigh this place."
"Well, I reckon not, "she snorted, flinging more bean hulls to the chickens. "But even if the neighbors didn't know, I do. You didn't work round them stills for nothing. You always got more than you drunk, and I guess that's where you got your extry spending money."
Her tone softened. "That's been five year ago and I'm might proud you've give it all up for God. I ain't never been prouder of you since the day I run away from my pats house to marry you. Only fourteen year old. All the girls thought you was a powerful good looking man. Guess I did too. Had it to do over, it would be the same thing, I reckon. Anyhow, I praise God you're a changed man."
Leander ran his hand through his hair. He took a deep breath and his voice became deep, solemn, and slow. It happened this way. Remember how hard times was jist before President Roosevelt come into power. I never remember when it was harder to keep soul and body together. Three of our girls was crazy to git married, but the young men couldn't take care of a wife. Along with everything else closing down in Knoxville and Sevierville, most of the Baptist churces around here closed down. We'd been Baptist all our lives. Now we had nowheres to go to preaching. Some said preachers had to live and they had to quit preaching and go to work. They couldn't trust the Lord to take care of them like the Bible says.
"Well we went about a year with no preaching to go to. Then Preacher Lipscomb come along. He visited in the homes around here. He brought religion right to us and showed us in the Bible where we should hold meetings in our homes. He convinced me and Myrtle that the Holiness have the true religion. You don't know how happy I was after God had touched me with his great Spirit. I could feel him working in me and the Spirit caused me to talk in tongues. Unless God had worked within you in that way you can't know how great it is to feel sure that you are saved, that you are going to heaven when you die, and that the Lord Jesus has his hands on you when you is living.
"Oh, it was God working in me to save me from my sin and calling me to help save others. I ain't never backslid yet. I don't git no money from preaching, for I ain't regular licensed. I'm what they call a lay-preacher. I only exhort and talk with tongues and preach a little at our meetings. The Bible says people can meet in their houses for worship and that's what us Holiness people hereabouts do, for there ain't enough of us to build a meeting house."
Myrtle threw the last of the hulls into the yard, picked up a handful of beans, and let them trickle through her fingers. She looked proudly toward her husband. "Yes, we all joined up with the Holiness people except two of the children. They're still Baptist and poke fun at us. But they'll regret it."
Leander nodded slowly. "They will, jist as sure as hell." He emphasized his words by slapping his knees vigorously. "And that ain't cussing, neither!"
"Now, Leander," said Myrtle, "there's some people don't believe in hell like you do."
"Well they would if they'd read their Bible. They'd know there was a hell and they'd be afeard to say there ain't."
"Leander believes every word in the Bible, but he can't read a word in it," Myrtle explained.
"He never had no schooling. My education stopped when I married, but I had Ioarned to read, write and cipher right well. my mother was a school teacher and she took right smart pride in me. Since we renewed up with the Lord in the Holiness faith, I have read all of the Bible to Leander and the children."
Leander stood up and stared out over the hills. "I know a lot of my favorite scriptures by heart, though I can sing the truth in hymns. Know most of them. Here's the prettiest of them all. Jist made for my case. Listen!" He threw back his head and sang in a deep throaty voice that set the echoes ringing:
"I've given up my liquor
"Ive thrown away my snuff
"For when I have Lord Jesus
"I surely have enough, ay Lord,
"For I surely have enough!"