1. January 19, 20, 1939.
2. Albert Denman* (white)
3. ----
4. Hicoria, Florida
5. Country store proprietor & farmer.
6. Barbara Berry Darsey
7.
*Albert Denman, fictitious name
Bob Franklin, real name.
Life History of Albert Denman* and Family Proprietor Country Store
Mr. Denman was working in a small garden about halfway between his house and his tiny grocery store and thus could keep an eye upon both as he cultivated cabbages, beans, and okra. When he saw me he laid aside his he's and insisted that he needed a little rest anyway, so we made our way to the front perch of his modest little home to sit in comfortable, but old and weathered, rocking chairs and talk.
He was tall and thin, with light hair and clear grey eyes. His demeanor was most serious but he talked freely in a pleasant friendly manner about himself and his family.
"Anne* went to town this morning with another lady and <text not clear> came back yet. I'm sorry she aint here and hope she gets back before you leave for she will be glad to see you.
She don't get to town often for we have me car 'cept my old work truck, I'm always glad when she does get a chance to go, it is a right nice change for her sometimes. She works too hard anyway and needs to get out some. Lately she suffers a lot with a pain in her side and I think she works too hard trying to keep us all clean and fed right. Sometimes she washes clothes twice a week when the children are in school. Did you notice all these clothes a drying' in the back yard when you came up, well, she put 'em all out his morning before she went to town, said Mr. Denman in a voice in which pride and sadness seemed mixed.
"She keeps the house so clean too and wears herself out a scrubbin' these here floors, I tell her. Of course the children all help, we are raisin' them that way, but while they are goin' to so school they can't do much with the work. We try to teach our children to be interested in ther home and feel a responsibility in it, and lets of times they take right held and do things about the house without being told. We want 'em to feel that taking care of and workin' about the house and place is a responsibility and a privilege tes for 'em. We aint get much of a home new, or much furniture for it, but I hope some day to fix a better place for my family though there don't seem much chance or it right now.
"The children aint home from school yet and business bein' so Black that's why you found me workin' in the gardin", he explained, "for I guessed it were a good time to <text not clear>them plants some. I get a larger piece back behind them pines over yonder, and I raise some cabbage, beams, and okra, like in this small patch here, but the land it ainy very good and I don't have the luck at farmin' like I did back in Alabama. I always made a pretty fair living there till the last few years before we come here, but seems like everything has gone wrong in money matters new for a long time."
We talked a little of general economic conditions and them reverted to his own problems.
"Anne and me was both born in Geneva County, Alabama, and lived right near each other on farms. I'm forty-five and she's about thirty-seven I believe but I never can keep up with dates and ages exactly seems like it take a woman for that. We both learned to farm and our fathers raised lets of corn and cotton. We get married in 1919, I think it was and then we came to Florida and stayed a little while and looked around for a place. We had heard of the fine farmin' land around the Lake in the muck, but we didn't get me farther than here and we bought this place. It were all just pine land when we first came.
We didn't like it much though and Anne was homesick all the time so we went back home and farmed up there for awhile.
"Yes ma'am, up in Geneva Country and I raised the finest corn and cotton you ever saw for about three years and I made right good money too. Then the dry weather come and the bugs started in and killed everything we planted, after about three years of then troubles we get up and come back here to Florida. I still owed some on this place, and it were just the raw land but I started in the clea in a spot my house I went in more debt for lumber to build just this here front room. Then we moved in, and I kept a clearin' more land till I get that little patch there done and ready to plant. Then I started on the larger place back of them pines. Anne, she kinder likes them big tall pines and the wind a whistlin' through them, that's how come I left them.
Mr. Denman sighed deeply and a reminiscent look came into his eyes. "Then we took a notion to go back to <text not clear> and see if we couldn't stay there. You see ma'am, it bein' our home all our lives and all our relatives were there we felt like we wanted to live there we could anyway we wasn't sure just what to do. All my people have lived right there in Geneva County a mighty long time, I reckon. <text not clear> heard my pa tell that his grandfather came over from England and I came to Georgia first and then right to Alabama. My pa was named Albert, and se was my grandfather.
"Well we didn't stay long that triper things was sure in a bad fix up there; seemed like the farmers jest couldn't make no crops no more se we came back here join to stay. I think that was latein 1925, ma'am, but it mighta been 26, I aint real sure. It was then I started to raises corn and cabbage, but the corn just wouldn't grow. Then I worked out on farms for people around here and found out just what to plant and hoe to raise it best. I thought I'd like to be a good farmer like I used to be back in Alabama; but notnin did any good. Folks said the land was now and sour so I planted cow-peas for a crop to sweeten the land. While' this was join on I still did work for ether folks, and managed somehow to live and take care e' my family. But it wasn't good care like I had expected to give 'em.
"Well, ma'am, along about 35, I got fifty-dollars unexpected like on some work I had done in Alabama. I find left there with it a <text not clear>. With things a goin' so bad in ferin', I decided to take most of that fifty dollars and try to start a little store right here. I got enough rough lumber to build that little shack you see ever there. I had to <text not clear> mire in debt for it but the lumber man knew I was tryin' my best to make a livin' and he helped me. I used most of the money for groceries and sure was glad for though I didn't sell much I got our feed wholesale and we had cheaper livin' anyway. But, with what I did sell and what I made with other work, and my wife able to' tend the store when I was away, I managed to stock up again and keep a goin'. I don't make much now on the store, and never have, but it helps us and gives us a chance to give the children some of the kind of food they need like milk, even if it is canned, and dried fruit, apples and bananas, and canned tomatoes. I never could buy all them things at retail the way prices is now."
He paused for a moment in thought: " Then 'tendin' the store gives us work to do and it's better to keep a tryin' to work than to give up and sit down and do nothin', aint it, ma'am.
"The children can all help now too, they can farm and keep the store, and help with the house, and they do it too. I was raised that way, my pa he believed in all us workin', and I aim to raise my children the same."
Just then a fine large car stopped at the store with a rancous blast of its horn and Mr. Denman excused himself to go see what was wanted. A petulant voice demanded a coco-cola and a five cent box of crackers. Mr. Denman soon returned to the perch and resumed his conversation: "Well, I made about three cents then. When I saw that fine car I hoped they would buy out the store, but most everyone who comes here just buys five or the cents worth," said he with a wry twinkle in his clear grey eyes.
"My folks always said I had a head for business but it don't look much like it now. I reckon if I had a better education I might a done more. I guess I went as far as sixth grade in school but it was different in them days. We had a little one room school house with one teacher for all of us. Every child brought just any kind of school books he had and studied them. I never did care much for school and was always glad to stay home and help with the farmin' for I loved that work. Yes ma'am, I had to stay home a lot and work. Sometimes pa had some nigger help but you couldn't depend on 'em for they all would get up and leave some times without any notice. When I was young and just married I expected to soon be a rich farmer but that just aint a gain' to be it looks like now," sighed Mr. Denman regretfully.
"Yes ma'am I sure believe in education. Ever since I been grown I have tried to get more. I read and study all I can, and I like to talk to educated people. I read the papers and good magazines when I can get them. Them trashy ones I wouldn't let come in my house and I hope my children never get to readin' that kind. Why do they let 'em be printed they don't do good and they are bound to do lots of mischief.
"We get five children. Letty, she's eighteen now about, and in high school. I hope she will be a teacher when she finishes and if I can I aim to send her to college too to study for one. Grace* is fifteen and she is about ready for high school I think. I just aint right sure of their exact ages and grades in school, ma'am, but reckon it's about right. Earline* is our youngest girl and she's eleven now. Yes, I got two boys too, John*, he's thirteen and a pretty good farmer if I do day so but I hope my boys won't turn out to be farmers there isn't anything in it nowadays but had' work and disappointment, the we got Gone* the baby who is nine, and you better not call him a baby he gets awful mad. We have a good sized family for such pore folks, and the children are all real good behaved too and gettin' on fine in school. Their teachers, and each one has a different teacher these days, tell me they don't have no trouble with 'em. Well, both Anne and no aim to bring 'em up right in the fear of God and the Baptist church.
"Sometimes I wish I had more boys, then I'm glad we aint get no more for they are a great responsibility and cost a let be bring up. Mine don't always have everything they want, and not always just what they neither, but I do my best for 'em and they don't do without many necessary things. Right now they need some work on their teeth and John needs a tonic for he's been sort of bunny lately but I just aint got the money right now. I always say the Lord don't send more children than a man can take care of and it looks like that in my care.
"I want my children to get on better in life than I have and I want 'em all to get good educations so they will be fitted properly for work. I don't know just what they all will want to do but I am a tryin' to put the idea of some special kind of work in each one <text not clear> mind. Lotty now wants to go to college to study for a teacher and I sure hope I can send her. It don't look like it now but some way may <text not clear> up. If we try to do what's right and do the best we can all the time I believe ways will work cut for us after all, "said Mr. Denman seriously.
"The schools here sure is fine too and they teach so many things these times that we never learned. They even get a business course and things like that, it makes me wish I could go too. The teachers are so pleasant too and my children all like them and they seen so interested in the children and visit my wife and talk to her about 'em. My children all like school and we never keep 'em home to work. My children always have parts in all the school entertainments and do well. Anne and me always go, we enjoy it and the children like for us to be there. I don't know just how to say it right but it seems like there is so much more in education these days than just in learning to read and write, and when children do get through they are more fitted to go out in the world and do their part is life. They seem more able to look after their selves than when I went to school.
"I don't know if I can get 'em all well educated but I sure aim to try. If I was makin' the money now like I made on the farm in Albana when I first started a workin' for myself everything would be alright. These times is so different and when I do make any there is always something to spend it for right away. We like it better down here in Florida now that we been here so long. The weather is better and things is a mite cheaper and not so much wood for winter. We don't buy no fuel here but pick up our wood. Our little place here is paid for now but it was a long hard pull to make it, I'm a tellin' you."
With his children in mind, Mr. Denman spoke again: "Anne and me, both, always tries to see that the children have the right food and good clothes. I don't mean fine clothes, but made to fit right and kept clean. We both have studied diots and foods so as to give our children the best we could on what we have. They all like milk, fresh or canned though I do believe they like the canned milk the best, and they like vegetables too, that is some but not carrots. They eat corn and butter-beans and string beans and okra, now they sure do like okra and it's good for 'em too. I never did care so much for vegetables myself but I've learned to eat lots <text not clear> in recent years. Sometimes I had to take part of my pay here about in vegetables and we had to eat 'em. No ma'am, that's when I was getting' started here, I don't sell my groceries much for tradin' unless its fruit. Some folks on some of the creeks out here do raise good bananas and when they bring in a bunch I take these in trade for oranges and some grapefruit too but we don't like grapefruit much. Mostly I sell for cash, I just have too, and I don't give credit for just aint able. If somebody is in real need I just rather give them something than sell on time, I can't keep books and anyway can't afford it.
"Havin this little store helps me in buyin' clothes and other things besides groceries for I can usually get a discount that I couldn't if I wasn't in the business. The children sure do use a heap of clothes in school too, they wear them out so fast, shoes too, they just don't last no time at all. I do try to keep my family in clothes, not what you call fine clothes but good kind. You may not believe it, ma'am, but these here is the best clothes I've got, but I don't need nothin' better than these kind of blue work shirts and pants. It does make me feel bad though to see my family not dressed all up as good as anybody else. I even wear these clothes to church, Anne keeps them all washed and ironed and I don't mind for myself if I aint got a suit like other people have.
"I couldn't exactly say, ma'am, just how much it would take for us to live comfortably. I aint figured on that for so long and of course it would take a lot of money for us to have all we really want and think we want. To have proper food and clothes all the time and maybe see the doctor and start in a better kind of life like I always planned for my family, well somewhere about seventy five dollars, if it was regular, might be enough but I don't knew. I wish Anne was here she might could tell you about that better than I can. It's mighty hard to say for prices are goin' up all the time and everything is so high.
"Sometimes I sell some vegetables, but it's got so the prices to sell 'em is so low it don't pay to take 'em to town. We can't eat'em all and so I decide every little while to quit farmin' completely it's so aggravatin', and just let the land go back to weeds and trees. But I do love the work and then when I think of all the time and work I put in clearin' the land and fixin' to farm I keep on at it a while longer. Seems like there is something about bein' a farmer; once you get at it you can't let go.
"We all like the store work too but it would be heap better if we was busy all the time with it. My children can keep store as good as Anne and me, and can weight out grits and meals and make change. Even though we live here on the highway it's so far off from most everybody I never did think a store would do much good but it seemed the only thing I could do, and it has helped us live. If I hadn't a put that fifty dollars in this store it would a been spent before we knew it.
"I got an old truck new too and I got a little work with it on county reads sometimes, and I haul for other folks too. When we first started here everybody said we wouldn't last long and that we was foolish to try a store and livin' here and it did worry me and made me wonder if I was makin' a mistake but it was all I could do and I just stuck too it, there aint nothing else to do. We have all come along so far without starvin' but it's sure been a hard pull."
Mr. Denman then spoke of life in town and said: "I wouldn't want to live in town, but I do like to go in sometimes and stand around and watch what other people are goin'. Don't see none that look like they are much happier than what we are right here and they all seen in such a hurry. I think people miss a lot in life of friendship and pleasant happenings that hurry on so fast. I think out here is the best place to raise children, they don't get the chance to learn so much mischief and get in trouble. In town they want to stay on the streets all the time, why ma'am, sometimes when I'm in town I have seen little bitty children all alone, so little you would think they would be scared but they aint they go walking right down the streets. I can't keep from wondering what their parents is a thinking about to them out thataway. Livin out here is cheaper a mite too, we pick up all our weed for cookin' and heatin' and we don't have to buy water and electric lighter. We use kerosene but don't burn much for we go to bed early. I don't keep the store open at night. Think of havin' to buy the water you drink and wash in, that gets me. I get a fine deep well outside my kitchen door, sometime I aim to build another room around it far the kitchen, and there is plenty of water for everything and everybody just for workin' the pump handle. I don't believe the <text not clear> intended for people to have to buy water, no ma'am, I don't.
"We get up so early that sometimes we have to light a lamp till the sun is up good, but we find plenty to do and I always believe in getting' up and at work with the sun. Seems like people who gets up early feels better than these who stay in bed so late. I always been used to getting' up mighty early and when I was a boy on the farm we got up long before daylight, my he sure did believe in early risin', Mr. Denman.
He then spoke of political aspects of the world in general and remarked: "Anne and me, both, is good Demarcate, like we was raised to be and like I'm a raisin' my children. We both vote but Anne don't take much stock in it, she is timid and don't like to go to the polls. I am a Democrat from the ground up and mighty proud of it. It sure looks like the Democratic Party is the only one for the Country too and I knew it has always looked out more for the pore people than any other party has. Nothin' much ever was gone that way though till this present Administration. I sure do admire Mr. Roosevelt and I hope he runs for a third term for the Country needs him. If he had been let do just as he had planned and wanted to without so much interferin' by them what don't know nothin' we all would be heap better off new. Why ma'am, I read where he had studied and planned for years to be the President some day and just what to do for the Country when he was and we never have had a President do that before," said Mr. Denman earnestly.
"People just can't help bein' pore and in a rich Country like ours something has to be done for the needy. I think Mr. Roosevelt saved the nation when he came in office. Before he was President people had got so discouraged and was a getting' so desprit' there was just about to be a war right here in our own land I do believe, and if he hadn't been elected it would have happened. I am prayin' for him to run for the next election and I'll sure work and do all I can find and try to keep up with the affairs. I tell her she ought to be glad to vote for that shows that she is an American citizen and that's a lot to be mighty proud of."
Mr. Denman paused and rocked excitedly for a few moments and a slight flush crept into his pale face: "With all them countries in Europe a fightin', we get a lot here to be mighty thankful for and we ought to do just what the President tolls us to for he knows what is the best to do and he sure is interested in his own Country. I don't understand much read about them foreign matters but it looks like war is headed this way too and we ought to be ready. I don't belive in war but if it comes we can't just let them furriners come ever and take our land. And we get lets to take care of right in our own Country and Mr. Roosevelt, he seems to know what do do for all of us, if the people would just let him do it.
Yes ma'am I'm a Baptist. My whole family belongs to the Missionary Baptist Church at Star and we go every Sunday as regular as we can. We don't have a car but we take the old truck and pile the children in and go. We give what we can toward the Church, it aint never much, but better than nothin' and the Church must have some money. Preachin' is the minister's work and he has to be paid same as the rest of us se he son live. Sometimes we give groceries or Anne bakes a cake for a dinner or a social but we can't even always do that when they ask us. They always want Anne to bake cakes for the socials for she sure is a good cake maker.
"We are tryin' to raise our children to be good Church members and workers. Seems like what the world needs today is more re<text not clear> religion and love for each other in it. While there is <text not clear> much hatin' and dishonesty goin' on, no wonder there is so much fightin' and trouble everywhere.
"I think the church is mighty important and bein' a member and havin' that responsibility helps of people to keep steady and behave right. Maybe we don't always like everybody in the church and sometimes even the minister don't suit everybody, but we aint in the church for a club like ans we should keep a gion' and doin our part for the Lord's sake. That's another thing I admire so much about our president Roosevelt, he goes to church and he prays too and he aint afraid to speak of God when we talks to us people, said Mr. Denman reverently.
