A. C. Jones, motorman
1048 Seymour Ave.
Nashville, Tennessee
January 6, 1939
L. A.
EVERY MORNING ABOUT FIVE-THIRTY
"I was raised up smelling skunks around the house. That's the countriest thing on earth, skunks wandering around the house at night. And they was lots of red foxes, too, in them days. Ever see a fox catch a chicken? They grab that chicken around the neck and sling him across their own neck and trot on off.
"I remember them sort of things from when I was raised on a farm in Smith County, about ten or twelve miles out from Carthage. Just raised what you might say in the woods, outdoors most of the time. Well, I started working on the farm as soon as I was big enough to work. When I was just a little shaver, I carried in stove wood. Later I helped pile and burn brush and thin corn and cut weeds in the tobacco. On down the line like that. I cleared land and plowed, too. Plowing makes a man out of a man. In this day and time they's not enough young boys learn to plow. They've got a saying in Smith County which it says a young man that can't plow a straight furrow ain't worth his salt. That's what I think when I look at Some of them slicked up and pasty face youngsters that rides my streetcar to school and from school. They carry on with the feisty little girls and run off at the mouth till you get ashamed to hear them. Then I say to myself, 'What you need, young man, is to do some plowing and I mean plenty of plowing! Might make something out of yourself if you did.'
"Nothing beats farm life if you're able to own a good farm. I remember the log-rollings and barn-raisings they used to have at home in Smith County. People in town never have good times like that. You know. Folks would get together from miles around. Maybe a hundred men at one time. They'd light in and cut those logs and square them in no time, or they'd get that barn up -- or the best part of it. And then come the good. time. The women folks cooked the eats while the men was working. It would be all ready. Everybody would eat till they near busted. You'd get up and walk around till you got what you'd eat sort of settled down and then you'd eat again. No. they's nothing like farm life.
"That's where I aim to be if things work out. On a farm. Been hoping for a year or more but just keep dragging. I plan to go back to Smith County. I own me a house and lot up there and I want to spend the rest of my days there. When a man gets old and gets his pension -- I'll get mine at sixty-five -- he can get by if he owns a home on a farm.
"Now you take me. I didn't get much education. Just went through the eighth grade. Then I quit to go to work. About five months school a year is all I ever got. Went two months in the spring and quit and helped my father with the crop and when that was laid by, why. I went back to school again for three months in the fall. Then I'd quit and work in my uncle's country store through the winter months.
"My uncle sold general merchandise in his store and he had a postoffice there. I finally quit school and worked there regular three or four years for eight dollars a month. Boy, I thought I was flying! Dollars looked like elephants then to what they do now. Way back then you didn't make nothing. If a man made fifty cents day, then he was stepping on it. But your money went a heap further. One dollar then was as good as five now.
The Government made my aunt postmistress but she didn't have no education so I took care of it for her. The store and post office was at Difficult, Tennessee, and I swear it was a difficult place to get to. That's what they used to say about it.
They was long hours I worked in the store because folks went there before they went to work and I had to get up before daylight. We stayed open till nine and ten at night because the folks would sit around and talk and tell jokes till late. Why, they'd gather in there with their banjos, fiddles, and guitars and enjoy the music. Take back then. They didn't have now here to go and they had a big time. They didn't have no picture shows and they really got enjoyment out of life. Seems like that's the reason people ain't satisfied nowadays. They got more out of life back then than the younger generation today.
The telephone company, way back yonder about nineteen nine or ten had an exchange at Carthage. I got the job running it for twentyfive dollars a month. I thought I was flying. I come to Nashville a few weeks and went through the shop and learned about the switchboard. They was forty or fifty lines on the board and we had a few long distance calls. Not many. We didn't have no storms in them days to break down the service and didn't have no trouble with people listening in. People didn't have the idle curiosity in them days, they have now. Anyway, I kept up the lines. I made up bills and done all the collecting and run the switchboard at night. Back then, the chief operator of Nashville tested all the lines twice a night and if you happened not to answer you got a stout letter right away.
But they wasn't much future in the 'phone business in Carthage, not to make anything out of, I mean. I had some friends in Nashville and one worked for the street car company. I thought I could make more money here so I come down and looked for a job. I didn't have no trouble finding one. The first job I got was with the street car company in nineteen and twenty, operating a car. So I moved here.
I worked till about nineteen and twenty-two when my mother got to ailing and I went back to the farm. She wasn't right well. She had gallstones and bladder trouble and was bed-ridden and had spells. Take way back then, they didn't operate much on people. Doctors didn't cut on you just for the money in it in them days. Well, I stayed on the farm about two years. Then my mother took down bad and died. I come on back to Nashville in nineteen and twenty-four. I went back to operating street cars. Been here ever since. That makes me fiftyseven and with the company eighteen years, off and on.
Now in the street car business, if you bring your car in ahead of time too often, they might lay you off a day or two. They expect you to be early and late once in a while. But, we've got close schedules to run on. It makes a fellow nervous when he gets in a traffic jam. He knows he's going to have lots of stops to make going out and coming back. That's why operators ding their bells so in traffic. Same reason a motorist blows his horn, just anxious and in a hurry and nervous.
I guess my work has some effect on my health. I reckon all work has effect on a person more or less. Bound to. I feel all right and I guess it agrees with me more than it hurts me. I have to work split hours and have to get up awful early to go to work. But I reckon my health's all right. I weigh two hundred and six pounds for my height and that's five feet seven.
I think the street car company's loyal and nice to the men in every way, more than the average corporation is. Most of the men are pretty well satisfied. Of course, most of the men would love to make more than they're making. But in this modern day you're lucky to make anything at all.
I never had no experience with unions. Most of them's run by foreigners and Russian Reds of some kind. But don't know nothing about them. If both the employer and the men in his employee would cooperate together, I think it's better without the union. No use in having a union if they get along all right without it. That's the way it looks to me.
I find the public is averagely pretty good on my cars. I mean they don't complain about service much. Colored people don't give much trouble, neither. They's all right if you keep them in their place. Of course, a lot of colored people is all right, but the country would be better off if it didn't have so many. Their work would be hard to get somebody else to do it maybe sometimes. Certain kinds of work, I mean. Dirty stuff, I mean. No. I don't have much trouble with colored people on the cars. I do occasionally when they try to sit up too far or don't drop their fare in the box if they think they can get by. They don't do it much now like they used to. Just now and then, if a whole gang gets on at once. Sometimes they get by a new operator but after he's been on a while they don't try to much. Car work is interesting. You get to see so much of the public.
I've been pretty well satisfied with life. I'd be better pleased if I could have accumulated something for my old age when I couldn't work. Lots of things to cover with my income and rent's my heaviest expense. Rents is a little high. Of course, I know it costs a heap to keep property up, high as city taxes is. If I had plenty of money I wouldn't rent. You can buy a home of your own a heap cheaper than you can rent, and don't rent time come around mighty fast, though! By the time I get through paying all my bills I don't have none left to bank. I'll take a dollar for all I banked in the last three or four years. I have to scratch like thunder to break even. If a man's got much on his shoulders nowadays he can't bank none.
Take now, we had to take care of my wife's mother two or three years before she died. She wasn't in good health and that helped pull me back. When you put all that on you, it just pulls you down. Yes siree! I don't have much to bank -- not much, but none. If I was getting fifty per cent more than that I'm making I could get along pretty good. By the time you keep up your insurances and pay all your bills and dues and things like that and clothes, it's mighty hard to get by. You can't hardly do it.
I want my children to have a good education. I want them to go to church and Sunday School. I want to raise them up in the right way so's people will respect them and appreciate them. Not many children is raised right nowadays. They don't respect old people or nobody else. If a lot of people don't raise them any better than they have been, I don't know what's to become of the rising generation. Lots of women nowadays don't have no regard for theirs elves or their sex. They sure don't. Womanhood should be the noblest thing on earth. They should be on a pedestal. They should be pure and I hate to see them mess in politics. When a woman goes to the polls and mixes and mingles there, she loses her womanhood. The trend of things nowadays and conditions, I hardly know what to think about it or about what's best for the future. Of course, a smart man would know. But that's one thing I wouldn't even guess at.
Take some of the amusements they have these days. Some of them is all right, I reckon. Some of them I don't endorse at all. Now, the way a lot of people go to roadhouses, for instance. I don't approve of drinking or dancing. Never danced a set in my life. Never did even try. Why, I wouldn't know how to get out on the floor and keep time with the music. I never square-danced in my life or rounddanced, neither. And I never done none of this hugging dance, neither. Dancing keeps you up late hours and you're not fit to work, keeping hours like that.
Drinking and dancing lowers the people's morals. It don't look good to the public who wants to do right. I think it's a sin to do these things. Even if people wanted to hire a man, they want a quiet, straight-up man and not the kind that follows that life.
It's not the right kind of life to live. Why, when I was raised up they didn't have no every-day pastime like they do now. The girls would go and spend the night and play games, maybe once or twice a week, on week-ends, Saturday nights, and Sunday afternoons. The boys they would come by. They thought that was fine back then. Believe me, the girls went home and got there before night or they better know why and their folks knew where they was.
I don't care for shows. Just don't enjoy them very much. I'd rather be out doing something else. A man has to go regular to learn about pictures to enjoy them. They mix me up. I can't follow what's happening. I don't endorse them much. And this modern stuff they're showing nowadays is just tearing down the morality of the people. I just don't believe they're decent for women and girls to look at them. I haven't been to see one in years.
I think show has influence in keeping young folks from church. I sure do. Take me. I go to church every time I can. Of course, the way I'm working I can't go every Sunday but some of the family goes most of the time. I belong to the Eastland Baptist Church but I have to work every other Sunday. Now, I'm not prejudiced against any church and I never argue with anybody about church or politics. That's their privilege.
A man's vote is his privilege, too -- but oughtn't to be a woman's. I vote sometimes but lots of times I don't and I never taken much interest in local politics because I don't know many people here. I'm a Democrat and I never voted nothing but the Democratic ticket in my life and nobody's ever had any influence on my voting, neither. No siree! I vote for the man I think he's best for the office, and he's always a Democrat, too.
I don't get to read much as I'd like to because I don't have much chance. What little I do read is newspapers and the Bible and things like that. Usually I sketch over the paper when I get home of a night but generally I get sleepy and go to sleep before I read much. When a man gets up at four 0'clock he can't do it. I usually read the general news and like to read the sports. Baseball is the only sport I really enjoy. Football, now I don't know a thing about that. They used to play baseball back in the old days when I was coming up. It's got bottom to it. But this football, now, it ain't anything but a brawl. Nothing to it.
If a fellow don't read the papers he just don't know what's going on in this world. Things change so fast. Why, if the population of the world keeps on like it has the past twenty-five or thirty years or more, how is people going to make a living? All this modernized machinery and these modern bookkeeping machines they've got in the banks, why, they'll do the work of I don't know how many people.
Take out on the farms like it used to be. Why, now days those big tractors they use on the farms will do as much work or more in a day as fourteen men can do. They pull two big plows, some more than that -- those real big ones. Just like my job here. When I come here they just had a few one-man cars. Most of them was two-man cars. Now, you see, they work one man on them.
Well, at least I've got a job and my health. Take My father, now. He's been kind of crippled up. Of course, he's getting along all right now, but he's ninety-three and that's getting old. He had a skin cancer on the back of his ear. Dr. Howard King taken it off with radium treatment. Those radium treatments cost a lot but the doctor come from up in Smith County and he let us have it cheaper than usual. He was crippled in an automobile accident a few years ago when his right hip and leg was hurt. About four year ago a State motorcycle officer run into us when we was almost home -- right at Seymour venue and Gallatin Road. They didn't have no traffic light there then and we had turned and was waiting to let two or three cars pass. This cop's buddie went around us, but he hung our front right wheel and turned the car clean around. It threw the front door open and threw my father plumb out in the street. He was sitting in the front seat. My wife and son and daughter-in-law was sitting in the back seat and it threw my life up against the front seat and bruised her breast and side and she was confined to her bed several days.
This officer vas sort of in charge of the motorcycle men in some way and he was considered a reckless man. He run into the back end of a truck before that out on West End. Crippled him up some and this was the first time he had rode a motorcycle since. He was headed toward town and he come over that hill, boy, making about seventy or eighty mile an hour -- just like a bird. My father never did go to the hospital but he wasn't no account and couldn't get about for a year or more. A year and a half I reckon it was. Bunged and scarred him up right smart and that officer never has been able to ride a motorcycle since. Broke him all up. He worked a while after that in the office, where they sell the drivers' licenses in the Memorial Building and used a crutch.
I sued him and the bonding company for two thousand dollars but didn't get nothing, not a red cent. Judge A. G. Rutherford was my lawyer and Judge A. B. Neil heard the case. Judge Rutherford said Neil just the same as instructed the jury out of awarding me anything. Said it was a clear case in my favor and that I ought to got damages. He said Neil done that to stand in with the administration.
Thinking it all over, if I had a better education I probably would have a better job and be making more money maybe and able to own a good car. I think a person without an education nowadays don't have no showing for a living. For that reason I think you can't do too much in the way of schools. Every child is entitled to and ought to have a good education. But he ought to learn to work, too. Take children nowadays. They're raised on a silver spoon. They don't appreciate anything at all."
Excellent
Every Morning About Five-Thirty (A motorman)
"Raised up smelling skunks around the house" -- "Plowing makes a man out of a man" -- plans to go back to farm at sixty-five with motormans pension -- remarks about street car business about the public, black and white -- women shouldn't vote, etc. -- severe on amusements.