Athens, Georgia
Morton Bldg., W. Washington St.
Mme. Annie Mains (Negro)
Hiss Grace McCune, writer
Mrs. Sarah H. Hall, reviser
MADAME LUCY
I could hear the reverberations of her lusty voice, for she was singing as I approached the closed door of her shop. "Come in," she called in answer to my knock. I opened the door and found Madame Lucy engaged in cleaning the floor. Long practice was indicated by the manner in which she handled that mop and pail of soapy water.
She giggled when she saw me, and I hardly recognized her. When I had come to make the appointment several days before, I had found Madame Lucy coping with the problems of a shop full of customers, and at that time she was dressed in a crisply fresh white uniform and immaculate white shoes --- a most professional looking Negress. I felt something of "behind the scenes disillusionment" when I saw her in a soiled old uniform, run-over shoes worn without hose, and with a towel tied about her bushy head. She is a light mulatto in color, of medium height, and very fat.
"I just knowed I'd git through with my cleaning-up before you got here, but it looks now like I was mistook. If you don't mind, though, I'll git the other floor mopped so it’ll git dry before time to open shop for the day.
"That's all right," I assured her, "just go right ahead with your work, for I don't mind waiting."
"Well, "she said, "the least I can do is bring a nice comfortable chair for you so you can make yourself easy while I finish cleaning up the reception room."
"Any one of these chairs will do," I told her, and started toward a comfortable looking chair that was in front of a dressing table.
"Lord! No, that ain't good enough for company," she insisted, as she came out of the reception room with a large wicker rocking chair. When I was established in the chair of her choosing, she said: "Them chairs over there by the dressing tables is just for work, not for visitors. We wants to feel good and easy when we talks."
She began wielding the mop again, but was soon interrupted by another knock at the door. The postman was there with a package and a letter for her. When she had hastily signed for the package she seemed surprised to learn that she must sign for the letter also. A happy look spread over her broad face, and she said with an air of specualtion, "I don't mind signing for that, 'cause I just bet it's money from my husband, and it’s high time he was sending it too." The postman was chuckling as he made his departure.
Madame changed her glasses for another pair before she opened her package, saying: "I'll put on my reading glasses before I start 'cause if I don't, then I'll just have to stop trying to read that letter and change specs, and I'se bound to see what's in the box and the letter too."
Another knock on her door interrupted her. In response to her "Come in!" a young Negress entered. Her skin was as light-colored as Madame's, and she apparently felt very much dressed up in her dark blue crepe dress, high-heeled, black patent leather pumps, and her carefully straightened and bobbed black hair. Probably one of the Madame’s customers, I thought, but none of the conversation that followed confirmed this idea.
"Now, think of that!" exclaimed madame. "You got here just in time to see what my husband has sent me."
Tearing open the letter she discovered three greenbacks --- two tens and a five dollar bill --- and a sullen expression spread over her face. "Just look at that measly little old twenty-five dollars," she spluttered, "and I was expecting at least fifty from him this month. He’ll hear from me about that," she grimly added, and from the tone of her voice I was sure that he would. She did not even look at the letter that accompanied the money, but just tossed it over on a table and impatiently ripped open the package.
It contained two dresses. She seemed to like one of the, a tailored, black silk crepe, but when she held up the other, a lace trimmed afternoon gown of pale lavender crepe, she again displayed annoyance and disappointment. "Can you imagine me in anything like that?" she snorted. "I look bad enough in the best-chosen clothes, without being rash enough to wear a thing like that."
"But, Madame Lucy, that is really such a lovely dress," the visitor protested, "and it'll look nice on you."
"Go 'way from here now," Lucy barked, in no way pacified. "I know what I can wear, and it sho ain’t nothing like that. But I ain't got no more time for things like that now, for I'se got to git cleaned up right away so I can finish up some appointments before dinnertime.
Her visitor laughed good-naturedly, "Well," she said, "I guess I know when it's time for me to go. When you gits time to out on that pretty lavender dress come in my office, for I sho wants to see you in it." She disappeared on the other side of the hall.
Lucy carefully folded the frocks and replaced them in the box, which she placed in the steel cabinet where she keeps her towels. She then picked up her mop and bucket and said, "You'll just have to 'scuse me a few minutes. I'll be back just as soon as I can finish cleaning."
While she was cleaning in her reception room, I looked around her small and rather crowded workroom. A piano and a long wicker settee almost fill one end of the room, and on the opposite side a cabinet is stocked with cosmetics, supplies, and other equipment. Oval mirrors are suspended above the two shelf-like dressing tables that are fastened to the wall near a window overlooking the street. Each table has a drawer for the equipment needed by the operator, and a gas burner that is shaped to fit the curling irons. A glass tray that holds combs and a small dish of hairpins rests on each table. The large electric dryer is of the blower type and does not have the part that fits over the head, usually found in beauty shops operated by and for white people. Ivory, tan, and light blue make up the color scheme that is reflected in the walls, woodwork, furniture, draperies, and in the linoleum floor covering.
A diploma from a school of beauty culture, certificates, a license, and several pictures depicting styles of hairdressing are displayed on the walls.
As I finished looking around, Madame Lucy appeared in the doorway. "Now, if you’ll just come in here in the reception room," she suggested, "we can talk. The girl that I’m training will he here in a few minutes. She can do all the dusting for me and see that all the combs and other things are cleaned and ready for use.”
In the reception room I noticed that tucker furniture upholstered in gay-patterned cretonne was the only departure from the color scheme that I had noticed in the workroom. A dressing table and chair, similar to the ones in the other room, are in here, and nearby is a large cabinet, a table, and several large screens. This room features pongee curtains end a linoleum floor covering in the same colors and design as those in the workroom.
"How do you like my little place?" Madame eagerly asked.
"It is so attractive and modern in every way that I see no reason why you shouldn't do well here," I told her in all sincerity.
Her friendly smile was broad, as she replied, "I am doing well. But while I'm glad that you like my place, I'm not yet satisfied with it myself; it's too small, and I don't like being upstairs. I wants to git down on the ground floor some place, for I knows it would he so much better. A good window display of my cosmetics would bring me in lots more trade, and this is the truth --- I really do have a good line of cosmetics.
"I needs more room. Why, I owns enough equipment to furnish a five-chair shop, and it's all paid for, just waiting for me to have it shipped on here from New York where I used it last. It's so different in this town from New York City. There I could rent me a place anywhere that I could pay the rent, but here I cain't rent nowhere but in the Negro section, and this section don't have a ground floor place for rent. Of course I knowed before I come back here how it was going to be, for this is my home town."
"Did you come back here from New York?" I asked.
"I did that," she said. "I never done nothing till I got away from here, and I did want to learn something and git me an education so bad, but do you know that all the schooling I ever got in the South was three months down yonder at Watkinsville, when I was eight years old. I was borned and raised between here and Watkinsville.
"Honey, I'se walked this street right outside where my shop is now, barefooted, many a tine --- didn't even own a shoe to my name. I even walked it barefooted after I got married. Now, I done that sho' nough. I'se had a hard time, and don't you think I ain't had to work for what I'se got, and no education to help me neither.
"White folks never wanted Negroes to learn nothing here in the South when I was growing up. Mother worked for white folks, and what I'se fixing to tell you's the truth, so help me God. I don't never remember my mother having even one dime of cash money. Of course we did raise what we et, and we didn't have to buy nothing 'cent a little sugar and coffee --- that is, if we got sugar and coffee a t'all --- and many's the time I'se drunk coffee sweetened with old black molasses syrup.
"There’s one other thing that I remember mighty well. I guess I'se just too wicked to forgit it, and for a time it made me hate all white men. One day, when I was somewhere around ten years old, the white man that my mother worked for told me to go down to a vacant house on the place and wait for him to come. I was scared as I could he of him, and so I went and told my mother, and she didn't want me to go. Mother told the man's wife about his plan, and do you know what that man done? He kicked me plumb out of that house, and down some high steps. I'se still paying in pain and money too for that white man's kick. It's already cost me one two-hundred dollar operation. Yes, mam, I sho did hate white men after that, but now I'se found out that not all of 'em is that way. But, hear how I'se running on about things that you maybe don't want to know.
"Suppose you tell me about your early life," I suggested.
"Honey, I didn't have no early life; I just existed in them days.
But my mind was made up from that experience with the white man that I wasn't going to be no servant, and I sho has worked hard and done the best I could with this nappy old head and no education to git what I'se got.
"I was real young when I run away and got married. I done that just to git away from home, for I had a mean old stepfather, and he wasn't doing nothing but gitting children by my older sisters. Yes, mam, I run away from him, and I was barefooted when I got married. Me and my husband stayed with his people till we could leave town. Now, you may not want to believe it, but it's the truth, when I left here I carried everything I owned in a little twenty-five pound sugar sack. What did I have in that sugar sack? Well, clothes, shoes, and just everything that belong to me then. Honey, that's the truth, so help me God.
"We left 'cause there wasn’t nothing I could do to better myself here. Why, I couldn't even go to school. The white folks wouldn't may nothing for work, and anyway I was still afraid to work for 'em. I wanted to be something else besides a washwoman or a house servant and it was plain to me I had to leave here if I was going to make a living at any other sort of work. I feels like I'se done fair for myself, and now I wants to be the first one of our people to open up a really up-to-date beauty shop here.
"The first place we went to from here was Atlanta, and after working there for some time we went on to Knoxville, Tennessee. During the World War we went to Cleveland, and it was in Cleveland that I learned my trade. I didn't have education enough to git in a school there, but, Honey, I sho did work four long years in one of them beauty shops, and that madame I worked for there really knew how to git the work out of us, as well as how to learn us.
"So today, there ain't nothing I cain't do in my line of work, for I went into it for all I could git out of it. When my work seemed to git harder whilst I was learning, I just dug into it all the deeper, for I knowed I always had had to work for what I got. Well, after four years, I got my diploma, and now I'se passed the State Board examination. My certificates and diploma don't tell no lies when they testifies that I'se well qualified to run a first class beauty shop.
"Yes, I’se traveled around lots since I first left here. From Cleveland I went to New York, and I left New York to come on hack here. I know it's going to be a tough pull, but I can make a success of it here, even if it is so very different in New York from what it is in Georgia.
"Take the rent, for instance. While I did pay $100 a month rent in New York; that covered my shop on the first floor and my apartment upstairs over it. It was such a nice place. What you see here is nothing to what I had there. I had a nice display window for my things, and I did a good business selling them. My license was only $10 a year up there." A sigh was quickly followed by a chuckle.
"The tax you to death in Georgia," she continued. "Just see the difference; here I have to pay only $10 a month rent, but my business license is $25 a year, and I have to pay another $3 license for training this girl. Everything I touch here seems to have a tax on it.
"Here Negroes can work themselves to death for nothing. House servants usually get two or three measly dollars for their services a week. Do you think they can live on that? I'll say they cain't. Very few Negro men make more than a dollar a day, and the hardest part of it all is that when there is norwork for them at any price, they are pushed around and out in jail for not working. Why don't they give them something to do instead of throwing them in jail? Treatment like that makes Negroes mistrust white folks, for most of our people will work if the white people will just give them work to do.
"In New York, I even had to pay the maid that cleaned up my shop $15 a week. Think of that! I wasn't allowed to work no operator in my shop for less than $16.50 a week, and my helpers kept all their tips. Tips amount to something there, for when New York folks are making good money, they sho don't mind spending it. One strange thing I noticed was that there are not many Negro nursemaids in the North. Up there they seem to prefer white girls as nurses. But now, think real hard! Did you ever hear of a white child being kidnapped when it was in the care of a Negro maid? No mam! A Negro nurse will fight to the very death to protect children in her care.
"In the North they don't think of putting the Negro business people off in a separate section of town. The only public places in New York that Negroes cain't enter are certain hotels. The theaters, churches, schools and, in fact, everything is open to Negroes there. Of course, they have to pay for it, and it does cost plenty to git in some of them places, but then when a Negro is making good money they don't mind paying it out to git in where they want to. I made thousands of dollars in New York, my self but I spent every nickle of it, for I knew I could make more right there.
"I was doing well in my shop and the store that I operated with it when business suddenly went bad and swept away everything I had at the time. Of course, my husband was partly to blame for that. I hates to tell this; I even had to go on relief in New York then. That was the only time I ever was on relief, and I didn't stay on it long then, but" --- Suddenly she was silent.
Recovering her composure she began again, “Honey, that was the best thing that ever happened to me. It really was, for I guess I had grown hard and wicked. I had plumb forgot how it felt to be down and out, but I did have to get down and I really got out. That brought me to my senses and made me realize where and what I had got to be. I got down on my knees and I prayed until I found my God, and since that time I'se tried to serve Him the very best I can.
"When I had started back to praying and found my God, I soon started to gitting back on my feet, and now I ain't 'fraid no more, for I has got the faith that believes that if I was in need again now and prayed to my God I would have a customer in my chair in less than an hour's time.
"Yes, mam, I'se made plenty of money, but I didn't have sense or education enough to take care of it. I ain't give up the idea of gitting a education, for I'se studying now. Of course, you know I had to learn how to write my own name before I could git ay diploma and certificates, for it was going to be necessary for me to sign all the reports and things like that a beauty shop owner has to do for the government. Now since the government is paying teachers for the old folks as well as the young ones, there ain't no excuse for nobody not having a education. I'm doing my own part, for my government teacher comes right here to my shop to teach me, and I want to say right now that she sho has helped me lots.
"You know, the government has made plenty of money off of these old nappy-headed Negroes for a mighty long time, and now since they are living them the chance to learn end improve their conditions, they are taking advantage of every opportunity. More and more Negroes are going in business for themselves, and that calls for licenses, taxes, and other things that brings money back into the government.
"Just look at our Negro boys during the World War. They went just the same as the white boys done, and they fought too. You know, honey," she stated seriously, "all our folks likes to fight mighty well, even when there ain't no war, but mark what I says, we'se going to be in war again before long. At least it looks that way now, and if it does happen our boys will be fighting right along side of the white folks again. Now, if I ain't done got to talking about things that's all off from my business, and it was business that you come here to write about, wasn't it? I don’t know why it is I'se been talking so much to you. I don’t usually say much around white folks, but I likes you, and it's pleasant to me to talk with you. I'll try to be good and get back to my talk about the beauty shop work.
"I'se been in this here business for nineteen years now, and when I look at this up-to-date equipment that I has to help me do good work now and then think about what sorry stuff I had to use when I first started out, it just don't seem possible that so much change and improvement could take place in them many years. I just has to laugh about my old stuff.
"One advantage we had then was that we didn't have all this red tape to go through with, and there wasn't no such thing as having a blood test to see if we were safe in health to work on other folks heads. There wouldn't have been nigh so much work done then if we had had to have running hot and cold water, 'cause mighty few Negroes had any plumbing."
There was a merry twinkle in her eyes as she started to tell me about the equipment she had used for her first beauty work. "Now, of course, some of the shops for white folks had better and more equipment than we had then, but when I first started I heated water in a tub or a bucket on the stove that warmed the shop, and it was dipped out with an old tin dipper. If we did three heads a day, it was considered a big day's work. My first equipment wasn't nothing but that old heater, a old kitchen chair that had the back sawed off, and a big cushion for the customers to set on. Finally, when I was able to buy me a old second-hand office chair --- one of them kinds that turns around --- I thought I was fixed up swell. I used that when I was working on hair, for it was so comfortable to be able to whirl it around without having to bend and twist around. It worked so good that since then all the operatoring chairs that I has used has been made on that style. Look at these chairs that I'se got now; they has regular barber chair backs, and you can see that the rest of each chair is made on the order of them old style office chairs that turns around. Don't they call 'em something like 'swivel chairs?'
"Whilst methods and equipment has advanced right along in these last nineteen years, I'se been able to keep up with it all. Fast as a new method comes out, I learns it, and when they brings out new equipment I just waits long 'nough to make sure it's safe and practical for my use, and then I saves up and buys it. My cosmetics are the best on anybody's market.
"I uses a mighty good pressing cream to soften and straighten the hair, for you know Negroes has mighty coarse hard hair, and it's naturally mighty dry. I first gives a good shampoo to get the hair thoroughly clean, and then I applies the pressing cream. I'se also got a good preparation for facials. In fact, I uses the Fulton system exclusively, and none of those preparations has ever failed me a single time.
"I wants you to look at this," she said. Taking a small jar of cream from the cabinet she broke its seal, and handed it to me. "In all the nineteen years of ray experience," she declared, "this has never failed to grow hair when used according to the directions, with the treatments that go with it. I'll guarantee to grow hair with it. If you knows or ever runs across a child that ain't got no hair on its head, I'll be glad to give that child a treatment if you'll have it brought to me. I'll give it every attention, and I'm not afraid to guarantee that I can grow hair on its head, for this preparation has never failed me yet.
"I can do any kind of beauty work that is practical for people of our race. Now, I would be foolish to advertise permanent waves, for they are not good for our hair. In fact, our hair just won't take a permanent, but I can give just as good a permanent as anybody else can.
"When I curls the hair I uses a curling' wax. I has a liquid preparation for that, but most times I uses the wax. The liquid has to be rubbed in the hair, but with the war it's so much easier, for we just stick the hot irons in it and it sets the curls nicely and makes them stay in good.
"This girl that I'se training is paying me for her lessons, and she'll have to work with me for one thousand hours before she can call herself a operator. After that she'll have to work for two years as a operator in a shop before she can run her own shop. She's mighty good and willing, and will really make a fine operator. I have to keep a correct tine sheet of all the hours she works for me because the government man comes around to check up on it.
"The same salesmen that sells supplies to the white beauty shops come here to ask for my business. The last time the inspector was here, when he got through looking over my place he said, 'Well, you have a nice place, and it's one of the cleanest I've been in.’ But I don't need no inspector to make me keep a clean place, for I always have been mighty particular to see that everything is nice and clean about my shop. Nothing I have is ever used the second time until it has been sterilized, and regardless of how many times I washes my hands, I always uses a clean towel every time, for I don't take no chances of spreading no kinds of diseases. Since we has the running hot and cold water it's lots easier for us to be clean and sanitary, as they calls it, than it was at first in them old 'bucket, dipper, and washpan days.'
"I don't mind telling you that it used to be that nearly every one of our people was lousy. Their kinky, nappy hair was just a good breeding place for nits, and their heads was always just full of 'em. Education has been a blessing to us in that way, for it has taught us to git rid of 'em. Now we's done burnt 'em up, and you won’† find but very few, if any, of our people that's got 'em.
"As I'se done already said, things is mighty different here from what they is in New York. Of course I don't love to see white folks and Negroes mixing together. It just don't seem right to folks born down here like I was, and that's all wrong for them to marry each other, but I do like the way the children goes to the same schools together in the North, for I think that makes the people have a better understanding of each other by giving them the chance to learn the customs and habits of each race.
"The young people ain't like they used to be and they don't take nothing serious these days. Why, by the time they gits grown-up they's all been married two or three times. One of my own nephews here has already had three wives, but I'se still got my same husband that I left here with and I wouldn't swap him off for none of the others. He's still working in New York, making $35 a week; and then too he looks after a store that we's got there. That's why I was expecting more money than I got from him this morning. He don't believe in banks no more since they's been busting so fast in the last fifteen years, and he has had a secret hideout made in his trunk where he keeps his money. But if anything was to happen to him he wouldn't have a dime by the time I could git there, for them folks he stays with would even have all his clothes. I tell you there's mean Negroes in New York, so mean they would kill you for a little money just as quick as they'd look at you. My husband's off up there in New York and here I am down here.
"I won't be satisfied till I has the first real up-to-date beauty shop for my people in this town. Now, of course, you know there are several women doing beauty work here but they don’t have up-to-date shops. In fact, I don’t know of but one other shop here besides my own. The others does their work in their homes. About that other shop? From what my customers tells me it must be one awful place to go in. Let's don't talk about it even.
"All my customers are mighty nice to me, but I don't go nowhere exceed to church. I don't never miss my church services. I works too hard to do the visiting around that some folks does. Why, I'se stood right there at that chair and took in as much as nine dollars in one day. Now don't git the idea I does that good every day --- I don't --- but it happens lots of days."
A brisk rapping sounded at the door. In answer to Madame's call of "Come in!" a tall, stylishly-clad mulatto woman entered. Her black hair was combed back straight and smooth, end arranged low on the back of her head. Madame Lucy arose and turning to me, said: "This is my teacher that I told you about, and this is the time for my lesson. I'm sorry, but I will just have time for it before I have to open my shop for the day's work."
I thanked her for the time so generously given me, and as I prepared to leave she said, "I'm glad you come, and it's been a pleasure to talk to you. Come back again sometime, just any time you can."
As I went down the hall I heard her say, "Lordy, I ain't never read my husband's letter!"
Madame Lucy (Hegro)	Ga.	Excellent
Beauty shop operator – reared in poor family – uneducated – plenty of initiative – learning beauty shop operation – practiced it in New York made and spent plenty money – business sagged –came home – slightly disturbed about inability to get location only in the Nogro section – wishes “best shop” in city – sketches changes in business over the years – being educated by WPA teacher.
Features: A determined woman – up from nothing – on the road to somewhere.