FROM FARM TO FILLING STATION
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal writers' Project
Augusta, Georgia
Areas 6 and 7
Apr, 5, 1939
March 22, 1939
Robert Leo Seabolt (white)
1490 South Lumpkin Street
Athens, Georgia
Filling Station Operator
S.B.H.
FROM FARM TO FILLING STATION
Dick Wallis has a very modern filling station in a white painted brick structure, trimmed in black. A sign over the doorway reads: "Where Service is Assured." Several cars were waiting to be serviced with gas, oil, and water, and one was on the cleaning rack. The operator and his one-armed Negro helper were darting about like bees.
"What can I do for you?" said Mr. wallis. When I explained my mission he was silent for a few seconds, then said: "Oh, well, I don't have a very interesting story. Nothing unusual has ever happened to me in all my young life. About the only thing I can think of is when I fell to the bottom of a 24-foot silo, and there's that other time when a mule kicked me. 'That was right exciting to me, at least. But you will have to come in my office and make yourself at home while I catch up with my work."
A man drove up in a Flymouth car. "Say, Dick, how about two good tires and a couple of inner tubes?"
"Well," said Mr. Wallis, "I have them all right enough, but they come mighty high. How about letting me get them second-hand for you?"
"Well, if you know what you are getting," answered the customer. "You know tires. All I can do is to take your word for it."
The operator went to the telephone, first taking a nickel from the cash register and putting it in the slot, and called a downtown tire company. The prospective buyer went outside where the helper was servicing his car.
Mr. Wallis came in the office, offered me a chair, and took his seat on the golden oak desk. "Now you will have to prompt me as to what you want me to tell you about, because I really don't know where to begin."
"Oh, it doesn't make any particular difference," I told him. "I am interested in your experiences as a filling station operator, and I would like for you to tell me about yourself from the beginning to the present time."
He was silent for some moments, and I glanced around at the contents of the station. On the desk was a cash register, a typewriter, and a filing case for credit tickets. Other objects in the station included a soft drink box, racks for cans of lubricating oil, and a laundry heater on which sat a 10-quart bucket of water. A showcase holding a supply of candy and chewing gum, was placed near a penny slot machine which dispensed salted peanuts.
"I was born in Banks County in 1912, and I was raised on a farm," Mr. Wallis began. "When my folks moved to Athens I was nearly eighteen. We had been operating a dairy on the farm before we came here, and as there was no local market for our milk, father sold the entire output to a creamery in Atlanta. I have forgotten just how much we got for the milk, but one thing I do know is that dairy farming is hard work. I have worked hard all my life. Folks think life on a farm comes easy but they are mistaken. I have gotten up many a morning long before sunrise to feed, the stock, help to milk the cows, take the milk to the station, and get back home by the time my mother had breakfast ready. I worked all day in the field in crop time. Of course I went to school, but I had plenty to do before time came for me to leave every morning. Iffy father, me, and a Negro boy did all the work.
"When we first started in the dairy business we milked from 20 to 40 cows and we did the milking by hand, but we milked between 70 and 80 after we put in the milking machine. Back then, folks didn’t have electricity in the country. Our machine was run by gasoline, but it worked on pretty much the same principle as an electric milker. One morning the machine broke down, and I milked so cows in an hour and thirty minutes; just about three minutes to the cow. Once you get used to milking it isn’t a hard job. My father wouldn’t have any other stock but Jerseys because they produce more butterfat than any other breed of cattle.
"One day I climbed to the top of our silo, and crawled through one of the ventilation holes. I lost my balance and fell 24 to the cement floor. I fractured my back and had to be kept in a plaster cast for several weeks.
"One of mother’s chickens got in the stall with a mule when I was feeding the stock one day. I was afraid the mule would kill it, and knowing how my mother loved her chickens I tried to get it out. I got too near the mule’s feet. She was frightened anyway at my being in her stall, but I wasn’t expecting her to kick me. When I came to, I was in a hospital in Atlanta. My parents thought I would die or that I would be foolish when I got well. I don't know, maybe I am." A customer came in. "Say, fellow, how about a drink? he greeted the operator."All right," Mr. Wallis replied as he pointed to a slot machine.
The customer fumbled with it and asked impatiently, "How do you get these dang things out of this here contraption?"
"You have to deposit your nickel first," was the response.
"Oh hang, I'd just as soon do without a drink. I thought they had this kind of soft drink box only in cities where there are so many crooks," he fumed.
"Well, friend, you'll find crooks everywhere you go, whether to a large town or a small one," Mr. Wallis stated, "I've been gypped out of so much money on soft drinks that I don't ever intend to have any other kind of selling arrangement as long as I have charge of a business that includes bottled drinks." The customer finished his drink and went on.
The man who was waiting for the second-hand tires to be sent out from town came inside. "Say, Dick, what is the matter? Ain't they going to send them tubes and tires? I can’t wait all day for ‘em."
"Yes, they will be out in a little while," was the reply. "I'll call 'ei to hurry ’em out."
"I wish you would. It’s 'most time for my wife to feed the baby and it's getting restless. I told her she ought to have brought that bottle along." Mr. tall is took a nickel from the cash register and was starting to put it in the telephone slot, when his customer protested. "Wait Dick, I'll put the nickel in."
"Oh, that's all right, forget it," said the operator.
"When the work is completed add the dime you have spent calling up about them tires on my bill," the man insisted.
For a few minutes I watched Mr. Wallis as he moved rapidly about the station to wait on trade. He is about 5 feet, 5 inches tall, and weighs about 135 pounds. On this spring day he was coatless, and wore a blue tie that matched his shirt. His white striped, blue trousers were mended in several places and a gray felt hat almost concealed his blond hair. He returned shortly and resumed his story:
"I'm afraid you'll soon get worn out by me having to stop every few minutes and wait on customers, but I'm glad to see them, for the more customers I have the longer I stay in business.
"I always thought as a boy I would like to work in a grocery store and I got to do it. In the 8 years I worked in one I found it was a much harder job than I thought it was going to be. For one thing, I imagine its like selling cloth and clothing, you have to sell yourself to the public and make your customers think what you have to sell is a little bit better than what your competitors have. You know, women buying groceries are like men buying gas. You want to sell the idea your gas is the only thing. Yours gives more miles to the gallon and there's less carbon in it. And your oil is the best on the market. See what I mean?
"One day I sold a woman a large beef roast. I was inexperienced and one cut looked like another to me. Of course, I knew the different cuts, hut I couldn’t tell how tender they were. Bright and early the next morning she was at the store. She bought what she needed in the grocery line, then she handed me a little package, and said, ’Here take this roast I bought yesterday; it was so tough we couldn’t eat it and I cooked it for hours and hours. What I bought this morning comes to the same price. Just let it go for that.
"I unwrapped the package and found just a small amount of meat was left on the bone. 'Where is the rest of the meat?' I asked.
"’Where do you reckon it is? We tried to eat it and couldn't, so we gave it to the dog.' I learned later she had served that meat to company at dinner and her guests had enjoyed it. One of the women who spent the day with her told me it wasn't tough to her.
That was one way of getting hack what she had spent the day before. The next time she came in the store we told her we didn't care for her business.
"I had another thing to happen to me that was very much the same. Only it was a Negro servant Who did the buying for the woman she worked for, I sold her, among other things, some oranges. Well, the next day the woman came in and brought a dozen oranges. They were dried up and some were bad. She wanted me to make them good. I called the man who owned the store, and he showed her that we didn’t have any had fruit. That made her so mad she threw them at us and walked out. We never saw her again. She thought she was pulling a fast one, just because she sent the Negro to buy the things she needed that day.
"When I first started to work, I delivered groceries and made $6 a week. When I quit the grocery store I was making $84 a month.
"My father and mother got tired of the heavy farmwork so they moved to Athens when I was about eighteen years old. I'll never forget my first job in town. I went to work for a furniture company at $10 a week. When I got my first pay check I thought I was rich. I gave my mother $5 and saved the rest to buy myself some clothes like those worn by the boys I ran with. It wasn’t long before I’d saved enough to buy a good looking suit. When I put it on my mother told me I reminded her of a bantam rooster. Oh, I thought I was the stuff! I had a girl, so I thought I would show off to the other boys who were less fortunate. I took her out to supper and we were going to a show. Just after the waiter had brought the food and we had started eating, a boy sitting back of us hit me with a rotten egg. I got up and started to knock him down, he pulled out a pocket-knife and said: 'If you put your hands on me I'll cut your guts out. You think you are somebody 'cause you have on a new suit showing off in front of your girl.' I didn't want to have any trouble so we left the cafe. I didn't get to take my girl to the show that night.
"The boys at the furniture place were all right. Oh, just a little rough, and I knew I wasn't bettering myself by staying there so I decided to quit and get another job. I found one at a filling station as handy man for $15 a week. I worked hard and saved my money. I went to work early and worked late, sometimes it was midnight or later before I got off. I would get a few hours sleep and be back on the job by 6 in the morning. I worked at my first filling station Job 14 months. I got tired of the long hours and quit. After I rested up awhile I put in my application at one of the hosiery mills. Of course I was an inexperienced laborer and they don’t pay you but $5 a week while you’re learning. Well, I stayed on the Job as long as I could, thinking every week they would raise my salary. I don’t know how long they keep you on before they give you a raise. I knew I would starve on that little $5 wage so I quit and got a job with another filling station. I didn’t work that time but 5 months, before I decided to go in business for myself. I opened up a grocery store. There is nothing in that business, but I had to find it out for myself. Among lots of the people they charge everything they buy and as long as folks will credit them they simply will not pay their bills until they are forced to. It was a losing proposition. After 3 months of struggling and trying to keep my doors open I had to close my store, due to the lack of capital and to so many unpaid accounts.
"During this time I had married and now I had the responsibility of supporting my wife and myself. I walked the streets and contacted every business man I knew in town. Finally I went back to the people I had worked for twice before and learned they were going to operate this station which was being built at that time. I took charge of it in November of 1938. In all I have worked for these people a little over two years. I think I have a good station here and am doing real well for the short time the place has been open. I have one helper, a one-armed Negro. He is a genius, and can do more and better work with one hand, than most men can with two good ones. 2046
"I sell two grades of gas. The better gas is worth the difference in the price. It goes further; you get more miles to the gallon. Oil is the same way; cheaper oils clog the motor. Take a car that the owner puts nothing but good gas and oil in and we don’t service it near as often as the ones that poor gas and oil are used in.
"I make a commission on all over a certain amount of gas and oil I sell, and on sales of tires and tubes, cars serviced, washed and simonized, as well as on all soft drinks, peanuts, chewing gum, candy, and telephone calls, in addition to a straight salary."
He left to service a car that had driven up in front. In his absence from the station his helper came in carrying a half gallon glass jug filled with buttermilk, with half of a corncob wrapped in a piece of white cloth for a stopper. "What are you going to do with that buttermilk, Jim?" I asked the Negro man. He smiled showing his white teeth, as he replied: "Miss, my name ain’t Jim. Folks calls me Pete, but my rightful name is Henry, sho 'nough. Miss, did you ax me what I’se gwine do wid dis here buttermilk?"
"Yes," I assented.
"I'se gwine take it home when I gits off and drink it for my supper."
"Is that all you are going to have, Pete?" I asked.
"Well, I ’spects my old lady will have some cornbread and fat meat fried down brown, wid some thicken’ gravy made outen the grease, for to sop dat cornbread in."
The man in front drove off and Mr. Wallis came in, the Negro returned to his work and my host took up his interrupted story: "You know, I like running a filling station better than any other kind of work I have ever done, even if people do give me trouble collecting. One man who was an insurance agent run his gas and oil bill up into too many dollars. I had to put the law on him and all I ever got was judgment. Finally I went to him and explained the situation telling him I was held responsible for every account on my books whether good or bad, and I had to make his bill good to my company. A few days later he came to me saying: 'Dick, I don't have the cash to pay that bill with, but I'll write you a policy to square the debt.' I had to let him write the policy in order to get the money I had to make good for his unpaid account.
"It was cold as everything one day when a man came to the station for gas. After I had put five gallons of gas in his car, he decided to have the car rinsed off. I told my helper to wash it for him. After he left the Negro came in and gave me 50¢. 'Didn't he pay you for the five gallons of gas?' I asked the boy. 'New, sir, boss, he sho didn't. He gimme dis here 50¢ and got out of here in a pow'ful hurry.' I watched the Negro for several days to see if he had any extra money to spend, after I didn't see any signs of it, I was sure that man really went off without paying his bill.
"I have been lucky about not having anybody breaking in my filling station. One night I closed up, locked the door and went home. Next morning when I opened up I found that in my haste in leaving the night before I had left one of the windows open. I looked around the station, checked everything, but nothing had been bothered. One other time I left and told my helper to close up. He closed all the windows and doors, but next morning when I got to the station I found the key in the door. I was afraid to go inside but this time nothing had been misplaced.
"My aim is to save enough money to buy a nice little home. Right now we rent our house and my cousin and his wife lives with us. We have a six room house and only pay $17 a month for it including the water. We don’t have separate apartments, we live together like one family and pay half of all the expenses connected with the house.
"I went to school in Medison, Greensboro, and Godfrey, Georgia, and made the 9th grade. The reason I went to so many different schools is that my parents lived near these towns in moving from one place to another. My wife and I belong to the Methodist church. She goes every Sunday to Sunday School and church. Really I don’t have time for I work 7 days in the week.
"My one ambition in life is to travel and see the world. That is why I like what I am doing, because I see and meet new people from other places every day. I have traveled a little.
I went to Jacksonville, Florida, once and over here to Anderson, South Carolina. The next time I start out I mean to go some place. After I have seen the world, then I’m going to settle down and buy a house.
"Well, I believe I have told you about all that has happened in my young life and none of it is particularly interesting or unusual. If there is any change in times when I started out and now I can't see ’em. An older person can tell about the change of times better than me, but I'm glad to tell you what I know. It's been fun doing it." A red truck rolled up to the door and its horn sounded. "Well, I have to see what he wants," Mr. Wallis said. "Good bye," and he walked out of the station. The last I saw of him he was leaning on the door talking to the man in the red truck. When I passed Pete, his broad grin again displayed his even white teeth, as he said, "Good-bye Miss," and kept on washing a car.
