November 14, 1938
Wilbur Edward. Roberts,(white)
Inlet Road and Oak Street Riviera, Florida
(Retired fisherman, sponger, turtler)
Veronica E. Huss, writer
WILBUR EDWARD ROBERTS
A Riviera "Conch"
Wilbur Edward Roberts is 84 years old; cataracts have rendered him sightless, and he gropes his way cautiously with a red and white cane.
I found him dressed in clean khaki trousers and a faded green shirt, sitting under the shade of a mango tree. His show-white hair was covered with a broad-brim Nassau straw hat, which his wife Mary Jane had made for him.
"Come and set on this 'ere bench with me where we can talk. Haint them mangoes nice? I kaint see em but I can feel their shade. Lemme 'old your 'and; I can talk better that way. Nice soft 'and no 'ard work--a lady's 'and.
"Nice day baint it? Warm too, the sun is always good. No cold weather this year, no storms. I feels fine. I can't see the sun, nor the water, nor nothin. But I knows it's there, and that 'elps. I'm sure glad you come.
I was borned over to the Bahaymees, Great 'Arbor Abaco Island, May 24, 1855. I'm most 84 now. I useter oould see, but not no more, my eyes 'as done gone. The doctors says it's cataracts. But there haint no money fer a hoperation. As soon as the welfare worker can git me a doctor, then I'll see agin, and everything will be all right. Then I want to go back to the Bahaymees for a visit, not to stay.
Hey Mary Jane! You make them younguns come in the "ouse. Them kids is me grandchildrens; Mary Jane she's my wife. They's all trouble, but I loves em anyways. The ony trouble Is I kaint give em the things theyneeds most, on haccount of my eyes.
"The govermint, they won't give us no work neither, cause we is still subjects of the Crown Land, and we can't get no American citizenship papers cause we can't read nor write. It haint fair cause most of us offered to fight for America in the last war. The commodity station does give us some food and clothes. Say! Won't you please go see the relief office for us. so my gal Bernice can get in the sewin room? Tell them we sure is needin plenty.
"My son-in-law, Bernice's 'usband, 'e's sick; got ulcers of the stummick, can't get well. 'E got that way in the war; 'e was gassed. 'E's American, borned in Indiana. That makes his kids Americans too, but Bernice, she's borned to-home, over in the Bahaymees. There was a law passed in 1922 sayin that if you married an American citizen, that automatic made you a citizen too. But Bernice was married before 1922 so she can't get relief work.
Well gettin back to where I was borned and my ancestors, they was great folks. My folks on both sides was borned and raised in the Bahay-mees. My daddy, 'is name was James Frederick Roberts; my mother before she married 'im was named Russell, Anne Elizabeth Russell.
"I remember my grandparents, especially my grandpa on my daddy's side, yet I never seed 'im more than onct or twict. I dreamed of 'im a-plenty--seen 'im in my sleep. 'E' was a fine feller, so tall and straight. His name was Mr. Roberts Duke. I can't remember his first name, but all the islanders called 'im Mr. Roberts Duke. 'E' come from England where 'e was a Duke. 'E' was a Duke, and a good man too.
"I've got certain lands comin to me in the British Isles, if I could get to em, cause I'm one of 'is heirs. But I'm too poor to get a lawyer so I can make my claim.
"After bein borned in Great 'Arbor Abaco Island, my family stayed there until I was beginnin to grow, then we moved to a island called 'Luber's Quarters.' In them days there wasn't many folks livin in the islands, and when we wanted to go visitin, we had to row from one island to another. That's the way Luber's Quarters was; they haint even got no school there. That's the reason I haint learned to read and write.
"After that we lived on first one island and then another. When I gets to be a man we moved to East Marsh 'Arbor Island. That was where I finally met Mary Jane and married her. I didn't marry her when I first met her; it was a few years later.
"By the time I gets to Marsh 'Arbor I can make sails--this I learned from my pa. I also knowed how to fish and turtle and sponge. Course there wasn't much to learn, bein I'd been brung up on it. I had my own skiff.
"After I lives in Marsh 'Arbor for a while, I packs me self off to Key West, where I stayed two years. I come back to Marsh 'Arbor then, and stayed fourteen months; then I went back to Key West and stayed another year. The last time I come back to Marsh 'Arbor I married Mary Jane Key. I was 41 then; we been married 42 years now.
"Leavin Mary Jane after gettin her settled, I spent most of my time on the sea. I'd come 'ome every few weeks to visit. I spent my time fishin and turtlin and spongin. I seen all the Bahaymees and Cuba and Jamaica.
"My younguns was all borned to Marsh 'Arbor. Mary Jane she 'ad four, three boys and one girl. Bernice, the youngest, she's 'ome now. Them's her kids you seen a minute ago. One of my boys got kilt at Niagara Falls. One of the others is in the North, and the other one is in Miami. We haint seed them for a long time. As for grandchildren, I got plenty of em; eighteen grandchildren and four great-grandchildren.
"We is glad to live 'ere in the United States, cause there haint much to live for in the islands; everybody's so poor and the work is so hard. We got no right talkin about our 'omeland like that, and I do love it, cause that's where I was borned, but I can't help it when I gets to thinkin bout the way them Britishers treats us. They haint like Americans. Americans 'elps their poor, but them Britishers they don't; they're always thinkin how much better they are than folks like us, and they haint got no time to help us.
"A-course it's better in the islands than what it use to be, but it still can't come up to what we got 'ere. You take them houses what we lived in in the islands; they's covered with thatch roofs made from our Bahaymee silver thatch palm. When a storm comes, and the seas is comin up, them roofs aint much of a shelter. Then when the storm's over we just have to make the best of it.
"Sometimes the goverment 'elps, but not much. They forbids us to hexcept money from the Americans too. They don't treat us right, that's the reason we rather stay 'ere.
"A- course the fishin and the like haint as good 'ere as in the islands. In the islands one could make a livin flshin, but 'ere them fish dealers charges us so much to rent their boats and nets--and buy gas from em too--that we can't hardly get by. It still wouldn't be so bad if we could sell the fish we ketch for a fair price--but we have to sell all the fish to the fish dealers, or they won't let us have the boats and nets and gas on credit. They buys our catches for almost nothin, and then resells em at high prices. It's terrible. We go hungry from it.
"But to get back to me story and the days when I was young man and 'ad left Mary Jane to 'ome in Marsh 'Arbor. At that time, as I said before, I owned my own boat and on one trip I took I went almost half way to South America and back. I covered 1400 miles. I 'ad a crew of 22 men and we rode this 'ere little schooner of mine. Blieve me, in this day and time if a young man was to make a trip like that he would be rich! Even Lindbergh didn't face no danger like what I faced on that trip. I didn't have no navigation instruments, ony a compass, but I knowed all the time where I was and 'ow I was comin back. We was fishin.
"But turtlin and spongin, them's the sights. When spongin we put a dingy over the side of the schooner with two men in it. One man sculls while the other hooks the sponges. Sponges is hooked with a pole anywhere from ten to forty-five feet long. To find the sponges they look through a home-made glass bottom wooden candy bucket.
"When the dingy is full up with sponges they go back to the schooner and put them aboard. Later they builds big pens in the shallows near shore and puts the sponges in to soak. The soakin loosens up the black skins of the sponges so ens it can be taken off. Sponges can't be allowed to soak moren four or five days, else they'll rot from their own heat, even in the cool sea water. When they is done soakin they is taken and beaten with boards till all that skin and shells and worm casins is beaten out. Then they're dried and ready for sale. There haint nothin like that for us to do 'ere.
"The turtlin use to bring us good money too. That was a sight--I mean turtlin. The kind we took was called a 'ox-bill' turtle. They have the shells what combs and the like are made of. We used to weave what we called 'bullys' to Catch them in. It's a kind of a cast net women from 15 thread twine and fastened to a circle of wire and loaded with about 50 pounds of lead. First we spots the reptile with our glass-bottom bucket, and if he's restin on the ocean floor we lets the bully down behind 'im, then bring it up quick and right over 'im. Then afore 'e knows what 'appened, we got 'im all messed up in that twine and is haulin 'im aboard. We ketches turtles in water from ten to ninety feet deep.
"We make away with 'im, and clean the shell and dry it. Sometimes we can trade the meat for fresh vegetables. Sometimes we just give it away. If we's clost enough to a town maybe we sells it.
Other ways for makin a livin was plentiful too. Besides our little gardens, the islands was full of wild game; and some 'ad 'ogs, others 'ad cattle, and so on. On some islands where not many folks lived, the birds nested by the thousands. You could walk along with a stick and kill all you wanted by just swingin the stick.
"I knowed one island where there was only one or two families livin; it was one of them barren islands where there haint no soil--nothin but bare rocks. The birds nested there so thick there wasn't no place for them to build their nestes. This here story sounds like I'm fibin, but it's the truth. Them birds was so thick they had to lay their eggs anywhere. And the people livin there would open their back door in the mornin, and before they could get their fire built to cook breakfast, enuff of them birds comes through that door and laid eggs for a good breakfast.
"All them days is gone. We can't do nothin like all that 'ere. We haint got the boats, nor nets, nor gas, nor nothin. Even if we had em I doubts if we could make much money.
"We come to the United States in 1915. We come from the Bahaymees in my own little boat, and landed in Miami. I sold my boat there cause we had to have some money. We come on north then, to Singer's Island in Lake Worth acrosst from us 'ere. We already 'ad friends from the Bahaymees there. My kids was pretty small then, but we built up on the old inlet, the real one, about a mile and a half north of where the inlet is now.
"We stayed there a number of years till a feller from Lake Worth come and claimed 'e owned the land. 'E told us if we'd all pay 'im a dollar a piece for back rent, 'e'd let us stay. Well, that haint much money, so we paid 'im and 'e let us be. 'E come back in a month or two, and this time 'e 'ad papers showin that the land was his. 'E told us if we wanted to stay we'd 'ave to pay 'im $20 a month. That was too much for poor fisherfolk like as to pay, so we moved. We moved right here to Riviera. We found out afterwards that 'e didn't own the land at first, but when we give 'im the dollar, that was what give 'im a legal claim.
"I bought my land right where I is now. I payed $600 for it. The United States haint fair in a lot of ways though; after I had done paid $600 for me lot, they went and charged me $750 for a street assessment tax. Now to-'ome in the Bahaymees there haint no taxes. And when you buy land it's all yours and your childrens for generations on.
"A-course we haint got much of a 'ouse 'ere, but it's a shelter just the same. I'll be happy when the relief gets me eyes fixed to where I can see. Then I Wants to go back to the Bahaymees for just one more trip. I haint never been able to get back sinst I come acrosst. I sure wish you could go with me."