See also "Our Times and Seasons" (pp. 12378-12907), another interview with the same individual. For more information on the graveyard trouble referred to on page 12256, see "Our Times and Seasons," page 12401-12407.
TALKING IS MY LIFE
(Italics)
Nothing on this living earth I'd rather do than get out and hoe a patch of cotton in good weather. These days I ain't got that patch and no hoe to work it with if I did have. Here I set, day in and day out, looking after my poor man Patey and hoping somebody will come by that I can pass a chat with.
Talking is just about my life these days.
Now, I know that some folks back through here in Big Ivy will say Aunt Tobe Easterly is a gossip. Law ha' mercy, a gossip is a sharp-tongue woman and I'm not that. I never say a harm word of nobody unless I hear they've done meaness of some kind. Well, I do scatter the news when news is to scatter. Somebody's got to do that or how is people going to know what's going on?
I reckon I'm as well set to spread the word as anybody. Sixty-six years I've lived here in this community. Saving the spell I lived in Texas. My pap and his pappy befor him lived in Big Ivy. Both my grandsirs come here from North Carolina back in eighteen hundred and something. Most of the people around here, their grandsirs was the Tarheel kind. I don't know why and when they started calling the community Big Ivy, but they started. They cleared away the hazelnut bushes, they cut the post oaks and elms, and they raised their cabins and begun farming. And that's the way it's been ever since. Only it is downhill now mostly.
It's pretty hard to tell just where Big Ivy starts and where it leaves off. On one end it's mixed in with Oak Springs. On the other it's tangled with Sand Hill. The only way you can tell where them end families belongs is by the school they send their children to and where they vote. If the children go to Big Ivy school and the menfolks vote at Joe Fulghum's store, why then the family belongs to Big Ivy.
Cotton is the most thing they raise around here. Generally always farmers will put in a field of corn and a vegetable patch and some raise a few hogs and chickens, but cows is pretty few and milk and beef meat is scarce. Cotton's the standby and always will be, seems like. Now, every place I ever heard of before, cotton and niggers just naturally grow together. It's that way around Zama and Kilburn. But not here, not in Big Ivy. No niggers at all live here, not one. Old Squire Irby Brazeale's pappy used to own three or four niggers back before the Confederate War, but the Klux ran them all out. Never been back since then.
Why, let a nigger start from Oak Springs to Sand Hill. He will cut around through the crosstimbers or go away over to Zama and circle back before he'll pass through Big Ivy. One time Bailus Acuff needed help in his cotton. He couldn't get nobody here to hire to him. So he had to haul in niggers from Zama. And, bless God, them niggers sure did make Bailus get them out of here by good dark, too! The funny thing, though, is nobody would touch a kink on a nigger's head if he was to come in here. The niggers just remember what the Klux done back in them days and they shy wide around Big Ivy. It's their doing, not ours. I've heard more than one man say he wished to his soul he could lay hands on nigger help to crop on the shares on hire on the place. But no--you can't get them to come in noways at all.
Most of us back through here is Republican Party and own our own land, such as it is. Us people here in Big Ivy holds to the good old ways that's the best ways, when all is said and done. Take this TVand A, this electricity stuff, they talk about these days. It would come in through here if we'd vote it in. Everybody studied it over. But you take this electricity, them wires---why they's power in them wires. Power to kill a body. Wires will come down then it's mourning for somebody. Yes, we're afraid of that stuff. They's things the good Lord never meant mankind to fuddle with. So we turned the TV and A down.
They's just two peculiar men in Big Ivy when it comes to religion. One don't believe in nothing and the other one he's a Jehovah Witness man. The rest of us is Baptist, Missionary and Primitive Hard-Shell Baptist. Missionaries go to Shady Grove Church and the Hard-Shells to Pilgrim Glory. In my young days they used to have all day meetings and big singings at laying-by time, and all manner of frolicsome doings like house raisings and play parties. Law me, nothing much like that now. Folks don't even have time to lay-by most generally. Just keep humping the year round to make a living.
Take the young folks now--why they's not a good dozen of what you could really call young folks in Big Ivy. Plenty of children, plenty of old people like me and Patey, but where is the young folks? Gone to Poplin because they want to be at the county seat where things is stirring. Gone everywhere and anywhere to get away from farming life. Young folks this day and generation can't seem to abide the hard scuffling ways you have to do to get by on a farm, even with the government paying good money to help out.
With most of the young hot blood, gone, they's mighty little trouble with the law. In olden times many grudges and feud fights happened around here. Even now once in so often a hardness comes up between some of us--one on my own front doorstep right now, my graveyard trouble--but it scarcely never comes down to the point of where blood's spilt these days.
I reckon you could say it's nothing much out of the way goes on here any more. We just keep to ourselves. Have to in rainy times when you can't find the bottom of these muddy roads with a ten foot pole, and in dry weather, too, because we're used to it. Oh, sometimes we go over to Zama or maybe to Kilburn on First Monday market days. If they's a big court trial at Poplin and the work's slack, Squire Brazeale or the Womackeses get their cars out and drive eighteen miles in. Squire takes the paper and so does young Earl Hixon, and that's how we hear of the wars in the world.
But mostly we just work and live our days here in Big Ivy. When we get old and broke down, like me and Patey is, we find some old shackle of a cabin and set back and the Old Age sends us a check every month. Lord bless that Old Age! Patey and me don't have nothing, but we don't starve, we don't have to be a burden on our children. That's a wonderful thing for old folks like me and Patey.