Rose Shophard
Interview 66
April 28, 1936.
II- HISTORICAL (Maudarin)
Mrs. Ruth J. Banes,
426 Florida-ave.
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mrs. Banes is a great-grant-daughter on her mother's side of Jacob James. One of the early Settlrs of Mandarin, who is buried in the old Sloon demetery on the banks of Julington Creak, and on her mother's Wide is <text not clear> from the Budin family.
Mrs. Banes says: "My great-grandfather Bardin came from England with John Bowden in the 17th century from a country village called "Mandarin trees 'Mandarin Orange Trees," from which their now home because known as "Mandarin" Florida. This information is considered authentic, has been <text not clear> down in our family, and is on file in the State Archives at Talla-hasses an being the correct data as to how the town of Mandarin received <text not clear> name.
"Great-grandfather's wife was Mary Hagin, of St. Augustina.<text not clear> of the Statin family, who were directly connected with King<text not clear> of Spain. When great-grandfather Bardin died, his widow married me friend, John Bowden. The late Uriah Borden, prominently connected with salry Duval county history, was her grand-son.
"Jacob James' mother was Sarah Churchill, sister of John Churchill of Marlborough, of England.
"The early English settlers of Handurin were all wealthy people.
Obtained large land grandson which they established themselves and lived in great luxury. They had many vloves were not concerned with work or professions, as we know them today, and were ladies and gentleman, indeed There was no struggle, except common defense against the Indiane, and they were all good neighbors, The mother bus vorsed in the efficiency of the nut roots and herbs, and nursed her family through favars and minor childish afflictions. I was married when I was twenty-one, and it was that year I first can a physician's <text not clear> to be filled at the local drug store.
"My family first had holdings in Orange Park, but on account of the isolation as compared with the more Thickly settled town of Mandarian, they bought the old General Loring place on Julington Croek in the Northe section of the county and located there.
"The Loring plantation had previously belonged to the Hott family son of this family, George S. Mott, of New York, met and married a Saming <text not clear> princess, according to the scared tree of the tribe, without going Throughwith the formality of telling either the princess or her tribe that he had a wife and several children in the State of New York. After a year of to, he left his parent's home of her parents in the State of New York. He was gone for two years. The next morning after his return to Mandarin, he went to the spring for a pail of water, and a welldirected eyes, as he stoopad to raise the pail. The Indians carried off the body to a nearby valley and executed over it their fiendish war dance. An old slave woman on a nearby plantation. Aunt Hetty Forrester, was an eye-wishess to the affair from a place of concealment, And heard the blood-curdling war-hoops of the Indians afterward. George S. Mott's body was later <text not clear> returned to the home of his parents, and buried by them in the kid cemetery at Mandarin. According to the records, this happened on May 18, 1836, now 100 years ago.
(Mrs. Banes -Mandrin History)
"My grand-father James, had a six-foot brother, who starching out his arms, many times as a front walked across the ST. Johns River to visit in "Cow Ford" as Jacksonville was know in the early days. The River was very shallow, the water coming up only to his chest. When cattle were driven across, the only place they were compelled to swim was in the current in the middle of the River for only a few feet.
"James James was educated as a physician, and was really Doctor James. But for his services during the Seminole Indian Wars, he was given the title of Captain, and was really better_known_by that. He and Col. Michintosh were great friends.
"I have among my possessions a letter to him from Col.<text not clear> comnsnding him for deeds valor, also other paper, deeds and <text not clear>. I also have my grand-mother. Mary Hugin Bardin Howden's passport visit her family in St. Augustine during the war Between the State <text not clear>
<text not clear> the second interview - April 29, 1936, Mrs. Banes has promised to us cure these old documents for the writer's inspection, and give addition al data).