Another version of "The Crofton Family," entitled "You Can Do What You Want To," can be found on pages 11397A-11406.
Approximately 3,400 words.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
THE CROFTON FAMILY
Date of First Writing	December 1, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Colie Craft (white)
Fictitious Name	The Crofton Family
Street Address	R. F. D. #3
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Textile Worker
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
The Crofton home is about two miles from Columbia., South Carolina, on State Highway Number 48, more commonly known as the Bluff Road, which leads from Columbia to Wateree. It is a five-room frame cottage, which Mr. and Mrs. Crofton bought some ten years ago for $2,000. They have improved and beautified it. Recently they were offered $5,000 for it, but it is not for sale. In sentiment, as well as by ownership, it is their home. And its location is conveniently near Olympia Cotton Mill where Mrs. Crofton is employed. It has a homey atmosphere. In the living room are upholstered furniture, a piano, an antique table, and a floor lamp. Built-in book shelves overflow with books, college annuals, and magazines. On the walls hang attractive pictures and samplers.
Mrs. Crofton seemed at first to question my motives; or maybe giving the story of her life did not appeal to her at once. Her large brown eyes examined me appraisingly. But a woman who works in a mill, takes boarders, educates children, makes sound investments and manages a home, doing all these things well, should have a good story. So I was rather persistent. A few minutes of talk overcame whatever was holding her back, and soon our conversation veered first to the subject of deepest interest - her children.
"The furniture is Eugenia's," she answered my admiring comments. "I promised that I would give it to her, if she'd be the kind of girl she should be. She had been so good by the time she was twelve years old that I bought it for her, piano and all. I heard Eugenia say recently that she had never told a dirty joke in her life nor said a word of blackguard.
"And I had to keep my promise to Kirby, too," she continued, with a smile. "It cost an automobile. We agreed that if he'd never curse nor drink nor smoke and would be obedient, till he was twenty-one, he was to have a car. Well, he got the oar, a brand new Chevrolet.
"The children had it pretty hard trying to get an education, but there are five diplomas in the house, and five medals. Kirby won a medal on declamation when he was twelve years old, at Swansea High School, and one on science. He wears them both on his watch chain. Eugenia got hers for being the best all round girl and for English and for making the best record. She won every medal that was offered in her classes in high school except the one for most improvement. She couldn't make no improvement, you see," with a smile. "She was valedictory of her class, too."
"Did both the children go to college?"
"Yes, both of 'em went, but Eugenia was the only one to finish. She got her diploma and has been teaching in the grammar school at Gibson, North Carolina, in the Boykin school, for four years. That child is a born teacher. Do you know, when she was eight years old she had a play school in the back yard, under that big oak tree you see out there. Sarah Martin used to come to her school every afternoon; she was crazy about Eugenia. I mean she'd take it in, too. Sarah Martin learned so much that they put her in the second grade when she started to school. And she's done well ever since. Eugenia's always loved children, no matter how they looked. She's been teaching in the children's department of the Sunday School since she was fifteen years old. She's done all sorts of things to help pay her tuition - kept house, corrected typing papers, worked in the mill, and cleaned up that barber shop you see right there. She got fifty cents a day for that.
"She graduated from high school at sixteen and went right to the University and started her A B C course, or maybe it's an A. B. I'm not sure which it is. She'll get her master's degree here at the university next summer. And she ain't stopping at that, either. She says, Don't you think I've quit. Nobody's going to do anything to block me. I'm going right on to Columbia University.' And, believe me, she'll do it. She's pretty as a peach; has lots of boy friends; but I don't think she's in love with any of them. She's got one in Greenville and one in Charleston and one in Charlotte, but the one she likes beat of all lives right here at this mill. They've growed up together.
"Really, I don't have anything interesting to tell anybody. I've never done anything worth while, but my mother's been with me fourteen years and I'll call her. Mother!"
Mrs. Sohaffeur, the mother, left her dish washing in the kitchen and came to the living room, drying her hands on her apron as she entered the room. She was talkative, a little old woman, with friendly black eyes, a winsome smile, and a gentle voice. "The children say I can't do a bit of work, because I spend all my time visiting the neighbors. I do love to go a-visiting every day and learn how they all are. I tell 'em I've worked in the field since I knowed how to get out there, and I think I ought to have some rest now. Don't you think so?" Looking at Mrs. Crofton, she asked, "Mary, has Kirby been over yet to-day?"
"No, Mother, but I was just going to tell Mrs.---------- about Kirby," Mrs. Crofton resumed, "I told you just how he's been a mighty good boy and we're proud of him. He's had paper routes ever since he's been big enough to carry papers, and he's turned his money over to me to take care of it for him. As soon as he was old enough, he got a job in the mill. He was soon making about twelve dollars a week. After we come to Columbia, he followed this sort of a schedule. He delivered papers from 4:30 to 6:30 o'clock in the morning; slept from 7 to 9; and then to school. In the afternoon he slept from 2 till 5 o'clock and worked eleven hours in the mill. He graduated from high school at sixteen, just like Eugenia, and entered the University of South Carolina. His expenses ran from $100 to $200 a year, and we had a pretty tough time getting it paid, but we met all the payments somehow. In the middle of his last year, he saw an 'ad' in The State and answered it. The Standard Oil Company wanted a man at $75 a month. This was too great a temptation to Kirby, and he decided to stop school and take the job. I told Ma it was providential; for the very day Kirby started work, the first Monday in September, a strike was called at the mill and Kirby woulder been out of work three weeks. Then they compromised. That was five years ago, and we ain't had a strike since. In two years, Kirby took a notion he'd go back to school and study law, working for the Standard in afternoons when he could. Hut he just stayed a year that time. He got in his head about getting married, and we couldn't do a thing with him."
Mrs. Schaffeur, ready to defend her favorite grandson's position, interrupted, "Now, Mary, you know you are the one who put a stop to that, you were so against it. You know you wanted a preacher, instead of a lawyer, out of him. That's the reason he quit like he did. But he's never felt a call to preach yet. Mary, put some more wood on the fire. I'm cold. Better brown a body's legs than be cold."
Mrs. Crofton smiled understandingly. She replenished the fire and continued the story. "Kirby had been in love for two years with the stenographer that worked in the same place where he worked, and I reckon it was about time they were getting married. It was a big afternoon wedding at Washington Street Church. She was Janie Perdue, Mr. Robert Perdue's daughter. And she had the most parties I ever seen, eighteen or twenty or more. For two weeks there was a party every night, and in the daytime, too. And the most presents. Never seen such a lot of nice presents in all my life. They went on their honeymoon to Washington. Brought us this plaque from Washington. Yes, they went in his car. He's mighty good to take us all on trips in the Chevrolet. We've been 'most everywhere in it, to Miami and to the mountains and to Myrtle Beach, and we're going to Greenville next Sunday to hear Reverend Johnson preach. He's the preacher we had before this one, and we were all crazy about him. We all belong to Whaley Street Methodist Church. Kirby's always been a good church worker. Been a Sunday School superintendent, a steward, and an usher. But he's joining Washington Street Methodist Church now. It'll be in the church paper - the bulletin, you know - next Sunday. He's making more than $100 a month, and I reckon it was the best for him to marry. They're living with her folks, but he comes to see us real often, and she nearly always comes with him.
"I'm purty sleepy," Mrs. Crofton yawned. "Didn't get enough sleep. They called me at 7 o'clock this morning, because we had so much ironing to do. I go to the mill at 4 o'clock in the afternoon and work till midnight, but I don't get to sleep till after 1 o'clock. When I get home every night, I wake mother up and we kindle a fire and sit around and talk for an hour or more. We make coffee and eat something, if we can find anything to eat. We done eat our Christmas fruit cake, and we've got to make another one before the children come home.
"Eugenia has her own car, too, a Plymouth. She's coming home in it for Christmas and says she's going to leave it here for us to enjoy a while. I tell her I can't drive, but I can learn. We get purty lonesome, with both the children gone. But we have company nearly all the time. Reckon Eugenia'll want to have a party when she comes. The children just will play cards. I don't believe in it myself, but Eugenia says it's just because I was brought up to think that way, and maybe it is."
"Tell me something about your husband, the father of this splendid girl and boy," I asked. "Does he work in the mill, too?"
Her expression changed and her tones softened. "Daniel (Crofton) was a close neighbor of ours, and, when he was 34 and I was 16 years old, we got married. We were poor, and there didn't seem anything else for me to do. We lived in the country and all of we children had to work in the field. So I figured I had just as well marry Daniel and have a home of my own. He was a widower with three children."
The mother interrupted, "And she's a good mother to them. They all acknowledge her as a good mother to them."
Mrs. Crofton resumed. "We lived on a farm two years and then moved to Cayce where we lived 13 years. Daniel run a little meat market at first, and then he was chief policeman. I was the postmistress and kept boarders. I've worked everywhere you find me, but those were the days that seem the hardest to me now.
"My salary as postmistress was $75 a month at first and then it was raised to $90. Camp Jackson was being built then, and I had fifteen or twenty men boarding with me. They were carpenters. I only charged them $5.50 a week, they went home on Saturday afternoons.
" We moved back to the farm, this time to live on 100 acres Daniel got when his father died. (I ain't ever inherited one cent from any of my family.) We've sold that farm to my stepson four years ago, but not one cent has he paid on it. From there we came to Columbia ten years ago. I was discouraged with working so hard in the field and having nothing to show for it. I was determined to educate my children, and that seemed the only chance. I got a job in the spinning room at Olympia and I've been there ever since. At first I made $11; then $19.80 for three years. But they took us women off that shift and now I only make $12.50.
"I've never been very strong. I've had two operations, and had a third one last summer. Right after me and Daniel got married, he took blood poison from a teeny little scratch on his hand. His whole arm got black and swelled up till it was twice its size. For weeks I stayed up nearly all night working with that hand. The doctor was here every day for three months. Looked like he'd die in spite of all we could do.
"He has had to walk on crutches for a time and now has almost no use of his hand. He sells at the city market. Tries to sell produce, turkeys, chickens, vegetables, and other things which he has bought. He has a cot there and never comes home nights unless it's very cold. Has to stay there to keep anybody from taking his things. He don't make a thing, but it gives him something to do and to think about, and so we let him do it.
"No'm, I never have knowed about a budget. I just pay all my bills; grocery, water, lights, insurance, et cetera, with what I get at the mill, and then with my rent money, usually about $75 a month, I make investments. I consider real estate the best one I can make."
Her brown eyes sparkled as she told about an investment she made recently. "I built a house at Cayce which cost me, lot and all, $2,400, and I've sold it this week for $2,650. It is valued at $3,200. But that payment certainly dreaned me; I mean it took every cent I had to pay for that one.
"My barber shop is possibly my best investment; this one right here by the house. I built it nine years ago and it cost me $450. I've rented it every year for $20 a month; so you see I paid for it the first two years, Including interest, taxes, and all. The other seven years I've made good money on it. The same man I built it for has rented it every year and pays his rent regularly, too. I have a life insurance policy for $2,000, and Daniel has one for $1,000. My taxes amount to about $60.
"Yes, we have enough land around the house for a small garden and, for several years, I tried to have a garden. But I find I can buy my vegetables cheap, about as cheap as I can grow them. I either had to hire the garden worked or work it myself when I wasn't able; so I put flowers in that space. Yes, I sold a few of them, but I didn't plant them to sell, I planted them to enjoy myself and to out for my friends.
"The girl who brought my mail in is a mighty sweet girl. She's a cousin of mine, just like one of my own younguns. I borrow from her, and she borrows from me when we get out of money. I realize it don't pay me to keep one boarder, but she helps with the work, kind of like home folks. She goes home every week-end and just pays me $3.50 a week. I keep her principally to come home with me at midnight from the mill. You see it's a quarter of a mile from the mill to our house. Ma, you tell her something about the war."
Mrs. Schaffeur had been waiting rather impatiently for a chance to talk. She at once began: "First of my remembrance about the war is -when Sherman's army went through. I was going home from a visit to a neighbor's and passed a number of Yankee soldiers in the road. They asked me if I had passed any men on the way and what the color of their uniforms was. They wanted to know if it was our Confederate men or theirs. This frightened me terribly. And when I got home, they had taken everything we had, and there wasn't much loft that we could call home. That was a powerful time when the Yankees went through.
"My father went to the war the 16th of April, 1862, and was killed the 16th of June, two months to the day after he went off. He was shot at Sessionville, on James Island, near Charleston. After the war, my mother had a mighty hard time, but she managed to keep us twelve children together. We never got any education. But we was raised in Sunday School, and I learned a lot I know right in Sunday School. Let me tell you something," she smiled, as she drew her chair a little closer the fire. "In 1872, I walked four miles to Sunday School every Sunday and never missed but one Sunday. I cried and cried about missing that one. I've tried to live a consistent member of the church ever since I joined. Oh, surely I've tried, to amount to something, but I haven't reached as far as I'd like to. I done the best I could for my children. Mary, get the counterpane and show it to her. Mary let the children use it for a saddle cloth, but it's been washed and I want to keep it because my mother made it. Here it is. Mother was told she could have the wool if she could tame some sheep enough to shear them. She did. And she sheared the sheep, washed the wool, carded it, and spun it into thread, and then wove the countorpane herself. I can almost hear her singing now, 'way in the night as she was weaving it:
'Roll on, roll on, sweet moments, roll on
And let the poor pilgrim go home.' "
While Mrs. Crofton went to put away the treasured black-and-white coverlet, Mrs. Schaffeur talked on. "When I was 54 years old I married Reverend Paul Schaffeur, he was a preacher and a farmer, too. You know preachers were scarce after the war, and he was a local preacher in the Methodist Episcopal Church, South. He preached twice a month at old Bethel one year. They always taken a collection for him once a year, and what you reckon he got for preaching that year? Four or five dollars, and he was mighty glad to get that much. He never had any education atall. Never went to school a day in his life, but his brother hoped him to learn to read his Bible and to sign his name. That's as far as he went. I never had any chance to go to school much, but I studied right along with my children."
Mrs. Crofton added, "And she reads better than any of us now. She reads the Bible, the Advocate, and all the papers. She's 80 years old and feels as young as any of us. She reads without her glasses, too."
"Paul worked in the field as a reg'lar hand," Mrs. Schaffeur continued, "till he was 86 years old. Then for six years he was sick. We worked hard and paid for us a little farm near Dixianna. There's where Mary was born, 43 years ago, when I was 34 and her father 67. We always made a fairly good living, didn't never lack for necessities, you know. I was his second wife. I liked his first one all right and hoped to nurse her all the time she was sick. I sat and heard him preach all along when she was living."
After the conversation had been dead for several minutes, Mrs. Schaffeur said to Mrs. Crofton, "Mary, did you give that man that come here this morning the contract for your new house at Cayce?"
"No, ma'am, I didn't, and he ain't likely to get it tomorrow, when he comes back, either. I smelt whiskey on his breath; didn't you? You know I don't have no patience with a thing like that, and I don't have nobody work for me, if he drinks and I know it." Turning to me, she said, "Nobody in my family drinks liquor nor spends a cent for tobacco, 'cept the old man chews."
The mail was brought in from the box by the boarder in the home. Mrs. Crofton noticed an account of the inauguration plans being perfected for the newly elected governor of the State. "Well, we liked the old governor, and we like the new one a little better. Like President Roosevelt better and better all the time, too. Everybody in my family voted for both of them."
"No, Mary," explained Mrs. Schaffeur, "you have forgot I didn't vote this time. Not that I'm opposed to women's voting, even if it was considered disgraceful when I was growing up. But somehow I didn't feel like I wanted to go vote this time, and I just decided I'd stay home and pray and ask the Lord to manage the election."
At the door, a Chinese Chow humbly sought admittance. "Oh, Queenie, are you cold?" Mrs. Crofton exclaimed.
"She looks to be a thoroughbred," I commented, more to find out than to pass judgment.
"Yes, Queenie has all the pedigree. Let me show you her pups. They are prettier than she is."
We went to an improvised kennel in the side-yard. One of the pups was black. The other two were brown and true to color and form. Their ugly broad faces showed the bullish fierceness characteristic of the breed.
But Mrs. Crofton exclaimed, "Ain't they the sweetest things you ever saw? They're just six weeks old. I can sell them for $10 apiece, but I've already promised to give them to some friends. I'm so crazy about them, though, I don't see how I'm ever to let them go. These dogs and my flowers are all the recreation I have. Hours in the mill and my family duties at home wear me down sometimes. These puppies and my flowers help to pull me up."
"This is my husband, Mrs.-----." as a rather frail-looking man came to the paved walk where we were standing. We exchanged greetings, and, expressing a somewhat petulant mood, he asked if his breakfast were ready.
"Yes, I guess Mother has it about done. I haven't had mine either, though I should have boon ironing long ago. It's about ten o'clock, ain't it?"
And Mrs. Crofton returned to the many duties demanding her capable attention.