Typist- Gelzhiser
Date of first writing - January 21, 1939
Name of person interviewed - Beulah Handly
Address - R. F. D. Jonesville, Virginia
Occupational status - Farmer's wife
Name of writer - Anne Davidson
Revised by - Ann Heaton
"You want to go to the Han'lys? Well, you just keep behind me an' I'll show you where to turn in…. Taint fur...just up the road a-piece."
With this cheerful offer the star route carrier; beginning his daily round through the hilly farm country above Jonesville, looked me over as he ground down on the starter of the 1929 mud-festooned Ford and turned into the road ahead.
He looked to be about 45 or 50 years old, with gray-streaked red hair, pale blue eyes and ruddy complexion, Although the clear morning promised a fair day, the outlines of his figure were concealed by bulky winter clothing. Layers of heavy sweaters showed where his stiff blue denim jacket gaped open between the metal buckles that held it together at the front, and below the knees his bulging trousers were stuffed into high felt-topped boots.
At the crossroads where I had overtaken him, several mail boxes identified by crude lettering were ingeniously fastened to the rim of a discarded wagon wheel. The wheel hub turned on a greased spike driven into the top of a post and the carrier, seated in his car and thumbing over his mail, had but to twirl the wheel to bring the wanted box within reach.
After three or four stops to deposit mail in roadside boxes and hoist the tiny metal flags to announce their burdens, a hand signalled from the Ford ahead and we drew to a stop at a narrow muddy lane closed by a gate made of rails, their ends thrust into hand-hewn holes in the stout oak fence posts at each side.
"Here's the Han'ly's gate," announced my guide, and although there was no mail for the box that looked like a zinc-hooded head on the post at the roadside, he lingered. His curiosity had not been satisfied, and he scrutinized me closely as I got out to slide back the gate rails. After I was back in my car, he spoke.
"The house's 'bout half a mile in. The road gets bad in winter, but you won't have no trouble today. It's been froze hard, an' it aint had time to get soft yet...The Han'lys kinfolks o' yours?" he hazarded. "I reckon I know a lot o' their folks...You ain't one of the Russells?"
I answered only that I was a friend of the Handlys and mentioned my family name.
He was pleased and relieved. It was a narrow escape. A strange woman visiting in the vicinity had crossed his path and had almost got away without his finding out who she was.
"You don't say! I been thinkin' you favored the Davises. I know Jim Davis. You ast him sometime about Tom Scott he used to know over back o' Rose Hill. That's me."
And he drove off beaming. When he joined the gossip forum waiting at the village postoffice that evening, he would have a nugget to contribute. "One of them Davis girls was up visitin' the Han'lys today. Didn't know how to git there till I told her to follow me along till she got to the gate."
The Handly's 160-acre farm lies on rolling slopes on the Virginia side of the Cumberlands, whose jagged crest is the Kentucky boundary line. The family consists of Kemp, 42, his wife, Beulah, 41, one son, Roy, 18, and a daughter, Mary Lyn, 10. With them lives Beulah's bachelor brother, Arthur Russell, 45, who, with Beulah, inherited a section of the Russell homeplace at the death of their parents. Both the Handlys and the Russells are descended from Scotch-Irish pioneers who settled on western Virginia lands after the Revolution, and the family is representative of the small farmer class of the Virginia highlands.
The sun was warm, and the birds set up a chorus in the bare trees of the nearby woods, as I drove in the ungraded dirt road that curved through the Handly's fields. High ridges of frozen mud between axle-deep ruts and rock ridges washed bare were hard on car springs, and few visitors were likely to come here in winter after the weather "broke."
The Handly home, a two-and-a-half-story weatherboarded house, built more than a hundred years ago by Mrs. Handly's forebears, looks its age. Facing east on a gentle hill above the road, the tiny panes of the dormer windows in its steep pitched roof sparkled in the morning sun and its walls weathered by a century's winds and rains blended with the soft gray of two majestic sycamores that spread their bare branches above the narrow front porch. Great dark green clumps of old boxwood survive the ancient hedges that once separated the houseyard from farm fields, and in the group of farm buildings at the rear are several are of logs now heavily coated with layers of whitewash. The only signs of life about the place were a group of cows nuzzling the sides of a straw rick in the creek meadow, the waves of snowy specks that were Beulah's white Leghorns, and a wisp of blue smoke rising from one chimney. But as I neared the house, rattling over rocks and steering carefully a round the deeper holes, wild barking broke out as assorted dogs bounced from under the porch and around the corners of the house. In the excitement the front door opened and Beulah, admonishing the dogs, came across the yard to meet me.
"Don't mind all the dogs. I saw the car comin' in the road, and I hoped it was someone to see me. We don't see much of folks in winter. Ain't this the grand day?"
Beulah looked sturdy and capable. Her friendly blue eyes were bright and keen, and her skin, though coarsened by sun and wind, was clear and healthy-looking. Her hair, touched lightly with gray at the temples, was pulled back tight above her ears and rolled in a bun at her neck. She had on a bright-colored cotton print dress; the runs in her cheap stockings had been carefully pulled together, and she wore flat-heeled low shoes.
She chattered hospitably as we went into the house.
"I'm workin' on a quilt today. All the quilts that Ma left me are about gone--that is the ones I been usin' are. I'm keepin' the nice ol'-timey ones Gran'ma had so Mary Lyn and Roy'll have 'em. It gets cold in this old house when the wind gets up; so I set up the frame here yesterday, and I'm puttin' new covers on some that's wore out."
The furniture of the combined sitting and bedroom had been pushed against the wall to make room for the quilting frame in which is stretched a hit-and-miss quilt cover. Beulah apologized for the humble pattern.
"I know them mixed pieces ain't so purty to look at, but I'm thinkin' about gettin' a cover on that old quilt, that's all. That's why I made it a log cabin. You can make a log cabin of whatever you happen to have, and I didn't have any but scraps just now. I traded some I had with Miz' Lucas--she lives over on the ol' Lewis place--and got that red over there in that corner. Red brightens it up, I think, don't you? As soon's the, hens get layin, good and I'm sendin' off an order to Sears I want to get some pieces all o' one kind to make a real nice quilt--a Pine Tree or a Rose of Sharon or if I get the time I've always wanted to make me a Paradise Tree—that's the nicest of all, I think."
I looked at Beulah's work-roughened hands as she talked and marveled at the tiny, even stitches that ran in such straight rows across the unfinished quilt. After seeing that her caller was comfortable, she inquired, "Wouldn't you like to quilt along some with me? Or maybe you'd just rather sit and talk. I think it's nice to have someone to talk to when I'm sawin'. I remember yet how Ma'd take me along with her when I was little and she was goin' to one o' them old-fashioned quiltin' bees they used to have. Sometimes they made quilts to give to the orphan home, and sometimes they'd be fixin up the house for the new preacher. Everyone'd bring things to eat;and while some would be quiltin', the others'd get the dinner ready and set the table and after when dinner was over they'd all quilt. That way they'd do a lot in a day and they had such a good time quiltin' and talkin' together. Ma enjoyed goin' and seein' her friends and hearin' all that was goin' on aroun'. Times like that was 'bout the only things women got to in them days."
While Beulah talked, she rummaged through her round, chip sewing basket for an extra needle and thimble. After prodding the needle into an emery bag, made of red flannel and shaped like a strawberry, she threaded it and handed it to me.
"You can begin on that corner. Here's the measure to go by, but I reckon you can quilt's good as ever I can."
The room in which we sat quilting was large; as the heat from the wood blazing in the fireplace did not penetrate much beyond its center, the far corners seemed frigidly remote. A walnut bed, its tall headpiece almost touching the low ceiling, a matching bureau with marble top and high, narrow mirror, and an old-fashioned curved back settee were the larger pieces of furniture. The bed looked comfortable and dressed up with a snowy-white fringed cotton spread over its fat feather tick and hand-embroidered pillow cases, and' there were hand crocheted mats on the bureau top. Two marble-topped small tables of a style beloved of our grandmothers, an old style sewing machine with a high box top, three rockers and several straight chairs completed the room' s equipment. On the tables in front of the windows were potted plants being coddled through cold weather, the soft green of the leaves, framed in white ruffled curtains, the gingham chair cushions and red roses straying over the shiny new linoleum rug added color, and the room had an air of simple comfort.
Beulah sat close to her work in a low rocker in which the original seat had been replaced by one of perforated wood veneer, which showed nails that held it to the frame.
A big homemade box beside the hearth was piled high with wood chunks, and from time to time Beulah anchored her needle in the row of stitching and fed the fire. I sat on a light, splint-bottomed chair, one of the litter that stood on unsteady legs along the wall. Beulah saw that I noticed the new chairs.
"How do you like my new chairs? We got them off two men that was a-sellin' them from a truck in Jonesville one day last summer when we went in to sell our apples. They had a sight of things--chairs of all kinds, little stools, stands that you set flowers on--the truck was all piled up with them. The men said they was up from North Carolina and they'd made every one of them things themselves. I reckon it looked kind of foolish for me to put my apple money out for them, but our old chairs was all to pieces with Kemp a-rarin' back like he does when he sets down. He saw me a-lookin' at them and said I was to go ahead and get some if I wanted to."
It was not hard to picture the attraction of the new chairs to Beulah, spending a holiday in the county seat. With the few dollars from selling apples loose in her purse, all that she needed was Kemp's approval. Having this, the chairs were soon in the family wagon and on their way to a proud place in the farmhouse sitting room.
From the chairs my eyes wandered over the cheap paper that made mottled waves on the walls and was marked with blisters and wrinkles at the seams where unskilled hands had pushed the strips together. Above the fireplace mantel, calendars and Sunday-school pictures made small islands of color on each side of a crude wooden-looking crayon portrait of a woman of uncertain age. Her dark hair was parted severely in the middle and her shallow white collar opened above a closely-set row of small buttons that billowed up the front of her funeral black dress. Her blank, unfocused eyes stared down over the mantel's burden of imitation marble clock, mail order and seed catalogues, bright with the harbinger of bulbous vegetables and gay spring flowers, an oil lamp, and a pair of worn cotton work gloves. A paper bag had been pulled down over the lamp chimney to keep off dust; and, fanning out from behind the clock were letters, receipts, and odds and ends put there for handy reference and safe keeping. Beulah straightened up after putting a heavy chunk of wood on the fire and called my attention to the portrait.
"That's Kemp's Aunt Carrie. No, she never lived here, and I just seen her once, I think. I'll tell you how I come to get the picture of her. A man drove in here one day about two summers ago. I was settin' on the porch gettin' butter beans ready for dinner when he come up and got to showin' me a lot o' the pictures he'd made of folks. Said his place was in Nashville. That looked like a long ways to come sellin' things, but he said he'd been takin' orders through here before and that that preacher come from Rose Hill from over in Tennessee was a cousin of his. He was friendly like and I asked him to wait and eat dinner with us. After I got hearin' him tell about all the orders he'd got from different ones around, I made up my mind that I'd get one of them pictures too. For a long time I'd been hankerin' to have something to hang up on the wall besides then calendars. Makes a place homelike to have pictures of your folks, I think, don't you? But when I got to lookin' for the picture of my sister that died when she was little-bitty thing I just couldn't lay my hands on it. I was sure it was in Ma's ol' trunk, but I couldn't find it, and he was in such a hurry to go off I let him take the picture of Carrie. I had to give him the dollar out of my egg money, and for the longest time after I never heard a thing about the picture and thought sure my dollar was gone. Then one day when I'd just about give up I seen someone comin' in the road and, sure enough, it was him."
As Beulah finished telling how she'd got Aunt Carrie's picture, she glanced at the clock.
"My, don't the time fly quick when you have company? Here I'm talkin' away and it most dinner time. If you'll excuse me I'll go and get us up a bite to eat; the men'll be here before I mow it."
It wasn't long before she called me to come to the kitchen, where on a long, oval table she had spread her proudest wares--pork tenderloin, canned at the fall butchering and now heated in the oven, sweet potatoes, corn, tomatoes, butter beans, watermelon pickle, quince preserves, currant jelly--all from shelves that lined the cellar walls. To this munificence of food she had added hot biscuits and coffee. Coffee and sugar were the only alien things on the table. Cream that had been carefully skimmed from pots of milk standing on the back porch table was rich and yellow and so heavy that a spoon had been put into the pitcher to stir it that it might be poured. At my compliments on the array of delicious food, Beulah beamed with pride.
The cook stove glowed with a quick, wood fire and the roomy farm kitchen, cluttered with housework things, was warm and homey. Though shelves of glowing plants across the one window dimmed the light, the cheerful red-and-white-checked oilcloth that covered the table and hung down in points at the corners made a bright patch of color in the center of the room. An old-fashioned wooden safe with inset panels of tin perforated in scroll pattern and piled high with odds and ends of work clothes in front of a row of lamps stood in a corner, and heavy wooden chairs were lined up at one wall. A huge biscuit board topped the flour barrel near the window, with sugar bucket, baking powder, soda, and spice cans handy on a shelf above. Piled-up woodboxes banked the wall near the stove, and from lines strung high above, towels, men's huge colored handkerchiefs, socks, and long cotton underwear hung down.
Kemp, Arthur, and Roy, as like as peas from the same pod, had come from the barn, where they were busy mending harness and getting ready for the spring plowing. All three wore the farmer's uniform of blue denim overalls and jacket, faded with much washing and heavily patched on sleeves and seats. Under the jacket Kemp and Arthur wore khaki-colored wool shirts. Roy had on a red sweater. Their faces, weathered a rosy red from days in the open shone now from being scrubbed in cold water at the tin wash basin on a bench outside the back door, and their hair had been sleeked back with a wet comb.
Beulah is a lively talker. It is easy to see that Kemp, good-natured, and easy-going, has let her get a good hold on the family reins. She bubbles over with healthy energy. . In addition to doing the heavy farm housework, cooking, canning, "putting down" great quantities of meat at the fall butchering, looking after the chickens, and caring for the milk and cream, she does most of the garden work after the men do the spring plowing and lends capable hands with the heavy tasks of getting the tobacco crop ready for market.
"Yes, I reckon that folks on the farm do eat better than most--that is, if they're willing to keep workin' and look after things. We have a fine garden, and I put up everything but what goes right to the table. Sometimes, I dry some beans and some corn, but we like 'em canned better. I cold-pack all my vegetables. You can't sell vegetables regular even if we did have some way to get into town. About everyone has a garden of their own. Of course, a farmer eats hearty, but that's about all he does have for his work. He gets mighty little money, and it takes money to live even when you're on a farm. About the only cash we get the year round is the little that comes from cream and eggs. The cream runs about $1.50 a week. The creamer truck comes around every week, but in winter we have to carry the can out to the road to meet it. Eggs bring right good about Christmas time when everyone is doin' their bakin', and when I have any I get the cream man to take them into the store for me. Then when he comes again, he brings coffee and sugar and things like that we need. Then in the spring an' summer ol' Man Hankins comes every week buyin' up fryers and eggs. He'd take vegetables too, but I'd ruther put mine up for winter. We look to our tobacco to help pay bills and taxes and maybe get us some clothes and things. One thing about tobacco is it takes so much hard work and so long to make the crop and you never know what you're goin' to get for it. After the hardest kind of work for months and months sometimes it brings such a little, that I declare it takes the heart right out of you. Last year we only got a little over a hundred dollars for ours. By the time we paid on the fertilizer bill, we didn't have enough to meet taxes and had to sell off the two heifers we was raisin'. We often think we might do better if we put all that work into something else, but the land here's not so good for other things, bein' so long in tobacco. You know tobacco's hard on land.
"And you see our farm ain't very big, and we do all our own work--all but the thrashin' an' the men trade work for that--and it just gives us a livin'. You hear a lot about the government tryin' to help the farmers get more money but that's mostly for the big places that sell their crops. It don't mean a lot if you got only a little place to live on. We talked to the county agent about it an' cut down our corn plantin' but,' twas such a little it didn't mean much.
"One thing we have that is real good is our apples. A long time back there was a good orchard of winesaps on the hill back yonder. It's limestone there on that hill and, besides bein' good for pasture and for makin' hay, limestone's fine for apples. Of course, the trees ain't been looked after reg'lar and pruned and sprayed like Mr. Nuckols, the county agent, says they ought; but when it's a good apple year, we have right many apples to sell. Even if they're not the best, they make good apple butter and cider. Some folks as knows how make right smart apple jack. I never tried that, but our apple cider is fine. We have an old cider press in the barn, an' the cider we don't use makes the best vinegar...Them apples comes just like a gift you're lookin' for.
"I have a fine big strawberry bed up at the top o' the garden. I thin it out after it's done bearin' an' separate the plants, an' I'm gettin' a fine lot o' berries. With raspberries and blackberries growin' wild along the fence rows an' in the woods we have plenty, an' in good years I have some to sell. Sugar's high an' it takes a lot o' that for jellies an' preserves, but I don't know how we'd get along without them, we've got so used to them. When the strawberries are good, I make some o' the preserves that you set out in the hot sun. They have the best flavor--not bein' cooked on the stove like the others.
"I have four of the best damson plum tree's, and a whole row o' red currant bushes. Gran'ma started them currant bushes, an' I mind how much store she'd set by her red currant jelly. I can see her yet skimmin' it; she'd have rows of glasses settin' in the kitchen window and on the back porch table. She was proud o' it an' she liked to hold it up to the light to show how red an' clear it was. Them bushes is old now, and the worms been gettin' them the last few years. I keep after them though. I'm like Gran'ma about currant jelly. It has such a good, tart taste."
Dinner over and the men having slipped out quietly to their work at the barn" I helped Beulah wash the dishes. Then we went again to the sitting room and the quilting.
"It's nice to have someone come to spend the day. You know in winter with the bad roads an' everything we hardly ever see any folks we know. That's one o' the things that's again livin' way back here. It's so fur from everything an' so hard for Mary Lyn to get out to school. Roy quit last fall. He'd got to the sixth grade but hadn't seemed to learn anything. I guess he'll just be a poor ignorant farmer like Kemp and Arthur. He'd got so he'd ruther stop at home an' loaf aroun', and I got tired fussin' at him to get him to go. Kemp an' Arthur took up for him anyway, an' I had to give in. But Mary Lyn is different. She is just learnin' grand, and she is goin' to be a teacher if I have anything to do with it. Every day Kemp or Roy takes her on horseback to and from the main road where the school bus passes. Kemp's people or mine didn't any of them take interest in us goin' to school. We didn't go but a little while, but we learned good. Roy is good at figurin'things, too. Both Kemp's folks an' mine owned their own places, an' they always got along good for them times; wasn't no one had it very good workin' a hill farm. But schools wasn't much then, an' younguns didn't get to go but a few months in a year. That's why I always had it in my mind to send Roy an' Mary Lyn as long as I could get them to go. Of course, when we was growin' up there was no way for us to ride to school, an' when the mud got bad an' snow come in winter 'twould 'a' been foolish to send us out to walk the long ways we had to go. When you think 'bout things like that, it's easy to see why younguns them days didn't get much schoolin'. Things was different in every way then. Why, when Kemp an' me was gettin' married, we never thought of anything but keepin' right on livin' here with my folks an' workin' the farm, an' goin on doin' things like they'd always been done. Pa an' Ma was gettin' old, an' we took over the place just like it was natural to do. But these days livin' on a farm can be the same as livin' in town--electric lights, telephone, radio, electric refrigerator an' all an' if you ain't got things like that it makes the children discontented with the farm. Automobiles, too. Near every farmer has an automobile aroun' here. The trouble is that them new things take money to buy, and there never was a way to make any cash money on a farm this size. I declare it's a problem! Another thing there wasn't all the different things to fill young folks' head with leavin' the farm--mills an' places to work like that. Sometimes you'd hear about people in far-off towns makin' big wages, workin' in mills, but that was up in the North an' you'd never think of anyone goin' off from aroun' here to get jobs like that. But here lately you hear of mills openin' up in different places close aroun' an' young folks leavin' the farm to go there to work an' even of some tenants pickin' right up an' goin' where they can get mill jobs even for the younguns.
"Now here lately Roy keeps on about us buyin' a car an' sayin' all we could do if we had one an' then again about us goin' to live in town. He knows Arthur has a share in this place an' that Arthur'll give in to anything he says, an' he's countin' on that. But Kemp an' me is of a mind that we are never goin' to put a mortgage on the place to buy a car or anything else. We can see there is never goin' to be any money comin' in to pay off a mortgage. An' you know if it was for me to say we'd stay right on here. This is my old homeplace. Me an' Arthur were both born an' raised here. Ma was, too, an' she lived here the Whole 73 years of her life an' died right in this room. No other place 'd ever seem like home to me. The feelin' that we're livin' on our family place means a lot to me, even if we don't have electric lights or an automobile to be goin' places. Besides farmin' is all that Kemp an' Arthur an' me know how to do. What would we do livin' in town? I know I'd never get used to people livin' so close by--all crowded up like. An' I don't see how I'd keep busy with only the house to 'tend to.
"We have thought some about gettin' a car. We'd have to sell a piece of oak timber that's back beyond the wheat field, an' even that wouldn't bring no more than'd buy some kind of a cheap second-hand one. I wouldn't like that you can't tell what you're buyin' that way. An'then with the road bein' so poor a car wouldn't be a bit o' use to us in bad weather. You can hardly make it through the road in a wagon in winter--sinks down to the axles in them holes.
"But it keeps me worried about Roy hankerin' to go away from home to work. You know it don't seem no time since he was a baby. He's 18 now, an' he's hard-headed an' likes to have his own way about things. He takes after the Crowes that a-way. The Crowes was my mother's folks, and when they come up into this country first they was Indians here an' they was only a few white folks livin' for miles aroun'. Gran'pa used to say the Crowes musta flew up over the hills--seems like they'd always been here. Gran'pa was a great hand at tellin' stories. When he was ol', he liked to sit by the far an' tell the things he'd heard Gran'pa tell--'bout how when he first come up here he'd fought Indians an' went bear huntin' an' things like that. I remember him tellin' 'bout the razor strop his Gran'pa had. Said he'd made it out o' the hide o' an ol' Indian he'd killed back on Wolf Greek an' how it was tougher than bear hide with the ol' Indian bein' ‘bout a hundred years ol' an runnin' aroun' naked like he did even in the winter. The Crowes come first from Pennsylvania. They wasn't Quakers, but they come with the Quakers that was comin' to settle in the Valley and then come up here. They cleared off the land and settled down--all but some that went on over the mountains an' took up land in Kentucky.
"When I think of them things an' them old family graves you can see up in that clump o' trees on the hill, I know it's goin' to be something mighty powerful to get me to leave here. But you can't get younguns to see like we do. All Roy's got in his head since he quit school's how he ain't goin' to be a farmer an' hearin' about the money folks that's gone over to work in the mills at Roanoke an' Covington an' them places 's been makin' an' how they got cars an' everything. One thing I'm glad is he don't want to go up to the mines to work. They's something awful about goin' down in holes in the groun', an' all kinds of terrible things happen--slides an' explosions. Even if they do pay good they ain't money enough for riskin' things like that. After you been used to workin' in the sun an' feelin' the wind blowin' like it does in these hills, it'd be like bein' buried to go down in a mine. But when young folks are growin' up now they want to be goin' aroun' with other young folks an' learnin' to dance an' that means wantin' money to spend.
"I'd like to go to church reg'lar, too, an' to the women's missionary. They have box socials an' oyster suppers an' things to make money for the missionaries Things like that are nice to go to. Out here, we don't go to church often but in the summer. Nearly every Sunday then some of the neighbors takes us in a car. We go into town on Saturdays right often, too. Roy an' Mary Lyn like to go to the movin' pictures, an' when he don't get a ride, Roy'll often walk the whole way. He likes seein' the young folks he knows an' goin' to them cowboy pictures they have there on Saturdays.
"They's lots of ways livin' in town 'd be easier. Bein' near the school for Mary Lyn an' near the mill to get our flour an' meal ground when we want it. In winter sometimes when flour an' meal runs low an' the mud's too deep for the team to pull through or the snow's drifted in the hollow in the road, one o' the men has to take the mare an' go to the mill with a sack of wheat and a sack of corn slung across the saddle. It takes near a whole day then to go, an' sometimes I get clean out before I can get them to make the trip. Now the new electric wires have come through too, but they're away over on the other side an' to pay for the poles an' lines to carry it over here would cost a sight o' money, and it looks like there's no way for us to ever have lights or the things that help make work easier..."
As I left late in the afternoon Beulah had pushed back the quilting frame to wait until tomorrow and made ready to do her evening chores. In the kitchen she put on heavy shoes and a sagging woolen sweater, and pulled a deep-crowned 1925 straw hat down over her hair. As she came out to see me off, she was on her way to "fasten up the hen house". After that she would take the milk pails to the barnyard for the men to do the milking. When the actual milking was finished, Beulah would take charge of the milk, and, taking out enough for the family supper, would strain the rest through white cheesecloth into flat earthen milk pots. For this primitive farm there is no mechanical separator, and the cream to be sold is skimmed from the top of the milk cooled in the earthen pots.
Four sleek well-fed Jersey cows waited in the barnyard for the evening milking. When Beulah appeared, four pairs of mild bovine eyes followed her every movement. Cats, waiting at the barn door for their evening pan of milk, came running to meet her and, while we talked, they rubbed contentedly against her skirts. Roy had gone to bring Mary Lyn home from school, and the two men re-fitting newly-greased wheels to the manure spreader watched as we left the house. As I started the car, Beulah grinned at me from under her mountainous hat and waved a friendly hand.
