Rev. G. L. Beasley (Negro)
248 Chestnut Street, S.W.
Pastor Rush Memorial Congregational Church
By Geneva Tonsill
THE LORD WAS WITH ME
I picked my way through the weedy vacant lot to the church, a large frame hull-like Building set far back from the street. The seats consist of cane bottom chairs. Rev. B greeted me as I entered the building and ushered me into a little room which he used as a study. It was sparsely furnished with an old desk and a few chairs, and the desk was cluttered with letters, papers, and a dusty typewriter.
Rev. B talked quite freely but from time to time he seemed to feel that I was getting a sordid picture of him and said, "I know you think I's a bad fellow being a preacher too," and asked me not to think the worst of him. Sometimes he interrupted his narrative to say, "Oh, no don’t write that or "strike that out and treat it as if I didn't say it. I hate for you to know those things about me."
"Why, I've lived such a terrible life that I'm afraid I wouldn't like to see it in print. Of course, I've never thought of it in terms of print and wonder if it would be interesting after all. Well, that’s better then, if my identity isn't known. I hate to have people know some of the things I did. Oh well, I wont tell all the bad parts in detail.
Let me see where must I start. I was born forty-two years ago in a little town in Tennessee. The house where I was born was perhaps the biggest house for Negroes in our community. My folks on both sides were farmers. They, like many other Negroes, migrated to town and became employed in hotels, domestic service as cooks, nurses, and maids, or in other common labor. Not much culture on either side of the family tree. Just ordinary people, respected in their community as honest, common folks. In the immediate family there were six children. I'm the youngest boy of this group and was the youngest child for thirteen years; then a girl was born.
"Mother married four times - two children by the first husband; three living children by the second; none by the third; and one child by the fourth husband. She separated from the first husband. My father, the second, by whom three children were born, died when I was a year old. He hadn't accumulated much and left my mother in poor circumstances, with five children to support.
"Father died under peculiar illness. Many people said he was 'conjured' but no one, not even the doctor, could determine what was wrong with him. After an extended illness he died. His symptoms were indeed peculiar - every tooth in his head became loose and as loose as they were it was difficult for the dentist to extract them. After his death, knowing the general gossip about his condition, in an effort to determine just what really was the trouble an autopsy was performed. It was definitely ascertained that he was poisoned and through whiskey.
"My father and his mother had agreed to buy a home jointly and it was in this home that I was born. After father's death my grandmother, an unusually difficult woman to get along with and unbearably grouchy, made life so miserable for mother that she with her children had to seek living quarters elsewhere. Mother had been accustomed to her own home with her parents and she didn't wish to pay rent as many people did. She started from the bottom, bought a home and raised her children in fair comfort. The house was nothing admirable, or worth a considerable sum but buying it jointly with her sister who primised to live with her, she was able after many struggles to pay for the home. The house was a simple, four-room structure, old when she bought it and had been moved from its former site to the present location. After she had paid for it, several rooms were added and other repairs made.
"I might add that on my father's side, my grandfather in his day was considered a man of means - if quite a few acres of land were considered. He was a promineth farmer with many, many acres of land which he tilled with the help of his sons. He lived to be a ripe old age of ninety-two years.
"My grandfather on my mother's side happened to be a veteran of the Union Army, and when he separated from my grandmother he moved to Memphis, Tennessee, where he died and was buried in the Government cemetery there.
"The early days of my youth were very hard ones as I recall. I can't remember any occasion where we ever want hungry and, as far as bare necessities are concerned, we always had full stomachs and fair clothes.
"When I was six years of age I started to school, in the middle of the term, as I remember now. I stayed in school off and on until I was about twenty-nine years old.
"I started working for a very definite salary when I was very young, about the age of eight, earned about 20¢ a month cutting kindling for my aunt. At the age of ten I got a better job and this paid 50¢ a week and 75¢ when the cook was not on the job for then I had to help a little more around the kitchen, the 50¢ earned by me was not considered mine as I had to turn it over to my mother just as received from my employer. On one occasion, being very fond of peanuts, I spent 5¢ of that 50¢ and when I got home I purposely allowed that money to drop and a nickel was never found. Of course, I was not whipped or punished for the lost nickel, although I alone knew it had been spent before the faked dropping of the 50¢. At the age of twelve years I got a better job which paid me $1.50 a week. This was at a boarding house. I was fond of this job because I had plenty of good food to eat and strange foods that I had never been accustomed to in my home.
"I(d like to pay this compliment to some very kind white people by way of explaining how my mother was able to meet her obligations with the responsibility of six children. They were all very kind in assisting - taught her how to cook and sew and encouraged her to go to school which was held in a little Baptist church there in the community. You see naturally a woman in those days who had no degree of training, had very little income. Mother’s provision for her family was made easier by the sympathies of a white family whose parents formerly owned my mother’s people. One lady in particular for whom my mother was named and for whom she worked a number of years, assisted in every way possible.
"At the age of fifteen, after school, I was employed in a hotel as a bell boy. I had the privilege of meeting quite a number of engineers who at that time were working on a government project near by. The wife of one of these men was exceedingly fond of me and wouldn’t allow anyone in the hotel to serve her but me.
"Hearing of work being given to Negro boys as water-boys, I quit the job at the hotel and went to the government project, where I was employed. The experience on this job was a very exciting one because I had the opportunity of running everywhere I wanted to go and did not have to do much work. I filled the barrel of water and carried water to the men. Really most I did was to stand around, watch the men work and sometimes I'd work. Viewing the past as I am I must have been a modest boy because it was on this job that I heard the first woman curse and I thought at the time it was the most horrid thing.
"These years were exciting to me not only as a boy working on a public job but in the midst of war as we were, one heard those songs of enthusiasm of war and speeches that tended to build loyalty in the hearts of everyone from the smallest child to the oldest man. Some of these patriotic songs must have caught me in their clutches for I bought baby bonds every opportunity I had. I kept them for awhile and cashed them in to buy a boy scout uniform, for so great was my ambition to became a soldier, I felt to be dressed as nearly like a soldier as possible furthered my purpose and ambition to become a soldier. I'd drill and salute all over the place with my little group of boys. I recall vividly the news being received that the armistice was signed, fighting had ceased. Ringing of bells, shooting of guns, shouting of people possessed my little town as it had possessed every other town in the union. One thing that added to my pride and joy was that I had a brother, several uncles and cousins who had become part of the United States Army and my brother at that time was in France, Hearing that the armistice was signed and having heard from him a short ’while before, naturally a baby brother looking forward to a big brother's return was a pleasant anticipation.
"It was during this same year, 1918, that with the money I had saved from working, I made the greatest purchase of my life - this was a second-hand bicycle, a thing I had longed for many, many months. I paid $20.00 for the wheel and unfortunately because of the unscrupulous dealer, it turned out to be a very bad bargain. The wheel was not worth a dime. I left the wheel in the hall or entrance of the building where I worked and it happened also to be the entrance to the shop where I bought the wheel and I haven't seen it since. At this time I was working in a pressing club as a delivery boy. I was fired from this job because I loved to play marbles. I'd rather play marbles than anything else I knew of and I’d neglect going my errands, no matter how important, or how much the man wanted or needed his suit, if I saw a marble game in process. I'd play for keeps and lost most of the time as I wasn't a very good player but nevertheless I'd play if it took every marble I could get my hands on.
"The following summer after school I got a job in the same hotel where I had worked previously. I was head bellman. Although just a boy, I made more money in a week than I have made in any week since. Though young I had learned the tricks of a bell-hop’s trade and had discovered to my amazement that the job of a hotel boy was a lucrative one, if one knew how to handle it. I was rich, forty dollars was nothing for me to make in a week: and among my friends I was a young ’Jay Gould'. In the midst of their flattery I would pay them enormous sums for minor tasks - fifty cents for a shoe shine was nothing for me to pay.
”I couldn't tell my mother about this money because she would have questioned me and if I had told her just What I was doing to earn that money she would have whipped me and made me quit the job, thus cutting off my income. The family profitted by my enrichment for I paid many bills of the house.
"As a boy of sixteen years I had grown very rapidly, so much so that short trousers began to look rather odd on me and with enormous feet, I looked a sight in short trousers.
"In school it was discovered that year, much to mother's amazement and disgust (but not to mine) that I hadn’t done so well and added to that was my repeated requests for a long suit, which my mother was still unable to buy. The first semester exams being over, my greatest desire was to quit school and since I'd been a complete failure and continued longing for a long suit mother allowed me to quit school and go to work.
"I recall during those months after I had quit school having attended quite a few of the silent movies where pictures with crooks as heroes were shown. For some reason or another, though being reared very Victorian, my sympathies were toward the crooks and I longed to be a part of a little gang in the community. Much of my money was spent visiting the theater and I would see the same picture a number of times.
"The biggest thing that happened in my childhood during that time was witnessing a commencement exercises in the local school. Not the commencement in itself but it happened that my sister was the only member that was finishing in that class that year. With the pride of a boy who knows of the prestige given a family when a member is graduating I ventured out to witness the exercises. I heard something that night from the speaker which created within me the desire to finish school and this inspired me never to give up until I had done just that. I heard that same speaker, fourteen years later, speak in that same school and I was reminded of what caused me to continue my education.
"During the summer I secured a job in a drug store and made plans to re-enter school. When school opened that fall I was on hand to register. Strange as it may seem that year I was an unusually good student. The teacher complimented me on the good work I was doing and said it paid me to stay out of school when I did.
"Just as I had quit school the previous year, at the same time, I took sick and had to come out of school. I had rheumatism and a hard attack which held me a year and a half. The following fall found me, though walking on a stick and cripple, trying to go back to school. It was a hard task suffering with a million pains every day but I managed to stay on. The following year, in the summer, just as strangely as the pains had come on me they disappeared and I found myself well again. Here again during my illness went its rounds that I was 'fixed' amd dwelling as we were under clouds of superstitious race, no doubt my family was inclined to believe that I was.
"I got a job, worked a few weeks and then quit my job to go West to visit relatives. It was my desire in going west to remain but after getting there I found it rather difficult to get a job. Living with my aunt who was somewhat sophisticated I was given no encouragement to work on public work or on the streets. Evidently she felt that doing such types of work would reflect on her prominence in the community. For awhile I helped my uncle paint and learned be a fairly good painter.
"One day while walking down the street I saw a sign which indicated that railroad men were wanted in another state east of the state where I was. These jobs were promised for a fee of $2, for which one was given transportation to this state and a Job upon arrival. I signed up and while my aunt, was away I slipped out of town.
"I recall on the same day I left my aunt's house to go on this job, the people of America paused for a few moments out of respect for President Harding, who had passed as a result of a paralytic stroke out in California. On going to the station that day on the street car, the motorman stopped the car and the people, including me, bowed their heads a moment and the motorman then continued his journey. I boarded the train and around five the next morning I reached the all place. I found men sleeping in their railroad bunks.
"At the age of seventeen I was thrown in the midst of a group of hardened men, the majority of whom had no respectability, culture or refinement. I was naturally a misfit, having had a different type of training and background from what these men had had. I couldn't accustom myself to the cursing and swearing where no one thought of giving thanks for the food they were eating, cursing and grabbing at the food. My first day's work was on Saturday and Sunday, of course, was a holiday. Monday I was on the job.
"I remember that job was located near an apple orchard, with big luscious apples everywhere. I was tempted as Adam was tempted in the garden of Eden, and along with a young Texas ranger, who was the personification of crudeness and uncouthness, I went into the orchard and filled my pockets with apples, while the boss had gone up the track for some reason, not maliciously but just as any average boy seeing apples just wanted some that is all. I didn't feel that a few apples made any difference in an orchard of a hundred or more trees. That incident parcipitated my being discharged because the boss came back just in time to see us picking apples. He gave us our discharge and ordered us back to a little town in Iowa to get our money. There were no trains passing through that night, therefore, this boy and I were compelled to board a freight train out to that little town, which was about fifty miles away. In that little town we spent a week trying to get our money. The days were spent in the station, in park, in front of hotels, or on benches. At night I covered my body with papers to protect me from the dew. Other nights I spent in jail, not from arrests, however, but because the officers of the law felt it better for me to spend ray nights in jail than on the benches. My food consisted of a very unbalanced diet during those days - light bread, cinnamon rolls and doughnuts and very little meat. After receiving my money I returned to ray mid-western state much to the surprise and joy of my folks. I secured a job there and worked a few weeks, then went back South to my home.
"I had been reared with a very peculiar notion in my head, gotten, perhaps, from the many peculiar superstitions that characterized the Negro race who believes that anything that is abnormal, or strange, is of peculiar divine significance. So being born as I was, with an unusual veil over my face, I was regarded as a child of destiny, who could depend largely upon the support of God to accomplish any desire. Of course, now, I don't believe that there was anything to it but just the thoughts of it have given me quite a bit of assurance. Before I was intelligent enough to understand such things, I believed what was transmitted to me to be true and perhaps I took undue liberties feeling I would be protected because of the unusual circumstances surrounding my birth which had been instilled in me. Even now, though not believing in it scientifically, I believe in it nevertheless to the extent that it has, because of my belief in my parents who transmitted it to me, colored my life and actions considerably. Though there aren't external evidence such beliefs up to the present having made for any great achievements but viewing the past I can see, as of by a miracle, the favor of the stars as it were, making situations to my advantage.
"Another thing in my life was the peculiar conviction that was transmitted to me by my mother. Before my birth she claims that she wanted, if I were a boy, for me to be a preacher. At birth, being a son, I was regarded as ’the given of God.' She says the mid-wife who was with her placed in ray forehead a Bible, which was an external sign that she was giving me to God as a preacher. I heard that tune all of my days, that I was supposed to be a preacher and very early in my life it controlled my actions but later in life it didn’t. Very early in life I was preaching. At the age of seven years, I can recall mimicing the various sermonic efforts of an apparent illiterate preacher in the little rural section that I visited regularly from time to time. The years that I spent there on the farm, where adults heard my mother say I was going to be a preacher, and hearing from the children of my playful sermonizing, they began calling me ’The preacher', and incidentally I am still called that in that particular area after nearly forty years. As I grew to young manhood, the ministerial field was the last thought of by me. I had no desire for it whatsoever and grew rather unreligious and irreligious as I increased in years. This straying away from these childhood tendencies was evidenced in my actions, for I did everything in the world except commit murder that contradicted such tendencies but underneath it all and in spite of straying away into a far-a-way country there was still in a multitude of worldly rubbish, the idea that perhaps eventually I would enter the ministry.
"After finishing high school and entering college, I remember that I became, at least verbally, an avowed atheist. This is judged from my incoherent grounds on which I based my denial of the existence of God and the efficacy of religion as being valuable. But along with this I became quite an assiduous student of the Bible, not simply for its religious value or spiritual worth, but as a means of argumentation when I gathered with the boys in the various rooms of the dormitory where I was attending school. I persisted in propounding questions which no one could answer with external or historic proof and which now, after many years, I have found only with a degree of faith can such questions be answered. Those phases of religion and God provoked a 'why' in me which now taken as matters that can’t be logically proved historically, but have to be accepted as pure belief end faith.
"I recall while in college I was quite interested in speaking and was on the varsity debating feam. I was regarded as an eloquent and powerful speaker. There came to that school, from time to time, a preacher whom I had heard speak to the student body. He became interested in me and I admired him greatly for his eloquence and stage decorum. When he returned to this school, on one occasion it happened that the administration secured living quarters for him in my dormitory and in my room. A room in which several of the so-called ’choice students' lived and the hours that he spent in there were very valuable to me, because admiring him as I did brought me more intimately in contact with him. Being associated with him as I was, even then I had no aspiration to be a preacher. It happened that Law, Business and Medicine were occupying my greatest attention. The feel of law was discarded because of lack of financial support. The urge of medicine was discarded because of a distinctive dislike to bother with dead people, and business was chosen upon finishing my course there.
"Insurance field being the easiest to enter without capital and naturally I became an insurance agent. Previous to this I had had a year's experience in that work. Upon finishing college, ignoring a teacher's job, I accepted a job as agent for a very prominent and substancial insurance company. I had a lot of fun in that field and while working on this job I had an opportunity of using all my powers of speech, if there were an all, in my biblical knowledge in persuading people to take out insurance and pay for it after they had taken it out. I enjoyed at that time, as I remember, passing on to my policy holders great promise of prosperity to those who had faith in God and all the while I didn't expect any tangible returns to those people but was using the tradition of faith, religious precepts and promises as a means of augmenting my own income and building up for me and myself a reputation with my company, which I did with a reasonable degree of success.
"I might say here though being somewhat unreligious and very indifferent, I was never an avowed opponent of the church as an institution, nor was I opposed to ministers and their efforts, nor did the knowledge of their moral inconsistencies astonish me very much, I was always very tolerant and was amused by the knowledge of such moral interpretudes. As an indication of my respect and tolerance of ministers, I was always very liberal in keeping with my meager means, in my support of their cause and was always regarded by them as being a rather nice fellow. If I knew one drank, I would, give to his church just the same. If I heard one swear, it would make no difference. I would give to him personally or would give to the members who were loyal to him, feeling in the meantime that despite his many weaknesses as it might have appeared' in his conduct, he was trying to put forth a big effort for good in many ways. He was, therefore, entitled to cooperation of everyone who stood for progress. This may have been a personal element on my part, knowing that if I supported the ministers' program they might say something to their members that would cause them to support my business. It is hard to determine just which motive led me to support the ministers and the church. Also on this job I had a chance to use my old masculine tendency of flattering the ladies, which worked very effectively, not only making me known socially but also securing business for my company. But strange as it may seem, on this job and in this town I was never guilty of breaking any laws of convention. At least for one time in my life I was a perfect gentleman. I have no recollections in my business pursuits as an insurance man to return to me now to make me horrified or make me ashamed.
"While on this job I met a man who was quite a salesman and I listened from time to time to his boasts of his lucrative income as a salesman of clothes and making me believe I was rather promising as a business man, he eventually caused me to became interested in this travelling salesman work. I accepted. In some ways I regretted having made the change for at the time I was being regarded as a very promising insurance man and was considered exceptional as was shown by charts and reports that were sent out by the manager. The manager, who was considered bery good, did not hesitate to tell me how valuable I was but in spite of all of this I quit the job and went on the field as a travelling salesman. This work took me to a number of places in various states and gave me contacts with many prominent people, all of which was enjoyed.
"It was while a travelling salesman that my religious nature became greatly enhanced. Perhaps it was because of the very critical financial condition that I found myself in from time to time. Depending only on my deposits from sales made, this began to bring on a change. While in one of these critical situations I recalled a biblical passage that had decorated the wall of our dining room about five years before. The words were; ’Be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee whither so ever thou goeth'. These same words, five years before, had produced in me courage to venture to a distant city for hospitalization without funds in my pockets. Having succeeded in receiving this attention, the words lingered in my mind, even though without any definite religious form. Now on this occasion, as a travelling salesman, in a strange town, among strange people, with no money in my pocket and withmmy clothing showing a deal of wear, hungry, on a very rainy afternoon, with nowhere to go, those words came back to my memory, as a flash of lightning in the night to fortify me, to strengthen and encourage me. There on that dismal afternoon, damp, weary, as I walked up a high hill in that strange city, I wanted to believe that those words were true, not only to a bygone people but were true to me. Meditating on those words and realizing my great pressing need, something drew my eyes to the lights of a little clinic that was on a second floor of a building on the street up which I was walking. Tired and depressed, it occurred to me that perhaps on that second floor I could make a sale that would replenish my already depleted pocket book. With a reasonable degree of faith and hope I ascended the stairs that led up to this little clinic. Upstairs I was treated very cordially and hospitably. The nurse asked me to be seated until she could finish the business in which she was engaged at the time. She returned to me shortly to hear my business. As I remember I told it very eloquently and very sincerely, for if I ever needed to be successful, it was then. The results were I made the sale that saved my life. I then sold another lady. Who the day before, had treated me with scorn in the drug store that was below. That, perhaps, was the happiest day of my life. I saw I had the means that would enable me to eat again. The superstition of the forefathers was brought back to my mind and I was made to believe that I had been successful because of being favored by the gods because of the unusual circumstances surrounding my birth. I finished the sale and with an expression of appreciation and a hearty goodbye I went in haste to the first cafe I could reach, where I dined with great joy to my heart's content. Afterwards I returned to my rooming place. I paid off some of my past due obligation, and was allowed to spend the night. The next day I was out again feeling quite confident and was able to make several other sales. I believed that the Lord was with me, despite the fact that during one of my sales I had visited a prominent physician and after discussing Shakespeare and some very rare paintings, also partaking a goodly supply of his 'private stock' I had sold him. The main thing I want to emphasize is, I was out again, feeling very confident, basing the cause of my success on the fact that I had been told over and over again that the Gods were destined to be with me because of the veil which covered my face at birth. On that same day the sales were sufficiently good enough to bring in an income that made it possible for me to pay up all of my obligations to my landlady.
"I moved on to another town. I arrived at the town late at night and was fortunate in securing a decent place to stay. I arranged with the landlady to eat also at the home. On the following morning I was on the job in another strange city and for the next few days, things were slow and again I found myself in debt. Again, as if by a miracle, the gods favored me. I came out of it, secured sales enough to pay all bills and then moved back to my headquarters in a city about two hundred miles away, where I went to my former boarding house.
"Christmas time was rapidly approaching and so sales were naturally slow and here again I found my funds growing low. I began to notice how little progress I was making as a travelling salesman. I made very good money as a whole, but whether it was little or much, it all went somehow and I was beginning to get to the place where I didn’t like it because I was tired of the incessant strain in which I found myself. Therefore, on Christmas Eve I caught a bus for my home town. I spent quite a few weeks, including the Christmas holidays, having a big time, imbibing of spirited beverages and socializing, also some time was spent selling in my home town with a fair degree of success, ha having sold most of the folks that were in the market.
”I haven’t as yet said anything about my married life. I met my wife fifteen years ago, when I was then in my prime of life. On labor day, fifteen years ago, I along with several other fellows, attended a party given in honor of a lady who was visiting the city. I remember how I busied myself all that morning trying to make all of the girls ’fall for me' and with a reasonable degree of success. But it all came to naught when all of the girls got together, each began to tell the other what I had said to them. Only one of the girls meant anything to me thereafter and that was my wife, whom I married seven years afterwards and to whom I am still married.
"During many of my experiences as a business man and salesman, she was teaching. During the summer nine years ago, following the fall term, we started housekeeping in her home town. In this I continued to make my sales. It was also in this town that I met a minister. He had, however, done a great piece of work in that town. I came very close in contact with this minister. He gave me a nice sand-off in my business and I in turn supported his work. We had many things in common and I spent much time with him.
"It was through one of our conversations that I divulged to him that I was sort of 'set-aside' by my mother to be a minister and having heard me speak and debate in his church, he hastened to encourage me along these lines. Strange as it may seem, I thought I was fartherest away at that time from being a minister. It had never occurred to me as a vocation. Although on the previous New Year Eve, during a watch meeting, at a little church in my home town, I was inspired by the testimony and determination expressions of some of the older members of the church to the extent that I got up, for the first time in my life during a watch meeting, and asked to share their prayers, expressed myself as being determined or inclined to order my life in the future. And may I say here, although I had been raised in a christian home, and even before birth was somewhat 'given to God', and had joined the church at an early age as had been taught me, I had gotten away from my training and was living a riotous life.
"This minister and I talked over the possibility of the ministry. Believe it or not I'm inclined at this time to believe that this man of questionable character and morals was the immediate cause of my entering the ministry. For along with my discussion with him, I renewed my study of the Bible and seemed to have felt that many of the statements of the Bible were directly intended for me. I was made to go back, so to speak, over all the things that had happened to me, I did very definitely begin to believe that I was getting nowhere because God was displeased with my actions and I believed that I had to do something to appease the wrath of God, which, I felt very strongly, was oh me. The urge to enter the ministry in a very definite way got on me and I began to share its urge with my wife and mother. Immediately preparations were made to attend the Seminary for professional training. In this matter I was encouraged by my wife and mother. I was ashamed to share this new plan with others outside my immediate family because I had lived a ragged life. Although the raggedness of that life, in so far as I knew, had never become current gossip. I was very efficient in keeping my actions hidden for I always had chosen the time and place very shrewdly. One morning in October I left for the Seminary.
"My arrival at the Seminary was accompanied by a number of anticipations but many things that I experienced shortly after arriving would have changed me in my course had it not been for the deep-seated belief that I was fulfilling a very definite obligation to God. For the first time in my life I was thrown in contact with ministers in a very intimate way and I found that they were just about like other folk, with their strong and weak qualities. Having found this to be true, there was very little outward change in my general character and although entering the ministry, I held on to my old traits. Some I would not have held on to and would have discarded had it not been for encouragement given by some others who were just as weak, or weaker than I was.
"It so happened that many things came up to deter me in my course. One of which was a letter from the manager of the Insurance Company in which I formerly worked as an agent. In this letter he offered me a new district, offered to make me manager of the district and promised large pecuniary returns if I were to accept the proposition. I almost yielded to it but eventually overcame and saw it through.
"I had no money when I got to the Seminary and naturally even a preacher will have a hard time without money but I still believed that the Lord would be with me and he was with me in a very real way. For out of every close jam, a way out presented itself and I was able to make it. I finally got adjusted my Seminary life and my life as a prospective preacher began, even though people were never kind enough to say I acted like a preacher, or even looke like one. Even now I don't think I act like one but they are saying I look like one now.
"I spent some of the time in the dormitory. The rest of the time was spent in a house that my wife secured for the remaining of my years in the Seminary.
"As a student I was regarded as being very promising and even to the present I haven't felt that the judgement of the kind people is very good, for as a minister nothing very remarkable has been accomplished by me.
"After I had been in the Seminary for sometime, I became the pastor of a little church. As pastor in the actual work, I began to realize some of the hardships, difficulties, heartaches and disappointments of the Christian ministry. These difficulties, disappointments, and so forth were made bearable by my wife, who as always, encouraged me greatly. She was very cooperative in anything that I did in the interest of the church.
"I began to feel the need of added financial resources due to the fact that the little church promised me nothing and paid me less than that and again I was made to feel as I had felt so many times before, that the Lord was with me. For an acquaintance of mine wrote a friend of his (both were white) and told him of my very precarious situation and this friend, feeling the need, came to my reseue in a financial way. This friend, up until his death, continued to help me. After him his wife felt the keen interest he had and she helped.
"After I had graduated from the Seminary, I retained my old pastorate and became the regualr pastor. Newer contacts were made, new friends were made, who have continued to help me as they knew my efforts, knew of my work and also knew the inability of the members of the church to adequately support me. This support has come in the form of money and clothes, not only for my personal use but money for the support of the specific projects in the church. These friends have multiplied and each friend has been a source of more aid for me and for my work. The little church experienced a degree of progress and with its progress I have become very popular with my general church and its officials. They have been most liberal and sympathetic, also encouraging. Their encouragement has be been expressed not only in words but also in financial assistance. I have received a multitude of expressions of gratitude and appreciation. Many of them will linger on as a sweet memory. I am also proud in connection with this along with one pastorate I assumed another pastorate. This work was a very small and there was nothing to encourage one there. I labored at this place for a long time without pay or even a promise to pay and after many labors I gave it up as a hopeless cause. I wrote the members to that effect. Fortunately or unfortunately, the resignation was sent and about the same time the person to whom I had sent it came to see me. I was surprised that he didn’t receive the letter and I told him at the time that I had written it and the contents of the same but he persuaded me to hold on. The same I did and a day or so later the church burned down. Had I not gone back I would not have felt any kind of obligation to the people but after I had made the decision I felt leaving them then would be a sign of cowardice and weakness. I assumed the task of rebuilding the church and was successful. I undertook this task, feeling somehow that the Lord would be with me.
"Well, let's see now, there is nothing much left for me to say, I've said so much already and yet I've omitted some of the happenings of my life. Although I was pastoring while I was attending the Seminary, I can tell you about my teaching. I found, after finishing, I had a new responsibility - that of assisting to educate a relative who was just entering college. Normally my wife and I could live fairly decently but what we were receiving and with this added expense, coupled with the responsibility of assisting my mother in her declining years, made it rather difficult for me to make it.
"Naturally clouds of doubt and despondency began to hover low but again the proof of the Lord being with me became manifest, for I secured a teaching position which augmented my income and made it possible for me to meet all personal obligations. After a few months as a teacher, I was promoted to a higher position and with this promotion came an increase in income.
"It so happened that almost simultaneously with this promotion, came an increase in my family, which necessitated an increase in obligations. This increase in the family came in the form of a son, who is very proud of his daddy and this daddy is very proud of him. Prior to his arrival I was called to a more prominent church, a larger church, that paid more in another part of the state. It seemed as if for a while I would accept the call but for some reason I retained my position as pastor and have remained until now.
"Born as I was with a veil on my face, although not overly superstitious, I derive quite a bit of joy out of believing that the Lord is with me despite many of my irregularities. Coming from a poverty stricken home, of poor parents, and who, after many setbacks, I have been able to because of my belief, my efforts, my friends and my God, to be at a point where I am rendering a service to God and my people. I am able to live a reasonably comfortable life. On the surface I am doing well but at the very heart of things, my life and living are rather mediocre but even now I believe that the boy who was born with the veil over his face is going to move on, not so much because of the veil, but because of his belief in God and the worthwhileness of his efforts, and I will continue to believe that the Lord is with me.
