FIRST VERSION: November 3, 1938.
WRITER: Claude V. Dunnagan, <text not clear>
NAME & ADDRESS OF FAMILY: MR. & Mrs. Joe Childress,
Yadkinville, North Carolina
The Story of Mr. and Mrs. Joe Childress, Farm Tenants In Yadkin County.
By Claude Dunnagan.
"I reckon we had it about as tough as anybody that ever rented a farm," Joe Childress said, as he spit a stream of tobacco juice through the window of the basement room. The floor was covered with bright gold leaves of cured tobacco and Joe, his wife, Pelvie, and the three youngest children were busy typing the leaves together, it was tobacco market season in Winston-Salem.
"We don’t mind tellin’ about our lives none. It ain’t very interestin’, though," Pelvie said. She was fat; she had brought thirteen children into the world, and time had left its mark. There was an expression of resignation on her face.
"We’ve had so many children I have to think awful hard to recollect the names of ‘em all. Four of ‘em’s dead. The three young’uns help us around the farm. The rest of ‘em got married or just wandered off. I ain’t seen Elridge for nigh on to three years now. "She paused to drop some snuff in her lower lip, and continued to tie the tobacco leaves with a mechanical motion.
"When me and Joe got married, we didn’t have nothing. I reckon we was as poor as anybody that ever got married. Our fathers was renters, so we didn’t get nothin’ when we started out. Right after we was married we hired out to Mr. Whittaker...he owned some farms near Longtown, and we got the one down near the creek. It was pretty run-down, and we had to work hard to get the land cleared and planted before fall. The crops didn’t do any good that year, so we moved off to another place. We didn’t do any better there, and next year we moved back to one of Whittaker’s farms. By that time we had a baby and another <text not clear> on. After that, the young’uns come so fast, I couldn’t keep track of ‘em. It seemed I’d no sooner weaned one before I’d be carryin’ another. It was a hard job, takin’ care of the babies and workin’ in the fields at the same time. Joe wasn’t much help in them days ‘cept when he was sober now and then. He ain’t that way now." Pelvie smiled wanly toward Joe, who was down on his knees, sorting the tobacco leaves. "He’s more help now than all the young’uns put together. He don’t drink any more." She paused and bent over to stack the leaf bunches in a neat pile against the wall.
"Yes, we’ve had our troubles. My third baby died right after it was born. The doctor said it was because I had the measles, but I don’t see how it could’ve killed the baby, though I guess the doctor always knows why them things happen. The next one lived, though we thought he was goin’ to die, he was so awful thin and weak. That’s Eldridge, the one that’s gone, now. The next baby died the same way as the other one, ‘cept he was already dead when he was born. We didn’t have no doctor that time. We just took him to the cemetary and buried him.
"After that, we worked in the field awful hard during the summer, but it didn’t do any good. The hail come and cut up all the tobacco, and the moles got the potatoes and the chickens well, we ain’t ever had any luck with chickens. The rich folks down in the city come up and turn foxes loose in the woods you see, they come up and hunt ‘em later on and the foxes come prowlin’ around every night, huntin’ for chickens. They got all we had last year. We can’t shoot ‘em cause it’s against the law....at least that’s what the rich folks say.
"We almost starved to death that winter. Some of the neighbors brought us some canned stuff and a little meat when they killed their hogs. We had to take the children out of school so they could help us around the farm. The landlord said we’d have to do better or we couldn’t stay there any longer. Lucky for us the crops done a little better next year. But tobacco wasn’t bringin’ anything on the market, and when we got through givin’ the owner his share, we didn’t have enough to pay the store for the groceries we’d got the last winter. We’d raised some wheat about fifty bushels and one of the neighbors said he’d heard about rich people up north that bought up all the wheat they could get and stored it away till nobody had any, and then they could charge a big price for it. That looked cruel to me, but Joe wanted to do it whith our wheat. He kept it in the barn two months. Then I got sick with another baby and he had to take it to the mill. The price wasn’t no better. It was lower. He sold it all what the rate hadn’t et up while it was in the barn. It wasn’t enough to pay the hospital people. Joe didn’t want to pay ‘em because they’d let my third baby die. But the hospital people said it didn’t make any difference. They kept sendin’ us a bill for the rest of the money, We buried the baby right next to the other two. Whenever we get time, we go to the graveyard and clean off the weeds, and take a few flowers. It just don’t seem right I lost ‘em all so quick, though I reckon it’s God’s will, the Bible says so, and I try to keep faith, but it’s awful hard sometimes."
Pelvie heaved a sigh and picked up a new bunch of leaves. She sat silent for a moment and continued to ply her calloused fingers over the crisp brown leaves. Her husband bit off another chaw of home-made tobacco and cuffed one of the children for lagging. Pelvie didn’t pay any attention to him.
"Things ain’t quite so bad as they used to be," she said as she spat through the window. "Since the government started helpin’ farmers and renters, it seems prices ain’t as low as they used to be. I remember when them buyers at the market didn’t give us anough to pay the fertilizer bill. Now we got a radio and a old car. We don’t run it much but sometimes we go to town and buy things, and Sundays we go see Aunt Tilly.
"When we finish this bunch of tobacco, we’ll have about twelve hundred dollars worth, if the price keeps up, ‘Course, half of it goes to the owner he furnished the fertilizer. We raised four acres this year. We got one cow and four pigs. We can’t drink all the milk we get so we give the rest the skimmed part to the hogs. They’ll be fat, come hog-killin’ time.
"We listen to the radio a lot. Joe likes to listen to them big fellers make speeches at Washington. He says they’re the only ‘uns that talk for the little man and don’t sound like a pack of liars that the forgotten man is bein’ remembered by them that runs the goverment.
"Me and the children like to listen to the barn dance programs the hillbilly cowboys and the rest. The plays are good, too Ma Perkins and Uncle Ezra seems like they’re folks just like us.
“Joe don’t go to church much. He’s awful tired of a Sunday’s. They always preach a sermon over the radio Sunday morning and he listens to one of them says it saves makin’ a trip to church and, besides, they can’t take up collection over the radio. ‘Course he’s just jokin, cause he always helps ‘em work on the church when-ever it needs fixin’.
"I used to think there wasn’t nothin’ in life but to wait and hope for heaven. Somehow, it’s beginnin’ to seem like that ain’t all, now. Things are beginnin’ to change for the poor people. Somewhere, I believe somebody’s tryin’ to give us a chance.
"You ain’t got to go, have you? I hope you ain’t tired listening at toe talk. We got some awful nice onions out of the garden yesterday. Here, take a mess with you. Jennie! Bring a sack! Oh, that’s alright! We got plenty of ‘em and more comin’ on. You know, it ain’t been so long that we could say that. But things are changin’. Come back and see us when you can. Punkins’ll be ripe next month".
