MCB
Project #3613
Stiles M. Scruggs Columbia, S. C.
11-22-38.
LIFE STORIES
REECE N. WOOD,
(white()
119 WALKER STREET
COLUMBIA, S. C.
Reece N. Wood is a veteran journeyman printer whose itching feet have carried him from the smaller to the larger printing plant a in the United-States and whose experience covers many incidents peculiar to the printing craft. His response to the writer's call for an interview was immediately cordial. "Sure, I'll be glad to talk about my comings and goings."
"I became a printer's devil, looking for the mythical type lice, in 1885, when I was twelve years old. My father and mother were Rally Wood and Sybil (Taylor) Wood, and they moved to Columbia a year or two before I began the printing vocation. Father was a bridge builder, and he moved his family about the country as bridge construction became available to him. He had learned that trade before he had mother married, in 1859. Shortly after the wedding, they moved to Jackson, Mississippi, where father had a bridge contract.
"They were in Mississippi in 1861, when father sent mother to her home in Fairfield County, South Carolina and marched away with the Confederate troops to fight whom they then called damn Yankees. At the close of the War, in 1865, father came home to the Taylor plantation, with his right leg shattered by a Yankee bullet. He refused to quit the game of earning a living, and, after a few years work on Grandfather Taylor's plantation, he moved to Columbia and engaged in construction work. He lived until 1898, when he died of paralysis of the right side. He never fully recovered from the wound he received in 1864.
"I was born in 1873, on Grandfather Taylor's plantation, and was too young remember moving to Columbia. I entered school at the age of seven and began selling newspapers on the street about that time. This ultimately developed into carrying a route; that is, delivering papers to subscribers. This service, however, did not interfere with my school work. I loved to study and soon learned how many bushels of unshucked corn were in a crib 10 feet wide, 16 feet long, and 11 feet high.
"During vacation, I took the chance offered me by the foreman of the Columbia Yeoman to work in the composing room. Charles M. McJunkin had established the Yeoman as an afternoon newspaper, and he was its editor and publisher. I had not worked in that office long before the foreman called me over to where he had just lifted a galley of wet type on the stone and asked me if I had ever seen 'printers lice.' I told him I had not. 'Well' he said, 'you will have to learn about them before you qualify for the role of a printer's devil.'
"Then he pulled the wet column of type apart, from about the middle of the galley and told me to look close. As I bent my head down to look, he shoved the wet type together, and the water spattered in my face. The foreman laughed heartily. He explained to me that type lice was a myth, there being no such insect. All printers, he said, had been through the initiation. He explained that printers' quads were quadrats, but the word had been shortened by the printing trade to quad.
"The M quad, the foreman said, was the first piece of type metal used in printing at the beginning of a paragraph. The quad is just half as wide as the M, and it is used mostly for wide spacing in print. The galley is a brass tray for holding a wet column of type. In the hand type setting days, a page of type was washed with lye, and the ink was scrubbed off with a brush. Afterwards, it was rinsed with water and lifted on to an imposing stone, from which it was stories each day.
"These things might appear to a non-printer as of little moment, but any printer knows they are essentials to the trade. As a matter of fact, there are a thousand and one little and big things in the vocation of printing that must be known by one who follows the business. Indeed, the printing business is like the university. One may graduate, but if he succeeds in any undertaking, he must learn something new every day about it. At least, that has been my experience. I worked about four months for the Yeoman that summer and then returned to school in the fall. The novice in all composing rooms was called the devil, when I began the trade, and that phrase is still in vogue for be- ginners. It means he is being initiated in printing, and it is never applied to a lad as a reproach. I became somewhat acquainted with the printing business in the Yeoman office. But when another vacation came around, Horatio Melton Emlyn had established the Columbia Record as an afternoon newspaper, and I was invited to work there as a printer's apprentice.
"I accepted the offer and remained there until I became what was then known as a journeyman printer. That label is used today. Generally speaking, a journeyman printer is a workman, while a merchant printer is the owner of a printing shop. Most job printing shops in the United states are owned and managed by a merchant printer. He may employ one printer or a hundred printers to work there. I once worked in a job office in New York where 137 printers were on the pay roll.
"From 1885 to 1893, when the linotype made its advent into the printing industry, the printers throughout the United States were a migratory group. The roving habit perhaps was due to the fact that a printer could 'catch on' to a job almost anywhere, and then, too, the young men who were 'foot-loose' of a family were generally keen to see the world and to get experience in the bargain. Hence, many of them became 'here today and gone tomorrow,' so to speak. Today that sort of soldier-of-fortune system appeals to some.
"Probably association contacts had something to do with it, but my feet began to itch for new pastures, and a new daily made its bow to the public at Charleston, South Carolina, in 1889. It was called the Charleston World, and I went to Charleston expecting to work on the new morning paper. When I arrived there, however, I discovered that the World had labor troubles, and I got a job on the old daily, the News and Courier. I worked for the News and Courier about two years, and I have always found a warm welcome from the News and Courier printers when I have visited Charleston.
"The printers' group has always had a fraternal system all its own, and no journeyman printer is a stranger very long in any printing plant in the United States, if he demonstrates he can talk the printers language. One day in Charleston, I learned from roving printers that the Savannah Morning News needed type stickers. My disposition was to go, although I had plenty of work at Charleston. I did go, and I did get a 'trick,' which is printers' lingo for a job, on the News.
" I became fond of Savannah's people and climate and was pleased with my job, but, after I had been there about eighteen months, a traveling printer told me nobody ever became a real, first class printer until he had worked for a time on New York newspapers. I thought it over that night, and the upshot of it was that I went to New York to try my hand. There were then, 1889-1891, the New York World, the New York Herald and the New York Tribune, and many lesser newspapers running the gauntlet there. Joseph Pulitzer, of the World, James Gordon Bennett, of the Herald, and Horace Greeley, of the Tribune, were about as well known to New York printers and the public as was New York itself.
" I went to work on the New York World, and there were no dull moments. Something exciting was going on all the time, although the composing room was functioning along routine line. I knew Joseph Pulitzer was a famous editor and a daring publisher before I went to New York. I saw him in action when I worked there. The other two, editors of the Herald and of the Tribune, were very widely known, and printers there had their favorites. Mr. Pulitzer was a decided martinet in all departments of the World, particularly in the editorial rooms. He would visit with printers often when he was at home.
"When Mr. Pulitzer was absent from the city, he made it a point to have the World mailed to him seven days a week. If anything he read in any department of the paper was dull, he sent a very pointed, sharp reprimand to the head of that department! or, if he was highly displeased, he hurried home to settle it. He came home when not expected one time, highly diapleased at the editorials. There were four or five associates editors, and Colonel John A. Cockerill was head of the staff, in Mr. Pulitzer's absence.
"Mr. Pulitzer got off his yacht, took a cab and came directly to Cockerill's office. ' What in h--1 has happened, Cockerill? he began. Hurrying on before Colonel Cockerill could answer, he said, 'The editorial page is full of dead matter, no life in it, and most of the editorials are about dead issues. Colonel Cockerill was a man of metal, and he explained that the editorials were not very brilliant, but they were the best he could get from the staff at hand. 'What do you mean,' thundered Mr. Pulitzer, naming two editors that Mr. Cockerill had fired for drunkenness. 'What's happened to them?' 'They were fired,' said Colonel Cockerill, 'for drunkenness.' 'Well, now you are fired,' returned Pulitzer. Then he told one of the other associate editors to go out and rehire the discharged men, saying: 'If it takes drunks to put some life in an editorial, then I'm in the market for drunks!'
" When the two man who had been discharged were found on the street and literally grabbed and hired, they were shaking in the brisk atmospers then prevailing, each unable to find enough cash to buy a drink of Whiskey. They borrowed a dollar from the man who hired then, and all of then had a 'shot' of liquor as they returned to resume work on the editorial staff of the New York World. All these 'goings on' were known in the composing room of the World, quite as soon as elsewhere.
" Colonel Cockerill was prominent in New York as a correspondent at Albany and at Washington, and he had won the friendship of Mr. Collis P. Huntington, a multi-millionaire industrialist. It was not long until Mr. Huntington bought a complete newspaper plant and turned it over to John A. Cockerill, who became editor and publisher of the New York Commercial Advertiser. Perhaps it is un- necessary to say that Colonel Cockerill never overlooked a chance to annoy the New York World. He put plenty of life in his editorials, and the Commercial Advertiser's subscription list grew like Jonah's gourd vine for a time. It soon began paying out $500 for any man or woman who was accidentally killed, with a copy of the Commercial Advertiser in his or her pocket. This news was discussed in the composing room as fully as it was in the editorial department.
" The Commercial Advertiser boosted its street sales and subscription lists by its insurance plan, but, in a few months, the death payments scheme was voided by the courts on the ever, the Commercial ground that it injured private insurance companies. How- Advertiser kept up its campaign on the world. At that time, the New York World building, with its golden dome, was about the only sky-scrapper in New York. The dome was about as well known there as the World.
" One morning the Commercial Advertiser had several little boxed notices reading: 'Look at the dome tonight at 10 o'clock.' The whole square was packed with men and women that night, and we looked at the dome as 10 o'clock struck. At that moment this notice was flashed on the dome: 'For news that is dependable, and editorials that are fair and warmer, read the New York Commercial advertiser! ' The big audience saw the joke instantly and proceeded to laugh at it.
"It might be said that the competitive animus between rival newspapers in 1889-1895 was far more spirited than it is today. They nagged each other. It was while I was on duty in the composing room of the New York World that I heard the following jokes about the editors of the Herald and the Tribune. I never saw Mr. Bennett. He was absent, the boys told me, when I was visiting printers there. In 1892, the "world and Tribune reduced the price of the papers on the street from 5 cents to 2 cents. The Herald management couldn't reduce its price without gaining Mr. Bennett's consent, and he was in Paris. They sent him a cablegram, and he wired back: 'Reduce and advertise it everywhere.'
"The Herald, late with its announcement of a cut in price, sent out crews to advertise it. One sign was painted on the street side of the concrete fence at Fort Thomas. The War Department raised a storm about it, and the Herald sent a crew to remove the objectionable notice on United States property. They couldn't rub it off, and they took a chisel and hammer and cut it out. That scar yet carries the notice that the New York Herald has cut its price from 5 cents to 2 cents.
" One day a printer on the Tribune got a note from Mr. Greeley. Try as he might, he couldn't read it, and finally he took it to Mr. Greeley and asked him to read it. Mr. Greeley did so and smiled, as he said: 'The editor says you are hereby fired.' The printer took the note and went to another office and applied for work. ' We can use you, if you have recommendations,' said the foreman. ' Sure ' said the applicant, 'I have been working on the New York Tribune and here is my recommendations,' handing the boas the Greeley note. Glancing at it, but not reading it, the printer boss put the note in his pocket and said cheer fully: 'All right, you may go to work! ' The printer who carried that note as a recommendation was wondering when he told me about it what might happen to him if the new boss should ever be able to read Mr. Greeley's note.
" I was present at the first demnostration of the linotype machine in New York in 1892. It made such a record at that exhibit that the three big news-papers, the World, Tribune and Herald bought upwards of 100 machines. That sale assured the manufacturing company of sufficient funds to succeed over the primary hurdle. By 1893, the linotype began to enter offices of newspapers all over the United States. Many other machines have appeared since, but the linotype has proved superior to them in setting straight matter, that is, type for the average newspaper. Great batteries of linotype machines now may be seen in most newspaper offices of the nation.
" After some experience on the linotype keyboard, and care of the machine, in New York, many printers there decided the machine had ditched them in the printing business and were looking about for new vocations. I was one of those, and I decided to come back to my home town of Columbia. However, when I arrived home, the sentiment was beginning to change about the machine making less work for printers. It appeared to be making more business, and men ware in demand to handle the increased business. That fact ultimately proved true, and it resulted in my staying in the printing industry. And I have been lucky enough to become a veteran printer and to find plenty of work right here in Columbia, where I spent my childhood years.
" In 1904, I was working in a job office in Columbia. Miss Essie Muller was also working as a cashier in that office, and we met in a business way there. I talked with Miss Muller at the noon hour pretty often, and we became good friends in a few weeks. I had admired her during those talks and kept wondering if she could ever care for a guy like me. Sometimes we walked a part of the way home together. One day I would think I was making progress, and maybe the next day I would decide I wasn't. But I had become so deeply in love with Miss Muller that I kept on making offers to escort her home or to the theater.
"My persistency finally won the day, and we were married that year by the Reverend C. A. Freed, then pastor of Ebenezer Lutheran Church. We still are members of Ebenezer Church. We live in our own home at 119 Walker Street, Columbia, and have been happy over the years since we married. We have never enjoyed great wealth, but we have enjoyed a comfortable living, as I have had steady work in the printing trade practically all the time since 1904. When I married I quit roving. I become a member of the composing room of the Columbia Record soon after Mr. R. C. Wright became its editor and publisher in 1912. When he sold the newspaper in 1929, I was still there, and I am still there today (1938). We now have a linotype scale known in the printing trade as piece-work; that is, one gets paid for the number of M's he makes during the working period.
" I am not the speediest typesetter on the Record battery of linotypes, but I can make a sufficient string on my machine to earn an average of $10.00 between working hours, 8 a. m. to 4 p. m., with a half hour's pause at noon for lunch. I am glad that I have been able to Serve the public in this way. I have set the type for books and for editorials, which may be read in after years, and this thought pleases me.
" The Wood family, at least my immediate part of it, is a bland, good-natured type of people. We have not been prone to hide from the sheriff, and we have tried our best to make an honest living. This is the way I wish to lead up to my late brother. He was not a printer, but he lived and died (1937) in Columbia. Most Columbians mistook one of us for the other almost as often as they did the two Dromios of William Shakespeare, in the Comedy of Erros.
" I was working regularly at the Columbia Record, when it was then a 7-day newspaper, and I was off duty on a Wednesday. The following Thursday another Record printer saw my brother on the street and asked him why he was loafing on Thursday, after being off duty on Wednesday. 'I'm off the Record for good,' said my brother, 'I don't care if I never go to the Record office again.' The printer hurried to the Record to tell about it, and while he was telling the story, he caught eight of me at work. The composing room had a big laugh over it.
" I evened the score with my brother soon after that, when his boss began to lecture me on the street one day, telling me he thought I was at work. 'I don't care,' I told him,' whether I come to work at your factory or not.' And he, too, ultimately found out he was talking to the wrong man, as he arrived at his place of business. These are two samples of mistaken identity that amused us for many years.
" And, in a manner of speaking, I think innocent jokes and all clean amusement make life a little more endurable. The thought comes to me that the dullest man I ever saw was the governor of a great state. And the brightest man I ever knew was a freckled face, red-headed tramp printer."