SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:  TRICKED BY GYPSIES
Date of First 1-February-1939
Name of Person Interviewed  Nick & Janie Young (Negroes)
Fictitious Name Nick & Janie Fuller
Street Address  None
Place Blythewood, S. C.
Occupation  Farmers
Name of Writer  Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser State Office
"Janie! Ja-a-nie! Where are you? The only response was the loud barking of two small dogs, as they ran threateningly from the rear of the little Negro cabin. There was no sign of any member of the family at home. But after another call for Janie, aa I backed off from the hostile dogs, I heard the voice of Janie, "Spot! Red! Shot your mouths." Facing the direction of the voice, I saw Janie, about two hundred yards away, emerging from a clump of sweet gum trees.
The hone of Nick and Janie Fuller is five miles east of Blythewood, South Carolina, on the Bear creek road, and one mile to the right of Langford Crossroads. The clearing for the house, possibly a half acre, is in the midst of a cottonfield, about one hundred feet from the road. The weatherboarding of the little cabin shows signs of having been previously used, as some of the boards have been painted a light blue, and all have been discolored by the weather. At the front is a porch still unfinished, haring neither roof nor floor. Several boards have been laid from the steps to the door to permit entrance. The white sandy yard is swept clean. A brown mass of dead leaves, at both sides of the steps and along the edge of the porch, is all that remains of the bright summer flowers. A huge black walnut tree rises high above the top of the house and shades the back doorway from the afternoon sun. Their small barn and stable combined is located some fifty feet beyond the house, to the right. Close by the stable, the pigs are penned comfortably in deep beds of pine straw.
"Please, ma'am, if you don't mind, come over here where I's washin'. I just gotta get dose clothes on de line."
I followed a well-worn path across the brown and dried cottonfield, and found Janie's washroom to be a large bowl-shaped hollow about four feet deep and possibly fifteen feet across, and open on the south side, Scattered about the bowl and along the rim are a number of sweet gun trees. Here she works in comfort, both summer and winter. In the summer, the shade of the trees make it cool; and in the winter, the sides of the bowl out off the cold winds. At the bottom of this bowl is a clear bubbling sparing which furnishes a permanent supply of pure water. The spring itself has been boxed in and covered with new boards, to keep, out the leaves and trash from the overhanging trees.
Janie Fuller, an energetic Negro woman of forty-five years, was busily engaged at her washtub which had been placed on a bench under tree. Over at one side, between her tub and the spring, was the boiling washpot of clothes. I took a seat upon a discarded water trough, which had been out from a large sweet gun tree. On this particular morning, Janie was busy, and, while she had greeted me in a pleasant way, she was in no humor to tell very much about herself. In response to questions, she replied with such non-committal phrases as. "I don't know; 'bout fifteen acres; sometime send some money; ain't much." And, finally, she said, "It seems to me de hard times I's had b'longs to me. It ain't for any one else to know."
But, from other sources, I had already heard of her experience with the gypsies, and, when I asked her to tell me about that, she seemed very willing to repeat the story.
"Dat was de awfullest thing. One day I was a settin' dere in de house just a sufferin' wid my rheumatism, and dese two women and a man drive up to de door. De man waa a-drivin' de automobile, and he ain't crack he mout' to say nothin'. De women come in de house. Dey tell me day can help me. All I gotta do is give 'em a little sumpin'. Dey puts deir arms 'round me and honey me up. Then dey ask me for what little money I has. I ain't mind givin' 'em dat money no more than I mind givin' you dis collar I is washin'. I just hands it out to 'em. When I come to my mind, and dat money and all them other things done gone, it 'most killed me. I ain't know what dey do to me. Dey muster hypnotized me or sumpin'. Dey drive off wid two of my very best quilts what ain't never been on a bed and a brand new dress what ain't even had de scissors stuck in it. I ain't never tell Bub all dey git, 'cause after it's all gone, 'tain't gonna fetch 'em back to tell. Besides all dat forty or fifty dollars and my best quilts and dress, dey take two great big hams what was hangin' in de house. Each one of them hams weighed 'most forty pounds. And, when dey leave, dey say, "Now don't say nothin' to Bub 'bout dis, or you won't git no better.' Then de nasty debils drive right on over to de field where Bub is plowin'. Day tell him day can cure no if he will give 'em twenty-five dollars. Bub say dey rub a little yellow powder in deir hand and say sumpin', he ain't know what. And then day caution him not to tell me.
"Bub say he keep watchin' an every day to see if I's better, and all de time I keep thinkin' maybe I'll be better tomorrow. But, shucks, de pain ain't cased up none, and, anyway, I was sick in my mind 'cause I give away so many things. Then one day Bub say he need some money, and I has to tell him I ain't got no money. Gee! dat was a time. But I shore was glad dat Bub do de seas thing I do; then he can't quarrel wid me.
"Yes, ma'am, dat was de awfullestthing. But de worst part was, dat we done borrowed dat money from de Gov'ment. to buy fertilizer for de crop and feed for de mule. It come in on a Friday, and dese gypsies come in on Tuesdsy mornin'. And we gotta pay dat money back. Dat's what put us behind las' year."
During the recital of her encounter with the gypsies, Janie's little black chinquapin eyes flashed fire, and her hands worked nervously with the clothes, as she hustled from the tub to the washpot and back to the tub again. In her bright-colored print dress, a man's old gray coat, and with a red bandanna tied around her head, Janie, a ginger-colored Negro, looked very much like one of the despised gypsies.
"How old was we when we got carried? Well, let me think. I must've been 'bout seventeen, and Bub (Nick) was most twenty-one. I shore wish you could've seen us marriage. It shore was sweet. Ma made me a white dress and a long white net veil. Miss Langford, she give me a pair of long white silk gloves. And she fix me a big bouquet of white flowers and tie 'em with ribbon. Dere was such a crowd, we had de marriage out in de yard. We put a table under de tree for de cakes. Ma made a cake and load it all over wid white icing. Then some of de people present me wid cakes. All de bridesmids fetch me a cake, too. De crowd stay all afternoon, and, when me and Bub drive off, dey throw rice at us.
"Yes, ma'am, we went right to housekeeping. Bub was hired out to Mr. Wilson, and we went over dere to live. He paid Bub fifteen dollars a month and give us a ramshackle old house to live in."
By now, Janie's mind had been diverted from the idea of telling of her hardships, and she willingly revealed the story of her life with Nick.
"How did you manage to live on fifteen dollars a month."
"We could live very well with me working all de time in de field for forty cents a day. I did anythin' dere was to do on a farm, 'cept plow. I sow de seed, chop cotton, hoe de crop, and put down fertilizer, and do anythin' else dey wants done. Us work four years wid Mr. Wilson and managed to save enough money to buy us a mule and a wagon. Then Bub take a notion he went to rent some land; so we move to Mr. Wall's place. And dat year, we work fifteen acres. He charge us one five-hundred pound bale of cotton. But dat was de first year de weevil was so bad, and we didn't make no cotton to speak of. We didn't have near enough to pay de rent. But Bub bought wood off different places, wherever he could find it, and hauled it to Columbia. He went three days out of every week. He would leave home between one and two o'clock in de morning. On Saddays, I went with him and worked for a white lady in Columbia. She just give me things. I didn't want her to pay me no money. 'cause what she give me was worth more than what de money would buy. When de chillum got big enough, we'd take them with us. Sometimes in de winter it would be so cold we'd have to stop 'side de road and bull' a fire. After we sold de wood, Bub would give de chillum what he aim for 'em to have. You know, you have to 'lowance 'em out or dey want everything dey see.
"Us just stayed dat one year on Mr. Wall's place. Bub decided he could do better to sharecrop. De next three years, we worked on de Lathrop place. Bub had his mule and wagon, and we done de work. Mr. Lathrop furnished de seed and fertilizer. Dese years we did very well. We made plenty of corn, peas, and potatoes, and raised some hogs and a cow. But we had very little money."
Nick Fuller, or Bub, as Janie cells her husband, came in from his work, and, wanting a drink of fresh water, came down to the spring. Nick is a tall, heavy-set, dark-complexioned Negro, with a rich, throaty voice. His attitude toward his white neighbors is friendly yet humble. He is good-natured and industrious and is recognized among both white and black for his honesty. He said;
"I don't want no one to steal even one pea from me, and I don't want nothin' dat ain't mine. I try my bes' to make my chillum do de same. When I find one take sumpin', I use de switch where it do de mos' good."
He has always lived on a farm. His parents were farmers, living over on the Rick's place, and they brought up the young boy to love the farm. His one ambition has been to own his own place, and fortunately, he married a woman with the same hope. Together, he and Janie have struggled, saving every penny possible out of their meager earnings.
After they had sharecropped three years, the wanderlust, natural to the Negro race, made them move again. This time they rented land from Mr. Langford for four years, and each year they paid one five-hundred pound bale of cotton. During all the years, whether renting or sharecropping. Nick continued to out and haul wood to Columbia. As Janie says, "Yes, ma'am, hauling wood is shore in it." Janie, whenever she could, worked in the white folks' kitchens, or helped with the butchering. Both of them are dependable and trustworthy, and they are always in demand when extra helpers are needed.
"Janie, why did you decide to buy this particular farm?"
"Well, while us was livin' dere on de Langford place, Ma was tryin' to pay for dis farm. She had a hard time tryin' to keep up de taxes and gettin' money to make de crops, and she had to borrow some money from us. She give us a Mortgage on de place. Pa had been dead several years, and she had got married again. But her husband didn't take no interest in de farm, and he wouldn't help her. Then M. decided to move to Columbia, and she turned de farm over to us. We had to pay lots of back taxes and pay de other chillum interests. Sometimes I think we'll never git through payin'.
"Missy, dey ain't nothin. like paid yet; "Nick rejoined, "And dis new house, you calls it, ain.t new stall.
"You know, I useta b'long ever here to de Flat Branch Church. Janie, she stick to Round Top. She wouldn't change her church. And she shore showed wisdom, 'cause now dere ain't no Flat Branch. Our parson useta always cone from Columbia on preachin' Sunday. Nearly every time he's come to us house for dinner."
"You might call it dinner, Bub, but many a time "twan't nothin' but bread and meat," interspersed Janie.
"Well, it was sumpin' to eat, and he was nighty glad to git it. Then de members begin to move away. Some of "em jined Round Top, and de few what was left didn't come preachin'. Then he quit comin'. De church was dere not bein' used. So I bargained wid de few members dat was left, and I bought de buildin' for eighty dollars. I borrowed de money, and now I done pay it all back.
"How I pat 'em back? Whenever I could git a day, I worked at de sawmill. And then I helped one and another wid de farm work, and I keep haulin' wood to Columbia. Then Janie she work and help, too."
"I reckon I did help. I sold everythin' I could rake and scrape. Payin' debts and raisin' eleven head of chillum ain't no joke."
"It never cost us so much to buil' dis house," Nick continued. "You see, whenever us friends had a day off, dey just come and help us. Janie would cook something for 'em to eat, so dey didn't haften fetch no dinner."
"Are you still hauling wood to Columbia?"
"No, Missy, you see dat mule old now, and he 'most done. I jus' hope he'll make another crop.'
"Janie, tell me something about your eleven children. Did you send them to school?'
"Dese youngest ones, what's at home now, go to school, but the oldest ones didn't take to books. They'd ruther work on de farm, and we shore needed 'em. Dere's three of 'em up in High Point, North Carolina. Minnie is a nurse and maid for some white folks. Sometimes dey sends me a little money. Little Nick is married, and he works at de sawmill. Arthur works over yonder in de dog hospital and gits five dollars a week. He helps me a little, but can't send much. One girl is married, and de other five are still with us. Me and Nick didn't have no chance at schooling, and we wanted to send our chillum. Dey can all read and write, and dat's more than us can do. We shore had a hard time getting all dese chillum raised. Sometimes dere wasn't too much to eat; and we was glad when de summertime come, 'cause then we didn't need much clothes. De good Lord keep us well, and dat shore helps. Little Janie is de onliest one what had any trouble to 'mount to anything. Her tonsils was bad, and we had to take her to de clinic. Dey claim dey cut 'em out. But I ain't know, 'cause her throat bleeds some yet."
While Janie finished up her washing, Nick, sitting on an upturned water bucket and leaning back against a tree, told me about the farm and his crops.
"Us got one hundred acres in one trac', and forty acres in another. Lordy! No, ma'am, dere ain't but forty or fifty acres cleared. De rest is woods, mostly oaks and street guns and poplar, with a few pines. My crops dis las' pas' year was pretty near all failures, I planted six or seven acres of cotton. But dere was so much rain, and de weevil eat 'em up so bad, I ain't git but one bale. I plant my corn in de bottom lan', 'cause it de richest, and I ain't have no fertilizer. But de rains come and drowns 'em out. Then I had peas in de corn, and, when us pick 'em, dere ain't but six or seven bushels. Since me and Janie give all dat money to them gypsies. I ain't had none to buy fertilizer. And dis flat sandy lan' shore takes a plenty. If I could get steady work somewhere's til time to start de crop, or, if I could git on dat P.W.A., it'd shore help. Taxes is just pilin' up. Dere must be more'n a hundred dollars back taxes, and I just don't see where dey comin' from. And I don't know if I can borrow from de Gov'ment again dis year or no.
"No, ma'am, I ain't never had much time for nothin' but work. Sometime I go coon huntin' wid de white folks. I's de guide, 'cause I know all dese woods 'round here. But I 'member one night I gits all turned 'round, and we gits lost. It's daylight before we gits home.'
"Janie, tell me, did the gypsies help the rheumatism?'
"Help? No, ma'am, dat dey ain't. Right now I got a piece of red flannin pinned across my shoulders. When I wake up dis mornin', I couldn't hardly git my head off the pillow. Dey shore never done me no good."