Roberta Mill
Concord, N. C.
October 10 and 12, 1932
M. L. W.
ROBERTA MILL
The unpaved country road winds through rich and beautiful farm lands. Wide fields of cotton, corn and hay roll gently to the horizon in every direction and the earth, turned up for wheat, is a deep reddish brown. Abruptly, at the foot of a hill, a hard surface road begins, but the countryside -- groomed by generations of canny "Dutch" farmers -- does not change.
Set down in the midst of this country, six miles from Concord, is the Roberta Mill. Rolling fields form a lovely but incongruous background for the little white mill village houses that are strung close together along the road for a half mile or more. They are like mill village houses anywhere else, square four or six room structures built on brick piles, with sharply slanting roofs, and narrow porches running the width of the front. On the whole, the small yards in front of the houses are unattractive and many are destitute of grass and trees, but occasionally one boasts a few flowers or several chaney (china berry) trees.
Besides the houses, there are two stores, a filling station, three churches and an elementary school in the settlement. The mill stands by a small stream that flows through the center of the community, and places are designated by the inhabitants as being "on this side of the bridge" or "the other side of the bridge." On a shady knoll near this bridge is the "Super's" house, a spacious white bungalow with bright blue trim and a green roof. Beyond this, a single row of shabby houses faces a sweep of country that lies peaceful and golden under the bright October sun.
Florence Starnes, a stout, middle-aged woman, sat placidly on her front porch, leaning over the edge occasionally to spit some of the snuff that filled her lower lip. Two boys in overalls lolled in a porch swing which sat flat on the floor, a third -- propped against the wall in a split-bottomed chair -- gazed gloomily out across the road and the fields. Florence was glad to have more sociable company; she smiled pleasantly and pulled up a chair for me when I came on the porch.
"You've never been out to the Roberta before? Law, I've lived here for twenty-four years and have been right here in this sane but for fourteen years. I was raised down in Stanley (County), near Richfield. My father had him a good farm down there -- hit paid him well, but he took a notion to sell out and go to work in the mills. I don't see yet why anybody that's got a good farm will quit it to go into the mills. Course, I don't believe I could stand it down in the country in Stanley now -- hit seems so lonesome when I go back there.
"We moved into Albemarle first, but my father couldn't stand it there long so we come over to Concord and he worked in the mills in town. Hit jist looked like he never was satisfied, though, until he moved out here and Mr. Flowe (owner of Roberta) let him work his farm nearly bout all the time.
"There wasn't but three of us children and I'm the only one that's got married. My brother he's a cropper for Mrs. Blackwelder -- his place is right back over the hill behind the schoolhouse -- and my sister she keeps house fer him.
"My husband was raised on a farm over yonder beyond the big road and has lived around here ever since. We've got four children, three boys and one girl, and that's a-plenty for me. Hit's been all we can do to look after them. You know, I jist don't see how some of these people out here who has so many younguns gits along. My oldest boy got married this summer, and I sure hated it -- I cried when he brought her home. His wife seems like a nice girl and I think they'll git along all right for she's working in the mill up at Kannapolis and he's helping to run that Tavern on the new highway, but what worries me is that they hadn't knowd one another but six months. I think you ought to know somebody at least a year before you marry them. Why I knowd Mr. Starnes two year before I'd marry him.
"That boy there (the boy in the chair) is old enough to go to work and he's quit school to, but he can't find a job nowheres. He's tried over in Concord this week, but it looks like you jist can't even buy a job anymore; the only way to git one is to wait for some of them that has them to die off. I know hit sounds wrong to talk that a-way, but it sure is the truth. My next boy's quit school too and he helps my brother on the farm. Marie, my girl, and that least boy there goes to school over in Harrisburg but this month all the schools is closed so the children can help with cotton picking.
"There comes Marie now, carrying that baby from next door. She don't look like she's thirteen, does she, but she's always been so nervous that she ain't growd like she ought to've.
"Jist look at that baby she's got, ain't he the cutest, smartest thing? We all make over him a sight, but he's not one bit spoiled. You know his mother never was married and I believe that's why he's so smart. They say that most children born that way is different. Well yes, his mother works in the mill just like she did before the baby come. Oh her folks felt mighty bad about it for a while, but now they're just as crazy over that baby as if it had a daddy. She never would tell a soul the name of the man and I've asked her I don't know how many times who it was, but she won't tell me.
"I went to school down in Stanley up to the tenth grade, but after we moved to Albemarle I didn't go no more. It looks like my children has copied me because two of my boys quit when they got to the tenth grade. I wish they had gone on and finished. Even if they do all go to work in the mills, hit wouldn't hurt them none to go to school.
"I'd get me a job and would work here now if hit was worth it, but it's not. They don't pay you enough for the way they work you. Why I've worked in many a mill in town and there's not nary one that works you as hard as this one does. I'm telling you, you have to be good to keep up out here; the machinery's old but they expect you to turn out the work just the same. They 'work you like a nigger', as the old timey people used to say, then they stand for a while, last spring they stood for ten weeks and all that time everybody jist had to hang around with no money coming in and nothing to do. Towards the end the hands commenced to getting that Social Security money.
"Well, the hands is supposed to work from six o'clock in the morning to half past two in the evening, but most of them goes longer than that. In the card room they put in eleven or twelve hours nearly bout every day. My husband is a fixer in the card room and he makes thirty something cent an hour. A weaver makes around $12 a week and a winder about $10. When I started winding here I didn't get but $7.50 a week, course that was a right smart time ago. I don't know what'll happen when this new law starts, but this place out here won't pay no attention to it I'll bet. They do just about what they take a notion to.
"Yes, hit would be pretty out here if they'd fix up these here houses some and help us to do something to make the yards look better. Ain't the outside of this house a sight? Last spring they put one thin little coat of paint on it but I declare I believe it made it look worse than ever. They never have put no screens to the winders; we nailed these here in ourselves and they're about wore out now. The roof used to be so bad you could see daylight through it, and we got so tired of putting pans and tubs on the floor to catch the rain water, my husband got some tar shingles and about re-roofed the whole house hisself. Our house don't have no such thing as electric lights and water. Yes ma'm we carry every drop of water we use from back up there at the schoolhouse. Law, everybody here carries their water, some of them further than that. Well hit is kind of hard when you go to do your washing, but I guess folks gits used to about any kind of way they have to.
"I wouldn't mind so bad if they would do something to fix up these houses. Jist come in here and look at this place ---- the inside hasn't seen a paint brush since hit was built. It don't seem like there's a bit of use trying when the floors is so rough and the walls so dark and ugly. See how awful this kitchen ceiling looks? Well you wouldn't believe me and my boy got up and tried to scour it last spring -- hit's black again from this here old oil stove.
"I think my husband pays 50? rent every two weeks for this four--room house, but you know I'd rather pay a little more and have something that was fit to live in. I want to ask you something. I was reading in the paper the other day where they're a-going to clean up the town by fixing up what they call these "slum" places. Do you reckon we're too far out to be helped by that? I was hoping they might fix up these houses out here.
"Course, I don't see how it would break the mill to keep their property in good shape. And you take Mrs. Blackwelder over there -- see how nice her own house is? You jist ought to see the places her crooners lives in. My brother's been a--working as hard as he can for her for the last six years and she ain't done a thing to his place all that time; he's had to do everything that was done hisself. You know, I'd be ashamed to own a thing and jist let it go like that. What are these property owners going to do with their money? -- There's one thing sure, they can't take it with them and if they leave it to their children hit causes quarrels and hard-feelings.
"This used to be a mighty rough place out here. Every Saturday jist about all the boys and men would get drunk and carry on awful rough, but since August things has changed. The Methodists had a revival meeting back then, and I'll declare I hain't never seen anything to equal it. The Presbyterians and Baptists went the same as the Methodists, 'till there was an awful big crowd all the time. Every evening before the preaching about two hundred men would gather in the woods there behind the church to hold prayer meeting, the women and girls would meet in the church rooms. Those men really had religion; it's over a half a mile down to where they gathered, but we could set right here and listen to their voices jist as plain.
"In all over four hundred people was converted at that revival and amongst then was the bootlegger that had been selling all the liquor to the folks around here. I told Marie I never was so glad to see anybody converted for he ain't made a drop of liquor since then, and people don't get drunk anymore. They hold prayer meetings now about three times a week around to the different houses. It's a better place to live in now.
"Yes ma'm, jist about everybody out here has some kind of a car so you can always get a ride into town with someone if you need to go. I don't see how some of these people can afford to keep a car, especially them that has a pile of children. But they're different from me I guess -- I'd rather have good rations to eat and all I want of then than to put my money into any automobile.
"I'm not one to want to go much, though. I have to stay close to the house while I'm cooking for them that works, and I help in the fields too. That's one good thing about this place -- everybody that's not too lazy can have a garden, some chickens and even a cow. My brother lets us use part of his land and we work hit on shares with him. We keep our hogs over at his place too and if you come out after hog-killing time, I'll give you some right fresh sausage. That's something good. -- Yes ma'm, that black pullet out under the chaney tree is mine.
"The best thing to go to around here is the schoolhouse. One Saturday every month Miss McCallister, the home agent, comes to the schoolhouse and spends all day showing the women how to cook and can and do about the house. She has classes fer the girls too, especially in teaching them how to sew. It's real interesting.
"In the winter time we have plays or fiddlers conventions at the schoolhouse. Last year I was in a play there. It was some funny thing, we laughed and laughed over it. Hit was called "The Old Maid's Convention" and I mean was really funny.
"They jist have four grades at this little school, but they're talking about moving them over to Harrisburg. I hope they don't, Law, if they move that school, there jist won't be anything to go to around here any more.
"Here comes my husband down the road from the mill. Law, no, you've not kept me from cooking my supper fer I don't cook but jist one time a day and that's at dinner-. The rest of the time I don't do a thing but set out what's left."
Mr. Starnes was a stocky man with very lively black eyes and a cheerful grin. There was lint in his hair. He looked tired after eleven hours in the mill, but his spirits were not dampened.
A lank old woman, wearing a red toboggan pulled down over her ears, strolled by the house. She was eating a baked sweet potato as she walked.
"Why hello, Aunt Mary," Mr. Starnes called out cheerfully, "How do you feel today?"
"I don't feel none too good," was the dour reply.
"Well, now, you look like you do, the way you're eating on that sweet tater."
Aunt Mary did not turn her head to notice anyone nor did she pause as she answered pithily. "Abody don't have to be feeling good to eat a sweet tater, I reckon."
Her unpleasantness did not dampen Mr. Starnes' good spirits as he bid me goodbye and joined his wife on the porch.
Cora Yates (at Roberta Mill)
Cora Yates was out bringing in the cow when I arrived, so her daughter asked me to join her in the kitchen while she finished "making up the bread for supper." She worked the dough vigorously and cut large biscuits while we talked.
"I don't do nothing now but keep house," she said. "Mama and papa works in the mill and my brother works in the fields; my little brother he goes to school...I'd rather cook for mill hands than to cook for field hands 'cause mill hands don't eat so much...I'm ashamed for you to see this dirty kitchen but I've been ironing all day. It seems like I'm kept busy every minute especially when I have to have meals ready for the folks when they come from work."
She put the biscuits in the oven of the wood range, cleaned off the front of the kitchen cabinet and the top of the large oilcloth covered table. "Let's go in the front room now; mama'll be here in a little bit."
I followed her through the dim hallway, running through the middle of the house, into the equally dim front room furnished with an iron bed, two large overstuffed chairs, a few straight chairs and a "library" table on which family photographs were carefully and geometrically arranged. The unpainted ceiled walls were bright with colored pictures, most of them cut from calendars.
We chatted a few minutes about radio programs, then Cora came in. She was a slight woman with sharp gray eyes and a vitality that seemed to charge the room. She talked quickly in a pleasant, hoarse voice.
"Yessir, I'm the oldest hand at this mill. I've worked here off on since I was fourteen and I'm fifty-one now. I had nine children in all and seven of 'em lived. I'd work as long as I could before they come and as quick as they would get old enough I'd hire someone to look after them so I could go back to the mill.
"Me and my husband both was raised right near here -- most of the people that work this mill was. I started to work here in the old Patterson Mill, run by water from the creek -- that's why they put it here. Well, that old mill burned down, I was here and I remember the fire. Afterwards there wasn't no work and people commenced to move away, but they come back when the Roberta was built."
At this point a small boy, very dirty and dishevelled, came in and plopped down in an overstuffed chair. Cora brought the two front legs of her chair down with a bang and broke into a rapid tirade.
"Just look at you, you're not fit to come in the house. Didn't I tell you not to get into anyone's coal pile again -- that if you did I'd whip you? Get on out of here -- go wash them black feet and legs -- I'll give you a bath that'll get you clean all right. You wait and see if I don't. How get on out like I told you."
He went. Cora and her daughter shook their heads in despair. Apparently he was their problem. The daughter went out to look at her biscuits.
"Well, I hadn't worked in the mill for several years now, but my daughter happened up to bad luck (a colloquialism for pregnancy of unmarried girls) and had to quit work. It takes two of us in the mill to keep five people going -- my son don't make much in the fields and he don't work steady either. I make $24 every two weeks in the spinning room but they take out that security money. My house rent comes to 75? every two weeks and my lights to a dollar a month. You see, this is a six room house and that makes electricity more.
"I've lived in this old house for so long, I feel like it's mine. Sometimes I tease Mr. Flowe (owner of mill) and tell him I just believe it does belong to me.
(Here Cora went out to spank her son vigorously because he hit a neighbor's child with a rock.)
"Yes, I like living out here -- maybe because I don't know what it's like any where else. But it seems that you can have things here you can't in town. I've got a cow, a garden, some chickens and two of the prettiest sows that'll be just about right for killing in time to have some good, fresh meat for Christmas.
"Another thing I like out here is the way we don't ever have to work on Saturday morning. When they put that new law in that says jest how many hours a day you can work, I'm scared they'll make us work Saturday morning. I hate that. I'd heap rather work longer every day.
"This mill don't run steady though. Last year hit stood for fourteen weeks and it was awful! What did we do? We jest lay around the house and run into debt at the store. The men that could all got work in the fields and we drawed some of that security money. I'll tell you another thing -- the boss man out here helped us out all he could.
"Well now, you don't need to hurry off -- you ought to stay and eat with us," she said as I rose to go. On the front porch I commented on the number of large rocks that almost filled the narrow strip of yard below the house.
The daughter, who modestly remained behind the screen door, joined the conversation again. "Papa white-washed all of 'em last year and they looked jest like tombstones."
"Yes," Cora added, "I felt like I was living in the middle of the cemetery and folks would come by and say 'ain't you scared to live amongst all them graves?' Thank goodness most of the white-wash has wore off now -- get you one of them roses if you can find one that's fit to pick."