Date of First Version:	Feb. 11, 1939
Person Interviewed:	Dr. Solucious Lycurgus Russell
Address:	Yadkinville, N.C.
Occupation:	Retired physician
Writer:	Clalee Dunnagan
Revisor:	Claude Dunnagan
Forte and Buggy Doctor
"I guess I'm what you'd call just a plain old country doctor,” Doc. Neville said, as he spit a stream of tobacco juice toward a distant cuspidor and scored a hit. ”Forty years ago, I recall, I finished medical school at Baltimore and I've been patching up wounds, distributing pills, and bringing babies into this world ever since. You know, being a country doctor is about the hardest, most interesting life a fellow can live. It'll either break you or make a real man out of you,” he said, and I noticed that it apparently hadn't broken him.
"I've about quit practicing medicine, but I still keep a supply of pills around the house for those that keep coming to see me when they're ailing. I figure I've done my share, and I've sort of turned things over to the younger doctors hereabouts. They come and consult me a lot but I don't go around over the country as much as I use to.
"You always hear talk of the country doctors in old days riding to their patients in a slow, rattle-trap buggy. Well, I guess I've had my share of that, too. I remember one day I was called to see a patient who was suffering from advanced..... or a bad case of itch, you might say. Well, there was a creek between town and this fellow's house, and it had been raining for several days. When I got to the bank of the creek, it was several feet out of its bank, and old Dobbin cut up a shine before he would go in. I'd just started practicing then, and I didn't know just how deep the creek was at the ford, so I asked a fellow along the road if he thought I could ford it with the buggy. 'Hit's purty deep', he hollered, 'but I reckon ye kin make hit'. I decided to try it anyway. Well, sir, that creek was just about five feet deep and when we were in the middle, I grabbed my medicine kit and climbed up on top of the buggy. The water was awful swift and old Dobbin had a time before he finally reached the other bank. I was sure we'd get washed away, but the old horse came through all right. When I reached the fellow's house, he'd almost scratched himself to death, making the irritation worse. I treated him with some ointment, and when I started to leave, the patient said to me, ’I ain't got no money today, Doc, but you'll have something from me tomorrow'. The next day, I had the itch!
"The most unusual case I ever attended was that of a Negro woman who had an abdominal pregnancy. When her time came, there were no indications that she was ready to give birth. Several doctors thought she had miscounted the days, but she insisted that she was right. 'It sho' has been nine months, I know dat fo' sho',' she said. When I examined her, I found a white spot on her stomach just below the naval. I diagnosed the case as abdominal pregnancy, which meant that the baby was not in the womb, but was being carried in the abdomen. I cut a small incision in the white spot and inserted a pair of tweezers. A moment later I pulled out some tiny hairs, the hair of the unborn baby. I called in two more doctors, and that night we carried her into the kitchen, a dirty, dark, low-ceilinged room covered with spider-webs, and put her on a bare table. In the dim light of a flickering lamp we performed the first Caesarian operation in the county, and so far as I know, the only one. The baby was, of course, born dead.......had been dead since the time of normal delivery. The woman recovered from the operation, but died a year later from T.B.
"Outside of rare cases like that, I don't suppose there's much more to being a country doctor other than knowing what kind of medicine to give for certain ailments, and in general, using the knowledge gained while in medical school. Of course a doctor has to be something of a psychologist, too, for a big part of sickness is imaginary with a lot of patients, and you've got to deal with them accordingly. Then, too, you always find people who believe in divine healing, particularly in the North Carolina backwoods and mountains. I was called to see an old codger out in the sticks once who had arthritis. The neighbors had called me and when I went to the house, he was mad as a Constipated Indian. 'Ain't nobody gonna give me none o' that stuff, he bellowed when I offered him some medicine. 'If the Lord aims fer me to die, ain't no medicine in the world gonna save me. If he aims fer me to live, I don't need none o' that stuff'. I finally had to slip the medicine in his milk before I got it in him. He got well immediately, and even to this day he still believes he was cured by the 'will of God'.
"Then, there was another fellow who waited till the last minute to call me when his wife was having a baby. He's had seven kids, rather his wife has, and every time I went to deliver one of his babies, it was already born when I got there. I guess that was because I only charged half-price for making a call when the baby was already born, and I just washed it and straightened up things. I guess he figgured to save some money......and he did, too, half price on all seven calls.
"Yes, sir, being a country doctor is no easy job, but you sure get a lot of satisfaction out of relieving the suffering of humanity."
He rared back and spit toward the spitoon. It was a bad shot.
"I ain’t so good at that as I used to be. I reckon a feller eighty years old sort of loses his aim."
