SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
NOT SHOWING SKELETONS
Date of First Writing	January 9, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Abel Starnes (white)
Fictitious Name	Jim Barnes
Street Address	248 Augusta Street
Place	West Columbia, South Carolina
Occupation	Textile Mill Worker
Name of Writer	Helen Shuler
Name of Receiver	State Office
Along the eastern block of Augusta Street in West Columbia are small white cottages with narrow full-length porches furnished almost invariably with a rocker and a green swing. Each yard is bordered by a low and well- trimmed hedge. The stranger passerby would see as the only distinguishing marks of these homes the numbers over the doors, and he might wonder if the personalities within were fashioned to the same mill pattern.
Stretched some seventy-five feet across the east end of this street is a low white mill tenement, two rooms deep. It resembles the buildings along the sides of the street only in its whiteness and full length narrow porch. It juts up to the sidewalk, leaving no front yard. There are no flowers or shrubbery to relieve the bareness of the long white wall. The porch is divided by balustrades into four sections, shoving the divisions of the tenants' suites. Here lives the Barnes family, in the four central rooms. Three other families use the remaining suites, two rooms in each.
Mr. Barnes, sitting in the front bedroom by a comfortable fire and reading the morning paper, responded to my knock on the facing of the open door. He arose promptly - a small, slender man and very erect. "Come right in," he said pleasantly, "and have a seat. I'll call my wife. She's busy this morning, out in the back yard washing the clothes. But she might stop awhile."
The room, a rather large one, lighted by one window and heated by A grate fire, serves as both a living room and bedroom. The walls were papered, with calendars as the only decorations. The floor was bare. The furnishings consisted of two old-fashioned dressers, a dark four-poster bed, oak-colored rockers, and a small radio on a table. All were clean and orderly.
While waiting for the wife's arrival, I explained the purpose of the visit and received, with flashes of his blue eyes, a very positive refusal. "Our life story? Not on your life. Pull out our skeletons and show them? Tell all the things I've done? I should say not, lady."
Then Mrs. Barnes came in. A stout pretty brunette, with dark brown eyes and hair that curled naturally. She greeted me with a pleasant and softly spoken 'good morning.'
Mr. Barnes announced, "Bessie, this lady wants you to tell her your life story."
Instantly her whole attitude changed. Her eyes flashed hostility; her body stiffened; and her voice became raspy and quarrelsome- "Now, Jim, you know I ain't going to tell nothing. Ho sir-ree: I ain't got no time to talk, neither. I gotta go to my washing. Here it's nearly time to put dinner on, and the white clothes not out yet."
With this spray of querulous antagonism, which seemed to include her husband as well as me, she flung herself from the room. It looked as if ay visit would prove futile.
Mr. Barnes, visibly embarrassed by his wife's manner, apologized for her. "She ain't got but six in the house to wash for and do for, and she ain't so well these days." And some barb hidden in her words brought a hurt expression to his face and some thought which caused him to reverse his earlier refusal. Hesitantly, he began to tell something of his life.
"My father was just a poor farmer over in the sand hills of Lexington County. All he had was a small one-horse farm, about twenty-five sandy acres. That kind of land takes lots of fertilizer, and Pa didn't have the money to buy it. What little he managed to put on the crops was washed away in the wet seasons, and in a drought the sun burned up the crop. Our crops was always poor. We had a big family, six children, but none of us was big enough to help much on the farm. I was the oldest boy and, when I got to be fourteen years old, I had to stop school so I could work. The next year Pa died.
"Sick long? Mo, ma'am, he wasn't sick atall. One day my uncle come over to our house, and him and Pa got to drinking. Uncle began talking ugly, and Pa told him to cut it out. Then Uncle got mad, and they went out in the yard, quarreling. They hadn't been out there long before Uncle picked up a long blackjack stick and hit Pa a lick over his head. It knocked him right out. He never come to again. Died that same night.
Mr. Barnes paused, as if to choke down some bitter memory and feeling. "What was done to the uncle? He was punished, wasn't he? " I asked.
"Naw'; he answered in a long frawn-out tone of disgust. "He come clear.
"Well, after Pa died, Ma tried to keep on farming, but she was a little woman and not too strong. Making them sandy acres, always needing fertilizer, produce a living was too much for her. She had to give it up. Two years later she sold the place and married Sam Hill, a local Methodist preacher. Young as I was, I tried to persuade her not to marry again to just a poor man. But she argued that she was lonely and had no one to help her with the children. Then I left home in a huff and went to work for an uncle on his farm. We didn't hit it off so good, and in a few months he run me off. I reckon I was a hotheaded fool."
About the time Mr. Barnes began his story the little three-year-old daughter had come in to snuggle quietly in her father's lap. And a married daughter, who had come in when her mother left, sat silently in a corner by the fire. He stopped a moment to let the little tot down from his lap.
"I didn't know where to go. But I come on across the Congaree River, and somebody tole me that old man Ben Malone wanted to hire a boy. Malone was a funny old Irishman and a hard man to work for. He never was satisfied with what a fellow did and was always running off his help. I reckon I was the first boy to stay with him a whole year. Every time he wanted to tell me what to do or how to do a thing he started with, 'Do you know; or 'Damn it.' One day he come out to the corn field where I was plowing and began quarreling. 'Do you know,' he says, 'you are not plowing that corn right. Do you know when you get to the end of the row you can take out the horse and leave.' I told him I was't gonna leave. I was gonna finish the year if I had to fight him every day. 'Damn it, Jim! he says,'if you got as mad as I do, damn it, we would fight.' One day his wife told him that I had hit the horse in the head and put his eye out. He come out to the field where I was digging stumps and got onto me about that. I told him I didn't do it. 'Damn it, he says, 'you mean to call my wife a lie?' I told him I didn't mean to call his wife a lie, and if he would come to the stable, I'd show him how it happened. There was a nail sticking out of the wall and when the horse flung his head around at a fly, he hit the nail. I showed him the flesh hanging on the nail.
"Shore, I finished the year with him. And when I left, he wanted me to come back the next year. He even offered me twenty-five dollars a month. He had paid me five dollars a month and my keep and give me a three acre patch of cotton. When I sold my cotton that fall, I had seventy-five dollars in my pocket, after the fertilizer bill was paid. "
During all this time, we could hear Mrs. Barnes, her tuba placed near the back door, vigorously rubbing the clothes, splashing the water, and inter- spersing her biting comments, That, or something, made Mr. Barnes nervous and restless. Getting out of his chair and walking about the room as he made and lighted a cigarette, he said, "Wait a minute - I'll tell you the whole devilment straight."
"Well, you see I hadn't done any kind of work except on a farm and didn't know anything else. But when I left old man Malone, I decided I'd try my hand in a mill. Wages on the farm was small, and if your crop failed, it was just too bad. The mill was running full time and paying pretty good wages, I thought. I got a job in the Duck Mill, and they paid me twelve dollars a week. At this time I was only seventeen years old, and wild, too, I reckon. Them days, bootleg wiskey was plentiful, and I liked it mighty well. Never had had any money to spend, and now I wasted all I made, after I paid my board.
"The two years I worked here, I boarded with a widow, Sallie Young, who had four children. Sallie was lots older than me, but we kind of fell in love and decided we'd get married. Then we moved up to North Carolina, and worked in the mill at North Charlotte. By that time, we was both getting sixteen dollars a week. But, shucks, we couldn't save anything. Didn't even try much. You know how most mill people do. They spend everything they make. The short weeks we spend less, and when the mill gets on full time, we spend more, It wasn't long before Sallie had to quit working and we had to live on what I made. In the next couple of years, we had two children. They're both married now and have families. 'Bout this time the war started, but, having this family, I didn't have to go. That's about the only good thing they did for me.
"But I had plenty of war at home. Me and Sallie quarreled all the time. She didn't want me to have one word to say about managing the children, and she wasn't satisfied with the little bit of money I could get. Well, I stood it six years, and then I just left her. Didn't get no divorce. I didn't have no money to pay for one, so I didn't do nothing but walk off."
Again Mrs. Barnes' voice sang out. This time it was, "Don't say nothing 'bout me in there. I don't want my named called. Tell all you want to about yourself. Tell how you mistreat me. Tell about your meanness and how you spend your money before you get home. But leave my name out of it."
Without paying the slightest attention to these admonitions of his wife, Mr. Barnes calmly continued his story.
"After I left my wife. I came down here again and got my job back in the loom room. I worked here about two years. And all the time I was going with a young girl, Bessie Smith. Me and Bessie got married in 1922. I was twenty- six, and she wasn't quite sixteen. she was working in the mill, too, when we was married, but she had to atop 'fore long.
"But all the time I was working in the mills here and in North Carolina, I had a hankering to go back on a farm. So after me and Bessie had been married six or seven years, we moved over into Aiken County and contracted with S. R. Fulmer. Fulmer furnished the mule, the land, one half of the seed, and one half of the fertilizer, and I did the work. We did very well on this farm. We made a living.
"Why did I leave and come back? Well, the boss man here at the mill sent for me. But we had stayed there four uears. We shore do like the country, and I would like to go try it again now, if I could get hold of some money to start on.
"Just now I am only making twelve dollars a week at the mill. And if it wasn't for my boy in the C.C.C. camp sending me twenty-five dollars a month, I don't know what I would do. The house rent and water is eighty cents a week, and the lights run from one dollar to one dollar and forty- five cents a month. Good gracious, I should say we do have a struggle. Bessie has had three operations. The last one, about three months ago, coat me around two hundred dollars.
"How'd I pay all my debts? I didn't pay all of 'em. There's some of 'em I just couldn't pay and had to let them go.
"And this girl of ours ran away and got married about a year ago. Her husband worked in the mill at Charlotte. But he wouldn't do nothing for her. She stood things as long as she could and then came back home. There'll be a baby soon. But I'm glad to have her back."
Verneas, the daughter, a pale weary-eyed girl of about sixteen, heard this, as she did the rest of her father's recital, without comment.
"Shore I vote. Voted for Mr. Roosevelt. And if he could get things running like he wants, 'em, we'd be working full time. I like Roosevelt, but I shore don't like 'Johnson.' He won't keep his promise. He might make the judgeship all right. But I don't know; that job carries lots. It takes a big man.
"When I have time, I like to go hunting and fishing, But I don't have much time, because I'm on the day shift. Sometimes when the mill is shut down, I go up on the lake to fish. And if my luck is with me, I can make two dollars a day. I should say it is more than I make in the mill, but I can't do that every day. One time I was camping down on Ashepoo River over night, and put our hooks out. The next morning, I went down the bank, barefoot and my breeches rolled up to my knees, to see if we'd caught anything. I was going along careless-like and stepping over logs. Then the other fellows called me to come eat, and I started back through the woods. I don't know what made me do it, but I looked down and there was a snake almost under my foot, all coiled ready to strike. I had a rifle in my hand, and I jumped back and shot him several times through his head. Then I called the rest of the bunch, and said, 'you can't guess what I got. let I got something you ain't.' They shore was scared, couldn't hardly get them to stay there any longer. He had sixteen rattles and a button, she mosquitoes down there was the worst I've ever seen. When we went to lie down to go to sleep, they 'most eat us up. We covered all over with a big piece of duck cloth, and they bit right through it. Old Bill hollered, 'Lord, I'm a fever all over.'
Mr. Barnes' face on took a far-away expression. Voices at the washtub caused me to wonder what the rift between husband and wife was. Each one had suggested there were things not to be divulged - skeletons to keep covered. Nothing thus far revealed showed any striking lapse of moral law. I wanted to pry a little deeper but dared not. Mr. Barnes, having got what he wanted to finish with collected, resumed his talk.
"There's some things I've done that I am sorry for, and I'm ashamed of them. If I had my life to go over again, I'd go to church more and try to live a more peaceful life. I guess I've got more sense than I use to have. A man's supposed to learn a little by the time he's forty-five. It don't help much to know that others have done things as bad or worse. But I reckon we have to learn by doing.