Liberty Warehouse
Durham, North Carolina
January 5, 1938
L.R.[Leanard Rapport]
BILL JORDAN, SPECULATOR
"I'd always wanted to get back in tobacco: when I had the store and later the bus line I'd promised myself if I ever got out I would. So as soon as I gave up the bus line I lit out for Baxley, Georgia. I was in Baxley on speculation five seasons -- the season there runs five weeks. Then I'd follow the market north, catching on next in Mullins, South Carolina maybe, or in eastern North Carolina.
"The first warehouse I ran was in Mebane, that same year. I had a partner and rented the house for one year. The next year, 1926, I had a house in Lamar, South Carolina. I was in Louisburg a year, and I've had a house at Chadbourn eight seasons. This year I left home on the Fourth of July and spent from then till opening day, August 6th, drumming the countryside."
Like most men connected with the tobacco market Bill Jordan was brought up in tobacco. His father, who raised tobacco all his life, had a 457 acre farm in Orange County. He was a substantial farmer; one year, Jordan remembers, their crop brought $13,000.00. There were ten children, four boys and six girls. Two are dead, one boy and one girl. The remaining three boys are in tobacco, one raising it on the old farm, Bill Jordan on the market as a speculator and warehouseman, and his twin brother as manager of a warehouse. The girls married professional or business men; one married a doctor, another a Methodist preacherone a Hillsboro merchant, one the secretary of a Raleigh department store, and one a county highway foreman. The Jordans are English and can trace their ancestry far back.
Bill Jordan stayed on the farm his first twenty years, raising, curing, and grading tobacco. One year while in his teens he went down in eastern North Carolina near Kinston, a section then new to tobacco, and cured. He got $50.00 a week and his board; and for six weeks, day and night, he handled a dozen barns. "I was just a kid but I had charge of all of them. They gave me a colored man to handle the wood and. I'd show him when to put it on and when not to."
He got his schooling at the Caldwell and Cedar Grove Institutes in Orange County. Then he went to Hillsboro, the county seat, and got a job clerking. One Christmas, after working four years, he was offered a place with another firm. "But I figured if I could make a dollar for them I could make one for myself. So I bought out a grocery store; I didn't have the money at the time, but I went ahead and bought it anyhow. That was in 1908."
In a few years Jordan was in the mercantile business, handling a general line of clothing, farm implements, fertilizers, and so forth. He married and. two daughters were born.
In 1918 while down with the flu during the epidemic, he sold out. When he got well he took the Delco agency for a month; he sold thirteen the first three weeks. "But I had to install the things so I got out."
He came to Chapel Hill, also in Orange County, and with his brother-in-law ran a bus-line. At that time the bus field was open and they were one of two regular companies -- and there were also independents -- running the dozen miles between the college village and Durham. The roads were poor; over one part they built their own section of slab road. In 1925 they sold out to the Carolina Coach Company. was then free to return to tobacco.
As a speculator Jordan handles seventy-five to a hundred thousand pounds of tobacco on a market. As a warehouseman his house will sell around two million pounds during its short season. Speculating or pinhooking he was worked all the way from Georgia through the South Carolina, the Eastern North Carolina, the Old Bright, and up into the Burley and Dark Fire belts of Kentucky and Tennessee. A typical season is to catch an early Georgia market, then move into the Eastern North Carolina belt, then to Durham in the old Bright belt where he can stay nights at home in Chapel Hill, and then to Kentucky or Tennessee for burley.
"A speculator buys tobacco on the market in the line along with the company buyers. He joins the tobacco board of trade and usually has to put up a bond. A pinhooker, though he may buy on the market too, buys directly from the farmer before the farmer puts his tobacco on the floor. Way back yonder they used to even buy tobacco green in the field. That's when a farmer would say, 'I've pinhooked my crop.' I bought tobacco in Tennessee around Franklin, north of Nashville, five years like that. I've made some good money pinhooking and I've made some bad breaks, too."
As a speculator Jordan goes along in the auction line watching prices and noticing which types of tobacco each company is buying. If he sees a pile going at a price which he thinks would give him a chance of later reselling at a profit, he bids, using the same signals as the company buyers.
"A raise of the eye, twist of the mouth, lift of the chin, touching yourself -- those are four standard signs on all the markets on which I've been."
If Liggett and Meyers is the strongest buyer on a particular market he will buy their type; if Expor or American, theirs. His -- and other speculators' -- biggest chance comes from the ignoranc or carelessness of farmers in grading their tobacco. With sales running along at an average of 360 baskets an hour a buyer has to estimate according to the poorest sample he finds. Speculators can take badly graded baskets, regrade and resell, having repacked by grades into several smaller baskets the contents of a single basket.
"Once in Danville I bought a pile where the farmer had tied all his grades together. The starter started it at six cents; I took it at six and a half. It weighed 360 pounds. I regraded and sprayed it on the floor and put it back on sale; 321 pounds of that pile sold at forty-one cents."
When speculating Jordan usually hires two people to regrade and repack the tobacco he buys. They do their work in the ware house. While on the market he boards or stays at a hotel. This season he has been on only two markets, at Chadbourn, with his warehouse, and at Durham, where he has been speculating. After the closing of the Durham market he may go to the Virginia or Tennessee markets.
His warehouse at Chadbourn, one of three in the town, is a new one, with 58,000 square feet of floor space -- more than an acre. He rented the building, last year with a partner, this year by himself. The Chadbourn season is about six weeks, from August 6th through September 23rd. At the house he acts as starter, moving just ahead of the auctioneer, quickly sizing up the trays of tobacco and starting the bid, which jumps by quarter-cents from five to fifteen cents per pound, by half-cents from fifteen to twenty-five, and by cents from twenty-five on.
"The first time I led a sale was down in Lamar, South Carolina. My partner had been called away by serious illness in his family and took over. I went to the buyers and explained and told them,
'I want you boys to lay with me.' My knees were a-chattering. I went on though, and led the sale that day and made out all right, and I've been leading ever since."
The warehouse collects the usual twenty-five cents auctioneer's fee on baskets over one hundred pounds, a weighing fee, and a21/2% payoff on the amount the tobacco brings. His most expensive employee is the auctioneer who, in the Eastern North Carolina belt, will get around $100.00 a week. Check men and markers, who follow the auctioneer and mark and figure the bids, cost from $25.00 to $50.00 a week. An expenss may sometimes be turned into a profit by the warehouse buying tobacco in order to keep some customer who thinks his pile is not bringing enough. Often this can be resold at a profit.
Bill -Jordan has a comfortable, attractive home. Like a many other Chapel Hill people he rents some of his rooms to University students. Both his daughters attended the University. and one daughter married an instructor in the University. The Jordans are Methodists.
In the offseason Jordan sometimes sells automobiles or real estate. For the past three years he has listed taxes for the town and since they are after him, he may do it again this year.
An "independent expert," whose living depends on his knowledge and judgement of tobacco, Bill Jordan smokes ten cent cigarettes. "I can't tell the difference." The present season's improved prices on cheaper grades of tobacco, he says, are due to big company's efforts to run out the ten-centers.
There is no such thing as absolutely knowing tobacco, Jordan holds. "You can take a four-hundred pound basket of tobacco, split it, and set the two piles side by side on the floor, and it won't happen one out of ten times they'll bring the same, and they're the same tobacco." As a warehouseman one thing you must never do, he says, is to let a farmer believe you think he hasn't got plenty of tobacco sense. Even if he's wrong you have to let him believe he's right. And if he has confidence in you and believes you know what you're doing he'll do business with you.
"This season on the Durham market I bought a basket of tobacco at twelve and three-quarters cents. I bought it at Star Brick and sold it on the Star Brick floor four times, and never could get twenty cents for it. So I told the Export buyer I was tired of selling it and for him to let me have twenty cents and take it. He said, I can't pay that for L-3. I've bid on that tray four times and I'd recognize it anywhere I saw it; it just ain't worth that.
"Well, the sale moved on across the street to the Big 4 and I repacked that tobacco and took it over there and put it in line. Along came the sale and Export bought it, not knowing whose it was. He paid twenty-six cents.
"Another time: Old Man Dutch Glenn -- he's dead now; used to be head circuit rider for Reynolds -- came in my warehouse once just as the sale was stopping for dinner. Old Man Dutch came in the back door as the buyers were going out the front; he was walking down the row and saw a basket Reynolds had bought for sixteen and a half cents a pound -- about 246 pounds. He called me back and said, 'Jordan, we can't use that.' Well, I told him, the farmer already had the check for it. He said, 'We can't take anything like that in the plant. You take it over; sell it and let me know what it brings. If you take a loss I'll make it good. We just can't have that kind of tobacco.' I told him I was always willing to help him out and I took it and he went on to eat dinner.
"While they were at dinner I repacked that tobacco and found a pile to match it and put it in line; then I went over to where they were eating and persuaded Old Man Dutch to stay on and buy on the afternoon sale. He did, and when they came around to that pile he bought it for Reynolds at twenty-three and a half.
"I didn't say anything to him that day but the next time I saw him I said, 'You remember that basket of tobacco you got me to take back last time?' He said, 'Yes, who bought it?' 'You bought it,' I said, 'That afternoon.' He said, 'How much did I give for it?' ' Twenty-three and a half cents,' I said. 'Jordan, he said, Nobody knows tobacco.'"
