Name of State: TENNESSEE
Original title retained - TILL THE RIVER RISES
TILL THE RIVER RISES
"As much sand and gravel as they is about here, you wouldn't hardly think nothing would grow. But it does. Every house down here, they's a spot for a garden near it if them that lives in it ain't too trifling to put it in. We have plenty of corn and 'taters and cucumbers and tomatoes in season. We shares with them that ain't got any if they's been down on their luck. I has flowers, too. Them seeds over there in the drying box is every one of them flower seeds. I save them from one year to the next."
Fan Flanigan sat against one of the crooked sapling poles which supported the driftwood joists of the porch, She was a small wizened woman, brown, gnarled; with thin gray hair. A washed-out shapeless house dress bad not been pulled low enough to hide her large bony feet.
"It's all right here," she said, "and I like it pretty fair as long as the river don't start acting up. We don't have no rent to pay, jest sort of squat here betwixt the railroad tracks and the water and build our places out of what we can git off the dump and the wood we can ketch floating down the river. Me and mammy been here sence nineteen and thirty-two, that hard old year."
She puckered her eyes against the strong sunlight and glanced over the thirteen stilt-set shanties which straggled along the banks of the Tennessee River between the approaches to two of Knoxville's bridges. Most of them faced the railroad tracks where strings of coalcars and empty boxcars stood. Beyond the tracks was a high deeply eroded embankment criss-crossed by foot paths and littered with rusty cane, bottles, and other rubbish.
"You kind of grow to like this place," said Fan. "You'd like any place, though if you live in it long enough, I reckon. A rich man up to Knoxville give this whole strip betwixt the bridges for poor folks to build they houses on. Them that come first taken the pick of what they was here. Ma done that. She come right after Pop died. We use to live in that biggest house over there. My brother-in-law lives there now. Him and Sis had sech a flock of children you couldn't stretch a leg without tromping on one. So me and Mammy moved out. This one room here we has is fair size and plenty for us. Mammy owns that brother-in-law house. She don't own a stick of this one.
"When you git your claim that rich man don't care what you make your house of. But they's one thing about it, the outside, I mean the roof, is got to be tin. That's the law. No way to put out a fire in Shanty Town. So it's tin roofs here or you can't put up a house."
An old woman appeared at the door. She wore a broad brimmed man's hat, full skirted brown calico dress, and a sweater with the elbows out. Toothless and stooped, she was as wrinkled as a dried apple. Without a word she walked to the far end of the porch, dragged the wooden box near the edge back to the wall. She pulled the hat down over her eyes as she settled on the box for a sitting nap.
Fan jerked her head toward the old woman. "It sure looks to me like my uncle might know Mammy likes to drap down for a nap now and then the same as anybody. He's got a broke back-leg and can't work none. He lives on 'tother side of the house and he gits lonesome and comes around here and sets and sets and talks and then gits himself settled on Mammy's bed. It always musses up the bed having him drap down on it. Don't you think mammy looks awful old? She ain't, really. Jest about seventy. I guess me and her both looks more age than we is. That's the way it is when you can't keep no meat to your bones. You jest shrivel up like a simlin hit by the drouth. Folks is always thinking I'm past the age I says I am. I don't keer, though. Gala that's always studying about they looks want to fool some man into marrying them. I'm forty-seven years old and I ain't never been married. And Lord a-living! I don't want to be! ain't hardly strong enough to live single.
"I may look bullhide strong, but I ain't. Mammy can outwork me two to one. My lands, she works out in that garden from sun-up till night come without stopping for more than a spitting spell. She's plumb stone deef. Couldn't hear you if you's to beller it right down her ear. But she knows every word I say when she can look at me talk. Every word. No matter, she's company for me and I hope the good Lord sees fit to let her live to be a hundred. She is got an old age pension and gits eleven dollars a month. It's what we live on. Besides that, we git supplies off the relife, stuff out of the garden when a drouth or a rise don't hit it.
"But Great Day! When that river rises they's no chance for a garden then. High water will drown a garden right to death. And we do git high water here off and on and the water kivers the whole place. This house is sot bout as high as any of' them--ain't but one sot much higher. But you can't sit away from high water. Get yourself, maybe, but not your house. The boy that's building that high has got hisself a city wife. He figgers he's smarter than the rest around here and he's perching his house a foot or two higher. Well, that bride ain't going to be no drier than the rest of us when the river rises up and starts flooding. Day of Judgement! She's going to be wetted down and mudified like anybody else.
"Oh, I tell you I've see that old river come up. And the gov'ment never sent us no notice of what the water was going to do. We jest set and see it come up. See it and know what we's in for. When it begins to git in the houses, we take and move everything up on the bank across the railroad tracks, and we camp there all on top of each other. Well, city folks com trotting up there gitting under our feets. Coming with soup kittles and kivers and half of them wouldn't no more set foot in your house low water times than nothing at all. I ought not to say a word against them and I know it. I 'preciates what they does. But it's mighty hard for them that's had it easy all they lives to know what 'tis to be poor.
"They's always one saying to another, 'Do you suppose them people's got little enough sense to go back to them shacks when the river goes down?' And that's jest the little sense we've got--to come back to where we got a spot for a garden and a house we've built to live in without putting out rent money when you ain't got money for eats, much less rent. Yes Lord, we'll always go back to Shanty Town till the river rises some day and forgits to go down.
"But, mercy on my soul, it's a mess when the waters run off! You got to take the rake and scrape mud off of everything. Half of what you got is plumb ruined. Oh well, when you been through it time and time again, you can git things in some sort of housekeeping shape before you know it. Then you can start pulling over the garden and seeing what ain't washed up for good. Adn see if there's no flowers left where you's worked nussing them like babies.
"I has right pretty flowers in the summer time. Nothing left now but that old hanging basket of moss and them mole beans. Castor beans, some call them. They's supposed to keep a from rooting up your ground. No moles round here I ever seen, but them beans stands the worst hot weather. They's something green to have around. My nephew trimmed them stalks up that way. He says they looks just like palmettos--them's thing that grow down in Florida State. The carnival my nephew works for shows in Florida most of the time. He's a show-hand for it. When they lay off for winter, he comes back here with us. I jest count the year around till time he's to come. He's my favorite nephew, the only one I've got.
"Mammy's a heap of company but Darcy ain't never one too many for me. He's awful good to me and ma. Gives us money now and then. He carries all the water we use and be gits the driftwood floating in the river. Brings it right to us for stove woods. They's lots men around here picks up money from selling driftwood. Darcy could, but he jest gives it to us like it ain't worth nothing. It's hard for him to git to before somebody else snatches it. I've see men fight till they drop over whose to git a few driftwood planks. Folks around here have to make out jest every way they can. At times they has right smart luck fishing and you can always sell fresh fish. But then they make you have a license to fish and you got to pay for it. Leastways, men do. Womern don't, so at times they take womern along in the boats when they go fishing. And the Law can't say nothing, not a dadblamed word, if it don't know who made the catch.
"womern is a big holp to men more ways than one. Stretching a little money to go a long way and fixing up men's homes for them. I wish you could see that fern Jack Long's wife got off the undertaker. He had it left over it from a funeral. It's so pretty. I jest like to go up there and set a spell to look at it all I want to. And Jack's got as much sense as she has about gitting the best that's to be got. He was a regular carpenter before hard times drug him down here to live. When it come to setting up his house, he know'd how. Got good lumber for doing it, too. The way he done it was to a down there to Henley Street where they's building the bridge. He picked up every stick of the wood they throwed away. Got enough for everything but the walls and ceiling. That didn't stump Jack none. He jest went over to a dump heap in South Knoxville, and there he run into jest what he wanted. It was a lot of emptied out sheet-iron barrels. First he knocked the tops and bottoms out. He split the barrels open down the sides and flattened them out for the walls and roof. Right in that same dump he picked up two hundred paint buckets. They's supposed to be empty, but he scooped out about two gallons of paint. It was a plenty for spreading over his house. The colors ain't the same, but that don't matter. It's paint. See over there how he kind of worked the different kinds into stripes and wherly cues? Makes a right pretty sight, don't it? Well, then he tooled and nailed some great big split cardboard boxes for the inside walls and pasted paper over that. Then he tinned the top, for the root has got to be tin down here in--.
"Good Lord! Look who's headed this way! Poor Mrs. Rosson!"
A thin woman dressed in black, with a white apron tied around her waist, was hurrying along the beaten foot path in front of the row of shanties. Her fingers nervously picked at her apron as she came.
"Most of the folks in Shanty Town is kin to each other," Fan said. "Mrs. Rosson is the onliest one ain't got a speck of' kin around here. She's a widow womern. She ain't like the rest down here, noway. Low class and poor. When she come, all she had left was three or four dollars. Some of the men folks built a house for her from leavings and pick ups. She's scared most of the time. She lives to herself and jest always scared something is going to happen. She's been worse ever since that man tried to kill himself jumping off the far bridge yonder. I see him drap. I was setting right here and looking toward the river when he jumped. It didn't kill him right off. But I heard since that he's died."
The woman had reached the yard of Fan's shanty.
"Come on up and set a spell, Mrs. Rosson," Fan invited pleasantly.
The woman made no move toward the porch.
Fan said in a low voice, "She's got it in her head that the wind is going to blow that feller up out of the river. She thinks the wind troubles his sperit. Well, that body, it ain't here, I've told her time and again that Pleas Newman pulled that feller out of the river. He was as live as I am when I see them carry him off. Pleas never did git a red cent for doing it, neither. Well, one thing he didn't need the money like most around here does. Pleas had a plenty. He bootlegged. Got his liquor from boats that come up and down the river. He was doing so well when he got killed. Making good money. His nephew up and shot him. Fairda never would have killed his Uncle Pleas it he'd been at hisself. Never in this world!"
Mrs. Rosson stood silently, staring at the river.
"It was jest the four of them living in a old houseboat up the river. Pleas, his little gal of about eleven, Fairda, and the woman who done they housekeeping. All of them was drinking the night of the shooting, except the little gal. I knowed Fairda never would shot Pleas unless he'd been crazy drunk. And that mean woman living with first one and the other of the two jest about egged him on. She's a whore. If ever was one she's it. Poor folks ain't got no chance to head the Law to the right one. No chance at all. If they had, I'd hike myself right up to court and tell them folks the straight of it. Git her burned to a crisp in the chair, instead of Fairda."
Mrs. Rosson turned away from the river. She walked to the foot of the steps and stood looking up. She spoke in a faint and worried voice.
"It's wavy today, Fan. The river's awful wavy, Fan. And the wind's up."
She did not wait for Fan to reply. Turning, she walked back in the direction she had come.
"She's gone to lock herself in," said Fan. "That's the way she does. Closes up everything tight about the house. Well, I've got the best pot of soup back there on the stove. I had Mrs. Rosson in my head when I throwed it together this morning. She's going git a good hot dip or two of it if I has to bust down the door to git it to her. I won't have to, though. She'll let me in. I'll tote it to her in a little tin bucket with a top to it. I keeps it for toting things fit to eat to them that's sick or hungry. When she gits some of that nice, warm soup in her stummick, maybe it'll get that wind out of her head."
Della Yoe
Jennette Edwards