Next door to the Hinsons and the Beneone, Eva Hardison, her husband and their three sons live. Her fourth and youngest son is in a CCC camp in Oregon.
Eva greets strangers in an easy, friendly way. Her speech is better than that of most of her neighbors. One of eleven children, she was born on a small farm near Wilmington, worth Caroline. At eighteen she married Otis Hardison who was working as box-car carpenter for the railroad. While their children were still young they managed to save enough money to buy e. lot on which they built a fire-room house a few years later. "I was so happy, watching that house go up," Eva says. "Papa had always said he hoped all of his children would live in home of their own. The children were so proud of their new home, too. We had it all paid for when the Union called a strike. Otis was loyal to his Union and he wouldn't go back to work until he got orders from the Union. When he did go back the railroad wouldn't have him, and he couldn't get anything else to do.
"Finally we had to mortgage the home to get food she continues."That was the last of our little place for us. It was a whole year before Otis got regular work, and it was too late then to start saving money for the mortgage even if he had been making enough so we could.
"Otis got work in a cotton mill in Wilmington. In a year or two he had worked up to $18 a week. The thought of losing: our home had got to where it didn't hurt so bad and we were taking great pride in our children. The oldest boy had finished the tenth grade and he said there wasn't anything that could keep him from finishing high school. The next to the oldest one was in the ninth grade and everybody said he had a good chance of being one of the best football players in school. That was in 1933 (?). There wasn't money out of $18, of course, to buy them clothes like they wanted to wear to school. Jim, the oldest one was always planning ways he could help himself. Well, when school was out we managed to get him in a CCC camp and I was to save the $25 a month he sent home so that he could have things like other boys during his Senior year. Then, the strike wee celled and Otis, who'd joined the textile union, walked out with the other strikers. The company opened the mill and sent out word for all the help to come back but it hadn't give to the workers any of the things they'd struck for. The Union told its members to hold out and they'd win the the end. Otis waited while one by one folks give in and went back to work. One morning he came to me and said 'I can't hold out no longer. We don't have a place to mortgage this time sad I'm not going to stand by and see my family starve. I looked at Otis and said, 'No, you're not going beck now, Otis. I didn't want you to join this Union because I remembered what a strike bed cost us. But you joined anyhow, and now you're not going back on the Union when it needs you. I'd rather starve than see you turn yellow.
"I kept Otis out and when the strike was called off he went to ask for his job back. His boss man looked at him right herd and said, I'll let you know when we need you. The next day we got our moving orders.
"Well, we moved out to an awful little house in another part of town and there we stayed. School started but Jim stayed on at the CCC camp. The $25 a month he sent home was all me, Otis, and the other three boys had to live on. You couldn't imagine unless you'd been through with something like it yourself how we suffered that winter. We didn't have half enough to eat and no clothes at all. Day after day I had to sit and think of my boy in the CCC camp while his heart was set on finishing high school. And, Claude, the second one, wouldn't go to school because he didn't have decent clothes to wear. I thought I'd go crazy seeing him look so sullen and bitter, and thinking maybe he blamed me because I had persuaded his Papa to stick by the Union.
"My boys had always attended Sunday school regular but since then the two oldest ones, have never been inside of a church. Until yet I don't know how we lived through that winter. The year wore on and Jim was still at the CCC camp. We sold our furniture, and with the money we got came to Durham looking for work. Moving some distance away was the only way a striker could get a job. Durham strikers went to Wilmington and Wilmington strikers came here. It was a miserable year for them that had made an effort to get what they honestly thought was their rights. Folks who wasn't mixed up in it can't ever know how much punishment we had to take.
"They didn't ask us here if we had been in the Wilmington strike and if they had, we would have lied of course. Working people can't live without work, you know.
"After all I've suffered from the Union, I still believe that we've got to organise If we're ever paid a decent wage. The first thing we've got to get is the right to organize. Some people think we have that now but it doesn't always work. Do you know what would happen to my husband at this mill if he so much as talked Union amongst the worker? They'd put him on a new job he didn't know has to do and give him three times more work than he could do. In a day or two his boss man would say "Guess I'll have to let you go since you can't keep up with your work.
"Another thing that makes it hard on the Union is the feeling folks hold against it who have been hurt by it. My two oldest boys are so bitter toward the Union they don't even like to hear the word mentioned. From what i've been able to understand in the papers the government is doing all it can to give workers the right to organize and I hope they'll be successful. I want to know for sure before Otis ever joins again. My life has been made hard by doing what seemed to be right and I don't want a threat hanging over me any longer. Me and Otis will live at the mill as long as we can get work, I guess, and I don't mind it at all. If he could get regular work and a good wage I'd just as soon be here as anywhere else. But my boys hate it and I pray for the day when they'll be able to find something else to do."
During the past winter Otis and the two oldest boys have worked when they could in the East Durham Mill. Borne weeks only one of them had work and other weeks the three of them worked from one to three days. They are still paying for the new furniture which they had to buy when they moved to Durban. Their grocery account which they run with a local store is always in arrears. The boys, thwarted and bitter, contribute, most of what they make toward house hold expenses and never mention the ambitions they once had.
