Mrs. Texas Morgan
Venus, Florida
12/7/88
Barbara Berry Darsey
Maria Gonzales
Maria came across the yard with an apron full of vegetables which she dumped upon the back steps; then, as several little pigs and a few chickens came forward to investigate, she called to one of the group of five or six children following at her heels: "Teeny, take them collards an turnips right on to the kitchen."
Dusting her hands upon her apron she came to the gate which was firmly fastened with several strands of barbed wire and proceeded to open it. "Won't you must scuse the looks of things. <text not clear> like I'm so busy all the time with my garden an the younguns, I don't have time to clean up much."
We then went up the steps and across the rickety porch into the front room where we stood and talked for awhile. "Then chairs aint very strong, but you can set on this bed. I knew <text not clear> looks kinder dirty for the younguns will waller on it."
Maria stated that she was born in Florida in a <text not clear> county, but she was not sure whether it was Hardce or De soto, about forty-two years ago. She thought she might be of Spanish lineage but was not sure of that as she had never heard her parents discuse their ancestry, and all of her grand-parents died before she was born, "Sometimes people ask me if I am Spanish because I am so dark of skin an have such big dark eyes, they always tell me, but I don't knew an what difference would it make anyway, I'd just be right on living like I am now.
"I was the fifth of seven chillens, and was raised on a farm and I learnt to do most all the kinds of farm work just as good as a man could. I never went to school much for I didn't like it and my Pa he wanted me to work on the farm <text not clear> of the time.
"John and I got married about twenty years ago and my oldest boy, Jim, he's nineteen now. John came here from a place called Carolina. No ma'am, I don't know if it was North or South, Carolina is all I ever heard him say. He was a farmer too and we started in to farm on a little patch of my Pa's farm but we didn't do so well.
"Seemed like John just didn't take to the ways here and he was kind a qu<text not clear>er and never would listen to nobody. My family didn't like it much the way he acted but we stayed on there about two years then John got real mad with my Pa and he moves as over here only we lived way out in the woods near a swamp<text not clear> I didn't mind living out there, I liked it for there didn't nobody bother us, we lived so far out. After you left the hard road you had to travel the grade for a long ways and then walk through a patch of woods for high on a mile, so didn't many people come to visit us. An I never was much to visit anyway, seems like."
Maria looked around her little rude poorly furnished room and sighed. "This here little house it's much better than what we had out yonder. John, he always was queer and he said we didn't need no house so he built us a shelter of palmetto leaves and put a floor in it and we lived there. After awhile he fenced it all round and got some pigs and chickens and we had <text not clear>all right there with us. Once a man said he would give John limber for a house but that made John awful mad said he wouldn't have it. He said he had always lived just like we was then and he didn't want to change."
A look of fear came into her dark eyes as she peered about the room: "We lived there for a long long time and it hasn't been but most four years we been a living here now. John he kinder went out his head and took his shotgun and said he was going to kill us all, so I got the younguns together the littler one was just a tiny baby then an we ran into the woods and hid from him all day. We could hear him a-rantin and a-cussin and sometimes singing gospel songs and we sure was <text not clear> Come sundown we<text not clear> to a neighbor on another far: about seven miles off an we all stayed there for the night. The next day we got to town and folks where looked after us. They got Jim a place to work on a poultry<text not clear> an they fixed upthis old place for us and here we been ever <text not clear>ines."
Maria paused us if looking back to the shelter in the swamp that was her home for so long. "Most of these younguns are: <text not clear> way out there. I never had no doctor tend me, just a nigger woman most the time, but there was times when there wasn't no one there with me but John. When he went crazy I had to grab the little baby out the bed and run with it in my arms."
She went on to say that the family had never had much medical care. While they were on the Relief" a nurse went to see her and then came again and said the whole family must be treated for worms. That made John mad too but the nurse was firm and even came out to give the treatments. Then John's eyes got so bad he could hardly see to work so they were treated and glasses fitted. The children are rarely ill and castor oil is about all they ever took.
"John went and lost his mind over thinking too much about religion, he got so he would't work even in the garden and would just set out under a tree and worry whether or not he was saved. We didn't go to church much. Way out there it is too far to walk. Now I go to church some when I can an I take all the younguns along. Sometimes we walk the grade; other times somebody comes and picks us up and carries us to town. Jim he gives to the church and sometimes he gives the younguns pennies to put in the basket just like the other chillens do and he always gives me a dime to take. I don't know what the church does with all that money. The preacher he must be powerful rich if they give it all to him. But anyway they always ask us for it. I never know just what the preacher is a sayin, he talks too fast but I like to watch him an I sure loves to hear the singin, I have a Bible but I don't read much on account of my eyes ain't so good, but I tries to get the younguns to read it sometimes. It's kinder hard for me to read anyway because I never went to school much cause I didn't like to go an would rather do farm work. That good is schoolin for a woman anyway? they get on just as well.
"I want my younguns to learn readin and writin better I did. They might need it sometime but I don't see no use much in more than that. These younguns always tryin to tell me about some fancy learnin they get at the school-house, but I don't see no use in it. John, he could read and write real well figger some too and there he is now away out yonder by himself, what good did it do him!
"When John run us off we didn't have no money, but we never had hardly none anyway. When Jim get work at the chicken farm he get fifty cents a day an he give it all to me. Now he makes a dollar an a quarter a day but he has to keep some of it, he's grewin up new, you knew, and get girls on his mind. He had to stay right at the farm all the time at first to tend the biddies at night an start lights so the hens could get up early an eat before sunup. Now he don't have to work that hard but he don't get home much sometimes he comes a little while on Sunday afternoon. He gets his board an we get some cracked eggs an sometimes a chicken an it helps a lot.
"I do farm work too an so do my oldest girls. they don't like to go to school any more an I guess they get enough schoolin anyway. When we came to this place I used to carry the baby that little one there in my arms with that nex one a-taggin along, holdin mostly to my skirt or hand, an walk sometimes five mile to a neighbors to work. Sometimes before we got there I had to carry both these younguns. Then I did farm work, whatever they told me to do, sometimes I hoed corn, or picked squash an beans, or shelled beans for market. I get my dinner and something to carry home to the other younguns who be at school then, an some vegetables. We never was much to eat vegetables except cabbage or collards boiled with side meat, but sometimes we got so hungry an we didn't have nothin but vegetables so that we learned us to eat meat all kinds, like beans an such."
She paused as if recalling something and then said: "One time when John was on the Relief a woman came out from the big town to tell us all what to eat and how to cook it. I didn't go to the meetin, but I heard about it. What's the use of thet? life is just life, an vegetables just grew an we all can cook them. Seems like thet woman didn't want us to boil our greens with lots of side meat for a long time. why they ain't fitten to eat if en you don't cook them thataway! An she never tasted none of it. When it's fried in hog fat they just ain't nothing any better.
"Another time they wanted to give us clothes for the younguns an us too and lunches for the younguns an us too and lunches for the younguns goin to school. That made John awful mad and he wouldn't take none of it. He said he knowed it were a trap of some kind an he would sure have to pay for it all sometime as else go to jail an he always was fraid of jail." Maria paused, shook her head sadly, and a far-a-way look came into her large expressive eyes: "They was others took all them things an they did have such purty clothes an they never had to pay for them or go to jail neither."
She then looked lovingly at her family clustered about her. "Never seems to me that I got a lot of younguns only eight. I know some folks got a dozen or more. Guess I'd a had three-four more come this time if John hadn't a run us off like he did. I have heard tell of some folks not havin younguns when they oughter that's real sinful. I think an it's agin nature too, just like takin all that medicine that time the nurse made us do. the Lord He don't want us to do all them things; it ain't right. Tis kinder hard come times getting enough food an clothes for all my younguns. the church, it wanted to help us once but I'm kinder like John thatway, I just don't like for people to give me things less I know <text not clear>en real well an then I want to work for em. Jim's money don't go so far things do cost a awful lot these here days, but people don't have more younguns than they should and they just got to take their share."
Mention of politics and voting brought a blank stare, and then: Jim, he wants to vote, whatever that means. I don't understand nothing about that and don't want to, it ain't for woman anyway an the lesser we knows about it the better off we is. I got enough so do tendin my younguns and garden an workin for other farmers thought messin up in voting." Maria's eyes fairly snapped, the first real emotion she had evinced.
We talked of town and city life and she stated: "Jim, he talks some of movin to the city but I won't go. I like This life now we got used to it. I guess it's better here than livin way out yonder in the swamp, though I aint never thought much about it. But livin in the city folks pester you too much more comes here to see me than what they did when we lived out tonder but I don't go to see them less I have work to do there. I don't want folks a-comin in an a-tellin me what to do how to run my house, an tend my youngun. This way suits me and it's my life. Out here we don't have much sickness neither like I hear tell they have in town seems like someone is always sick there. Sometimes <text not clear> youngun has the colic an I give him plenty of castor oil and he soon gts well if he has a teeth hurtin I let him pack snuff round it an it will stop hurtin real seen Snuff's good for earache too if you blow it down in the ear, it don't feel se good at first but soon helps. I don't want no change movin in from out yonder was enough an I be satisfied with my way of livin. I don't see why folks always go a trompin round from place to place, why don't they git a place and stay there."
Several of the smaller children had gone out to the yard and were playing ball. Aria gazed at them pensively and said: "John, he never did let the children play not even in the clearin at the swamp. He said when they had time they should set an think an figger if they was saved or not but they don't take much to that. I guess maybe it'll come later with them. Seems like they just got to have a little fun an I let em play lots and don't pester em all the time. They is good younguns as any you will find an I let the two girls go to little parties sometimes. I always make em premise not to dance for that sure is the devil's work of course I aint got much say ever Jim now, but I always pester him about not dancing too.
Maria paused and seemed in deep thought for some seconds, then sigh and said: "John, he came here once a long time ago an tried to get us to back out yonder to the swamp with him but I wouldn't go. I was scared of the look in his eyes. Kinder red, like when he was awful mad about something, the town folks they told him if he pestered me agin they would put him in jail an I guess thet scared him pretty bad for he ain't pestered me no more an I ain't seen him for a long while now but sometimes he talks to the younguns in town."
