Federal Writers' Project
Room 36, Federal Building
Greeensboro, North Carolina
February 14, 1939
February, 1939
Mr. Frederick Moore, father
Lenore Moore, daughter
Storekeepers
Harper's Crossroads, N. C.
Katherine palmer, writer reviser
__________reviser
THE COUNTRY STORE
The salesman's dilapidated Ford stop ped with a loud screeching of brakes. The man peered anxiously at the dim signs at the curve. One read siler City and the other Carthage. He sat idly for a moment. A sleek crow watched him from a fence. Two buzzards circled evilly. The winter landscape was bare and broken only by the green pines which showed above the slender scrub oaks. Mistletoe grew in the large trees.
Discovering a country store a little way down one of the roads, the salesman backed up and leaned out of the car. Four men were grouped lazily in front of the door.
"Could you all tell me if this here's Barnett's Cross-Roads Store?" he inquired with a gentle drawl.
"Yeah", one of the men answered without looking up."It sure is".
The stranger alighted and picking up a large muddy rock, he placed it under the worn rear tire.
"Brakes kinda' going back on me", he remarked amiably."Give out two mile from Rabbit's Crossing."
Going to the rumble seat, he tugged at a heavy black suitcase, the men eyeing him curiously, but made no move to help him. Straining under the heavy weight, the man advanced slowly toward the little unpainted building.
"I'm Jake Nelson", he announced simply, and added glancing in the door, "I sell fine canned goods, best of any to be got."
Getting no response he stood uncertainly, a tall thin man of thirty with mild blue eyes, dressed in a shabby black serge suit of cheap cut, His dusty black hat had no band. Although this particular Chatham County territory was reputed to be "pretty good", he felt tired and discouraged. It was his first trip for "the company".
"Who owns this here store?" he asked.
A man with a florid complexion detached himself from the others. Here, one felt at once, was a person of importance. He took a few steps in Jake's direction.
"Reckon that's me. I'm Ted Cameron." His voice sounded a trifle breathless. He was very fat.
"Just let me show you", Jake began.
The storekeeper interrupted him. "We are stocked up right smart," he said with elaborate indifference, simultaneously eyeing the salesman's bag with childish pleasure. "But step on in," he invited grandly.
Jake followed the large man into the store. The two men seated themselves in front of a small stove. Its iron sides gleamed redly. A small black kitten dozed in a chair. One by one the other countrymen entered. They lounged against the counter.
"Where you from, boy?" the storekeeper asked.
"Down near Fayetteville" Jake answered.
"Juanita", Mr. Cameron called to his daughter. The gruffness of his tone did not conceal the affection he felt for the invisible girl.
"Coming in a minute, pa; I'm busy", a voice answered from a small closet at the back of the room. "I'm trying to pour out this here cold molasses."
The father got to his feet heavily, and "Just Make yourself to home a short spell", he said over his shoulder, "and I'll look at your samples dereckly."
The men in the room stared silently at the salesman. Jake was glad enough not to talk; it gave him a chance to take in the details of the store. a motley array of merchandise met his eye.
Guns, overalls, and axes lay untidily upon an old orange crate. A new sewing machine stood in the corner. Large rat traps with cruel jaws were piled on the end of the counter, new plow handles stacked beside them. An old fashioned ice box and rusty scales stood in the center of the room. A row of straw hats and bright tin buckets hung on pegs above several bags of grain.
There were fly swatters, ties, socks, writing tablets, scissors with green and red handles, bolts of ginghams and cottons of pale hues, boxes of snuff, china, tin basins, men's working shoes, lamps, shiny locks and keys, and a large paste-board box of cigarettes. Crates of eggs and bags of turnips and greens were near the door. There were candies, stale cakes, dried apples, sacks of tobacco, and "new indexed Bibles."
A gaudy painting of a flock of pheasants stood on a table. This picture was not for sale. It was the work of "Miss Belle Heritage, a lovely invalid lady."
The store contained signs of every description. Jake read: "Armour's Big Crop Fertilizers", "White bond envelopes", "Acme Snowball Cocoanut Candy," "There Is Only One Orange Crush",
"Drink Coca Cola", "good grape", "Seven Up",
"Cardu Helps Women", "Navy Sweet Snuff", "Bon-lee People's Bank," "Oshkosh-By-Gosh Overalls," "Smith and Buckner's Funeral Home, Siler City," "Powdered Alum," "Thedford's Black Draught", and "Red Devil Lye."
On the shelves were rows of canned to matoes, kraut, canned oysters, "Ramon's Brownie Pills," and a large notice which read, "The Tobacco That Put The Roll In Rolling-Duke's." There were faded shirts, peanuts, cans of "Esso Motor Oil", and "Herb Pills". Jake was a little bewildered by this display. There were too many signs, he thought. They made him wonder "where he was at."
Presently Mr. Cameron rejoined Jake. "That girl will be here in a minute," he beamed, "She does beat all for work." "Peartest girl I ever seen; always at it. Opens up the store at six-thirty every morning, rain or shine, sweeps out, waits on customers, and sews some too on this machine here I gave her for her last birthday. We don't close 'till nine or ten some nights. Makes a right long day, don't it?"
He paused an picked his teeth with a broom straw. "This has sure been a slow day", he said. After a moment he continued, "I set such store by 'Nita, you'd think she was my only one, but she ain't. I've got two other good girls and three boys. The boys is hauling lumber to day over to Siler, and the girls is putting up jam. My wife is dead", he added, "and those girls has took over the housekeeping fine. We have run this store fifteen years."
Jake sat quietly. "well I declare," he put in, glancing toward the open door, A small ragged boy stood there uncertainly. He held out a grimy hand. "Please, Mr. Ted, Ma's snuff," he asked without taking his large eyes off the stranger.
"Howdy, son", Jake smiled. There was no response.
Juanita finally joined the two men. She proved to be a girl of mouselike appearance. Her hair was stringy, but her brown eyes were frank and kind. She was dressed in a pink apron and waist. On her feet were black pointed slippers, much too large. At first, conscious of young Jake's presence, she sat primly on the edge of her chair, but as she became used to him, she relaxed and talked with ease.
Two thin hounds came up to her and licked her fingers. "Get away, Eloise and Sal," she scolded softly.
A farmer passed, driving a team of mules. "Hey Ted," he yelled. Seeing Juanita he smiled broadly. Lordy me! Ain't that big girl of yours married yet? You will have a old maid on your hands sure as you're born!" he teased.
"Dogged if I believe that", Jake said unexpectedly, blushing furiously at his own gallantry.
The storekeeper cleared his throat and put on a serious expression. "Well, let's see now, boy, if you and me can do any business," he began.
Jake opened his suit case and arranged his samples neatly. "You all can tell, effen you look careful that I sell only the best," Jake stammered, his eyes upon Juanita. A great variety of canned goods were spread upon the counter. There were also glasses of preserved figs, cherries, and other fruits.
"Look pa," Juanita said eagerly, "Let's get plenty. This here is a good chance to stock on whatever we got to have."
The idlers in the store had gathered close to watch the sale. They pointed and snickered.
A young negro shabbily dressed, entered. He smiled and looked sheepish.
"Niggers is kind of a nuisance", Mr. Cameron whispered to Jake." "It's always wait 'till Saturday, please suh, when it comes to paying."
"Piece of side meat 'till Saturday, Miss 'Nita?" the negro asked, shuffling his large splay feet.
"Go on and let him have it, girl," Mr. Cameron told his daughter, as she looked doubtfully at the waiting boy. "He always pays sooner or later--chiefly later," he added, and pleased with his own wit, he broke into a loud guffaw.
The negro took his meat, grinning widely. Now he was sure of himself. "Little meal, Miss Nita?"
"Go on and let him have it, girl," her father said.
The men began to leave the store.
Mr. Cameron took out a heavy watch and regarded it carefully. "I'll set while you go eat your dinner, 'Nita." He gestured vaguely toward the door. "We live just across the road," he told the salesman.
Jake saw a comfortable grey house. "Well I declare," he remarked politely.
"Have you et?" Hr. Cameron asked the boy hospitably.
Jake shook his head.
"Well, 'Nita while we get the order fixed up, you might as well bring Jake here some dinner."
"Don't care if I do eat a little something," Jake put in, in his mild pleasant voice.
The storekeeper gave him a good order. He liked the boy and Nita seemed to want the stuff. As it was the salesman's first trip and Mr. Cameron wanted to encourage him.
As Jake Was putting the last samples away, Juanita returned with a large hot dinner which he ate rapidly.
"This here dinner is sure all right," he told her between large mouthfuls of turnip greens.
Juanita smiled happily and met his eyes shyly. A slow blush spread over her sallow face.
Her father noticed the glance and laughed delightedly. "I'll be doggone," he said elegantly.
Jake leaned back contentedly and rested a while. The little cat purred softly by the stove and the light rain beat upon the roof. A few country people came for simple needs. It was pleasant sitting there.
Finally with an effort the boy began to fumble with his hat and pull himself together.
He glanced at his watch.
"Ah, set a spell longer, son--no need to rush off," the storekeeper spoke hastily.
"Yeah, Jake, please stay, ana leave we three talk a while longer" Juanita asked, made bold by the sudden thought of his departure.
"Don't care if I do set", Jake answered pleased. He picked his teeth for a moment, then looking at Mr. Cameron, he said "Lots of troubles of different sorts when you run a store, I can bet." He nodded his head sympathetically.
Ted Cameron answered with relish, "You just don't know, boy. One dark cold night this winter," he began--
At this familiar opening, two country men who had been leaning indolently against the wall, drew nearer.
Ted paused while his friends settled themselves comfortably around the stove. The story of the holdup had grown to be a legend in the neighborhood. Everyone loved to hear him tell about it. "Besides", old man Silas whispered slyly "Ted always tells it a little different from time to time."
"Well," the storekeeper began again, looking around at his audience with an important air, "It was mighty cold and I was mighty tired that night. It was a Saturday, and pretty late. The filling station down the road had been shut for several hours. Well, I was sleepy as a owl, and I remember I sort of stumbled as I started across to home. I was carrying sixty dollar's in my pocket, aiming to bank it in Siler on Monday. I had nearly reached my gate when I'll be doggone if three people didn't spring out at me from behind them trees!" He stopped to get his breath.
"Well, shut my mouth! Just like a picture show!" Jake exclaimed excitedly. Memories of Jesse James passed through his mind. He had always liked reading about this wicked bold "James fellow." The bandit was the mild youth's secret hero.
"Picture show nothing! This was real," Mr. Cameron said, a trifle crestfallen and scornful, "This was the real thing, boy, not no painted sissies a floating over no screen.
"Yes, sir, them three sprung at me and be dogged if they didn't get every blame cent of my sixty dollars, and some little extry change out of my other pocket, too. There was two men and a woman. I always thought they was show people took it, you know. The circus had just been to Siler. Of course I can't say for sure. We never found no trace at all but a roll of new circus tickets up in the thicket a few days later."
"Weren't it a sight, Pa?" Juanita said, patting him lovingly on the arm.
They sat silently. After a moment hounds began whining outside the store.
"I'll swannie. Them Northern hunters is back," Juanita spoke with interest.
Three men entered, and stood near the door. They were preceded by the mail man who had come in to warm himself. "Cold-, you all is lucky being able to set", the carrier said, eyeing Jake and Ted Cameron enviously. "Just resting up for Judgement Day. I reckon."
"Just totes letters about and makes more than I do plowing," a farmer murmured to Jake. There was a tinge of malice in his tone. It was well known in Barnett's Crossroads that he and the mail carrier had once been rivals for the hand of plump Miss Mattie Sirus. The farmer had lost.
Juanita had gone to wait on the pine- hurst hunters. They wanted to buy some twenty guage shells.
"Is the rabbits and squirrels shopping, Mr. Floyed?" Juanita asked politely.
"Pretty good. We're having rotten luck with quail, though," he answered in his crisp voice.
The girl joined the two men by the fire. She smiled at Jake.
"I have had some funny things to happen when I've been Keeping the store by myself and Pa away," she said. "One time old Miz Jane Sedberry came right quick early one morning to get a extry Bible for her oldest girl, Lula Ann to read in. preacher Wilson had borrowed Miss Jane's. Ann had been "traipsin'" some again with Buck Allen's boy, I reckon."
"Well, I declare," Jake said, noticing her slender waist and hands.
"The sweetest maiden lady peddler comes by in the spring with a whole line of pins, ribbons and such. Effen she don't come on time, I'm real anxious, but she always gets here," Juanita continued.
"Be doggone if I didn't sell goods for a wedding dress once. Sue Woods come by all excited, cheeks red and eyes bright aholding Jesse Dunlap by the hand. Them two was catching the train to Fayetteville next day as man and wife.
Be dogged if I didn't sell the goods, make it up, and fit it on Sue by that night. She was pretty as a picture in it too." "Of course," Juanita added modestly, "the goods weren't much--just dotted blue cotton, but I always say sweet feelings helps a new dress look right. I were sure wishing Sue and Jess all happiness while I seamed it up. Course I wouldn't take nothing for the dress--just a setting of eggs later when they was settled."
Dusk had fallen when Jake again looked at his watch. "Hey folks, I've just got to get from here. I've set all day." He rose slowly, as if against his will. The father and daughter bade him goodbye reluctantly.
The rain had stopped and the stars were out clear and bright. Jake felt a lot better about everything, in general, and as he was getting into his Ford, he asked Juanita if she would be at the store when he made his return trip the following spring. She replied "Effen nothing happens, which in Barnett's Crossroads means, "I'll be waiting for you, Jake."