Approximately 2,200 words
SOUTH CAROLINA "WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: MARY GREEN
Date of First Writing	December 1, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Gertrude Hail (Negro)
Fictitious Name	Mary Green
Street Address	2589 Cherry Street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Domestic Service
Name of Writer	Verner Lea
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #3613
Verner Lea
Columbia, S. C.
12-1-38
LIFE STORIES
GERTRUDE HALL
(Negro)
2589 CHERRY STREET
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA
Gertrude Hall's unusually large eyes bear the expression of a dumb animal in distress. She is a tall, very thin and emaciated Negro woman of forty-four years, with hair just beginning to turn slightly gray. She lives on Cherry Street, in what might be termed a slum section of Columbia, S. C. The door of the little three-room shack was opened by a small, black Negro girl about five years old who called out, "Ma, a lady wants to see you."
Gertrude Hall came out. She made a neat appearance in a dark shirt and a red sweater which had seen better days. Large gold earrings hung from her ears. A gold ring was on her hand.
The neat but scantily furnished bedroom contained an iron bed in one corner, with a pink spread on it. In another corner was an old-fashioned wardrobe, and an improvised dresser stood near. On the wall hung small framed photographs of various members of the family who had died, with a large picture of "The Last Supper" over the mantel. The Biblical texts, "The Lord is my Shepherd," and "The Lord is my Keeps" were on either side of the mantelpiece.
Four bright looking small children, the oldest five years, crowded into the room. They were Gertrude's grandchildren, with whom she shared her home. Undernourished and thinly clad, they appeared to need warmth against the cold of the December day, yet there was not a spark of fire in the house. Talley May, aged twenty-three, and the oldest of Gertrude's two daughters, sat nursing a baby that looked to be not more than a month old but was in reality eight months.
From the adjoining bedroom came the sound of some one groaning. "That's my dear old mother," said Gertrude. "Ma took real sick in the night, and I thought sho' she would die before I could give her any relief. She must of had 'cute indigestion. It was round three o'clock in the morning, and I woke up hearing Ma groaning and callin' on the Lord. I got up and rubbed her, heated water and put a bottle to her feet, and give her a few drops of camphor, and after while she got easy.
"Ma is sick, though, and she's eighty-nine years old. Ma's name's Nancy Lawson. Pa was Sam Lawson; he's been dead a long time. They had ten head of chillun. I'm the only one left. I take care of Ma, and it just near 'bout grieves me to death 'cause I can't do more for her. She can't even wash herself out a dress, and I have to bathe her and treat her just like she's a baby. It 'most kill me to see her like this. She's the best woman on this earth. She's been good and kind to everybody all her life, and she's always worked hard 'till she got so old.
"She and Pa first lived up on the Wlliam Martin place near Winnsboro, South Carolina. Mr. Martin had a big farm. I've heard Ma say she could hoe out a whole acre of cotton in a day. They paid her fifty cents a day when prices were good, but if cotton was low they give her forty cents.
"After Pa died, Ma came to Columbia and lived on Green Street. She cooked for Mr. S. E. Powell, on King Street, for twenty-three years, and right now it nearly break Mr. Powell's heart 'cause he can't help her. She is a good Christian woman; been that way all her life. 'Course Ma can't go to church now, but she always use to tell us that folks sho' couldn't live right outside the church.
"Mr. Powell went to see 'bout the old age pension for Ma, and they promised to send her some money on eighth of October gone, and that's the last we have heard of it. A lady come by here way last year, too, and say they was gonna get the old age pension for Ma, but we ain't never hear no more 'bout it. I went to the office not so far back, and they told me she would get it, but she sho' ain't got it.
"We have to pay two dollars and a half rent for this house, and don't have any garden or chickens or anything to help out. Sometimes I get so worried, jus' studyin' and wonderin' where the money's comin' from, I 'most go crazy. I wants to move to a cheaper place where I can have a little garden spot, but I'm 'fraid we wouldn't get the mail if any of us did get a work notice. They calls it relief, but ain't none of us ever got any.
"Don't Talley, my husband, help? Not much, ma'am. Talley is a mean man. He worked in Charleston a long time, and never wrote nor sent us nothin'. When he got out of work he come on back here. He gets some work now, a few days a week helpin' to build houses, but not relief work. He so mean he won't even let these chillun eat if I ain't here to see to it, and he 'most worry me to death. Yesterday Talley May wanted to make herself and Ma a cup of hot tea, and he jus' cuss and carried on scandalous. He don't treat Ma half right and make her feel so bad, 'cause she know he don't want her here, and she never done nothin' but good to nobody in her life.
"I lived over on Senate Street ten years before movin' here, and I been here three years. I had a good job there. I cooked for Mrs. Brown. She paid me four dollars a week, but after a bit she moved to Augusta, Georgia. Seem like then was when things started gettin' bad for me, and kept gettin' worse. I had a bad spell of malaria fever two summers ago, and seem like my strength jus' left me then, and I never have got it back. I can't even get my poor mother underclothes, medicine or anything."
Talley May, the young daughter who nursed the baby, spoke up: '"Why, that ain't nothin'. Ain't nobody goin' to do nothin' for you, 'less you got the money to put right in their hand. Wasn't this baby of mine so sick I thought ever breath it draw would be its last? I didn't know what to do. I jus' wrung my hands and run out of the door up to a lady's house where I use to work. She said: 'We got doctors in town what's paid to doctor folks what ain't got the money.' And she called up and told him how things was, and he come out, and I hope God may strike me dead this minute if I ain't tollin' you the truth. That doctor come, and you know he wouldn't do nothin' for my baby, or leave it a drop of medicine 'til I give him two dollars. We had 'zactly one dollar and a half in the house we was savin' for rent, and I had to run out the house and borrow fifty cents 'fore he would do a God's thing for this poor sufferin' baby. That's the God's truth if ever I spoke it. That was the cruelist man I ever see'd in my life." Gertrude shook her head sadly and verified the statement of Talley May. "Yes, ma'am, Talley May has had a herd life too, and I hates it so, she bein' so young. She's got two chillun, and she never is been married. I tell you she ought to save me all the worry she can, and not be runnin' 'round with boys who ain't thinkin' 'bout nothin' but gettin' people in trouble. My other daughter is name Hermenia, she's seventeen. Fred Spigner is her husband, and they have one child. This little one name Glory is her baby, she's sixteen months old, and she can't eat like Talley May's baby. That poor little fellow have to eat anything come to his hand, but dis Glory she was raised on milk, Carnation cream, and she won't hardly take nothin' but milk. Heap of times we gets plum without a drop of milk, and no money to buy any.
"And now I'm plum outdone with Hermenia. Other day I see her comin' down the street and I say: 'Hermenia, is anything wrong with you again or is my eyes deceive me?'"
"She say: 'Yes, Ma.'"
"Well, I like to know if you've los' your mind? Fred with no work, and you got no work, and you wouldn't had a bed to sleep in if I hadn't give you one of mine. Here I am gettin' gray as a fox and worry is jus' a killing me. Fred done registered twice at the relief office, and was promised work, but they never have sent him no notice yet. I got no job but jus' a little odd work that I go out and beg for, and that don't pay nothin'. I got a little job of two hours today and made twenty-five cents. I spent fifteen cents of that for food, and I've got one dime of that lef' to buy a handful of wood to keep the chill off of Ma and all these chillun tonight. Fred's a smart boy and a good boy, and he'll sho' work when he got a job to work at.
"If my brother Sam was livin', me nor Ma neither wouldn't have nothin' to worry 'bout. He was one good boy, and loved Ma more'n anything in this wide world. He always done for Ma and helped me too Wasn't a lazy bone in his body, and he always worked and made good money. He married when he was young. His wife is named Elvira, and she live on Green Street; but him and his wife jus' couldn't get along. 'Seem like she jus' never was satisfied with nothin' he would do, and it seem like Sam jus' never could wean himself away from Ma either, and it riled her 'cause Sam was good to his own mother.
"When the world War broke out, he was one of the first ones to offer his service. He went to camp at Newport News, Virginia. When he lef', seem like Ma jus' grieve so for him. He wrote to her and told her not to worry, for the Government would pay her some money for him. His war insurance was made out to Ma and to his son, Tom Lawson.
"He worked at camp, too, didn't jus' put on his uniform and walk around like heap of them done, but he helped build, and do anything that come to his hand. He never did get across, though. The very day he was to sail, peace was declared. Soon after that he come back to Ma, but wasn't with her long 'fore he took pneumonia and died. He went to war from Ma's house, and he died in her house. Ma the one nursed him and stood over him and see him draw his last breath. She sho' hate to see him die, and 'most grieved her heart out for him.
"Elvira, his wife, crooked up some kind of mess and got part of the money from the Government, and Ma never has got one penny. He been dead goin' on nine years. The year he died he was forty years old."
From the adjoining room came the sound of Aunt Nancy's voice as she awakened from a fitful nap and found that her favorite great-great-grand- child had disappeared from under the covers. "Whar dat little Glory gone? She sweetest little thing. Dere she is. She's sweet and happy little thing. Come here to Ma. How come you gits out of Ma's bed?"
Gertrude said: "Ma loves all these chillun and so good to 'em, but Glory her favorite.
"Me and Ma use to have heaps of good white friends. I been knowin' Mis' Rosa, Mis' Kate, Mis' Ellie and Mis' Georgia Romanstine for years. They are sisters and live on the fifteen hundred block of Pickens Street. I use to work for them off and on. They would always help me when I was in trouble or needed anything. But they been hard hit too and are in right poor circumstances now. But they sho' are fine folks, and me and Ma love all of them. 'Course they ain't as young as they was once either, but if Mis' Rosa could, I know she would help me. She sent Ma some tobacco last week, 'cause she knows Ma loves to smoke her pipe, and I don't never have money for tobacco.
"I've worked hard all my life, and don't remember ever havin' any pleasure. I reckon the few months I went to school was about the best, 'cause I wasn't old enough to worry so. I went to school four months one year, and six the next; but after I quit, I'd study, and I can read and write and spell pretty good.
"Talley May went through the fifth grade, end Hermenia went through the seventh; and I want all these little 'uns to go when they gits old enough. Seems like people sho' gets along heap better these days if they got some education."