January 24, 1939
Abe Link, Proprietor
Southern Department Store
Salespersons:
Mrs. Maud Elliott
Mrs. B.F. McEntire
Mr. Mell McCurrdy
Broad and Jackson Streets
Athens, Georgia
G.M.
DAY IN A DEPARTMENT STORE
I selected a cold, rainy day in January to visit my favorite department store for an interview with its proprietor, Solomon Goldberg. I knew that on a disagreeable day fewer customers would venture out and he would probably have more time to talk.
"Why did you ever leave a nice steam heated office to come down here?” cried the salespeople, as I entered.
"I came for a talkfest,” was my reply, ”and I expect to learn a great deal before I leave here.”
I was just in time to join them in their morning coca cola.
Mr. Goldberg arriving as we drained the last drop from our soft drink bottles, wanted to know what sort of business sense people had who knew? no better than to swallow iced drinks on a cold day.
Mr. Goldberg's Dixie Department Store is warmed by a large circulating heater in the center of the first floor. All of his employees were gathered close around the fire waiting for the store to get comfortable before starting their tasks of dusting counters and straightening stock and displays before the customers might begin coming in. Each was trying to get a word about his or her chores for the day into the general conversation.
One saleswoman has charge of the drygoods department, which is on the first floor; a man is in charge of the shoe and men’s clothing department on the first floor; and another saleslady presides over the ladies’ ready-to-wear and millinery department on the balcony. Soon they scattered to their various posts and Mr. Goldberg began:
"You know this is one of the oldest brick buildings in town. It was erected when Broad street was the main business street of Athens. There are three stories in the structure. My store only uses the first floor and the balcony. The Cohen Brothers have offices on the second floor and the shirt and overall factory that they used to operate on the third floor is there yet, but under new management and ownership.
"It was in this building that Meyer Brothers did business for a long, long time. In fact I’ve heard that this is where they had their first store here, and their home was down on Oconee street at that time. You can know it’s been a long time ago, for it's been a long time since they moved from there. After the Meyers moved up to their fine new building on the next street, Lewis Bloch had a dry goods store here for some years, and then it was bought by the father of the Cohens who have offices over us now. The old man has been dead a long time but the building is still owned by his family. He and his sons ran a store here for several years, but when the old man's health failed he sold out to my father-in-law, end now he has passed away too. When the Cohens sold out their interests in the store business, they opened up their overall and shirt factory upstairs, and they ran it until last year, when they sold out to another company.
"We moved to Athens when I was about nine years old and I've lived here since that time. I went to school here and graduated from the University of Georgia. My dad had a store on Broad Street and there's where I was kept busy in the hours before and after school. Boys don't have to work as hard now, but those were great days.
"I'll never forget one night when I was a member of the freshman class and the sophomores were trying to prevent us from attending our freshman class banquet. They carried me out below Princeton and tied me to a tree on the riverbank, promising that if I could get away from that tree and make my way to our banquet nail I would be allowed to attend without further interference; otherwise they would return after the festivities and release me. I struggled man-fully against those ropes, but was not having any success in my efforts to get untied. Finally I heard an old man over on the hill hollering at his mules as he plowed his little patch of a garden. His 'gee-haw,' and 'whoa, mule,' sounded mighty good to me. Confident that he needed only to know my plight to be anxious to help me, I started yelling as loud as I could. He did hear me and came to investigate. I begged him to untie me. 'What'll you give me?' he shrewdly asked. After some discussion he agreed to release me for a pair of shoes to be delivered to him at my dad's store the following day. He cut the rope and I lit out for home.
"Yes, I had to walk, tut who minded that if we could outdo the sophs. I hurried along confident that they would keep their word - not to bother me again that night - and when I reached home I arrayed myself in my party clothes, tuxedo and high top hat, and went strutting off with my head high in the air, bound for the old Imperial hotel, where our freshman banquet was to be held. The sophs were all lined up outside. ’How in the hell did you get away?' they demanded when they spied me. I grinned, pulled off my silk hat and made them a sweeping bow, a grand gesture. But, Oh, boy how I paid for that I For in spite of their gentlemen’s agreement that if a freshman worked out of any place they put him that he would be free to go where he wanted to, they threw rotten eggs all over my clothes and my swanky silk hat received an especially rare vintage of those eggs in unlimited quantity. I was ruined. I couldn’t go to our banquet wearing those clothes that were splashed with rotten eggs, so one of my friends helped me to get out of those garments and he tied a couple of aprons around me. That’s how I attended the banquet, but comical as that sounds, some of the other freshmen were worse off than I was."
An old Negress could be heard arguing with a salesman and insisting that he let her see the manager. Mr. Goldberg had her escorted to his desk and then he courteously listened to her complaint. ’’Now you just look right hyar at dis pair of shoes. I just got ’em last Sadday night and already dey's done busted plum’ out."
He gave careful inspection to the pair of felt house slippers that she displayed, and then asked, "Auntie, didn’t you get 'em a little too small?"
"I never got ’em a fall," she retorted, "my gal, she done buyed ’em for me."
"Take her back there and fit her out with a new pair of house slippers," Mr. Goldberg instructed the saleswoman, "and this time be sure and see that they actually do fit."
"I done told ’em you'd make my shoes good," the old Negress boasted, as she thanked him and made her way back to the shoe department.
Two Negro men came in and asked to see overall jumpers. A salesman carried them to the department where overalls are kept at the rear of the store. They first wanted to see some "warm jumpers with lining in ’em." After unfolding and shaking out every lined jumper in the house, they decided that they would "ruther have some of dem sort what ain't got no linings." They were shown these and while much discussion followed regarding the relative merits and prices of both types of jumpers, they managed to unfold and handle practically every one of the unlined jumpers. Finally after exhausting the stock of jumpers as well as trying the patience of the salesman, they departed to "look around som'ers else."
"That’s what we get all through the day," remarked a saleswoman as we watched the prospective customers for overall jumpersleave the store. "Why, sometimes I'll meet people at the door and ask if I can help them, and do you know they'll walk all over the store and out again, without even answering me at all. Then some-times they'll wander all around the store before finally asking to be directed to a rest room. We have all kinds of experiences, some comical, some exasperating, and some that are very agreeable. In fact the majority of our customers are nice, agreeable people, and it is a pleasure to wait on them."
A woman came in looking for a handbag to match a suit. The saleswoman helped to make the selection, also showing gloves and other accessories to match the bag. The delighted customer was profuse in her thanks for the assistance so cheerfully rendered. After selling some children’s socks to a man, a child’s sweater to a woman, and cloth to another customer, this saleswoman rushed to answer the phone in her department. Someone wanted her to look out on the side street and see if there was a good dray for hire, asking her to be sure and select a drayman who had a good horse and wagon.
"Is making contact for draymen and their customers part of your duties in a department store?" I asked. "Why, yes. We don’t mind it. Drays and trucks collect around this street corner, and some people think we have time to hunt them up at any time they want one.”
A well dressed little man entered and asked for Mr. Goldberg. He introduced himself as Mr. Jacobson. "I’m on my way from Florida to Hot Springs. I’ve been sick for quite a while and my money has run out. I need help to get to Hot Springs."
"How long have you been ill?” asked Mr. Goldberg.
"For sometime,” he answered. "I'm not accustomed to asking for help, but I spent everything I had trying to get well. I’ve always donated liberally to our society for the help of Jews, and it is embarrassing now to have to ask help for myself, but I just can’t stay on here in this weather. It’ll put me right back in bed."
"Have you been to see the president of the Jewish society here?" asked Mr. Goldberg.
"Yes, and he gave me a place to stay last night, but said that was all he could do for me. The president of the ladies’ auxiliary of our society here told me that nothing could be done locally to help me. When I told her that I mi gut get down sick any minute and asked her who I should refer to, her or the rabbi, what do you suppose she said? - I’ve never had one of our race talk to me like that before - Why, she actually said, ’Go call on the city. They have a department organized to take care of people in need. ’ When I was prosperous and had plenty of money to spend I had plenty of friends." After asking Mr. Goldberg to give him the name and address of the local rabbi, the irate visitor departed.
A traveling salesman came in to show Mr. Goldberg his line of ladies’ ready-to-wear from lingerie to dresses and suits. The buyer of this department declared nothing was needed in this line, as the orders for spring stock had been placed weeks ago. "Why is it I’m never able to land your order?" questioned the "drummer."
"Because you're always too late," was the reply.
“Business hasn’t been as good as usual on this trip," declared the salesman. "I don’t think anybody made any money in ready-to-wear last year. They were lucky if they broke even.”
“Well,” began Mr. Goldberg, "Fall of the year is when I get my best business, for the largest portion of my trade comes from farm families. They had short crops last year and did not clear anything much. Most of them depended on cotton for a money crop and lost on that. When the farmers fail I always lose too.”
Men’s underwear was the objective of two Negro men. "Do you
Mean union suits?” asked the salesman.
"Yassir, dat’s hit,” answered the prospective customers.
The heavy weight garments were too heavy for them end they declared the lighter weight, “wouldn’t last in our sort of wuk." Nothing was just right and they left after assuring the salesman, "If us don’t find no better ones, us’llsho be back.”
A girl, a co-ed from the educational institution across the way, came in and asked to see an umbrella. Mr. Goldberg waited on her. She asked for an oil-skin umbrella, but when he showed her those, she wanted a cellophane one. When she saw the cellophane parasols, she decided she must have a silk one, and then decided to purchase the oil-skin that she had first inspected. Then she asked to see overshoes; not galoshes, but plain old-fashioned overshoes. She asked if she would be permitted to try them on over her socks.
After a futile attempt to pull them on over her wet shoes, she left with the umbrella, saying she would return for the overshoes. After the outside door closed behind her, Mr. Goldberg told the salesman to give her size 8½ in case she returned, for she would never be able to get on an 8. He declared she had asked if her feet would look smaller if she wore overshoes fitted closely over her hose, with no shoes. "Somebody's been teasing that girl about her number eights," declared Mr. Goldberg.
Two Negro girls brushed by the salespeople and walked up the steps to the ready-to-wear department on the balcony. They ignored the store employees who were waiting on the balcony to serve them, and walked to the dress racks, where they pulled out one dress after another, looked at them, then walked out of the store without speaking one word.
A saleswoman in the piece goods department started out to lunch and as she passed through the outer door, the husband of one of her loyal customers met her with the request to match some cloth for his wife. She came beck and waited on him before going for her well earned noon recess, notwithstanding the delay made her late in filling an engagement.
Two Negro women on the balcony were looking at a child's size wash dress. They were arguing as to what size was necessary.
One said one size would fit the child, while the other insisted that another size would be necessary. Finally they bought a dress, and then went to see the hats. The saleswoman was very obliging, and showed the new hats, explaining the different style s and colors. One Negress picked up a small rolled brim hat and said, "Ain’t dis hyarpurty? I sho does lak it, and I means to come back hyar and git dis very hat.” They looked at the new spring dresses and spent much time inspecting the spring suits. One of them opened up a box she bad been carrying around with her end compered a suit she bad purchased elsewhere with the stock on display here before she could be convinced of the quality of the ones before her on the rack. The second Negress declared, "I'se a-coming right back hyar to git my suit." As they left the store after what seemed an endless tour of inspection, the saleswoman remarked, "It’s all in the day’s work."
"Only the other day I sold a coat to a woman," continued the saleslady. "It was a hard sale, for she did not know what she wanted. Finally I boxed it up and handed it to her, wrapped and ready to take it home, and extended my hand for the cash. What do you think the customer said, Well, listen to this, ’I just reckon as how I won’t take it.’ It took me another good hour to sell her that coat all over again.
"Another day I had a customer that I had to show everything in this department. ’Mamma’s got one just like it,’ she declared after she looked at each article. Very often these young flappers come in and try on dresses and hats just to have a place to rest and smoke, but they are usually very nice.
"One day a woman asked to be shown the ’very latest’ in dresses. After trying them all on and examining them carefully, seam by seam, what do you suppose she said? ’Thanks a lot for all the new ideas you’ve given me. Pm a dressmaker and I just wanted to see how they made up the new styles, and how they actually looked.'
"Some people think that salespersons have easy jobs, but they just don't know what it is to have to keep stock in place and to brush and dust it every day, and it takes hours to get it properly arranged after a busy day. At the end of every season things have to be packed away to make room for the new things for the next season. Every year as I pack and put things away, I wonder if I'll be here next year to unpack them. I’ve sold goods in this same block for 27 years.
"Tell me all about it," I invited her.
"Well," she began, "I'll tell you what I can. I was just a young girl when I went to work for old Mr. Cohen in this same building. That $5 a week that he paid me to start off, looked like big money to me for I had never worked before. I worked two weeks, and then I got a message telling me to report to the office. I just knew I'd done something wrong and that they were going to fire me. My knees were shaking so I could hardly stand up by the time I got to that office, dust imagine my surprise and delight when the boss told me the owners were satisfied with my work and that they had decided to raise my wages to $10 a week! And that after only two weeks trial!
"Business was good those days and we had to work mighty hard, but we didn’t have much competition and the store made good money. Farmers would come in to outfit a whole family at one time, and their bills ran into money. We got a bonus check from old Mr. Cohen and his sons always gave each of us a piece of gold money at Christmas time."
While she stopped to wait on customers, I looked around her department. One side was stocked with well-filled dress racks, and in the central space of the balcony were several larger dress racks of the circular type. They featured house dresses at prices ranging from 98¢, $1,98 to $3,95. Other dresses were priced from 98¢ to $7,95. Children's dresses were from 49¢ up. Popular priced tailored suits averaged $9.90 each. There was a wide range of prices for winter coats, according to weight and quality. Raincoats were priced from $1,98 to $2.98. The opposite side of the balcony was devoted to millinery. All sizes, shapes and colors of hats were there. A table in the center of that department displayed a line of hats priced at 98¢ each. More expensive hats were in the show cases and shelves along the wall. A large glass case held blouses, gloves, handbags, sport clothes, and uniforms at various prices.
The alteration department was at the rear of the balcony. In the fitting room was a table, a chair, and a long mirror, and the sewing room was outfitted with a long sewing table and electric sewing machines, an ironing board and electric iron, and another long table end mirror. In the main part of the balcony was a tall mirror for the convenience of customers who were trying on hats end dresses.
The cashiers' stand occupies part of the balcony. Here is where the baskets come from all over the store, bearing the cash and purchases to be wrapped. It is only in the busiest season that there is a supplementary register and wrapping counter on the first floor.
The customers left and the saleswoman came back to resume her story. "Did you know that there’s been two weddings right here on this balcony?" was her surprising question. "That was when I was working for Mr. Cohen. I dressed both brides. The first couple was from out in the country. The bride came in and bought her outfit from underwear to shoes and hat. We dressed her in the fitting room and celled a Justice of the Peace to come over here and marry them. I never laughed so much in my whole life. That Justice of the Peace asked the groom if he would take the bride and feed her on cornbread and collards. All our salespeople and a crowd of customers and other people who had heard of what was going on, were crowded into the store to see and hear what they could of the wedding, and I thought they would laugh themselves to death when they heard that question. I never saw such a wedding as that before, and there certainly hasn’t been any more just like that since then.
"The next wedding was really nice. The couple was from Madison County. We dressed that bride too. They had brought their friends to stand up with them, and we called Rev. Elliott to come and marry them. This was a solemn and dignified wedding, very different from the first one.
"Mr. Cohen joined the buy-a-bale movement in 1914 when the farmers had been through such a bad year and couldn’t get enough from their cotton to pay the cost of growing it. Mr. Cohen bought a bale of cotton and put it in the window with a big old sign on it that read, 'We will buy your cotton at 10¢ a pound.' And let me tell you, be sure did buy the farmers' cotton, bale after bale of it. We did a grand business that fall for they all traded with us, it seemed, and by taking their cotton off their hands at so much more than the market price, we kept our old customers and made lots of new ones among the farmers.
"When the World War started, Mr. Cohen's two oldest sons were among the first to volunteer to fight for our country. How we did hate to see those boys go 'over there,' and we knew how it was hurting Mr. Cohen, but he said that he didn't want his boys to be slackers and he didn't want anybody to have any excuse to say that he had raised slackers. We just tried ourselves that year, to see how hard we could work. Business was good everywhere and we sure got our part. That Christmas my bonus check was for $300.
"Mr. Cohen was one good old man to work for and he appreciated what his employees did for him. I never had trouble with him but once. I was a little late getting to work one morning and several customers were waiting for me. The boss gave me a dirty look and a raking over the coals right before the customers. That made me mad. I went ahead with my customers and sold them all I could, but when they were gone I put on my hat and coat and went by the office, told them I was quitting for the reason that I didn't intend to let any man humiliate me before my customers again. Then I walked out. Mr. Cohen called to me, but I didn't answer and I didn’t stop walking. I kept right on until I reached my home. Not long after I got there two of Mr. Cohen's sons were knocking on my door. They begged me to come back. They told me what was wrong with their dad. A bank that he had several thousand dollars in had closed that morning, and he was worried and hadn't realized he was so cross. I stayed home a week and went back and never had any more trouble with him, although I worked for him as long as he stayed in business. In all I worked for him 14 years and 10 months.
"After he went out of business, I worked for another store in this same block until 1932, and then I came here to work for Mr. Goldberg."
She left for her noon recess period, and I went back to the first floor. I saw a saleswoman approach two women who had just entered the front door. They told her that they had just come in to "warm up and rest a while." She placed chairs for them by the heater and went to wait on another customer, and I listened to their conversation.
"I just had to come to town today, to see about getting something to fix for my children's school lunch," said one of the women. "You know I has three in school and they's got to the place where they think they's too good to take jelly on buttered bread in their lunch, and for that matter they don't want no pre -serves neither, and it's been a long time since any of 'em would let me put an egg in their lunch box, no matter how nice I fixed it up. They just thinks they's got to have things like apples, oranges, and bananas. Why, if I didn’tjust set ray foot right down, they wouldn’t take a thing some days ’cept candy. At home my children eats really more than most grown folks, for they're not finicky and picayunish there. They just get that was about what they takes for lunch.”
The other woman took advantage of the opportunity to get in a word. ”I just had to come to town to git my radio fixed up again. When they told me it would take all of two hours to fix it, I just made up my mind to come on here and wait. I knowed these folks here wouldn’t mind. They all us has such good fires and nice comfortable places to rest. Why, sometimes folks eats their lunch right here when they aim to be in town all day. I bring eggs and garden stuff along to sell 'most every time I come to town and these folks that work at this store are mighty good to buy whatever I have to sell. All my youngsters likes eggs and I don't know what I'd do without ’em-when it comes to fixing lunches. Speaking of children reminds me that mine told me to be sure and bring back our radio. We all likes to listen to it every night when we are through with our work. I’m glad they likes it for it keeps ’em from gallivanting around at night so much.”
The Bible was their next topic of conversation. "Folks don't read it enough, and mighty few of 'em reads it right,” was the opinion of one of the women. ”And anyway don't nobody understand all of it,” she continued. After arguing pro and con in a good natured, but very serious, way, they went out together to see if the repair work on the radio had been completed.
One of the saleswomen came back to the fire. "This has been a grand day for sweater sales," she said. "Whenever it is rainy and cold outside our sales in knit goods go right up." She paused as though she wondered if she should proceed with the revelation of her thoughts, then giggled and said, "Listen, I'll tell you folks a good joke on the boss."
She did not know that Mr. Goldberg had just returned to the store and was standing right behind her. "Now look here," he laughed, "If anybody's going to talk about the boss, let him talk first, so he can tell why all his clerks are so much older than he is that they have no respect for him and just, talk to him any old way.”
This brought a storm of laughing protests, and then the argument began. One salesperson announced, "Our boss was one of the best soft ball pitchers here for years and years, until Father Time stopped him and now he plays golf." Mr. Goldberg laughed, "They'll ruin me yet," he wailed in mock distress. "Better let her tell her little joke, for I know I'll have to pay for it," he said.
The saleswoman continued: "Well, last week a stout woman came in to buy a sweater in size 38, for another person, and nothing would be acceptable except dark blue. I know our stock pretty veil and am well acquainted with how sizes run in knit goods. When the fat customer stated that she was not as large as the person for whom the purchase was intended, I knew at once that nothing less than a size 42 would fit the customer and as the other person was larger, I sold her a size 46, saying nothing about the labeled size, and assured her that if the garment did not fit we would exchange it or refund her money.
When she had gone, the boss bet me a couple of coca colas that the sweater would be returned because it was sure to be too large. Well, yesterday the woman came back, and he couldn’t wait to ask her how the sweeter fit. Was he surprised when she replied, 'It was just a perfect fit and we are well pleased with it."
"How about the bet?" I asked, "Did the boss pay off?"
"No," he hastened to reply, "but I’m going to pay right now, for if these folks ever do get anything on me I never hear the last of it. But they are pretty good sports after all, and we've worked together so long that we don’t mind what each other says and does.
"We have extra help every Saturday," he continued, "and during the fall season we add several extras to the force, but it's these long dull, off-season days that whip us ell down. They are worse than being busy. Our best trade is from country people, but last year the farmers made such short crops that our fall season was mighty disappointing. You see, they had depended too much on their cotton, and the boll weevil ruined most of that. When the farmers fail, we all lose. While business was not so good last year, we are looking forward to better times this year and I don’t believe we are going to be disappointed this time.
"We open at 8:00 in the morning and close at 6:00, except on Saturday nights, when we stay open late for the benefit of our customers that have to work too. Our trade includes all classes and kinds of people. Most of them are nice, but we do run across some amusing things sometimes.
"Last fall during the rush season a fine young fellow from the college was working here. He was well liked by everyone here, but did we get some good laughs on him! A country woman came in to buy some shoes. This young man waited on her. After he had tried on several pairs of shoes, all at once she demanded to know if he was a married man. He was dumfounded, and hardly knew how to answer, but stammered as he told her that he was not married. She refused to let him finish waiting on her. ’I'm a respectable married woman, and I don’t want no young upstart fitting shoes on my feet,’ she indignantly stated. ’If there ain’t no settled married men in this store to fit the shoes for married women, I’ll just go somewhere else to buy my shoes.’ An older salesman was called and when she was convinced that he was not only married, but was the father of a large family, she permitted him to fit the shoes, and as she left the store with her package, she was muttering, ’There ain’t no young upstart going to try shoes on my feet.'
"It seems that the shoe department is where most of our laughs come from. Nine out of ten women insist, on shoes of sizes that are too small, and then can’t understand why they aren't comfortable. The colored folks are very amusing. They’ll try and try to get on a shoe that is several sizes too small, explaining that ’my foots won’t look so pow’ful big in dese little shoes.’
"The ready-to-wear department has similar experiences in selling garments. We have to keep close watch on crowds. When groups of people come in together and flock around one spot all too often they conceal someone who is able to pick up and conceal articles, even if we think we are looking right at them."
When Mr. Goldberg left for lunch, he told his staff not to expect him back that afternoon, as he had an engagement. Turning to me he said, "Don’t let these folks tell you too much on me."
I asked the saleswoman in charge of the piece goods and notions to tell me about her department. "Well," she began, "at the end of a busy day my tables and counters look like a cyclone has been through them, but I dbn’t mind, Even if they don’t buy when they are making the most disorder, they usually do come back and ask for me personally and often, a large sale of piece goods results from several patient failures to sell. Through the years I’ve built up a good and loyal following, who will not let anyone wait on them but me. If I’m busy when they come in, they’ll wait until I can get to them. Most of them are considerate and understanding, but I have had people to come in and after going through everything on my counters, shelves and showcases, they would tell me that they didn’t come in to buy, but were just killing time by looking at things, and that anyway clerks were paid to show the goods.
"It’s in the fall of the year that every department in this store is busiest. I try to prepare for that season by putting in the best possible selection of piece goods and everything I can find in the way of notions, but invariably before the season gets well under way, somebody will come and ask for something I did not stock up. I have a time with the new help we have, to put on in rush seasons.
Often we hire girls who have never worked in a store before, and they have to learn the stock and the prices, as well as how to handle customers. Last year one new girl asked me if cloth marked 19¢ was to be sold at 19¢ a bolt, or a yard, Things like that make me think of when I first started out working in a store. My first Job was as cashier for the James Company at $8 a month. 'They had two stores here then. I never had worked before and was just as green as anybody ever could be. I simply didn't know a thing about a store. I didn't have a bit of trouble learning how to handle change but the telephone had me. I never had used a telephone in my life, and didn't know how to answer it. I'd just let it ring 'til somebody else answered it. One day when it was ringing away, somebody called to me, 'Answer that telephone.' I just didn't know what to do. I picked up that receiver and said, 'Hello,' just like I had seen other folks do, and I never heard such a noise in my life as came through that phone.
A Jewish woman was talking and I couldn't make out a word she was saying, so I just put that receiver back on the hook. It immediately started ringing again, and I let it keep on ringing until some of the others came and answered it. It was our boss' wife. She wanted to know who that d --- fool was that made such a mess of answering the phone. It wasn't long before she came into the office demanding to know why I'd hung up on her. I just had to tell her the truth, that I didn’t know how to use a telephone. She looked at me right hard as if she didn't know whether to believe me or not, but she showed me how to use the phone. She was always mighty good to me after that, and I worked for them until I got married.
"I was mighty little and thin then and Uncle Duke was awfully good to me. He was my boss' wife’s bachelor brother, and everybody working in the store called him ’Uncle Duke.' His digestion was bad and he didn’t have any appetite much. They used to fix up the nicest sort of food for him and he would tell ’em that he didn’t have time to eat at home, Just to put it on a tray and send it to the office for him. Then he’d give it to me, for he said I needed it the most, on account of my only having cold sandwiches for my lunch. I didn't know then that he thought I was thin and puny looking and believed it was because I wrasn't getting enough of the right food to eat.
What I didn't know about that didn’t hurt me, and I surely did enjoy those good things he smuggled to me. He’d bring me turkey, chicken, and goose, all cooked in those unusual ways that Jewish people prepare them, and the cakes and pies and other good things were just wonderful to me. I never dreamed that his folks supposed he was eating all those good things that he gave to me.
"Uncle Duke had a hobby of saving gold money. Every time I got any gold in the register he would take it out and replace it with paper money. His people all knew about his gold-saving hobby, but after he died they couldn’t find his accumulations of gold. They sent for me to come out to their house and told me that they knew he liked me and talked to me a good deal, and they wanted to know if he had ever told me anything about where he kept his gold money. I was sorry that I didn’t know anything about it and couldn’t help ’em. I never heard any more about it, but I suppose they must have found the gold.
"About that time I married and quit work. Five years later my husband died and left me with two little girls to raise. I came right here to this building and went to work for the Cohens as cashier again, but this time I started off at $25 a week. In busy seasons the boss asked us whether we preferred that he pay us '$3 a week extra to buy lunches, or to let him have our noon meals cooked at his home and sent to us at the store. We decided we would rather let him provide our lunches from his home and we didn’t make any mistake, for those big plates that he had served to each of us, were laden with the best food that could be bought and it was cooked so good. How we did enjoy it!
"The Cohens did a big business and we worked mighty hard, and liked it." I asked her if she witnessed the two weddings on the balcony of this store. She laughed, "I was right there," she said. "I never laughed so much in all my life as when that Justice of the Peace asked the groom if he would feed his bride on cornbread and collards, but the other wedding was as nice and solemn, as the first one was comical.
"I worked for the Cohens until they went out of business, and we hated to see them give up the store, but knew it was because of the old man’s health. He never forgot us. As long as he was able to get about he used to drop by to see how we were getting along. I had al-ways worked as cashier until Mr. Goldberg hired me and started me on the floor as clerk. I thought I never would get used to it, and for a long time I didn’t like it, but now I wouldn’t want to change back. I’d miss the good customers who always call for me, and I appreciate their personal interest. I just couldn’t work without my customers.
"Why, only last Sunday as I was coming out of our church, I noticed an old man standing off to himself, his clothes were old but he had a clean, neat appearance. I didn’t know his name, but I remembered I had often waited on him at the store, so I shook hands with him and told him how glad I was to see him at our church. It seemed to make him happy to have someone notice him. He looked up at me with a shy smile. ’Don’t you work down at Goldberg’s?’ he asked. Now, you see my customers do remember me, and they afford me lots of pleasure.
"Business isn’t what it used to be. We don’t make what we did when those good old bonus checks were coming in every Christmas, and sometimes oftener. They’re a thing of the past now. I make just about half what I did then, and I have a time trying to live on my earnings now, but in spite of the fact that I'll soon he fifty-four, I’m not yet willing to give up my work. I like it too well."
A policeman on that beat came in to warm. "That wind’s blowing a regular gale outside," he began, "and it’s getting mighty cold."
A customer appeared and asked for the saleswoman who was talking to me. When she had made a sale of children’s sweaters, she returned to the stove and began talking about the picture to be shown at the theater that night. "Do you really enjoy picture shows?" I asked.
"I surely do," was the reply, and she hastened to add, "but not any more than I enjoy my church and Sunday School services and other social gatherings with my friends. I enjoy having them around me, more than any other pleasure."
A saleswoman from the ready-to-wear department joined us. She was laughing over the recollection of an episode that took place in the store on the preceding Saturday night. We persuaded her to tell about it.
"A Negro couple came in and expressed the intention of purchasing a dress for the woman. She went into the fitting room to try on a dress, telling the man to watch her purse which she was leaving on the counter. She didn’t like the dress so the saleswoman came out for a different selection, and the Negro man joined the woman in the fitting room. The Negress asked him, 'What is you done wid my pocketbook?' The man did not reply, and the woman's voice was shrill as she added, 'I told you to watch my pocketbook when I come in here.'
“'You didn't nuther,' retorted the man, 'But 'oman, you'se better git dat pocketbook and git it quick, and when you'se do you'se got tagimme back dat money I'se done wuked so hard for. If you ain't got no better sense'n to leave money laying 'round counters, you sho' ain't gwine to tote my money, or spend none of it needer.’"
The woman hastened out and with the aid of all the salespersons the purse was found exactly where she had left it, submerged under a pile of dresses that had been taken from the racks for her inspection. He took charge of the purse, over her vigorous and wordy protest, and as they left the store without making a purchase, they continued to hurl unprintable threats at each other. An hour later they returned and bought not only a dress, but also a hat. The man was carrying the money, and spending it.
"What about credit?" I asked. "No," she replied, "we do not extend credit, but we do have a peach of a lay-away plan. People select what they want and it is laid away for then until payments are completed. They are supposed to make regular weekly or monthly payments, and when they miss several payments, the article goes back in stock, but not until Mr. Goldberg has written to ask them what they desire him to do about it.
All alterations are entirely free of charge to the customer here. In busy season we employ a full time tailor, and we always have one here on Saturday, but in slack times and through the week, we send the work out to local tailor shops.
"Look at that clock," she marvelled. "Would you believe it? It's most closing time. I've got to get my stock covered up."
Mr. Goldberg came in. "Well," he said, "what did these folks tell you about their boss?"
"Only nice things," I answered. "You have some splendid people working for you."
"I know that," he said, "for men I'm gone, the work goes on just as well as when I'm here. I think we've all enjoyed telling on each other today, and recalling old times. Come end spend another day in our store the first chance you have."
