May 9, 1939
Odessa Polk (Negro)
713 E. 6th Street Charlotte, N.C.
Cook
Cora Lee Bennett, writer
Mary Northrop, reviser
Bachelor Mothers
Original Names	Changed Names
Odessa Polk	Myrtle (Last name not used in story)
Madelene	Josephine
Sarah	Janie
Wootsie	Snookie
Beulah Mae	Lily Belle
Jean	Cora
Charlotte	Riverton
Bachelor Mothers
Myrtle left the room suddenly. The noise of the children's voices rose high and loud. When she opened the door into the next room the excited voices grew silent. Then together three of the four children, her grandchildren, began to explain who had caused the disturbance. Myrtle meted out justice.
"Children just will have their fusses," she said, "Only heaven knows it seems like these kids never get along. When I was a child Grandma made us do right or we knowed we'd get a switchin' and a good one at that.
"I was born right here in Riverton and will be forty-two years old my next birthday. There was fourteen of us, children I mean. My mother was married two times. I'm the youngest child of the first set; they was only three of us--one boy and two girls. But they was eleven in the second set. Most people don't know that that crowd are my sisters and brothers. We never lived together.
"My mother married the second time when I was only three years old and my stepfather was so mean to us, Mamma's children, that we had to go to stay with my grandmother. He wouldn't let Mamma keep us. When any of her people would come to see her he'd go off and stay and wouldn't buy anything to eat that day. From the day I left Mamma's house I never stayed with her another day.
"My Grandma was old and she wasn't able to work much but she took in washin'. Mamma didn't help to support us any so my sister went to work. My brother left town and went to Philadelphia and he's still there.
“When we was real small we didn't get to go to Sunday School much even though Grandma really wanted us to go. We didn't have the clothes to go out decent like other children. But I can remember once there was a lady who belonged to the Baptist church who was a missionary. Well, she and her club would help poor kids who really didn't have no way to get clothes to go to Sunday School, so she fixed me and my brother up and if it hadn't been for her it would have been a long time before we could of got to go. I guess that's one of the reasons I work so hard in the church today.
"I was nine years old when I started to work. I got twenty-five cents a week washing dishes for a woman said she bought my clothes too. I went to the old Myers Street school and worked after school hours. Grandma was sort of a old-timey woman and she kept us out of school for the least little thing. She didn't understand that we really needed to go. She wasn't able to see that it would mean anything to us. Anyway I finished the fifth grade before I quit and went to workin' full time in a white lady's house.
"When Grandma died I went to live with Mamma's sister. She only had one child but she never was very well after it was born. Then she had heart trouble too and used to have awful spells. So she wasn't able to work much either and it was about the same at her house as it was at Grandma's. She did the best she could but it wasn't much. We did pretty much whatever we wanted to.
"I have three girls but I've never been married. I hardly know how it all happened. I guess I was just misled not havin' anybody to really take care of me and tell me what to do. I worked hard and no one cared anything about me, so when I got to go in' with the boys I guess I sort of lost myself and believed the things they told me. But I was so frightened when I found out about myself the first time I didn't know what to do. I didn't know to go to my sister or my aunt so that they could at least ask the boy to marry me. I just kept it a secret as long as I could. Then one day I got so sick I couldn't stay on workin' anymore and I vent home. Of course I think the lady I was workin' for knew about me before I left but she didn't bother me. I didn't go back to her anymore but she come to see me once after the baby come and brought me some things.
"After my first child, Josephine, was born I just sort of seemed to lose hold of myself and then the other two children come. Before my youngest, Janie, was born I started to keepin' house for myself and moved into three rooms of a two family house. Then when Janie come something sort of come over me and I decided to change my way of livin'. My sister did what she could for me but those days were hard. I had to stop workin' away from home and take in washin' so I could look after the children.
"When they got large anough to go to school I had more trouble on my hands. I wasn't hardly makin' enough to buy 'em clothes but I managed it somehow. After I'd get them fixed up to go out I didn't have anything left to buy clothes for myself so I'd stay home most of the time. I'd send them to Sunday School too and they'd always come home and tell me about the lesson for that day.
"My second child, Snookie, was always sickly. Every since she was about ten years old she has had the rheumatism. I'd have to get the doctors with her all the time and I wasn't makin' enough to keep my doctor bill up, but I'd pay what I could. When she'd have those spells she couldn't walk a step. The doctors advised me to have her tonsils took out 'cause they were poison; they thought that might stop the rheumatism. I didn't have the money for the operation but there was a clinic at the school for children under a certain age to have their tonsils out free. Well, Snookie was over that age but Janie, my youngest, brought a slip home from, school to go have hers taken out. Well, I thought Janie's could wait 'cause they'd never give her much trouble so I took Snookie and said she was Janie and they took them out. But it didn't help much and sometimes she still has the rheumatism.
"When little Janie started to school I had a time gettin' her to go. One day I remember I thought she was in school. When the twelve o'clock whistle blew in walked Janie. Well, I thought she'd got home mighty quick and when I finally got the straight of the thing, I found she'd been under the house all mornin'. But I broke her of it and next year I couldn't get her ready for school fast enough.
"None of my girls didn't get to finish school. I hate it. So bad...."
Myrtle had been sitting quietly, erect in her hard straight chair. She was holding a clean white handkerchief and new she began to pass it through her fingers, examining it very, very carefully, as if inspecting the border for imperfections. She frowned heavily and swallowed two or three times. Her voice came strained.
“All my girls has children and none o' them's been married,“ she said.
“I did the best I could with 'em, but when they got big enough to 'tend to theyselves, I had to go out and work so I could make a little more money for 'em. I couldn't know what was goin' on at home.
“Janie and Snookie had to stop school the same year. Janie was almost fourteen and was in the right grade. Well, I thought I couldn't stand it. But I did. Janie's child was horn just a month before Snookie's was. Of course folks blamed me. Some of 'em said you couldn't expect any more of my girls.
“For a while everything went black but I put my trust in the Lord. The next year the same thing happened to Josephine. I had hoped so hard that she'd get to finish 'cause she had got up to high school; but she didn't. She has two now, a girl and a boy. It sure is a pity none of us wasn't never married.
"Well, all the girls work now and each one is responsible for her own children. All of 'em give me somethin' on the rent and the wood and food. They all buy their own clothes and the children's clothes. I help all of 'em out some, though.
“Now Lily Belle's father, that's Snookie's little girl, helps take care of her some. He sends her money sometime and buys her clothes once in awhile. His mother is in Washington, and she sends clothes sometimes too.
“I reckon I hate it worse about Janie than I do any of the others. Janie really wanted to go to school. That Janie, she's got a big mind. I know she was smart. Right now she reads everything she can get her hands on. She gets all the magazines like Time, Life, and Harper's from where she works and brings 'em home to read. She likes to read novels and stories in other magazines too. When the people up at the house get through with their books they always let Janie read them. She was workin' one time for one of the music teachers out at the white college and nearly worried us to death talkin' music. Janie, more than any the others, realizes her mistake. She tells me that she don't want Cora, her little girl, to come up like she did. Right now she wants to send Cora to a Catholic school in Georgia where she can stay winter and summer until she finishes high school. She wrote the people and they said they was tryin' to fix it to take her in. She's determined for Cora to have a chance.
"I make pretty good, I reckon, considering what some of the other cooks make here. We manage. We don't have all the nice clothes we'd like to but we're satisfied when we keep the children lookin' nice. We try to buy 'em the right kind of food. They don't get all the milk they should but they get some. Since me and the girls eat where we cook we only have to buy food for the children, and as near as possible we give 'em what we're learned is good for 'em. I make $9 a week and car fare and I been workin' for this lady eight years. Between us we make about $23 a week.
"Janie has two part time jobs. She gets up and fixes the children's breakfast before she leaves in the mornin' and comes home and cooks their dinner before she goes to the afternoon job. She is a real smart girl and it's a pity she never had a chance.
"Not so long ago she was real sick and I was scared she wouldn't make it at all. She had kidney trouble, female trouble, and arthritis. She was workin' for a doctor and he was real good to her and come to see her regular. All I had to pay for was the perscriptions. Right after she got better she went with the doctor and his family to the beach. He thought it would do Janie as much good as it did them. All she had to do was watch the children. When she come back, she looked a lot better and every since then she's been gettin' fat.
"I've always hoped we could move into a better house than this or at least one where there was electric lights. The children have been so crazy to get a radio, but we haven't been able to get one yet. I tell 'em we don't have any extra money now and if we had to pay light bill they'd have to go without somethin'.
The family of women live in a four room house. The front hall is short because most of it is Janie's and Cora's bedroom, screened from the front door by a cretonne curtain. In the living room a two piece suit of overstuffed sofa and chair also wear cretonne. Two other chairs and a center table have been precisely spaced. The Bible at one end of the table is balanced at the other by a lamp with shining chimney. The windows are hung with cheap but perfectly laundered white curtains.
Behind that is the big bedroom where Myrtle sleeps in one bed and Snookie and her child Lily Belle in the other. Josephine has the back room with her two, Juliet and Sonny. There is no bathroom and the only water faucet is on the back porch. Meals are served in the small neat kitchen.
"I spend just about all the time that I have off, workin' in the church. I attend all my church clubs and get a lot of satisfaction out of doin' all I can for the church." (Since I am a member of her church she did not need to tell me that frequently she is head of those clubs and stands high with the congregation). "I reckon I get as much pleasure doin' that as I would anything else. I don't know when I have been to see a picture. Of course the girls go sometimes but I never even think about it."
