Professor Tom Terrill, of the University of South Carolina at Columbia, has located another version of "The Rig Builder (#2)," in the WPA Papers, in the Oklahoma Historical Society, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. That version is dated August 16, 1939, and the interviewer is identified as Ned DeWitt.
THE RIG-BUILDER
"In work, outa work; outa work and in again---"but mostly out. That's rig-building. Work a month and off six; or usually, work a day and off a month. And the wages we get, that sound so big when you talk about it, just aren't enough to keep a man's stomach hooked on the rest of him. And that goes double when he's got a family.
"When I first started in the oil business the little towns out on the prairies were all on the boom, and if there wasn't a town the companies made one. Oil was high, and it looked like it was going higher all the time, and we'd all be millionaires. I had a brother-in-law at Drop Right, the little boom camp on the Canadian River that they later named Markham. There isn't anything there now to mark the town but some greasy lumber that the natives haven't hauled off yet for firewood.
"I was fourteen when I went there; that was in 1915. I went there on a vacation, while school was out, but I got tired of lazing 'round my brother-in-law's house and went out in the field. I was big and husky, so I tried for a job on a casing crew and got it. Men were scarce then, and I got a job the first place I tried. It was on 6-inch casing crew, wet casing. And that's hell. We had to pull the casing, or lower it, while the well was flowing, and oil soaked us from hair to toenails. We looked like we'd been painted kind of greenish-black, we always had so much oil on us. And if there was salt-water flowing too, and we had cuts anyplace on our body, that salt-water got in the cuts and made festers, big sores that stayed for weeks. "I always managed to get in about four days a week, and could have got in more if I'd wanted 'em. They paid us $10 a string, damned good money then or now. I worked at that for six months or so and quit; I had too much money. Before I went to Drop Right I'd worked in the cotton fields, chopping cotton, for fifty cents a day; and what I'd managed to save out of working on the casing crew was more'n I'd of made working in a year in the cotton fields. And I hadn't saved much either. "I went on home and went to school a while longer. Then my brother-in-law got a job as a rig contractor at Drop Right, and wrote me I could have a job if I wanted it and could stand up to the work. That last part made me kind of hot, thinking I couldn't take it, so I lit out for there again. I was fifteen, but looked a lot older.
"I only made $5 a day running rigs, but that was still a lot of money to a kid. I worked on till that fall, and then both of us lost our jobs. My brother-in-law left for another boom, but I had to go on back home and school. The next fall I went down to Yale, another boom field, and got a job running rigs at $3.50 a day. I worked there almost a year, and then when I heard my brother-in-law was contracting rigs at Covington I lit out for there and went to work for him.
"I got hurt for the first time up there at Covington. Working on those wooden rigs we had to 'lay them out' --- saw the wood right there on the lease ourselves --- and then put them up. I was using an adz to carve out a walking-beam---the part of a rig that moved up and down; you've seen a thousand of 'em---and the adz hit a chip of wood and bounced off. The blade went clean through the leaders and tendons in my left leg; through the back part of it, right back of the ankle.
"I set down and grabbed it, holding my knee up as close to my chest as I could get it, and trying to stop the blood. Everybody quit work and run over there. The crew pusher told me not to straighten my leg out or the leaders would crawl clean up to my knee. We only had one car in the crew; they bundled me in it and we lit out for Covington. On the way, the contractor --- I wasn't working for my brother-in-law then, but for another fellow --- told me that if the doctor wanted to give me ether, for me not to take it, I'd be sick for a week.
"There wasn't "but one doctor in the whole town, and they had to go out and round him up. I waited in his office, and finally they brought him in. The rest of the crew had come to town in buckboards, and they crowded in the office to see it. The doctor got out his cans of ether, and started to give it to me. I told him I didn't want any, I could stand a little pain. He cussed me for being a damned fool, and I cussed him right back for being a quack. Finally he went out and got a quart of whisky and handed it to me and said to drink ever' damned drop.
"I downed all of the quart I could, and laid back on the table. The doctor put two men on each arm and each leg, and then he cut my calf open. He had a pair of ordinary pliers he'd dipped in alcohol, and he took them and started reaching up there to pull the leaders down. I give a big heave and knocked all eight of those fellows clean acrost the office. The old doctor got mad and held me down on the table and poured the whisky to me. I must've drunk all of it; I was weak anyway, from losing so much blood and the shock of seeing my leg laid open and all, and I passed out.
"They made me puke after it was all over and got me up. The old doctor had a pair of crutches in his office, and I walked out --- just about an hour after we'd started. But I was still weak as a cat. You know, that old fool tied those leaders in square knots, so they couldn't slip or break, and they pulled my heel clean back against ray ankle.
"I couldn't walk a step. He told me to get a wood block to use for a high heel for that foot, and every little while to shave off a piece. I did, but it was over a year before I could work again. I had to pay my own doctor bill, but the contractor paid me back later; and I had to lay off on my own time all the time I couldn't work.
"Well, just about a year after I went back to work, I was running rig at Yale, Oklahoma, and a fellow come up on the job and asked me if my name was Charlie Storms. I said, Yes. He said he was from the insurance company, and if I would come to Tulsa, Oklahoma, on a certain day the company would settle with me. Well, I was a damn-fool kid, and didn't even know the companies and contractors had to carry insurance on the men; that insurance fellow could have kept quiet and I'd never knowed any different.
"But I went on up to Tulsa, paying my own way on the train, and went up to the insurance office. The fellows in there had me walk around, lift things, and hop and skip. They said I wasn't hurt so bad, but they'd pay me off anyway.
"And do you know, those sonsuvbitches give me a check for $45! Yessir; $45, and I had to pay my own way up there and back! Well, if something like that happened today, I'd certainly know what to do about it! And it wouldn't be for any measly $45, either!
"Working then was pure hell, 'specially for a kid that didn't have any sense. We had to hit a hard lick every time we raised our hands, and keep it up all day long. I've seen rig-builders piss while they was working; they didn't have time to take out to the brush, and they was so damned tired they just couldn't control themselves anyway. I've worked till my shoes would squish every step I took, with the sweat that'd run down in them. And I couldn't get my hands closed at nights; holding a rig-hatchet or a cross-cut saw all day long, working with it, the muscles in my hands would get so cramped I couldn't close my fingers. I'd have to take one hand and bend the fingers down to grab something small, like a match.
"I've been pretty lucky about my hands; I don't have a "blemish on them anyplace on the backs. But you can see the palms of 'em are so corny nothing could hurt 'em. I never had a "blister on the insides of my hands in my life. One time, right after I was married, I came home and laid down on the sofa while my wife fixed supper. She woke me up picking at my hands. I didn't feel any pain at all; she'd already pulled twenty-three splinters out of one hand, and her jerking at 'em woke me up.
"Handling rough wood all day put splinters in my hands, all right, and other places too. The way they'd "build a rig in those days, the rig-builders had to do everything. We dug the cellars, made the footing, sawed out the lumber for the rig, and then built it.
"When we sawed the lumber, making the rig according to the plans the contractor or company had, we called it 'laying out the rig. The pusher would get his orders to build a rig twenty-two feet wide at the bottom, say; and maybe five feet, two inches at the top, which was, say, seventy-two feet from the ground. The contractor would point out where the hole was going to be. Send out the lumber, and then leave it to us.
"Well, we had to figure that there was so much slope — drop-off --- to every section in the rig. On a rig that size, seventy-two feet, we usually figured a twenty-inch drop-off for every section, or two and a half inches to the foot. The first girt --- the straight cross-piece in the rig --- was always ten feet from the ground; that made a twenty-five inch drop-off. So we'd take two by twelve board, saw it to nineteen feet, seven inches, and nail a two by four board at the correct slope on one side.
"Then we'd put a brace against the sloping inside of the two by four and on the other end of the two by four and on the other end of the two by twelve; that was the first girt. From there on up the girls were eight feet apart; so for the second one, we'd measure twenty inches back on the two by twelve --- eight times two and half inches, see; the third one, twenty inches more; and so on, till we'd laid out the eight girls and braces. All we had to do then was pile up the boards and saw 'em.
"Steel rigs like they use now come already cut to size; with bolts and nuts, and the bolt-holes already drilled. A man can't possibly make a mistake on one of them; there just isn't any way to stretch out a piece of steel or shorten it.
"The first steel rig I ever worked on was down in Texas in '2b. It was a little seventy-two-footer, but damned it it didn't take us three days to run it. The company was just starting to build steel rigs and they had to send a factory man down there to help us. The manufacturers used to have their men out with us all the time at first; they wanted to find out what was wrong, what kinks had to come out, they asked the rig-builders. You wanta know how your stuff works, ask the man who has to use it, that's the best way.
"And carpenters weren't worth a damn in building those wooden rigs, either. Down in Fort 'worth one time, a company called my brother-in-law, who was contracting at the time, to come out and try to repair a rig. They'd hired a carpenter to put it up in the first place, but he hadn't had any experience, and made one helluva mess of it. My brother-in-law took one look at it and called up the company headouarters and told 'em he was going to build a new rig — there wasn't a big timber in the whole damned thing he could use.
"A carpenter could be a rig-builder, but he had to start from the ground up, from the "beginning, and learn everything. He had to forget all he ever knew about finish work and learn how; to do rough stuff; and he had to learn how; to cut lumber in a different way from any he ever knowed.
"While I left Yale, Oklahoma, I went to Eastland, Texas, in 1919. I run rigs there for a while, during most of the boom, and then I went to Breckenridge, Texas, right at the beginning of the boom there. I got in there late one evening, and tried to get a room hut couldn't. Only buildings in town were a hay barn, couple of houses, and three old rickety buildings. There was a pool hall in one end of a building, and I went in there and got to talking with the guy that run it.
"I thought he stayed open all night, there was a helluva lot of drifters come in for the boom wages, but he wasn't. He didn't have any place to stay, either, and he'd been sleeping on a pool table. He told me I could sleep on one if I wanted to, free. If If he'd charged me anything I'd been out of luck; it cost about six bits an hour to use one of them tables.
"The second night I was there I slept in the hay barn, along with about two dozen more fellows. I stayed in the barn about a month or maybe a little more, until they got some shack boarding-house put up and I could rent a room. Living down there, or in any boom town, was hell, but the wages was good. I made $22 a day, average, all through '19 and '20, and sometimes getting as high as $25 a day. I wasn't a crew-pusher either, just a hand. In the last part of '20 they cut the wages to $20 a day, and then in the first part of '21, to $18 a day.
"I didn't like to get my wages cut so much and so often, but I stuck it out. They were paying even less than eighteen dollars a day up in Oklahoma, and I didn't want to come back.
"I got hurt again down in Breckenridge. We were skidding a rig down there just outside the town for Magnolia Petroleum Company. We skidded it with steam. The way we did it was to cable on to a tree or a dead-man---a long pipe buried in the ground, to use as an achor --- or anything else solid, and then put skids under the footing of the rig and throw the steam to it.
"We worked like hell till noon, and got it moved about halfway to where we wanted it. We went and ate, and then four of us went over and began letting the engine house down. We wanted to get the job done by night, because we had another one to start on the next day. Me and another fellow were standing by the exhaust pipe, knocking the sheeting off and fixing to put skids under the engine house.
"Steam's always kept up on a rig, and 'specially if there's a job like that going on. The driller, who'd been handling boiler, didn't know this fellow and me was behind, and he walked over and fed it to her. That live steam blew outa there and scalded me from waist to my heels. I couldn't do a damned thing. It hurt so goddamned bad I couldn't even holler, just dropped on the ground and laid there, trying my best to holler or do something to relieve myself.
"The other fellow didn't get burned bad; he rushed around and begin hollering and they shut down the boiler. We was just a little way from town and they picked me up and run me in, carrying me in their arms. The took me up to my room, and then most of 'em run out to try and find a doctor. I hurt so goddamned bad I'd of done anything to ease the pain. I had one of the boys go get a fan, and I cut off all my clothes and cocked my legs up on a table, and let the fan blow right down my legs. It was the worst thing I could of done, but if it happened to me again I'd do the same damned thing.
"By the time the doctor got there I had big blisters raised up under my things and the calves of my legs that looked like footballs, only bigger. He give me a big shot of dope, and then took out his doctor's knife and ripped the blisters open. A half-gallon of old blister water poured outa each one of them blisters. It would of hurt like hell but I had so much dope in me I hardly felt it.
"Then the old doc smeared me with salve and give me some more dope and left; somebody else had got hurt and he had to go tend to them. I stayed around fourteen days and got well; he must've known his stuff because there isn't a scar on me now. I thought I'd never get over it at first, and it surprised me more'n anybody when I found out I was healing up all right.
"I did a lot "better on my compensation, too. I got $20 a week while I was off, and I got all the doctor's "bill paid "by the contractor. I didn't get any lump compensation, but I was so damned glad to be alive and without being crippled up that I didn't even care.
"The doc griped at me all the time he was treating me. He was a crusty old fellow, but he knew his stuff. He told me, and I had a doctor a year ago tell me the same thing --- that all rig builders have some kind of a rupture. This one last year said that eighty-five percent of all rig-builders have a semi-rupture; they might not even know they're ruptured, but all of 'em's got piles, and some of them pretty bad.
"In 1922 I came to the Osage Nation, where there was a big boom on in the Indian lands. Me and another fellow come together; we piled off a train and had to walk a couple or three miles to get to the fields, When we topped the hill at Kaw City it looked like all the rigs in the world was down in the valley. We stood there and counted over a hundred rigs under construction, and we thought sure as hell we had work enough to last us the rest of our life.
"We got a job easy; all we had to do was walk up to a rigging contractor and ask him, and he told us to put on our overalls and come out in the morning. But damned if that field didn't shut down eight days after we went to work. I never did find out why, either. At ten o'clock one morning the contractor rode out end told us to climb down outa the rig; he was closing down. And every other contractor, except just a few that were doing the contracting on their own stuff, shut down too.
"That was in March, 1922, and I didn't get another job till July 4th that year. I got in a few repair jobs once in a while, tightening up a rig or nailing wind-braces on, but nothing I could call steady till July 4th. I stayed at a little town called Apperson, another boom town not far away. And that little old town's gone, too, just like Drop Right.
"In '23 I kicked off from the Osage Nation and went back to Texas, to Breckenridge and Albany. Both of them were on the boom; Albany was a new boom, and there seemed to be lots of work. I got in enough work that I thought I couldn't lose, and in '26 I bought a house there in Albany. 192b was a good year, and seemed like everything meant money. I paid $3,100 for that place, and it was a nice one, too. I put all I had into it ---- more'n $700 ---- and was supposed to pay it out at $20 a month.
"But in '26 I didn't get in a lick of work for months at a time running rigs. I did get in twenty days with a casing crew, but that was just enough to keep "bread in the house, and no cutter. And finally I lost the house. I had about $1,000 in it "by that time, but I couldn't have got out with half that.
"I moved the family----wife and girl----to a shack in the town, and we tried to get along with whatever jobs I could get. In November of '27 a friend of mine that was working for Magnolia in Oklahoma wrote and said I could get a job with him; he was pushing a crew. I came on up and worked till early in the spring of '28, when the job played out.
"I sent the wife and kid to my daddy's, over near Muskogee, Oklahoma, and a friend of mine and me hit out for California. We heard there was quite a bit of work there and we decided to see if there was any truth in it. But that state was lousy; no work at all, no rigs "being run, no nothing. They'd quit building wooden rigs out there and were using steel. I didn't know from hell about a steel rig, those big rotaries you know, except the one I'd helped run, but I hit 'em all up anyway. I didn't get as much as half-a-day's work for all the walking I did. This "buddy of mine got job roustabouting, but I wasn't as lucky, and finally I came on back.
"I met my "brother-in-law out there in San Diego and came back as far as Wink, Texas, with him. When he turned off south. I turned north, and hit the highways to Wichita Falls. The boom was just about to play out there, too, but I managed to get in two days' work there. I hit up a contractor one noon there, and he said he'd put me to work the next morning; for me to be ready and meet the truck at a certain spot, at four o'clock. I wondered what the hell we'd be doing out that time of day, but I didn't say anything.
"I was there about three o'clock; the truck come by and away we went down to Graham, Texas. I found out why we left so early ---this contractor wanted us to build a 112-foot rig; he wanted us to lay it out, dig the cellar, and run the rig all in one day. Well Mister, I needed a job, and I really balled the jack. All of us did. We worked like a bunch of demons, and by five o'clock that evening we was through.
"The guy was happy about it, and gave us another day's work --- the same kind. We finished that one about ten o'clock that night, and, of course, only got paid for a day. And that was the end of the work for us, me especially.
"I went back to my daddy's farm and worked 'round there for him, and picking up what work I could till the Oklahoma City field opened up in the fall of '28. I busted down there and got in 15 days, and then they shut down a while. There wasn't enough work e around there for a rig-builder to keep a boy busy---leastways I didn't catch any of it.
"I walked over to the Fox Rig & Lumber Company office one morning, about a five-mile stroll from where I was staying, and asked 'em for a job. The pusher said sure, he'd give me one, a day. I was to git a lunch ready and come back and go out with the gang next morning. I hustled back to the room and spent the rest of the day trying to get some lunch ready for the next day.
"Bright and early the next morning I was over there. I squatted down out in front with about fifteen other rig-builders for a smoke, when the boss called me in. He took me back in his office and asked me if I was the new man, the one that was to be paid the $10 a day. I said: No, I was to get $12 a day. He said: No, $10 was the regular wages. I said all right, and walked on out.
"I stood up in front of those other rig-builders and said, Boys, I just got in town here a little while back, and I don't know what's customary. Your boss here just offered me $10 a day is that the customary wage? Every damned one of 'em bellered: Hell no! We get $12 a day! So I walked back in the office and told the fellow that he'd made a mistake; $12 a day was the customary wage. He said! $10, take it or leave it. I left it.
"I'd managed to bring my wife down with me when we left my daddy's, "but we didn't have any money. I went on home and told her what I'd done, and she begun taking on. We only had $1.50, and no damned chance of going to work. But I told her if I'd taken the job I'd of made me about fifteen enemies; that in the end it would have cut the wages of every damned rig-builder in the city. She didn't like it, hut she took it.
"That next Saturday I went over to where they were building a big garage and hit the foreman up for a job. I told him I wasn't no carpenter, but I could make him a damned good hand. He told me to get to work; to go across the street where they had the material piled and carry sheeting over to the carpenters. I begin giving that sheeting hell. I carried enough of it to last every damned carpenter there a month, and when I saw I had plenty I picked up a hammer and started to help 'em. But they wouldn't let me; they said I wasn't a union man and for me to sit down. So I up-ended me a nail keg and sat down to wait 'em out.
"The foreman came by and saw me sitting there and told me to grab a hammer and go down and start on the other end of the building, nailing on sheeting. I didn't want to get fired off this job, too; so I grabbed up a hammer, filled my pockets with nails and set out. And do you know, by God, I finished half that damned roof myself; I met four of those carpenters half-way on that "building!
"Well, anyway, when it come time to pay me off the next Saturday the foreman called me over to one side and told me he was ashamed to pay me just $4 a day, like he'd said he was going to. He said if I wouldn't say anything about it he was going to pay me $8 a day, the regular carpenters' wage. I was as quiet as a dead dog; I couldn't said anything about that extra $4 for a drink of whisky.
"I worked on that job about five weeks, and then it folded up when the building was finished. I hustled all over the whole field but couldn't get a thing. One night I was setting at home when somebody knocked on the door. A fellow asked me if I was the one who turned down the $10 job at Fox Rig Co; I said, Yes; why? He said he liked the idea of me doing that, and that; he was a rig contractor, and if I needed a job to come out and go to work for him.
"Did I go? I worked for that fellow all through '29 and '30 and damned near cried with him when the depression hit him.
"When it got really tough down here, in about '31, I had a helluva hard time. My daddy died, April 21, 1931 I only had about $100 left out of my savings and it took damned near all that to put him away. I left my wife up there in Muskogee with ray mother after the burial, and I came on back. But it was '34 before I could get my family back down here. I couldn't seem to make more'n $25 on any job; they'd last about two-three days and then fold up, and there wouldn't be another one for a month.
"One Christmas I was working down at Anadarko for a rig contractor. He was a tight guy; he never paid me off tille he'd got his pay, and sometimes he forgot I was even working for him. He owed me a about $60 that Christmas, and I got a ride up from Anadarko and came by his house to get my check. I wanted to go up to Muskogee and see the family. But his wife said he'd gone to Houston, and wouldn't be back till after the first of the year. She handed me a check he'd left for me --- for $25. So I had to stay in Oklahoma City that Christmas.
"In '35 I was working; for a contractor in the Oklahoma City field. I'd got in eight days, when one noon the contractor came out and told the pusher to tell the crew that he was cutting the wages from $8 to $7, and that the cut started the first of the month, which was about two weeks before that day. When the pusher walked over and told us --- we were sitting around on the rig floor eating out lunch---we waited till he got through with his little spiel, and then I told him he wasn't cutting my wages a nickel.
"The contractor heard us arguing and come over, and I told him the same thing. I said I'd gone to work at $8 a day, and that was what he was going to pay me, if he didn't want to go to court about it. He took me off to one side and tried to argue me out of it, but it didn't do him any good. He told him I went to work at $7 a day at noon of that day, but I had eight days coming to me at $8 a day, and By God, I was going to get it all. He said he'd pay me the $64, and did I want to work on the rest of the day at seven. I said, No; I'd work for $4 for the half-day, not for $3.50. He finally saw I meant it, and said all right.
"But that afternoon there were two men, rig-builders, standing around the rig waiting for me to quit, so they could try to get my job. Times was tough, but I was damned if I was going to be chiseled like that.
"I got a job with another company, and then I pushed crews for a contractor for four years, in Oklahoma City, St. Louis, Ray City, Seminole, and all around the state. I went to work for Fox Rig & Lumber Company for a while, and got along pretty good with them, too.
"They tried to organize a union in '35» but didn't have much luck. In '37 the boys tried again, with A CIO organizer helping them, and they had a pretty tough time getting some of the boys to join. They went on strike once, I went out too, but lost it. There was a big meeting down at Seminole about that strike, whether we'd go out or not.
"They all thought I was a damned radical. The contractors were trying to get us cut from &10 to $8, and I told the whole damned bunch of lem at that meeting that I wouldn't pull on a glove for any $8 a day. Well, they finally all walked out, but we lost the strike anyway. I managed to get in a little work after that with the Phillips Petroleum Company; they paid me $10 a day too.
"They had a bunch of leases that they had to drill on or the leases would be voided, so they had to put up a rig on each of them --- that's what the leases called for, a rig on each one. During the strike the "boys wanted me to go out to a lease and call the men off, try to get them to throw in with us. I started out there and met the contractor on the way. He stopped me and said: Storms, I know you're going out there and call my crew out on strike. If you do, I'll see you never get in another day's work in Oklahoma City!
"I told him I was sorry, but I was doing what I thought was right, and he shot his car in low gear and lit out for town. The boys seen me coming, and shut down the job till I got on the lease. I hollered up at 'em and told 'em to come on out; and ever' damned one of 'em throwed his gloves high as he could, and picked up the tools and come on back to town.
"After the strike the contractors was sore as hell, and lots of the rig-builders was too. There was only two contractors in the whole state paying $10 a day, and both of them was made at me. I thought I was going to have to live on dirt and dew from then on, but one night this Apple, the contractor who said he'd see I never got to work again, called me up and said he wanted me to go to Perry, Oklahoma, for him and go to work.
"I forgot about being made at him---especially after he said he'd pay me $10 a day --- and went up there, and worked eighteen months for him. We got along fine, too; never a cross word between us.
"Then the union started again, but I stayed clear of it till I saw the boys meant business. I wasn't going to be the one that got my neck out like a Christmas turkey, so somebody could take a whack at it. The ones that'd been the hardest ones to get out on strike was the first ones to try to get the new union started, and before long, about three months after they begun, a pretty strong untion was up and going.
"I signed up, and I've tried to make a good member. Right now I'm setting her on my Royal American because there aren't any union jobs anyplace. I could go out and scab on the boys, but that'd hurt me as much or more'n it would them. Women don't quite understand that idea, I know my wife don't, but I think most men do.
"We got some heels in the union, but hell; there's heels everyplace, and rig-building's no better'n other jobs. We just take the good with the bad, and try to line them up straight.
"The union's done a helluva lot for the rig-builders, I know that. Back several years ago, when we didn't have one, the pusher got around $3 or $4 a day for using his car. He had to haul the crews out to the job and back, and then he had to hook on a cat-head to his car wheel and use it to pull up the steel in the rig. A cathead's a kind of pulley; you just bolt it on your car wheel, sling a rope around it, and start up your car. It'll pull the top out of a rig if the car's anchored solid.
"Now, under our union rules, the pusher gets $7 a day for the use of his car; and wages all around are better than ever before. That is, they're more regular, even if the work keeps getting slacker. A green man gets $6 a day; an intermediate man, who doesn't have enough experience to be a full rig-builder, gets $10; and a rig-builder gets $12. A pusher draws $14 a day. If a man can get in enough days a year he can get by on those wages.
"Another good thing about the union is that they're getting rid of a lot of things that cause accidents, and making the men realize that accident prevention's a helluva lot better than gambling on pulling through. For one thing the union won't let anybody but the contractor---nobody else but the crew, the pusher, and the contractor --- on the rig when they're running it or tearing down. Too much danger of somebody getting hit.
"And we won't let any caterpillars or any other tractors or any bull-dozers --- tractors to push the dirt out --- on the lease when we're working. With one of them working on the same lease there's too much danger of somebody not hearing what somebody else is hollering at him, and he might get killed.
"I remember once, about as bad a job as I ever went on, an old wood rig had to be tore down, right smack over a wild well. The gas was blowing up outa the hole like a dozen cyclones, and the tools had been blown up in the top of the rig and hung there. The tools and the gas pressure together had damned near ruined the rig, and they sent us out to tear it down. We couldn't of heard the last trumpet, and the gas damned near blowed me out of the rig a couple of times.
"The only way we could make each other understand, or the pusher could tell us anything, was to write on a piece of board and send it up on the line. We finally seen we could take it down the regular way, especially without taking a chance on striking a spark and setting that well on fire and us too, wo we unhooked the guy wires from the top and run-around platform, climbed down, and pulled the whole rig down.
"That was down in Seminole, and believe me, I'd think a while before doing a job like that again. About as dangerous a job as a man can get hold of is a rig that's been burned. They're treacherous as hell; the steel is all twisted and warped, and you can't tell when the piece you're standing on will give way and send you to hell. The only way to do one of them is reinforce it as you climb it, then when you get to the top, begin tearing down. You have to put extra guy wires on it, too.
"Lots of rig-builders have been killed because the pusher or contractor jumps on just one side of the board. You see, when we're building or tearing down, either one, we have to use a platform of 2 x 12's; four of them: The men on the ground have to test them for us; the green man, usually, who has to drag up the steel or carry it away, puts one end of the 2 x 12 on the floor of the rig and the other on his shoulder, and then somebody jumps on it to see that it won't crack or split.
"If the board isn't jumped on both sides, one of 'em might have a knot in it and when they sent the board up the rig-builders might get the wrong side up and walk on it with a load of steel. They do that, and their wives are as good as widows. But our union makes 'em jump on both sides of the boards.
"We've had a lot of changes like that, all of 'em for our good and the contractors too, come in the fields, but everything isn't rosy---not by a helluva lot. The oil fields keep moving away, and all a man can do, rig-builder or whatever he is, is keep following 'em. A man rents a house here like I done, buys his furniture, and begins trying to live like most white folks do, and he'll have to pull up and follow the oil. Either that, or leave his family there and go by hisself, and maybe not see 'em for months at a time.
"We've got the wages and hours settled; now all we gotta do the whole damned oil industry lined up, and keep it there."
