Campobello, S. C.
R. F. D. #2
January 27, 1939
R. V. W.
Names changed
ROGER B. CHALMERS
The immaculate white bungalow of the Chalmers family is situated about three miles northwest of Campobello on a country road, and represents the successful efforts of a man who, like many other farmers in the northern section of Spartanburg County, has realized the value of diversification of crops. He is Roger B. Chalmers, who was born September 27, 1890, on the same farm which he now owns. "Bonny" is his nickname.
"I had a rather tough boyhood," Mr. Chalmers said. "My mother died when I was three years old. I don't remember her. At that time, Dad's sister, Aunt Emma Chalmers, lived with us. We lived in an old two-story frame house which is now a part of my bam. Aunt Emma took care of me after my mother's death, and she is responsible for my nickname. When I was born, she told everybody that I was the prettiest baby in the county, and, up until the time of her death, she often remarked that I was the prettiest baby that she had ever seen. Early during my boyhood, my friends began to call me Bonnyface. The nickname eventually changed to Bonny and I doubt seriously if there is a half dozen neighbors of mine who know my real name. They all call me Bonny.
"My father was what you might call an ordinary farmer. He had been born on a farm, and used the same methods in farming that his father had taught him. He bought thirty acres of this tract before I was born. And one of my earliest recollections is that of my father telling my aunt that he didn't see how he was going to be able to meet the interest on the mortgage.
"I don't remember what we got for farm products during my boyhood, but I do know that it wasn't so much. I started to school when I was seven years old, but as I grew older, there were many times that Dad kept me at home to help out because he was unable to pay for help. As a result of staying out of school so much, I didn't reach the sixth grade until I was sixteen years old. I kept on going to school until I was eighteen. Then I had to quit because Dad was getting too old to do the work.
"I took almost complete charge of the farm in 1909. Dad was too feeble to do any of the heavy work. We had two mules, a cow, and a couple of hogs then. It took me from daylight to dark to get my work done. Cotton was the money crop, and it began to go up. But we didn't use the modem methods of producing cotton then. I did very little terracing on the hillsides then, and fertilizer was almost unknown. I was lucky to get a bale for every two acres. I made a little off of com, but most the crop went to keep up the stock. I had to hire help to plant, hoe, and harvest my crop. The first year that I had complete charge of the farm, I ended up with seventy-five dollars in cash after I had paid the taxes, a small amount on the principal of the mortgage, and the other expenses.
"But despite the fact that the farm required most of my time, I did find time to do some courting. On Christmas Day, 1909, I married Mary Earnshaw. I'd known her almost all of my life. This Christmas will make thirty years for us, and whatever I may be today, I owe any success that I have had to Mary. She's the greatest wife any man ever had.
"Mary took over the household as soon as we were married. Dad and Aunt Emma were crazy about her, and she handled them like babies. Besides looking after the house, she took charge of the garden, and, with what help I could give her, we began to produce more things than we could use. Her father gave her two young heifers when we were married, and they were soon giving milk. And she set hens and looked after the chickens. On Saturdays we would drive to Murray or Tanner and sell our produce. It's about twenty miles from the farm to the nearest city and we rarely ever went there in those days, for the roads were pretty bad. We bought supplies at Murray or at Tanner. And sometimes we would send things in by neighbors to sell for us. That extra money helped out lots.
"Dad died in 1911 after a short illness. Being the only child, naturally I inherited the farm, and, I might say, also the mortgage. Dad was sixty-nine when he died, and less than two months after his death, Aunt Emma died. Dad left me a thousand dollars in insurance, but Aunt Emma had none. The cost of the burials made a big hole in the insurance money. On top of that, Roger, Junior, was born in July, a month after Aunt Emma had died. Because of Mary's condition, our doctor advised us to have the baby born in a hospital. That bill was no small amount. And I had to hire a woman to stay at the house until Mary got well. The year 1911 took away Dad and Aunt Emma and gave me a farm and a mortgage.
"The next few years saw us gradually getting out of the hole. I learned better methods of farming. I subscribed to several farm magazines and studied them at night. The Clemson College Extension Service sent me bulletins, and county agents began to come along with a lot of helpful advice. The family grew, too. Thomas was born in 1912; Mary in 1913, and Henrietta in 1914. By 1915, I had cut down the mortgage from $2,000 in 1911 to $1,100. I wasn't making a furtune, but we were getting along, and managing to save a little.
"Contrary to what you might think, the war and the boom days that followed it didn't help me out so much. I got lots more for my crops, but they were rather poor during those years. And it was almost impossible to hire help. What help you could get cost so much that it was almost prohibitive to employ anyone.
"I almost went broke in 1920 and '21. The boll weevil. We didn't know how to fight it then, and it was heart-breaking to see a good crop go down. Some of my neighbors just gave up and moved away. You could get farm land for almost nothing. It was impossible for me to meet my notes, but the bank was kind enough to let me get by with just the interest. And I had to scrape to do that.
"County Agent Jackson had been preaching diversification of crops to me, but my ears were filled with cotton. About 1922, he urged me to plant a few acres of peaches for commercial purposes. I couldn't see it. With a number of other farmers, he took us over to Gibson to look at the small orchard Jacob Gibson had planted. Mr. Gibson hadn't been so optimistic about the peach idea either, but he and a few of his neighbors had planted small orchards a year or two before. They had changed their minds when we made our tour. The trees were growing.
