There are two versions of the following life history. "Pay Day," (pages 8932-8955) by Virginia Stevens, is a radioscript based on Ida Moore's interview (pages 8902-8931).
34 Seventeenth St.
White Oak Mill Village
Greensboro, N. C.
I. L. M. [Ida L. Moore]
OLD MAN DOBBIN AND HIS CROWD
It was payday at the mill and old man Martin had drawn his last check. He held the little blue slip in his hand and not paying any attention to me or to his wife or to his two grandchildren he read the figures again and spoke aloud. "Five dollars and ninety-three cent and a dollar and sixty-three cent of it took out for rent. Never got in but two days last week. It ain't so much but it's goin' to push us to get along any sort of way without it."
"It'll shore be hard but then its near 'bout always been hard," his wife said in a slow, twanging voice.
Her statement was one beyond which none of us could for the moment pass. We sat there in a semi-circle around the little laundry stove which furnished heat for the small room, and my mind reviewed the conversation I had had not more than fifteen minutes before with the man who was passing the Martin home. "That house there? That's where old man Martin and his crowd lives," he'd said. "They's twelve or thirteen of 'em, I forget which, livin' there now. More'n likely you'll find the old man hisself at home. I heard tell they laid him off the other day. Frank Martin's his name. Yessum, he's got children aworkin' but I wouldn't be surprised if the old man don't need his job too to get along on."
Frank Martin shifted his chair a little further from the stove. "Yessir, it's goin' to be hard to get along and me not aworkin'." he said.
"How did you lose your job?" I asked.
"Well, as you can see, I'm agettin' old. Be sixty-eight comin' June. But I coulder held out if my age hader been all was against me. Seven year ago a automobile struck me when I was crossin' the street down yonder in front of the comp'ny store and I was right bad injured. It laid me up for three months and left me with a game leg once I did get about again. They give me a elevator job when I went back to the mill but awhile back when they took a spell of stretchin' the stretchout they cut out my job and divided the elevator runnin amongst the four ropin' haulers. And they put me on a job of sweepin' and haulin' and cleanin' that would just about finish up airy forty-five year old man I know. I stuck to it for a day and when I come home that night my whole entire body hurt me so I couldn't lay in bed atall. The next mornin' I went to my bossman and asked him if they wasn't some lighter job he could put me on for maybe lower pay. And he answered me, 'You've got as light a job as they are in the mill. The New made all mill jobs heavy.' He never explained what he meant and I've been awonderin' since what he had in his mind. Then he told me if I wanted a job I'd have to keep the one I was on, and I says to him, ' If I tried to keep it up it'd most likely kill me and if by a miracle it happened not to kill me it'd lay me up in bed for six months with big doctor bills for my children to pay. Since I see trouble abrewin' if I stay on,' I says to him, 'I'll nip it in the bud before it matures by quittin' right now.' When you get disabled to do hard work they want to get rid of you and they knew how. And so, I reckin this here is the last mill check I'll ever draw."
Frank Martin slipped the piece of paper into the pocket of his old brown coat. He removed his battered brown hat and sat hunched over with his big-knuckled hands pushing fingertip to fingertip and then quickly pulling them apart. Obviously he had never been a very large man, but as I looked at him I had the feeling that for a number of years he must have been dwindling away with pernicious regularity to have reached his present emaciated state. His energetic voice and his equally live gestures did not seem to belong to the puny-looking body from which they came.
"Have you lived here many years?" I asked Frank.
"I moved to White Oak eighteen year ago and every one of my crowd learnt in the mill down yonder. Up till then it'd been me and the old lady to make a livin' for all and we had plenty strugglin' adoin' it.
"We started off farmin' and stuck to it up to the fall of 1913 and '14. That year we planted cotton on a fourteen cent basis and got six cent for some and four and a half for the rest. Europe had got started is the war and the countries that had put is orders for cotton countermanded 'em and flooded our home market. He and Sally made fourteen bales of cotton, thirty- one barrels of corn and three hundred bushels of potatoes besides a sight ef peas. It was one of the best crop years I ever knowed in Johnson County and we come out about the porest we ever done. We worked let me tell you, we worked to make that crop."
"Law, I reckin we did. I hoed seventeen acres of cotton by myself without one lick of help except for the little grass pickin' done by the geese, done my housework. and looked after three children. Many a night after supper I'd scour my floors or do my washlin' and have it ready so's I could put it on the line before I went to the field at sun-up next mornin'. In gatherin' time I'd take my little baby to the field and put him in a wooden box at the end of a cotton row of a early mornin' when the frost lay thick as snow on the ground. Me and Frank picked every boll that want into eight bales of that cotton and I never got so much as two yards of ten-cent apron gingham."
"We didn't pick the last bale," Frank said, "and I never seen prettier cotton in a field. I'd hauled thirteen bales to the gin and hadn't brought back a cent. Mr. Johnson, my landlord, got half of it because the land was his'n and he took the other half to pay for what rashins he'd furnished. Me and the old woman was busy tryin' to get the peas picked and the potatoes dag so's to have somethin' to live on and I had no notion of stoppin' to pick that last bale of cotton. I said to Mr. Johnson, 'Now, they's some pretty cotton down there in the field, and it's all yourn and on yore land. I've wore out and I've not got time to pick it neither and pickin'e sixty cent a hundred. They's not enough money at my house to pay for the pickin' of one hundred pound. If you want your cotton you better see togettin' it out.' Mr. Johnson said, 'I'll get some hands in there and get that cotton ready for ginnin', but if I don't come out on it, I'll charge up half the loss against you.' And I answered him like this, 'Mr. Johnson, you charge it if you want to but it'll be what's called a dead debt. I ain't gonna work like a mule raisin' fourteen bales of cotton off of which I've got nare cent and then pay somebody extry money because I was fool enough to raise it.'
"He come back to me a few days later and he said, 'We come out four dollars in the hole on that bale and yore part is two dollars. I thought maybe you'd just let the shoulder of meat I borrowed from you when you killed that hog the other day go to settle up with me.'
"I felt right sorry I was a human then. I looked at him and I said, 'Mr. Johnson, I loaned you that meat thinkin' of course you'd pay it back. But if you want it that bad keep it.' He kept it.
"And it's hard to believe, but a few days later he come to my house and said half of my four hags was his because I'd fed 'em out of the crop."
"Yessir, he done that thing, he did for sure, and me and Frank had cut weeds to feed them hogs and we give 'em corn we'd made the year before. He'd got everthing we'd growed on the land but a few potatoes and peas and then wanted half the hogs."
"I'd rented corn land," Frank said, "on the terms of one dollar for every barrel I, made and me furnishin' the fertilizer. We come ont even on the corn.
"I said to Johnson when he asked me for the hogs, 'Do your mortgage call for hogs'- he'd took a mortgage against my half of the crop before he'd furnish me you know. 'No, the mortgage don't call for 'em but if you think about it honest you know they're mine.' I answered him with, 'Take everthing your papers calls for but I'd advise you to leave the rest alone.' He never got my hogs.
"We had them peas and potatoes and hogs and no clothes atall to face the rest of the winter with. Good luck come to me though, and in February I left the farm and went to public work. The Continental Nursery Company at Kittrell give me the job of stableboss and paid me $30 a month and furnished a house to live in too. That wages did seen powerful good after the long hard year of work that hadn't cleared us a nickel. I reckin it must've been about July when I got a chance at a better job."
"It was August, Frank. I remember it was three weeks after the twins was born we moved to Hendarson."
"Wills was beginnin" to pay good," Frank continued. "It wa'n't long till I was makin' $20 a week."
"We done some good livin' then," Sally remarked. "It seemed like we never had to study and contrive so hard. I could buy all the milk my children needed."
"Groceries kept agoin' up," Frank began again, "and they took up most of the wages, but then we did have enough to eat.
"In 1919 we moved to Durham and first thing I knowed I was makin' from 25 to 35 dollars a week. Times stayed good with us up to '21. When I say times was good I don't mean we done no fancy livin' atall but we set down to the table three times a day and always found somethin' on it.
"Then one day I went in the mill and seen a notice tellin' of a twenty-five percent cut and a shortenin' of time to three days a week. Hard times really set in like always groceries never come down acoordin' to the cut."
"Them was miserable days for us," Sallie declared, "and many a time my little ones cried for milk."
"And when it begin to look like the livin' wa'n't worth the worry of gettin' along I lost my job complete -- left without my little piece of a job.
"It was human kindness that caused me to lose it too. A body is hard put to it to understand how kindness can work against him sometimes but it sure happens. Word got out amongst the neighbors that we was havin' a struggle gettin' along with me one workin' and seven children lookin' to me for a livin'. First thing we knowed a woman come out and set to talk awhile with my wife. She asked her how we managed to live on what I made and the old lady answered we done the best we could. At different times three women come out and done just about such talk as the first one and Sally, she answered 'em all alike, but not ary time did she ever ask help of 'em' But it wasn't long till baskets of groceries started comin to us and it seemed just like manna from heaven. That'd been goin on a few weeks when my boss told me Mr. Phillips, the superintendant wanted to see me.
"Soon as I could I went to Mr. Phillip's office and told him Mr. Frank said he wanted to see me. He answered right quick, 'Yes, Martin, I did. The comp'ny's decided all who can't live sumptuous on what they make at this mill is to be given ten-day notice. I'm givin' you yores now.'
"'But Mr. Phi llips,' I says, 'I don't understand what's causin' this. I have never raised one word of complaint against this mill.'
"Mr. Martin, it's awful knockin' on the mill,' he says, 'to have folks workin' for this company that calls on the welfare and the Salvation Army for help. We don't like to have the Salvation Army callin' up this office and tellin' us they'd like a contribution from us to help them take care of our hands.'
"I looked at Mr. Phillips settin' there behind his desk and I knowed he couldn't help feelin' I was tellin' the truth when I spoke. 'Before God, Mr. Phillips,' I said. 'to my ricellection I've never spoke to a Salvation Army man or woman in my life and I've never been to no organization to ask for help.'
"'But you've been agettin' help, ain't you?' he asked.
"'I've got help and I highly appreciate it,' I said. 'It's kept my children from goin' hungry.'
"'You've got your notice.' he answered me.
"I took some of the money I drawed that week and bought me a ticket to Greensboro, Had a brother livin' here then and he took me to his bossman and helped me get the promise of a house and job. But I knowed it cost money to move and I thought to myself it won't hurt none to go to Mr. Poe, the general manager, and see if he won't be more reasonable in his ways than Mr. Phillips.
"On a Wednesday I went. And I says to him, 'Mr. Pee, I want to ask you, do you find fault with my work and my way and manner of livin'?'
"'None whatever, Mr. Martin, ' he answered me.
"'Then why is my job bein' took away from me?' I asked him.
"'We may be doin' you a favor. Mr. Martin,' he said, 'It'll be for your own good if you can go something else and get more time and better pay. The picture for this mill looks mighty gloomy. Have you got any notion where yon're goin'?'
"I've got a house and a job waitin' for me,' I said, 'but I've not got a copper to pay for movin'.'
"'Go out and hire you a truck,' he says, 'and charge it to the mill.'
"Well I couldn't get nothin' but a delivery truck and it wouldn't bring all of our furniture. when I went back to Mr. Poe he told me to have the balance crated, take it to the depot, and he'd pay the freight.
"You know them neighbors of mine crated everything I had and wouldn't let me raise my hand to help. They's never been no better people than them at that Durham mill."
"They's another thing they done always comes to my mind when I think of Durham," Sallie said reflectively and her eyes looked beyond the two of us who listened.
"Two year before we left, when Frank was out one time with a sore foot, they'd come by our house after quittin' time of a evenin, them that worked in his departmint, and they'd drop coins in his hands till he had more'n he woulder made workin' that day. It's always stayed in my ricollection as a powerful sweet thing to've done." Her chair was rocking steadily now that she had ceased talking and her eyes were still gazing toward the hall.
"The welfare bought us train tickets and the neighbors fixed up dinner for us to eat on the train," Frank reaminisced.
"They was cake and salmin balls and ham biscuits," Sally said. "Yes, they was a custard too."
"A old bachelor that boarded and never had no way of fixin' things bought the children some peppermint candy," Frank said. "I remember how the old lady worried with them twins tryin' to keep 'em from messin' up their clothes with the red off of that candy. That little Clara smeared it all over her face and Sally was washin' her when the train pulled into Greensboro."
"We've been here at the White Oak Mill since," Sally said. "Twan't but a few months till Dan, our oldest, was fourteen and went in the mill with his pa. Now there's one good religious boy: anybody around'll tell you that. He never misses a Sunday goin' to church mornin' and night and of a evenin' too if they's preachin' goin on. Pays no attention atall to the girls and uses his money to help out at home. He never got no education much on account of havin' to stay at home and help me with the other children, but he sure puts a heap of study on his Bible."
The last lingering tone of her monotonous voice trailed away into a silence, broken only by occasional sounds created by two small children who played in the rear of the room. Presently I became conscious of the movements of persons in the room overhead, listened as the sound became that of slow-moving feet descending stairs, and caught the jumbled noise of two girls talking as they moved through the hall outside. One suddenly ran ahead of the other and opened the front door. Her voice was loud as she said, 'Come on in Mrs. Alexander.' A moment later three persons came into the room where Sally and Frank and I sat.
"Them's my two girls that stays at home," Sally said, "and that there is my friend neighbor, Mrs. Alexander." Mrs. Alexander, a massive woman wearing a sky blue coat, shoved herself across the room sat down with measured gradualness in a chair near the ramshackle dresser. As the concluding move toward settling herself she brushed her bobbed hair away from her ruddy face and laid her hands comfortably at rest in her bulging lap.
"Jetty nor Venie neither can't seem to get on at the mill," Sally said referring to her two daughters who sat on the bed. "'Course, Jetty there has always had a bad head trouble and I don't know as she'd ever be able to work if she could get work to do. Her care just takes spells of bleedin'. and little pieces of what looks bones comes out too."
Sally's words produced in Jetty such an acute embarrassment that she could not for the moment speak though her lips moved. Finally when she did speak it was in a cracked, nervous voice which except for the restraint forced upon it would have cried out rather than spoken out its words. "Mama, I wish you wouldn't be talkin' about my head," she declared. "Just cause my ears used to bleed you tell it like I still have head trouble. I can hear good as anybody now."
"Well, honey, you can't help it about your head and it ain't nothin' to be ashamed of," Sally said. "The doctors says your head ain't just like anybody else's but you shore ain't to blame for that, Her head treatmints and tonoils cost us $91 three year age. She's not had the doctor in a right smart while now."
Jetty, unable to think of any further defense of her health, made a few final gestures of retreat. She brushed nervously at her frizzled yellow hair, shrugged her shoulders and stared out of the window.
"Jetty quit school when she was fourteen year old because it made her awful," Sally was saying presently.
"I quit when I was fourteen too," Venie said, "but it was because I wanted a job. I've been waitin' five years for it and I guess I'll set here waitim' five more."
The suggestion of prolonged waiting instantly drew Frank out of his silence. "We'll all about parish before five year unless work picks up." he said. Venie giggled but Frank, unmindful of interruption continued, "After I found out the mill was through with me I went up to the welfare and put in for a old age pension. The lady at the desk told me she'd have to wait to see what the legislature done about the appropriations for pensions before she could give me a answer. And when I asked her how long that'd be she said the first of July and I says to her, 'I'll be perished by then.' She laughed at that but t'wan't meant for no joke, Times is gettin hard for us."
"Taint like if they could make the full time the mill runs," Sallie explained. "Now Dan, he'd make $10.08 if he worked four days but every week he's sent out to rest a day. Same with Clara and Clarice. Clara's married new but her husband works in the chair factory at liberty and she boards here like the rest that's workin'. She draws on the average of $9 a week and Clarice draws about $7. Ruth, the mother of these two children you see here and one more that ain't come home from school, she makes the same as Clara. The four workin' pays me $5 a week apiece and I feed thirteen out of it and keep up best as I can with the rest of the debts housekeepin' makes. Frank's always went for wood and coal and rent and some for clothes. Now this week I can't get much board out of Clara, and Clarice because they both near 'bout had flu last week and never put in but a day apiece. They say it's all they can do to keep up with their work when they're well and to go down there sick would sure enough finish 'em up."
"I bet Ruth never missed nare day they'd let her work," Mrs. Alexander said.
"No sirree" Sallie answered. "I believe she'd go till she dropped in her tracks. She's at work today and her with a cold that ain't fur from pneumony but I couldn't keep her at home. She says a woman with three children to raise ain't got time to be sick. It's the same answer she makes when I try to get her to go to the sanitorium and he pleuriscoped. Beins her husband died with the tbs the doctor said her and the children both oughter be pleuriscoped ever six months, but she won't go. She says if she's got it she don't want to know it because with no money to take care of herself she'd die any way and knowin' it would make her worry and bring death on that much quicker. But she do cough awful of a night.
"Sid, he had the gallopin' kind, you know. Seemed like the more we done for him the faster it worked. Old Mrs. Smiley over on 12th St. fixed him up a remedy that's gauranteed to cuore it but we couldn't see as it done Sid one bit of good. Some says they's nothin' you can do for the gallopin' kind nohow and I reckin they're right.
"These babies here, though. I do all I can to give 'em milk so's to bulid' em up enough to keep 'em from havin' it. I worry more above Ruth than I do the children naturally since the work she has to do ain't none too good for her heath nohow. Ruth never was no strong person but I always said she had more grit than anybody I knowed. I believe that's the children comin' now, ain't it Frank? It's past three o'clock."
"That there little Sarah'll let you know in a minute," Frank said, grinning. "First sound she ketches of stalkin' she'll make a beeline for the front door." And no sooner had he spoken than Sarah, the older of the two grandchildren, who had been trading dell chairs with her baby-sister, poised her head for listening and the next moment scrambled to her feet and rushed out of the room.
"Of a pay day Ruth always brings her somethin'." Sally explained.
There was laughter in the hall and a child's grunt of pleasure, and the instant, Sarah, leading the crowd, pranced into the room licking an ice-cream cone with great delight. The baby emitted a little squeal and stopped her feet high over the obetructing doll chair to reach her mother. Ruth bent down to pat the child on the head and to put into her outstretched hands the other cone she'd brought.
"This here is Ruth and that one's Clara and the other Clarice though I doubt if you'll remember long which twin is which. Frank says they's times when he can't. That there to Dan." When Sally had finished introducing her daughters they looked about the room and fitted themselves in wherever they could. The twins, hardly more than five feet two and weighing not over ninety pounds, sat side by side on the further end of the bad. They had pert-looking narrow faces with pug noses, smooth skin, and eyes which must have been bright when less fatigued. Ruth, smaller than the twins, seeming so weary that she did not want to talk slid into a chair in the corner partly shielded from view by Mrs. Alexander. Dan went into the kitchen, came back occasionally to stand in the doorway listening to the conversation but never contributing to it.
And before the crowd had fully adjusted itself a small boy bearing two books and a tablet under his arm dashed into the room. Still panting, he stopped before Ruth and asked in great eagerness, "What'd you bring me, Mama?"
"I wasn't lookin' for you so soon," Ruth said. The Martins laughed and with greater abandon laughed Mrs. Alexander.
The laughter was like a stinging blow to the child. Instantly he was sobbing and in his embarrassment he flung out his fists, pounding his mother and demanding a nickel. Before Ruth could calm him sufficiently to reach into her pocket Clara came forth with a nickel and said, "Now be a little man, Johnny, and hush your cryin'. Your mama's got to save her money to pay her insurance with." The child took the nickel and his sniffles gradually died away to leave only the sound of an occasional shuffle of feet within the room.
"Talk like you ain't get no insurance to pay." Clarice said to Clara.
"Well I never made enough this time to pay mine nohow," Clara answered.
"They's not a one of 'em," Frank began with a sweep of his arm which included Dan in the kitchen," that draws much more'n half what they oughter. He batted his eyes and straightened himself in his chair. He looked about the room with a I-will-speak expression and began again to speak. "What labor's got to do is organize. I'd rather see it get its rights through laws but the laws they've got now is easy to get around. Seems like the Union's the only chance."
"We joined the Union durin' the strike." both twins spoke simultaneously. "All of us did."
Frank prepared himself for further speech. The presence of his children seemed to bolster his spirits and give impetus to his thoughts. He raised his right arm to elbow-angle and swung it to and fro like the pendulum of a clock as he spoke.
"Yessir, all mine joined," he declared. "I had that one there that's never worked a day in the mill to sign a card. I think it's the thing to do. If I was arunnin' the Union I'd try to sign up all the new crop out them waitin' for jobs in the mill. Then, when the companies got ready to turn off Union members workin' for 'em they couldn't find no non-union ones to take their places.
"They work -- the comp'ny, I'm speakin' of -- to keep a extry supply of help on hand out here in the village, folks that's been settin' around waitin' for a job like a dog waits for a bone. That away they can hold a threat always over yore head so's to drive you to the last breath and then if you can't do quite as well as they want you to, they can say, 'Git out, you can't keep up, we're done with you, and we've got a dozen that ain't wore out atall out there waitin' and abawlin' for yore job.' That's the reason they take in folks for miles around that's livin' out on farms and glad to get what extry money they can make in the mill. Yessir, they invite 'em in from far and near and they've got folks livin' next door to the mill in comp'ny houses that'd might nigh give part of their life for a job. They's young folks that's never had a job been awaitin' and abeggin' for years to get on down there. And it takes all able-bodied hands in a family aworkin' on the wages they pay to give theirselves a decent livin'. Boys and girls aloafin' -- time on their hands to do nothin' with but get in trouble -- and no money except what they have to take from them that's not able to give it.
"A farmer out raisin' his stuff and ownin' his land can afford to work twenty-five cent on the dollar cheaper than reg'lar mill people. And the best part for the comp'ny too, he don't need to mutter and grumble and he goes around givin' 'em a good name because so much extry is just so much extry. And families that's helped the country make what they've got set here in the village with half of 'em waitin' for the word to come to work. Yessir, have 'em so glad to get a job they'll take anything for pay."
The pause was transitory. Frank's hand was poised in mid-air. Jetty leaned over from her space on the side of the bed, caught her father's hand, and in a sing-song voice declared, "Pa's a preacher, Pa's a preacher."
All of the family laughed with unrestrained glee. The little boy who had cried clapped his hands to give expression to his great good feeling. Jetty beamed over the success of her joke.
"Like back in '32," Frank was saying, his arm beating in clock-like rhythm, "I come home and found five jobless men settin' on my porch. Five that couldn't to save their lives find a lick of work to do. One of 'em was Clyde Manos and I'd knowed Clyde ever since I'd been in Greensboro. He says to me when I stepped up on the porch, 'Well, Frank, I wish I was lucky as you, had a good job to go to of a mornin'.' I says, 'Well Clyde, I'm thankful I've got a job to go to but it ain't what you'd call a real good job, I don't suppose. I don't draw but two dollars and five cent for a pretty worrisome piece of work.' He says, 'Frank, if I knowed that you'd quit the job and wasn't goin' to have it back noway nor nohow I'd go right straight down there and ask for it and if the boss said, 'You can have it if you'll work for a dollar a day,' I'd be so thankful at gettin' it atall I ain't certain I wouldn't cry right there and I've never cried but once since I've been a man.'
"Yessir, I think when a comp'ny like this owns a village they ought to be made by law to give a job to every able-bodied man and woman living in it and wantin' to work before they'd be allowed to bring in help from the outside. And I wish I could live to see the union sign up all the workin'-age boys and girls as well as the ones in mill and I believe the workin' man would get a fairer deal."
"Did many of the people here join the union during the strike?" I asked.
"Lots of 'em joined but most is scared to tell it," Frank replied.
The girls laughed and exchanged glances among themselves. Clara said, "Maybe we oughtn't to be tellin'. But law, I've showed my card to more'n one."
"They can't turn you off," Clarice declared. "The new law gives a person the right to join the union. Taint like it was after the tater patch meetins."
"How them was pitiful times for some," Frank said. "They come a man here back in '31 to hold union meetins and wouldn't none let him have a bulidin' to hold 'em in. You see, the man that owns these mills near 'bout controls the whole city and he coulder ruint any man that rented his bulidin'. But they went out yonder on the edge of Hoidoe Heights in a open field and a good many attended. Some joined. How one way or another the Cones got word of ever one that joined and they give 'em ten-day notice. Some woul'd move. The law come out and moved they things to the street.
"The next Sunday evenin' me and old man Berry rode around Revolution where the worst was goin' on, and on two streets we counted eleven families settin' out on the sidewalk beside their things. To see them little children settin' out there with no manner of shelter over their heads, to see the women wore out with tryin to live, sure put you to thinkin' and made you sorry you had to stop at thinkin'. What you thought about the ones that would do it wouldn't make no pleasant talk. It ain't no wonder folks here is still scared of the union.
"It looked for a while like them folks wasn't goin' to move off the streets. Up town they couldn't seem to figger out the law on it, but finally they got the health doctor to come out and declare the right sanitation wan't bein' carried out. He called their way of livin' a menance to public health and they moved 'em som'ers, I never did know where."
Ruth's eyes were like a flame as she spoke. "I'll stick by the union if it'll try to get me a decent wage for my work so's I can raise my children. I work like a dog in the spinnin' room and when I'm lucky enough to get four days I do as much or more as used to be done in five and a half but I'm paid about like what I ought to make in three.
"When they first put in that new Long Draft machinery women down there fainted and fell out. I fainted ones myself. When I come to, my bossman was standin' over me and I was so scared of him I fainted again."
The picture of the second fainting drew laughter from the crowd. It's spirit still lingered in the room when the door was opened after a light rap upon it and a man walked in. He nodded at the crowd, leaned against the wall, and looked at the twins. "I've come to collect," he said. "We've got nothin' for you this week," Clara replied. "We can't even pay Mama our reg'lar board. We'll pay next week." "Don't pay to get behind with your insurance," the young man said. "I know but we can't help it," Clarice said.
The young man turned and looked at me. "Selling insurance too?" he asked.
"No, but I feel very muchat home with insurance people," I replied. "I usually meet one or two in most mill village homes I visit if it happens to be pay day."
"They're the hanginest round folks you ever seen," Mrs. Alexander declared. "Before you can get a bite of bread in your mouth," she continued, raising her fat arm toward her mouth and stepping just short of reaching it, "they're at your door knock, knock." She concluded with imaginary raps in the air.
The insurance man grinned sheepishly pushed his hat to the back of his head. "Well, insurance is a pretty good thing to have, Mrs. Alexander," he said finally.
"I'll never be without it long as I can drag and make a dollar," Ruth declared. "I seen what it meant to have somebody you loved dead and waitin' to be buried and not a penny to your name to bury 'em with. If I can help it the welfare won't have to bury me and the children. I may have to do without things I need to eat but I'll have money laid back in insurance for my folks to buy a coffin to bury me in when I'm dead."
Mrs. Alexander broke the silence. "I reckin that their insurance man has seen as many little new-born babies as air doctor in Greensboro. He's there to write 'em up before thay've let out their first yell."
A roar of laughter went around the room and was sustained by a belated cackle from Frank who seemingly had thought upon the words before he allowed them to provoke him to laughter.
Presently the young man made his departure but first he warned the twins to have his money ready the next pay day. He temporized the caustic tone of his demand by smiling as he went out of the door.
A restlessness invaded the room which could not immediately resolve itself into conversation. Bodies shifted, feet shuffled. Presently Clara as if moved by a sudden inspiration jumped to her feet, went into the kitchen and came back with a pan of water and a cake of soap. She placed the water on the stove, reached up on the closet door, secured the big wash cloth hanging there, and dipped it into the small pan. She soaped the rag with a great display of energy, and began to give her face a vigorous scrubbing.
"You talk about bein' strict," Clarice said after awhile, "if you had to inspect in the clothroom under our supervisor you'd think you was in school with the meanest teacher in the United States standin' over you. She has a fit if we so much as open our mouths. For eight hours we go as hard as we can pedalling the machine while the cloth runs through, strainin' our eyes to find a little bad place in it, and if we have three cuts out of the two ar three hudred we do a day to come back on us she sends us out to rest the next day. It's her way of punishin' us. The other day two girls had went over to the fountain to get a drink of water - most of us run there and back so's not to be fussed at for leavin' our work -- and a man they knowed passed by and spoke to 'em. They wasn't gone no time but a little longer'n usual, so the supervisor sent 'em home and told 'em they'd better rest a day and then maybe they could stay at their work. They know how bad we hate to miss time when don't none of us make enough to get along on anyhow."
Clara emerged shortly from behind the folds of the big wash cloth, her face a glowing red. She went into the kitchen to empty the pan and returned with fresh water for Clarice, "I think your face needs washin' too," she said to her, and instantly the other twin was engaged in soaping the rag for a face scrubbing. Her face was well covered in lather when someone tapped on the door and Clara tripped across the room to open it. A woman past middle-age who carried a big black satchel in her hands came in. "Have this here seat, Mrs. Weaver," Frank said rising and placing his chair near the center of the room. Mrs. Weaver seated herself and lost no time in opening up her satchel and drawing forth brightly colored dish towels. "These," she said to Sally, "are to be give away to everyone taking a. $1.00 order this week. It's a very attractive offer. Wouldn't you like a little flavoring set this time, Mrs. Martin?"
"I'm afraid I can't take nothin' this time, Mrs. Weaver," Sally replied. "The twins lost time last week and I'm shorter'n usual on money."
"And I've no longer got a job," Frank said but Mrs. Weaver did not seem to hear him.
"You don't have to pay me today," she said to Sally.
"I don't believe I'll take it," Sally said. "I don't won't to get no further in debt. 'I won't be nothin' for me this week, Mrs. Weaver. Ruth has took all that cough medicine she get from you but that little bit up there in the bottle, but it ain't seemed to do her no good atall."
Mrs. Weaver raised her eyes to the mantel to lock at the almost empty bottle. "It is nearly gone," she said. "Batter let ne leave you another bottle."
"No, I reckin not this time" Sally responded.
After unsuccessful efforts to supply the twins with vanishing cream Mrs. Weaver closed her bag and departed, promising as she did so to return at an early date.
"That Garbo-Christian line's right good," Sally said when the door had closed, "but it comes pretty high."
Frank grabbed his chair, restored it to its former place, and speaking as a man who has discovered a truth ha must express, he said, "Now cuttin' the hours ain't cut down on the joblessness atall. I believe it has actually increased it.
"What the manufacturer done was to stretch the stretchout a little more and speed up the machinery so's to get the same production with less help and shorter time. The mills is makin' the same amount of goods in three and four days as they used to make in a full week. Anybody'll tell you that.
"Twenty-four looms is splenty for any person to run. Most runs thirty-two. Thirty-six batteries is enough for any young boy or girl to fill - takes 'em young on that job, old once couldn't keep up - and they've got forty-eight apiece. The cardroom man need to run two slubbers and now they've give him three. When I come here it took seventeen men to keep up with the quill job; now the same work is bein' done by nine. They used to be a tangle man but now if you was to catch up five minutes with your own job the bossman says, 'Get over there and start to untanglin'.' First one and then another works at it till it gets done.
"What they really need is a committee of men that knows mill work from beginnin' to end -- men hired by the governmint and not the comp'ny you understand - to go around and say, 'Now twenty-four looms is a fair job, so many batteries is enough for one person to fill,' and like that right on down to the sweeper. It's the work and not the hours that's needin' governmint regulation.
"I do think that Roosevelt is the biggest-hearted man we ever had in the White House. He undoubtedly is the most fore sighted and can speak his thought the plainest of any man I ever heard speak. He's spoke very few words over the radio that I haven't listened to. It's the first time in my ricollection that a president ever got up and said, 'I'm interested in and aim to do somethin' for the workin' man.' Just knowin' that for once in the time of the country they was a man to stand up and speak for him, a man that could make what he felt so plain nobody could doubt he meant it, has made a lot of us feel a sight better even when they wasn't much to eat in our homes.
"Roosevelt picked us up out of the mud and stood us up but whenever he turns us loose I'm afraid we're goin' to fall and go deeper in the mud than we was before. That's because so many of his own party has turned against him and brought defeat to lots of his thinkin' and plannin'. The Bible says, 'A house divided against itself cannot stand, a kingdom divided against itself will end in desolation.' If they keep abuckin' against him and bigheads get in there that try to make too quick a turn back desolation will follow in our country.
"Roosevelt is the only president we ever had that thought the Constitution belonged to the pore man too. The way they've been areadin' it it seemed like they thought it said, "Him that's got money shall have the rights to life, freedom and happiness.' Is they any freedom to bein' throwed out of yore home and have to watch yore children suffer just because you joined a organization you thought might better you? Does it make you think you've got liberty to be treated like that when the man you're workin' for has always had the right to join the association to multiply his own good livin'? Yessir, it took Roosevelt to read in the Constitution and find out them folks way back yonder that made it was talkin' about the pore man right along with the rich one. I am a Roosevelt man."
Frank Martin's children had listened absorbedly to his solemn pronouncements. They gave the impression once he had I finished of persons who had had their own thoughts spoken for them. They were beyond the ties of family bound together now in the unity of common thought. There was no immediate need for continued speech or action and the silence which followed was restful and full of ease.
Presently a bright-faced boy of perhaps thirteen came into the room and Sally introduced him as her youngest child, Henry. "He's the only one I've got in school now," she added. "He's in the eighth grade, How come you so late, Henry?"
"I went by the Y awhile." the boy answered as he passed into the kitchen. There came into the room the sound of one plate being slipped from a stack of plates followed by the click of a stove door opening.
Clara in deep preoccupation cast critical glance from first one member of her family to the other. "Why, Henry's already gone farther in school than any of us," she said finally. The thought amused her and she laughed. All the younger Martins joined her.
"None the rest of us ever got past the seventh grade, did we?" Clarice said. "Den. he was so busy totin' us younguns around he didn't get that far. Mama used to say she bet Dan had rolled me and Clara as far as from here to New York and back in that double baby carriage we had."
"They was a woman in East Henderson," Sally began, "that had twins too but hers died. She heard about mine and sent word to me she'd sell their carriage to me for four dollars, Then I was considered one of the best hands in West Henderson for doin' up bonnets, I done enough bonnets to buy the carriage and I don't see to save my life how I'der raised them twins without it.
"Clara, they's somebody else aknockin' on the door. It'll about be Mr. Oshkosh comin' for a paymint on my dress."
Clare came back presently followed by a fat, well-dressed man who after a general nod at the crowd directed his attention toward Sally. "How are you, Mrs. Martin," he said, and Sally, reaching into her pocket answered, "All right, I reckin, Mr. Oshkosh. Here's your fifty cent and I'll try to have the rest of it next week." "That's all right, Mrs. Martin," Mr. Oshkosh answered, and after a smile to all left the room.
"He's a dress peddler," Sally explained, "and a mighty nice man. Him and his brother runs a store up town and he puts part of the goods in his car and comes around peddlin' 'em out. Some times the children fusses at me for buyin' from him because they say his wash dresses is always about fifty cent higher than they are up town but he's so nice about waitin for his money. Sometimes a body may be able to save fifty cent a week to pay on a dress when they can't save a dollar and a half at a time to buy one. I appreciate how nice Mr. Oshkosh is about waitin'."
I looked out of the window and already the foggy day was losing the little of its light that remained. I arose to leave and after I had said good-bye to the crowd Sally got up and accompanied me to the door. I was going down the porch steps when someone called my name. I turned around and Frank Martin stood there just outside of the door, and by the light from the near-by street light I could see the solomn expression on his face.
"If ever you get to talk to any that it'll do any good to talk to," he said, "they's one law you night tell 'em oughter be passed. It is a sin and a shamed for air comp'ny in the world to run a elevator without a reg'lar operator. It's my ricollection I've never heard tell of a accident on a elevator where they was a reg'lar operator. But many a time I've read where folks has gone to a horrible death when they've got on one and never knowed how to run it.
"Course if this comp'ny was to get a reg'lar man for the job it'd more'n likely not be me. I'm did and they don't want me. But the law ought really to be passed.
"No, I don't know as I'll ever have another mill job," he muttered as he turned to go back into the house."
