Veronica E. Huss
LaBelle, Florida
DWELLINGS OF THE FAR SOUTH LABELLE, HENDRY COUNTY, FLORIDA.
The far, far south may have its beauties, but like many other places in the world, it has some squalid places where humans manage somehow to live, places that can cause shudders to the fastidious. Of these same places, there are a number in the backwoods of the South Florida cattle ranges. These same homes are incredibly close to the famous coastal resort towns, where the society of the world meets. People in these districts often live without so much as ever seeing a newspaper. Many cannot afford them, while others don't want them, still others could not read them if they had them. Many of those who do read them cannot understand what they read. Their homes are still more deplorable.
A thirty-seven year old grandmother, with her youngest grandchild on her knee says she isn't sure of her age being even that. She thinks possibly that she is older, but because her mother died when she was very young, in her combined efforts to live and keep safe, her age was forgotten. But this age forgetting is another thing which worries these people but little. What do they care how old they are? "You live until you die anyway". Many of them do not know the exact ages they really are.
The same woman, the corners of her mouth drippy with snuff, knows little of reading and writing, the limit being to sign her name, while the reading is practically nothing. When spoken to concerning the current events of the day, she knew nothing of them, being able to discuss only the tome and the woods, for her life as a whole has never been any further than the boundaries of these two places. Yet of these there is unending talk; especially of the woods.
The land on which this woman and her daughter settled belonged to them, another thing unusual. Land is acquired here by the taking, to use as long as needed. This has gained such settlers the name of "squatters", but the majority of the natives have the habit of moving very often so the land they use is never in use very long,; thus no one cares. In this family, is the mother, her own youngest being about three, and her married daughter 18, who had an eight month’s old child. Their homes are just a few feet apart.
High water from the Caloosahatchee river ran them out of their homes at Ortona during, the spring, of 1936. There too, they had lived in the accustomed shacks, but as they had deeds to the three acres where they now live, they decided to build here on dry and high land.
The grandmother, with her husband and small children, erected a palmetto shack for their home, which she said was cold even in summer. The furnishings are two beds, a dresser, several boxes and trunks. The dark odd corners are piled with other things. Against a far wall, hangs the gilt framed picture of some relative. There is no door; the windows are patched try torn corrugated boxes. The bare, earthen floor is covered by rough pine boards to ward off the everlasting dampness, and one of the children must sleep on these boards at night.
Black snakes have a habit of using this pitiful abode, seeking warmth and shelter among the dry fans of the top and sides. The mother complained of one getting in her hat which she left hanging on the wall. Yet thus they live!
These shacks are constructed from peeled cypress poles of the sapling size, cast-off pine slats from the sawmills, which form the skeleton. The sides and top are then covered by layer after layer of palmetto fans. These fans are obtained by the whole family going out and cutting them, then hauling them on the usual family truck. These hone made trucks are poorly constructed like the houses, flat bottomed and a "carry-a" kind.
The interiors of the shacks on cold days must remain cold, for there is no method of heating them without the risk of fire. With each gust of wind which sweeps the open "pa-raries", the fans are lifted, letting in the cold wind. They serve against rain but against the cold they are no help.
The kitchen to this particular place is off to one side, a lean-to of three sides. Within it is a tiny home-made table, a cracked iron stove, whose lop-sided chimney, rusted and in a decided state of collapse, runs out through the patched tin roof. The three sides of this lean-to are covered with gunny sacking and odd pieces of tin roofing. All eating is done in the open.
To warm themselves on cold days, a pine knot fire is lighted in the clearing before the shacks, far enough from the house to prevent fire. Here they all sit, their backs to the wind, their bodies bundled in ragged odds of clothing, while they warm their hands in the glow of the fire.
Dirt is everywhere; chickens, dogs and cats share the house with its occupants. Nobody seems to mind the dirt and discomfort.
Although they now have pumps in their yards, all water previously came from the slouch behind the houses. Sanitation in all respects is a thing almost unknown. Throughout all this country, the act of bathing, is often accomplished by combining pleasure and what they consider work. Much bathing, is done in the "cricks". The family goes swimming and that is the end of it.
In the home of the daughter, the 8 months old baby wallows in the filth of the floor and chews a dirty rag, while flies swarm over after it. Here also sits the mother, barefooted and dirty, her feet covered with sores. The grandmother tells that the whole family is bothered with these sores all the time. And she wonders why.
At first glance it is seen that the girl’s home is furnished much better than the home of her mother. Yet like her mother, she takes care of nothing. Numerous dogs stay in the house. She throws all dish water and refuse through the ever open back door; a foul odor prevails at all times. Her home is constructed of fresh cut pine lumber, which is bright yellow and smells sweet. The windows are glassless, and covered try wooden doors, these swinging on hinges made from auto tires. The doors already sagging and shapeless, swing in the same manner. The floor looks as If it had never been scrubbed; the sight is sickening.
Above the beds the usual mosquito netting is held up by small ropes and string. This is used by night to keep out the numerous bugs. The walls are covered by pictures cut from magazines.
Throughout all these woods places of this description are found. Of course the scenes vary, some being cleaner, some dirtier, all defending upon the occupants.
Sickness too, is prevalent in these places, diseases of every kind apparent. Still the people refuse to listen or to take heed, preferring that which might come, regardless.
Work is also scorned except just when necessary, although the heads of both these families are employed by the WPA. While the man whose home Is the palmetto shack hopes in time to come to be able to build himself a pine board home, as yet he has had nothing but hard times. A hard time that has ruled all their lives ever since they were born, and one which will more than likely keep right on until they die. For in not knowing any trade and having to take work of the lowest kind, their lives hold no better promise.
