Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winneboro, S. C.
CATHARINE: T. SMITH
78 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
Catharine T. Smith, an aged widow, resides in the oldest house in Winns- boro, situated on North Vanderhorst Street. She loases the ground floor, or first story, as an apartment. She and her companion, Miss Ida Gilbert, occupy the second story.
"I was born in this house, indisputably the oldest in the town of Winns- boro. It was built as a residence by my paternal anccstor, Colonel William McCreight, in the year 1775, two years prior to the founding of Mt. Zion College, now Mt. Zion Institute. My father, James McCreight, and my grandfather, Daniel B. McCreight, were born in this house. I was married here, and all my children were born here. This home has been in the family for five successive generations.
"You can see the architectural design is that of an English county home. There are twelve rooms on tha basement floor. The entrance into this basement floor is under a stairway that loads to the second story. There are four rooms in the second story. Along the a story, fronting Vanderhorst street, the piazza extends the full length of the house.
"I was about five years old when the Yankees reached the town of winnsboro. My sister, Rachael, was older than I. My brothers, Dan, Eugene, and James, were younger. My mother, before marriage, was Catharine Truesdale of Charleston, S. C. I was named for her, but have been called 'Kate' when my 'memory runneth not to the contrary'.
"I do not remember a great deal about the Yankees, but remember seeing them pass our house on Vanderhorst street. Four of them came to the gate, and I refused to shake hands with them. They teased me for it, jumping as up in the air and seating me on the gatepost, until I cried. They then commanded one of our slaves to bring each one of them a ham from our smokehouse. They came into the house and ransacked it, carrying away everything that could be carried away on their persons.
"Later, other squads came and carried away all the food and provisions. Only one chicken was loft, an old hen, that ran down back of the garden. The neat day, while another band was threatening my father with dire injury if he did not show them where had had concealed the jewelry and other precious things, an officer, in command of some part of the army, rode up. Father, being a member of the masonic fraternity, gave him the sign of distress, which he recognized. The officer drew his sword in a flash of gleaming steel, and, with an oath, drove the miscreants from the premises, promising father that he would send us something to eat, which he did. It lasted us three days after the army left Winnsboro. When that was consumed, our slaves went to the place where the Yankees had fed their horses and swept up several bushels of corn, with dirt clinging to the grains and cobs. This was carried into the house, and, for three weeks, we lived on 'big hominy' made from the corn.
"Perhaps your readers would like to know how this hominy was made. First of all, we took the ashes from the fireplace, put them in a barrel, in which wheat straw had been placed, poured water on the ashes, and made lye. With this lye, we would boil the corn until the husk came off; then we washed the corn clean and fried it in bacon grease. We also parched some of the corn and used it as a substitute for coffee.
"Some will wonder how a five-year-old child can remember so much. Well, believe it or not, these recollections remain more vivid to me, after seventy odd years, than most things of twenty years ago.
"My first school training was in a small private school, taught by Miss Maggie Blain. We trudged to school in the morning. For the first year, we carried a slate, a slate pencil, a sponge, and the blue-backed speller to school. The next year, Davies' Arithmetic was added to this equipment. The third year, I went to Miss Alston. The fourth year, I commenced at Mt. Zion and completed the course there, with prof. R. Means Davis in charge of the school.
"When I was a child, ladies were hoops and enormous plumed hats. But about the time I became a young lady, hoops had been discarded and the bustle had just become the vogue. A girl, at sixteen, put on long dresses, and her parents gave her a 'coming out party'. This was generally an elaborate affairs much thought was given to it by the girls parents and friends, and there was dancing and refreshments for those in attendance.
"Amusements? Young people in Winnsboro, along intthe 1870's, were sociable; they gave dances, charades and theatricals in Thespian Hall. Some of the plays were Handy Andy, Pinafore, and Ten Nights in a Barroom. Mr. Boag's sloating rink was a resort for young people not otherwise engaged. The young girls and boys delighted in horseback riding. The livery stables catered to the crowd, keeping five saddle horses and sidesaddles for the accommodation of the female sex, who in those days rode this particular style of saddle.
"Do I remember anyting about the Hampton campaign in 1876? Let me see. The white people were cautioned by their leaders, General Bratton, Maj. Woodward, Colonel Gaillard, and other prominent man, to preserve peace. The wish of the radicals and the scalawag leaders was to have riots and disturbances so they could plead the 'baby act' to the Republican President at Washington, charging the white citizens with bulldozing and intimidating the Negroes, and, thereby, getting further help from the 'powers that be' in Washington (the National Government) and sympathy and exploitation from northern newspapers. Indeed, the carpetbaggers, scalawaggers, and leading Negroes didn't mind the bloodshed from a few Negroes if it furnished them a chance to 'wave the bloody shirt'. So we were privately schooled to avoid all contacts that might bring trouble.
"The county was organized into clubs composed of white man and white boys who could ride horseback. These wore red shirts on all public occasions during the campaign. It was an imposing eight to see them marching through the countyyside to Winnsboro and in mass here - thrilling to the whites and fear inspiring to the Negroes and their evil-minded leaders. I tell you a thousand man in red shirts on horseback, riding with military order in ranks; old Confederate soldiers! the marshall, riding up and down the lines, transmitting orders on the route to the speaking ground; old men, women, and children waving handkerchiefs and hats to riders and singing and cheering added much enthusiasm and had its due effect on the final result of the election in 1876.
"Many colored people, carried away by the enthusiasm of the scenes, returned to their allegiance to friends of former days, joined the democratic clubs at the solicitations of the whites, and voted for Wade Hampton. However it be in 1938, their votes, as well as their prayers, were craved in 1876. The rostrum from which Hampton spoke, in 1876, was in the Presbyterian woods in the south- western part of Winnsboro. It was constructed of ordinary rough lumber, but was embellished by a bower of flowers, suitable for the throne of a king. Individual work among the Negroes went on energetically, the canvasser reminding you of an industrial insurance agent in his home-to-home canvass for insurance. Whenever and wherever a white man met a Negro, he tried to make a vote for Hampton.
"The white boys of Winnsboro did their bit; they rode in the parades, cheered, and persuaded. Twelve girls sat on the platform the day Hampton spoke. These were dressed in white, with blue sashes, and sang a patriotic song 'Carolina'. I remember they rode to the speaking ground intthe parade in Mr. George Crawfordss Jersey wagon.
"After the election in November 1876, there was incertitude and anxiety in every household until April, 1877, when Hampton was recognized by President Hayes and his Cabinet as the rightful Governor of South Carolina.
"I was married in 1886 to James M. Smith, son of Dr. Ira T. Smith. We have had four children; Mollie, Mrs. S. S. Richardson; Irene, Mrs. Edward Ginn, Varnville, S. C., Gene; of Charlotte, N. C.; and James L. Smith, of Sumter, S. C.
"This ancient hone was a scene of festive charm September 22, 1936, when friends and kin people poured in to congratulate and bring gifts of love and affection to me and my husband in honor of the golden anniversary of our marriage.
"The porch and outside windows were decorated in yellow and buff autumn flowers commemorating the golden anniversary. The hall was decorated with marigold and yellow daisies. The windows on the east side reception room were draped in yellow shades and hangings. On the center table was a golden cake, made and presented by a friend in Charleston. This old mantel (indicating) attracted attention, ornate with hand-carved lines and holding yellow daisies in those vases, which are a hundred and fifty-seven years old.
I want you to look at that Duncan fift table, in the corner over there, and this secretary, both have been in our family since the foundation of the Republic. You see the glass front of the secretary is so arranged as to show 13 panels, just the number of Colonies in the American Union of States at the time it was made.
"What necessities were scarce during and after the War Between the States? And what waseussed as substitutes? I remember a few. Coffee was one: substitutes for it were parched meal, peach chips, and okra seed. Sugar? Well, we used sorghum for that. We often found it hard to get dye. We had a madder bed. We would get the roots, dry them in the sun, grind them as fine as talcum powder, then put this fine dust in a vessel of water and boil the contents. Any cloth or garment dipped in the contents would come our red. When we wanted blue, we used indigo. Yellow cloth could be obtained by using peach tree leaves and alum. Tan could be had from cedar tops and coperas. Purple, from sweet-gum bark and coperas.
"Matches were scarce, so we covered the coals of fire before retiring. Very often one would borrow a coal of fire from his next door neighbor, being pretty certain to have to pay it back some day in the near future.
"Perfumes were scarce. The woods furnished sweet shrubs. Our family has always been of the Presbyterian creed and faith. My husband held the position of clerk of Zion Presbyterian Church in Winnsboro for forty years, and was ordained an elder more than thirty years ago. He died in 1937. After a long life of usefulness to his church and community, God called him higher, to his reward."