In an otherwise identical version, additional information is given. The interviewer is identified as Welborn Hope, the notes "Oklahoma Writers' Project," "Oil in Oklahoma," and "6-9-39," appear on the top of page 11017B, and the handwritten comment--"Would he know? Isn't the device too obvious here"--appears in the margin on page 11018 near lines eleven through twelve.
SPUDDER MAN
The young man entered the pool hall, stopping midway to mop the sweat from his brow, and look intently at each of the baseball fans. Then, he proceeded on to the rear through the swinging doors in the lattice that separated the domino-games from the bar. Across an expanse of vacant tables, sat a middle-aged man with his head buried in a newspaper. As the young man approached, he looked up and smiled a greeting. He was short and thickset, with a dishevelled mass of iron-grey hair, and a round, pock-marked face with gold-teeth prominent.
"Hi, Curly," said the young man, and sat down in a chair beside him. The older man pushed the newspaper toward him, pointing with a knobby forefinger to headlines on the oil-page.
"Gusher in Kiowa County at One Thousand and Fifty Feet", read the young man. After a moment, he exclaimed: "Why, that must not be far from your lease, Curly."
"A mile and a half due east of our one hundred-and-sixty. Looks like maybe we've got a break at last. A man sent me a telegram from Hobart this mornin', offerin' us fifty bucks an acre."
"Going to sell?"
"Naw, I reckon not. I've thought it over, and if I can find Ed Nelson, my pardner, we may decide to drill another hole ourselves. Y'see, we've got three wells out there that we dug with Old Betsy down to the 450-foot stuff."
"Have you still got a drilling rig?"
"Just our old spudder --- Old Betsy. And a spudder ain't much good except on shallow stuff. It don't use a derrick, y'understand; just a mast. And it's portable so, of course, it's pretty light. Don't have any walking-beam either, like a regular cable-tool rig does.
"But we can pick up a cable-tool rig pretty cheap, now. Probably won't need no cash at all with the prospects we got.
"Y'see, I figure it this a-way. This new big gusher's makin' a hundred barrels an hour, and holdin' up at it, from only one foot of sand. Must be on a crevice, drawin' oil from a hell of a big pool somewhere. Well, I figure the gusher's on a high, right at the edge of thag Anadarko Basin, where the Wilcox sand is 13,000 feet deep. Some kind of pressure, maybe water-pressure, is pushin'that oil up from the Basin to a pimple along its edge. That's what makes our stuff look good. Why ain't we on the edge of that Basin, too, a mile and a half due west on a bee-line? Of course, only the bit can tell the tale......
"But, golly, we ought to get a break. I reckon old Ed and me had more hell out in that country tryin' to make an honest dollar than two poor son-of-a-guns ever will have out there. And that was while I was trying to get married, too.
"Y'see I started courtin' Mollie fourteen years ago. She was pushin' plugs at the telephone-office here in Ada then, just like she is now. Mollie wasn't no Queenasheba, and twicet my size, but my face never beat nobody's four aces for looks, so I guess it was about even. And she was a good girl, and she sure could cook.
"I was a harum-scarum young feller then, pushin' cable-tools around here and there, but I never could get steady work because I drank a lot of whisky in them days. Spent all I made on booze, and got fired I bet fifty times. Well, I got to goin' with Mollie, and pretty soon I wanted to marry her. But when I propositioned her, it was no Soap!
" 'Naw, Curly," she says, 'you booze too much. Before I'll ever get hitched to you, you'll have to settle down, and cut out that boozin'. Moreover, you'll have to show me where you've got a thousand bucks in the bank before I'll even talk about the marryin' business.'
"I didn't have a red sou in the bank, and not even a job then, but I made up my mind to get one, and save up that thousand bucks. And I slowed down on the drinkin' considerable. Pretty soon I landed a cable-tool job, and stayed with it, sober as a judge for maybe a couple of months, savin' my dough. That impressed Mollie, and I thought I was doin' fine. But one night I got with the boys and fell off the wagon, and stayed full for a week. When I got sober, I didn't have no job, no dough, and no gal.
"It went on that way for ten years. I'd get a job, save my dough for a few months, and Mollie would begin to talk like she might marry me. Then I'd get full as a billy-goat, and lose my job and Mollie again. She was still workin' at the telephone office, not makin' much, but savin' a little of it along.
"Then the depression come along, and I hubbed trouble sure enough. Cable-tool jobs was mighty scarce since nearly all the drillin' was bein' done with rotaries, and I never learned how to push rotary-tools. I was just a good old cable-tool man, and the graveyard's full of good old cable-tool men.
"I had struck up with old Ed Nelson --- he was past sixty, but a hard workin' old devil --- and we'd managed to get a-hold of old Betsy --- which was a Dempster water-well machine, and so wore out then that nobody else would have it --- and for a while we drilled a few water-wells for farmers in this vicinity. But times got so had that anybody who didn't already have a water-well, just went to the creek for it, instead of having one dug. It didn't look like I could get a lick of work to do, and that thousand bucks seemed mighty far off. I didn't drink, but Mollie was gettin' pretty distant.
" 'Curly, it don't look like you're ever goin' to amount to anything.' she says, 'and I better look around for another man before I get too old. You won't never have a thousand bucks ahead in all your life.'
"That hurt me like the devil, but I begged her for one more chance.
" 'Gimme just one more chance, Mollie,' I says. 'Ed and me are goin' to take Old Betsy out in Western Oklahoma, and wildcat for a shallow well in the red-beds. We might open up a pretty good little field out there, and make some money.'
" 'Yeah, you might,' she said, 'but I'll bet you don't.'
" 'So Ed and me went out to Hobart in Kiowa County. We didn't take old Betsy at first, because we didn't have the money to haul her out there. We prospected around, without no geology except the way the creeks and ridges run, and finally we made a location on a strip of prairie about twelve miles long between the Wichita mountains and the Gyp hills. Gettin' a lease was a problem, because all the farmers was laughin' at us for thinkin' there was any oil in that region, and when we did get a lease, we had to agree to drill on it in thirty days.
"Ed went back to Ada to get Old Betsy, and I stayed with the old farmer that had give us the lease. He soon found out I didn't have no money, but he let me stay on anyway, though he didn't seem to like it much, me eatin' and sleepin' on him without payin'. He didn't think there was oil on his farm, but was good-natured enough to let us have a try at findin' some.
"But when Ed got to Ada, he had a hard time borrowin' a truck to haul the machine, and the days went by, and still he hadn'st showed up with it. The old farmer begun to get pretty sore at me for sponging off him like that, and he figured I was a four-flusher for certain. When twenty-nine days had passed, he served notice on me that if me and Ed didn't have a hole goin' down by midnight, I'd have to pack my grip and skedaddle. I was sure nervous, and when I called to Ada to ask about old Ed, I learned he'd been on his way to Kiowa county for three days with Old Betsy. I wondered what in the hell could have happened to him.
"About nine O'clock on the night of the thirtieth day, he wheezed up to the farmer's house in an old Chevvie truck with Old Betsy on it. He was kind of sheepish, and had to admit he's stopped at too many beer-joints on the way, and had got lost, wanderin' around all over Western Oklahoma for three days, includin' a night spent in jail at Purcell. Well, we just had three hours to get rigged up, and start makin' hole. But we hustled, and just as the roosters was crowin' midnight, we spudded in.
"You might say we didn't have nothin' in the way of tools to work with but a monkey-wrench and a sledge-hammer. All we had for lights was two gasoline-lanterns. And we was flat-broke.
"We only had one meal a day a lot of the time, and we had to steal a chicken now and then from the old farmer. He would miss it, and be sore as hell at us for a week. Gosh, it was hot out on that bald prairie. We had to drink hot gyp water, as we wasn't able to buy ice. We didn't even have a dog-house, and we slept out under the stars.
"Several times we tried to borrow a little money in Hobart. But it wasn't oil-country, and nobody was interested. Farmin' was all they thought about. In oil-country, like around Ada or Seminole, if you have ahole goin' down and get broke, somebody will take pity on you and lend you enough to poor-boy it down a little further. But not out around Hobart. All we could get was the cold-shoulder or the horse-laugh.
"But we made hole, just the same. We would have to go clean back to Ada for a length of pipe, 175 miles beg, borrow, or steal it, and Duncan, 80 miles off, was the nearest place we could get a bolt or screw if anything went wrong with Old Betsy. And something was always goin' wrong. But we got on down with the hole.
"Then, one day, at 448 feet, we broke through a little shell, and oil come bubblin' over out of the hole. Was we excited! The whole countryside was, too, and before we hardly knowed it, we had a crowd of several hundred farmers watchin' us. We managed to get a tank and make connections, and found we had a dandy little 35-barrel a day well. But it was low-gravity oil, and the next thing was to find somewhere we could sell it, as there wasn't a pipeline in sixty miles.
"But there was enough interest stirred up out there that we was able to Borrow some money from the bank, and so we skidded over about fifty feet and started another hole. We tried haulin' the oil from our first well to Duncan, but soon found that didn't pay. So we went on down with the next hole, hopin' to find some way to sell the stuff by the time it came in. We would work hard all day, and rustle for leases from the farmers at night. We accumulated about 700 acres, but could get the leases for only a year.
"Well, we had tough luck with that hole. We got it down to 445-feet---almost on top of the sand---and there the tools stuck and we fished for 'em a month, and had to give it up. So we skidded over a little further, and started a new hole. By the time we hit the sand, and got a well, it was in December. It turned out to be about the same size well as our first one.
"There we was, with two good little wells, and not able to sell a dime's worth of oil. But we went right ahead with the drillin' of another well. Winter come, and that was the coldest place this side of the North Pole. In fact, there wasn't nothin' between us and the North Pole on that prairie, it seemed like, but a barbed wire fence --- and it was down.
"Along late in February, there come a fellow by name of Redding, who offered to put in a crackin'-plant, and take our oil. Of course, we agreed to let him have it. It turned out that he didn't have the equipment to refine gasoline from it, but he could make what he called Tractor-Oil.
"That Spring, farmers come from miles around to buy that cheap Tractor-Oil. He used a lot of our oil, but said that he would have to pay for his little plant before he could pay us for the oil. He seemed to be doin' such a good business, that we figured that was all right. So we dug away on our third hole, expectin' a nice chunk of dough from him by the time we got it finished.
"Well, we got up one mornin' in the middle of July, and found that Mr. Redding had loaded his plant on trucks, and vamoosed durin' the night, leavin' us without a red sou, and no chance to get one.
"That killed all my confidence in the human race. We was plumb disgusted. We moped around for a day or two, and then decided to give up the whole business, and go back home.
"When we got back to Ada, I never was so blue. I would have got drunk, but I was too broke even to do that. So went around to the telehone office to have a last talk with Mollie.
"'Well, Mollie,' I told her, 'You was right. I won't never have a thousand bucks, and I ain't never goin' to amount to anything. I'm goin' to leave this part of the country, and let you find yourself another man.'
"'Aw, Curly,' she says, 'I know you had tough breaks out there. And you ain't been drinkin'. I've got enough dough saved up for us to start housekeepin', if you still want to get hitched. You'll get another job, maybe, after a while. I'm just a poor, weak woman, I guess.'
"Well, of course, I didn't like the idea of spongin' off Mollie like that, but I finally give in, and we got hitched. That was two years ago. Since then, I've had mighty little to do, a cable-tool job about onct every six months that maybe lasted for a week or two. Ed's been drunk most of the time since --- poor old devil ain't got no folks --- but I've been sober, and kept our lawn lookin' nice, and I made a good garden this year.
"We lost all our leases out in Kiowa County, except the one hundred-and-sixty where we had production. I had just about forgot we even owned a lease out there, until yesterday I saw the headlines about this gusher a mile and a half away, and then that man sent me the telegram, offerin' us fifty bucks an acre for it.
"That sure made me happy. I rushed straight to Mollie, and says:
" 'Look here, Mollie, you was all wrong. I ain't not only worth a thousand bucks, but I'm worth four thousand now!"
"It made her mighty happy, too. Then we talked about whether we ought to sell the lease, and discussed the possibilities from all angles. Finally she says:
" 'Well, Curly, I took a powerful big chance when I got hitched to you, and you ain't made such a bad husband, even if you have been broke. If you can get a rig, I'm willin' for you to take a chance on gettin' a deep well. We won't be no sorse off than we are now if you get a dry hole.'
"That's what I call a good sport.
"Ed's off somewhere drunk this week, but I'll find him in a day or two, and tell him the good news, and he'll sober up. Then we'll be on our way back out there. Next time you see me, Mollie and me will be ridin' down Main Street in a Cadillac, or I'll be sittin' right here flat-broke like I am now."
<text not clear>
