Athens, Georgia
232 Hull Street
Lamar J. Johnson, embalmer (Negro)
Tom Jackson, propietor (Negro)
Miss Grace McCune, writer
Mrs. Sarah H. Hall, Mrs. Leila
Harris, John N. Booth, revisers
YOU HAVE TO GET IT WHILE THEY'RE CRYING
On a side street in a Negro business section, a huge sign proclaims:
"THE JEFFERSON FUNERAL HOME
Successors to
WILL'S UNDERTAKING COMPANY"
Entering the open door I looked about the reception room which was unoccupied. Heavy pongee draperies adorned the tall windows whose sills held a colorful array of potted plants, mostly geraniums, in full bloom. A hat rack, noticeable chiefly because of its unusually large mirror, was placed just inside the door and goldfish were swimming about restlessly in a bowl on the center table, near which several leather chairs were grouped. A closed door was labeled "Office," and over an open doorway leading into a narrow hall, appeared the word, "private."
My rap on the office door was answered promptly by an elderly, thick-set mulatto, dressed in a dark gray business suit. He invited me into the office which was furnished with two desks, an iron safe, several comfortable chairs, and an overstuffed divan. The courtesy with which he placed a chair near the gas heater for me and remained standing until I was seated, revealed no servility. After the amenities had been observed, he said, "I am Jim Jefferson. Is there anything I can do for you?" In answer to my request that he tell me some of his experiences in the operation of a funeral home he began:
"To tell the truth, I really don’t know very much about it, because I have nothing to do with the bodies or the funerals. But if you don't mind waitin' a few minutes, my embalmer will soon be back and maybe he can tell you some interestin' experiences.
"I'se only been in this business about four years, and mine is just the business end of it. Just tryin' to make a livin'. That's all. And I guess I'se done fairly well, considerin' how oncertain ever'thing is now. My, but times is changed in this business since I was young. Even if I haven't been in it all the time, I've lived long enough to notice the changes."
"What changes have you observed?" I inquired.
"Oh, well! I guess the difference in the way we bury folks now and the way they done it fifty years ago would come first. To begin with, when a person died then there was no embalmin' done, for they didn't know nothing 'bout it, at least they didn't tround here. The plain old coffins that they buried 'em in, was nearly all made right at home, or by just anybody around town that knowed how to make a coffin. They wasn't never made up ahead of time, but after somebody died, they would take the measurements and go ahead and make up a coffin that oftentimes would be under the ground by nightfall of the day it was nailed together. Them days you could ship a corpse off on the train and nothing was said 'bout embalmin'. But you can't do that now. Lotsa things have been changed.
"You'se got to have a permit for ever'thing you does, and one sho thing is that you can't ship a corpse that ain't been embalmed. And the casket has to be in a tight box. If it's being shipped a long ways off, you is got to have a steel vault. But, Lord, back in the old days you didn't have no box but the coffin. It was put right down in the ground, but most of the time they did lay a few planks acrost the coffin, before they started shovelin' the dirt on it.
"Folks went to the graveyard in wagons, where it was too far to walk, but for the most part they walked and nearly all the time they sung all the way. But always, the family rode in a wagon, although oftentimes all the others walked. Sometimes you could hear the singin' from them funeral processions a mile off. I wish I could 'member some of them old funeral chants. Times has done changed all of that, and them old ways is 'most forgotten."
A well dressed young Negro who appeared to be of about high school age, came in. When he saw me, he removed his hat. I hope my amazement was not too apparent when the older man said, "This is my embalmer, Sam Jones.
"Sam," he said to the youth, "this lady wants you to tell some of your experiences in your work," and he slyly chuckled as he added, "and don't forget to tell her about how you got your glasses broke." Sam grinned a little ruefully, as he suggested, "Suppose you give me an idea of what sort of information you are seeking."
"Well," I told him, "I am interested in any details of your work, I want to know how you like it, and I'd like to hear the interesting, as well as amusing experiences that you can doubtless recall after having been in charge of as many funerals as I hear that your firm handles. And don't forget to tell me about the glasses."
He laughed. "Well," he said, "I don't know much about the older ways and customs except what I learned in school. But from what I learned in college, there has been rapid advancement in improvements adopted by your race as well as mine, when it comes to mortuary equipment and customs.
"I went to a college attended by both whites and Negroes. Of course we boarded in different houses, but our classes were together, and in this way we learned the customs of both races. I learned lots about your race in college, just as the white students learned much about the Negro race, and both sides found it most interesting. We had a grand old teacher and he would encourage each pupil to relate experiences and customs common in his own home section. My home is in Savannah. Throughout our school days we always enjoyed the times when old graduates would visit the school and relate to us their experiences, and we got many a good laugh out of them. I had never realized before that white folks have as many amusing things happen to them as happen to Negroes.
"As I progressed in my studies, I learned what a simple thing the funeral business was before embalming came into regular practice. Then when a person died, the corpse was simply bathed, shrouded, and placed in a box to await funeralization. After the funeral services it was carried to the grave, where the box, or coffin, was lowered with ropes or straps, because there were no automatic lowering devices then. The roads were very rough and rugged, and from all accounts they were particularly bad in cemeteries --- graveyards, they were then. There were no hearses, at least not in small towns and country places. They had to use wagons drawn by horses, or perhaps mules, and instances have been heard of when the wagons were oulled by steers. But when, through the courtesy of science, embalming was made practical for general use, funeral customs and conditions improved rapidly.
"The Egyptians embalmed their dead long before we were able to learn a practical method for general use. Americans have in recent years made several improvements on old methods practiced in this country, but the Egyptians continue to outwit them. It is said that bodies have been exhumed in recent years that have been preserved for thousands of years by the perfection of Egyptian embalming. But then, as you know, Egypt is naturally a very dry country, and you can realize that it would be easier for bodies to be kept firm and in a good state of preservation in such a climate.
"As you can doubtless remember, the first hearses were drawn by horses. It was not long after automobiles were invented that motorized hearses came into use. Interest in the science of embalming grew to the extent that embalming schools were opened and, soon with the increase of scientific study, improvements in methods and equipment came into general use.
"Only a very few years ago, it was not necessary for a death certificate to be filed with the Board of Health. But now, the State law requires that before we can bury a body, a death certificate, signed by a doctor or coroner, must be filed with the local registrar, and a burial permit must be granted us for each separate interment.
"Now caskets are factory made, and embalming fluids and other funeral supplies have become a new field of industry in the country in the last few decades. A few years ago, no specific amount of education was required before one could become an embalmer and no license was required. But now, before you can announce yourself to be an embalmer, you must be a graduate of an accredited high school, with either six or nine months in an embalming school before you are permitted to go before the State Board and take the examinations for the State license. Both men and women have chosen this newly developed science as their profession.
"As a rule colored cemeteries continue to have very rough roads that become so muddy in wet weather that it is mighty hard to get a hearse and cars through them. Did you ever notice how often funerals have to take place in wet weather? It has often been said that 'death is no respecter of persons,' and any undertaker can tell you that neither is he a respecter of weather. And in the cemeteries maintained by our people, the families often have to walk to the graveside because their lots are not accessible to cars.
"As I told you before, long study has combined with the courtesy of science to make embalming a success. Some families want their dead embalmed at home. As you can readily understand, that is most inconvenient for all concerned. A much better job can be done at the morgue, and it will be much less trouble for the family as well as for the mortician.
"As far as I have been able to learn, such a thing as removal of the corpse to be prepared for funeralizing was unheard of a few generations ago. In fact, there really was no need for removal back in those days except in rare cases, say for instance, of other sickness in the home or persons dying away from home. Then there were no embalmers and no funeral homes where they could be carried. Most of the first ready-made coffins were said to have been stored in the attics or back rooms of furniture and hardware stores, and carriage shops,”
Young Sam Jones evidently enjoyed making comparisons between the white and Negro races, and he did it with such an innocent manner that no offense could be taken. "Your folks and my folks," was his method of differentiating the two races.
In a general discussion of funeral customs and rites, he said, "There is one great difference; your folks do not seem to desire to keep the body out as long as ray folks do. They will keep them out just as long as possible, longer than is reasonable and sensible sometimes. They always prefer to have the funeral on Sunday, for the reason that more of our folks can go on Sunday than on any other day.
"All kinds of requests and demands come to us. Some of them are amusing after it is all over. As you know, in this part of the country hymns are usually the only songs sung at funerals, but at one funeral the family wanted the song My Buddy, sung, because that was the favorite song of the deceased."
"Did you have it sung?" I asked.
"Oh, yes, it was sung during the funeral, and the whole family liked to have fell out.
"But I didn't know until I heard the white students talk at college that your folks cried and fell out like our folks. Now, I don't mean that I thought your folks didn't care, but I had always imagined they had so much more self control than we have. Tell me, do they continue to do that now?" he asked.
"Many times," I replied. "Probably the most emotional funeral I ever attended was preached on Mother's Day and the service lasted for two and a half hours."
"Now, is that right?" Sam's question was in reality a satisfied affirmation, and he continued with a grin, "I didn't know anybody but us had to go through with scenes like that. Of course, you understand that I am talking from the standpoint of the embalmer and what his nerves have to stand. Even an embalmer has feelings and they get the best of him sometimes."
The older man interrupted him. "That reminds me of a joke that I heered one time," he said. "I mean, what Sam said 'tout showing your feelin's at funerals, and I'se feared this one is on your folks too, 'cause if it hadda been one of our folks they never could have cotch him. But," his eyes twinkled as he asked, "can I tell it?"
"Surely," I answered, "go right ahead."
"Well," he continued, "it was this a way; an old man's son had done died 'way off from home, and they brung the body home for burial. The old father couldn't git over it 'cause he never got to talk to the boy just 'fo' he died. He went ever' night and prayed over the grave, askin' the lord to let him speak to his son just one more time. A crowd of young fellows thought they would scare him right bad, to stop him from going to the graveyard ever' night. They was a feared he would keep on 'til he might lose his mind. One of 'em wropt a sheet around his self one night just when the old man was pray in' to be 'lowed to 'speak to my boy just one mo' time.' The boy in the sheet walked out from behind the tombstone and mumbled, "Here I is, Pa, what does you want?'
"The old man rose up slowly and stretched out his hands, as if to push his son away. 'Go back, John, go back!' he urged. 'Go back, John, I tell you. That's the reason you am daid now. Hit's 'cause you is just so hardheaded. That's why the Lord done had to put you in the graveyard.'"
When our laughter subsided, Sam remarked, "That must have been your folks, for like Mr. Jefferson says, if that old father had been a Negro man, he would be running yet. Our folks are funny in some ways and superstitious too.
"Our funeral customs have gradually drifted away from those sad old funeral songs. Now a different type of music has become popular. When They Ring Those Golden Bells is more typical of the modem funeral song. People used to think they had to have those long black veils, and all black clothing for a funeral, but now they wear white really more than they do black, and often they wear whatever they have.
"I have just returned from a place where a very old woman has died. She was feeble a long time and the neighbors didn't visit her much during the last months and years of her life. Just as soon as the news got out that she had passed out, they all begun to flock around and everyone of 'em wanted to come in. You know how it is. But her daughter stopped 'em at the door and wouldn't let a one of 'em in. She said: 'You wouldn't come to see her while she was alive and lonely, and now you can't see her after she has died.'
"Do your folks use flower girls at funerals?" he asked me.
"Not often," I replied. "When they do, it is usually for children."
"Well, our folks will raise cain to get 'em. They want 'em at every funeral. They want 'em all the same size, all dressed in white, carrying the same kind of flowers, and we have to provide a special car for 'em to ride in. What is more, they expect us to make all those arrangements and provisions, and honest, our folks can think of the most things for the undertaker to attend to and if everything is not done in just the style they want, they sure put up a howl."
"You have not told me about your glasses," I reminded him.
Both men laughed. Sam said, "I've done told Mr. Jefferson that if ever we do have any more funerals for that family, I'm going to get pay for my glasses. It was this way. We were getting ready to leave the house for the funeral services at the church. All the family were looking at the deceased for the last time. They were taking on, crying, and hollering, because it was their mother. They were all falling out and we had a time trying to keep 'em from falling into the casket. One of the daughters was bent over it taking on something awful, when I saw she was fixing to fall out and to keep her from falling right into the casket, I grabbed her and she hit me right in the eye. That blow broke one of my lenses, cut my eye, and knocked the rest of my glasses clear across the room under a bed. I liked to have never found them and I had to go to the doctor to have my eye attended to.” There was no smile on Sam's face as he ended the story and ran one hand gingerly over the scarred places about his eye.
The old man laughed heartily. "You can just know Sam was hoppin' mad," he said, "but what made him so very mad was that she was fat and ugly and he said that she smelt awful." At that Sam growled, "I wish I'd let her fall in that casket."
"Do you prefer to conduct funerals at home, in a church, or in your own chapel?" I asked.
"In a church, any time," Sam quickly replied, "for there's so much more room to get about, and it is more convenient, both for the family and for us. If the church floor is not too rough, we can roll the casket around to the family to take their last look without having them rise to their feet, and that saves plenty of trouble, for when the family has to get up and walk to the casket after it is opened up, there is no end to the trouble they can cause us. Wheeling it before them for the last look is a late custom and we find it a very good one.
"I much prefer to bring the body here for embalming as it is so much more convenient in every way, and then too, all my supplies are right here. It's difficult to take everything needed to a home. Something is apt to be needed that is back here in our laboratory.
"Probably one reason why I so definitely prefer a church funeral is that we do not have a regular chapel of our own. We have a good sized display room that we can turn into an improvised chapel if necessary, and we have taken care of some right big crowds in there at times.
"I have conducted one Catholic funeral. The Negroes do not maintain a Catholic church in this town, but the white priest --- they call him Father --- preaches the funerals for Negro Catholics here. You probably know that they do not let you carry flowers in the church, not even on the casket, at a Catholic funeral. I don't know why that is, unless it is a rule of the Catholics. Now that is one funeral where they do not open the casket. The priest keeps sprinkling what he calls Holy Water, over the casket all during the service. And all that service is in the Latin language. And too, the family is much quieter at a Catholic funeral. They don't cry and take on there. That was, without a doubt, the quietest funeral I have ever had. Now, in Atlanta they have a big Catholic church for Negroes, and even have Negro choirboys in it.
"Another custom, that is rapidly dying out, is the attendance of groups from the Scoieties to which the deceased had belonged. The members of these Societies wore their regalia and marched in a body and often conducted elaborite rites at the funeral. Now they do not turn out any more, unless some big important person dies, and then just a few of them are selected to serve as honorary pallbearers.
"Of course some of them still engrave something on the tombstone to show what lodge or society they belonged tol And the Woodmen still puts up their special sort of tombstones over the graves of their members. The others don't do so much of that now as they used to. Sometimes the Odd Fellows mark the graves of their members with a small piece of iron with three links of chain on it."
"We have been noticing small wooden crosses on graves of Negroes that appear to have been painted red or perhaps rose colored. What do they indicate?" I asked him.
"I don't know," he replied, "and I really cannot imagine, unless it's the emblem of some society, but still I don't know which one that is. I don't believe I've ever heard of one that used a cross on the graves.
"We have one thing to put up with that I don't imagine white undertakers are bothered with much," he said, "and that is trouble in making our collections."
"Is it very hard to collect your accounts?" I asked.
Both men laughed, and the old man said with some feeling, "You had better git it shilst they're still cryin'. They'll come in here just bawlin' and takin' on, and say to us, 'I'll just work my fingers to the bone to pay you, if you'll just let us have a nice casket for my loved one, I just cain't stand for my own flesh and blood not to be put away nice.' Yes, yes, they'll promise anything 'til after the buryin'.
"'I ain't long 'fo' all that sorry feelin' is gone. Then you just cain't git a dollar outta 'em. It's alius the same old thing. 'I'll pay you next Sadday,' but the Sadday when they sho 'nought pays, never comes.
If you git anything outta 'em, you sho has to work for it. They knows they's got all the 'vantage over us, You see, if it was a piece of furniture, or a car, we could go out and take it hack for non-payment, but we cain't take hack a coffin or a casket what's done been buried in the ground, and so they don't pay us no mind. Even if we could re-possess what we sells on time, what good would it do. I'd like to see somebody try to sell some of these Negroes 'round here a second-hand casket. They'd have a fit, for they wants only the very best even if they don’t never pay for it. So like I said in the beginnin', it's up to us to git our money whilst they's still cryin’."
Sam grinned. "I really would like to see you try to sell a second-hand casket to some of these folks when they are feeling so bad about some of their folks that has just passed out. They want the best, but they expect to get it for nothing. Of course if they have insurance that's a mighty big help, but even with them holding a reasonable large insurance policy, you'd better make the family pay you before you finish the work as Mr. Jefferson told you --- 'While they're still cryin'.'
"Of course there was a time when our folks didn't have insurance like they do now. In these days you will find that our folks 'most all have at least one policy and they'll sacrifice lots of things to keep that insurance paid up."
"And they's funny 'bout that too," added Jim Jefferson. "Sometimes folks will come in here with a 'polish' for $2,000 or $3,000 and of course right away we go to showing them the best in the house. They'll look and cry and cry and. look, and then tell us, 'Dear So-and-so did not want us to spend all this money on the funeral but said for us to keep some of it to live on.' Them sort of folks are apt to wind up with one of our very cheapest funerals.
"And right on the other hand, some folks will come in here with a 'polish' for $50 or $60, and they'll want the best we have. Oh, yes, they'll cry and just promise us all kinds of things, but we just cain't do it, 'cause what we gits at the start is all we gits. If we don't git it then, we is most and genually just out of luck.
"No matter if they don't want to pay us, they 'spect us to come runnin' promptly next time, and we don't answer the call with everything to go ahead and fix up the corpse just right, they will more than holler about it. For ever' funeral the cars must he cleaned, washed and polished up, and in fact, ever'thing has to be just right.
"I've buried a few folks for the Red Cross, and now that's one thing that does git next to me, for it is such a cheap little funeral. I know they cain't do no better. It's just a plain, cheap casket, with a little linin' in it, and not any paddin' in the bottom a fall, not even a pillow for the head. That funeral only costs $15 and of course we really lose money on it, but it is a charity to bury them even that way. It has to be done by somebody and we tries to do our best for we alius wants to be able to feel like we have done our part."
The telephone rang and the old man answered it. He rejoined us and said, "Sam, them folks wants you to come right back to their house." Sam groaned. "I wonder what’s the matter now,” he said. "I'll bet some of the neighbors has got in the house and wants to see the body. Anyway I have to go see what they want." Turning to me he said, "This interview has been a pleasure to me and I hope that we have given you some good material." After telling me good-bye, he went out.
Jim Jefferson said: "They do git the best of Sam sometimes, and I just has to laugh at him, but he's a mighty good boy and he does try so hard to please ever'body that sends for us."
<text not clear>
