Federal Writers' Project
Room 36, Federal Building
Greensboro, North Carolina
December 28, 1938 Mrs. Vesta Huffman (white)
417 Fields Avenue
Greensboro, N. C.
Mother of Family on relief
Husband on Chaingang
One son recently killed as a bandit
One married son in WPA
One single daughter in NYA
Albert North, writer
-----, reviser
Across the railroad tracks, along a narrow path skirting an empty lot strewn with sundry debris into the one block long Mills Avenue that makes the toe of the stocking by running at a 45 degree angle from the termination of Monroe Avenue; up the gully which was once a sidewalk, on the south side of the street, I found the Dunlap abode.
The north side of this street is unbuilt with the exception of an ice plant and two very small, black, abandoned shacks wedged in between the ice plant and the end of a foundry. Mills Avenue is a Dead End street (ironically called an avenue), surrendering its claim for continuation without a struggle against a trash littered and weed covered dirt bank adjoining the foundry.
A narrow field lies between the north side of Mills avenue and the railroad tracks, and in the two small shacks one sees evidence which marks them as one night lodging houses for hoboes. On the same side with the gullied sidewalk, beginning with the corner lot is a row of dilapidated frame houses. The corner one, a grim two-story house, and the one-story house next it, are unpainted and much of the weather boarding and other parts missing in such a methodical manner the thought comes to one that it has meant warmth to huddled figures over tin stoves, in those other dingy houses up the street.
The third house, though in slightly better condition, was also unoccupied. From the appearance of the yards one could not tell the occupied from the unoccupied houses, as tin cans, old casings, rags, weeds and a heterogeneous litter stretched in an unbroken array across them all. It was only by a slender finger of pale smoke slipping stealthily out of squatty chimneys that one could tell which of these shacks held human lives within their flimsy grey-black, smutty walls.
In the yard of the third occupied house, the sixth from the corner, and in the path of what would have been the sidewalk had it not wearied itself out in the gullies cutting across the hillside lots into the eroded dirt street below, stood a massive charred stump that had withstood the ravages of the knives and hatchets and fires of the Dead End boys of Greensboro.
This unsightly marker, which was once the life of a giant oak, of a virgin forest of sweet smells and soft shadows, proved to be the ironic marker of a family also reduced from rugged, independent forebears, as rugged themselves as the forests from which they had hued their homes and cleared for tillage.
For just three generations back, Mrs. Dunlap's grandfather, James Mosely, used to make their own wagons and tools and the family's shoes. Then her own father and mother had died leaving eight children. She was among six of the younger of these who were placed in the Charlotte Episcopal Orphanage.
The house situated at the highest point of the street took on the dingy dullness of its setting. Six steps led up to a short and narrow porch, enclosed with short railings, upon which set terre verte colored pine board flower boxes half filled with loose dirt. There was no evidence of flowers having ever grown there and one wondered if they could.
Two doors opened upon the porch, one at the end, and one at the side. On the weather boarding by the door on the side of the porch, the house number was painted in large, uneven, figures in dull green paint; and again, over the door at the end of the porch.
I knocked on the nearest door, the one to the side, which partially opened almost immediately, as though someone had been standing there, waiting. A small boy with a dirty face, a running cold, a new zipper corduroy coat and overalls stood looking silently and wonderingly up into my face.
"Hello, little man," I said, "is your mother in?"
He turned away without a word nearly closing the door. I waited. Presently a middle- aged woman, in a worn dull-brown dress and with mild but lustreless gray eyes framed in a dark parched-like skin set with many freckles, reopened the door a little further and waited for me to speak.
Upon my introduction she invited me in to the fire. The day was biting cold. She led the way through the parlor, chilly and sombre in its semi-darkness. Over the mantle, I glimpsed a large picture of Robert Montgomery (the movie actor) slipped into an old picture frame with its soiled and yellow border. There was an old fashioned settee and two large, squatty easy chairs; their upholstery colorless and worn smooth. In the corner was a bureau with its top literally crowded with objects strewn in wild disorder around a tall bronze statuette of First Love.
Then, I saw the sitting room. The boy with the running cold and the dirty face had taken up his position at the foot of a bed piled high with drums, toys, cardboard games, and various garments. A small rocking chair was moving as though hurriedly vacated.
Upon the side of another bed sat two young women, who barely looked up from their position of leaning forward toward a low two-lid iron stove from which little heat was escaping. I could not see their faces as they were framed against the gray-light coming in through the room's only window at their backs.
Taking a seat in a chair facing the girls across the stove, my back to an open door of another room through which a blast of icy air was pouring, I, too, leaned forward toward the tiny, undernourished stove. Mrs. Dunlap had seated herself to my left.
Then a lady with a tam drawn down over her ears and a shawl of uncertain color drawn about her frail shoulders, followed by two tall young boys entered the room and stared at me. This lady, whom I felt had just left the room prior to my entrance, took the little chair which had so shortly before ceased its empty rocking. She was a Mrs. Short, I was to learn, "who always stopped by to see the Dunlaps whenever she came to town."
I sat there cold, aware of all eyes upon me. Mrs. Dunlap waited with her arms folded against a flat breast. The lady with the tam hunched forward in her little chair, the shawl drawn tighter about her shoulders. Two tall boys stood at the foot of the bed near the two seated girls, who were still leaning forward toward the stove. All was silent. A minute seemed a long time.
The room was small and cold. Two beds crowded the only two corners not given over to doors. The beds, where the lower side of one nearly met the foot of the other, left a narrow path and a small patch of flooring beyond, where a door and a tall, green painted, pine board bureau, fought for supremacy.
The bureau nearly hidden by the open door leading to the kitchen and dining room combined had evidently taken many knocks and slams, but had stood its ground bravely, well weighted down, and bulkheaded by the foot of one of the beds, leaving no room for retreat.
"Ma! Whars my han-cuffs?" whined the small boy with a sniffle as the effort had snapped the temporary lethargy of his cold.
"They'ar in thar", she said with a listless wave toward the mountain of stuff upon the bed with the toys and garments.
I watched her face narrowly for any emotion the name of handcuffs might awaken in that placid face, for (although I had been conscious of it all along) I was startled to think that this quiet woman was the mother of Stanley Dunlap who had been shot down as a desperado just twenty-one days before, in a filling station holdup. If there was any connection in her thoughts there was not a trace of it in her face and eyes.
"Bobby, don't never know whar his things are at", she said to me, "from one time to nuader."
"I want my han-cuffs, I do" he started to cry, punctuating his yells with retrieving sniffles.
"I bet, I've got just what you want, Bobby", I said, rising from my seat. Bobby stopped his double action bedlam instantly, suspending a sniffle upon an apostrophe of wonderment in his large, tear-gleaming eyes. Even the lady of the shawl screwed her head around to follow me with her gaze to the pocket of my overcoat which was lying across the pile of other things upon the bed.
Yes, it was there. A sack of the biggest nickel's worth of highly-flavored highly- colored tiny pillow candy from the 5 & 10 cent store.
Bobby needed no urging to take the sack. One quick peep inside and he scurried out of the room, heedless of his mother's reminders of "pass it" and "what yo' say, Bobby?" As hurriedly as his mother had spoken, her thoughtful coaching had fallen on deaf ears, as Bobby had said it in action.
A slight motion and sound as if caused from mirth came from the leaning, sphinx-like girls seated upon the bed.
I laughed a little and made some remark about boys not holding back much upon ceremony, and was careful casually to close the door at my back before resuming my seat.
A glance into this room revealed it to be a very small one. It had another door which opened upon the end of the porch, and a single, small, window which afforded ill light. I noticed a bed, a trunk, and a bureau. The trunk was piled high with clothing, lying upon the top of which was a freshly laundered shirt. This one clean shirt, stood out noticeably from the dimness of all the other drab objects within the room.
"That is shore a junk. room", came Mrs. Dunlap's soft voice at my back, as I closed the door. "I shore hope we can move into a bigger house some day, we're shore crowded here."
"How many rooms do you have?" I asked.
"Jes' five," she said."This her'n, that'er'n, jes one more small bed room next to it, the Kitchen and dining room thar, and the parlor."
"Is the room you use for the kitchen and dining room about the size of this one?" I inquired.
"I should say it aint. Come and see for yo'self. We can't hardly git around in thar when we're trying to fix and eat."
I had followed her to the door and as I looked into that room I felt a heaviness settling down within my breast.
Inwardly, I had to more than agree with her that I could not see how they managed in there during meal time. The round table which must be crowded to its greatest capacity during the meals, was now pushed close against one of the small walls.
But it was not the lack of having ample space which had gripped my heart. That room seemed to stir some famous phrase lying dormant within me. A poignant thought that had stuck with me from something I had either read or heard in a speech over the radio some years ago. I could not, as I stood there taking in that scene before me, word the phrase or place its source. But it was linked inseparably with what I now saw.
The groove and tongue board wall which separated the kitchen from the bedroom beyond had large cracks in it where the settling of the house had caused the boards to pull apart. One of these cracks was nearly an inch wide. The door to the outside had a still larger space between it and the floor through which the cold air literally In addition to the table there was a small well worn cook stove and a kitchen cupboard. The cupboard, a narrow flimsy thing, was homemade out of thin pine boards and painted green. It leaned precariously to one side as if about to tumble over.
"Yo' see it aint very large, is it?" She reminded me.
"No," I replied. But I could not so easily tear myself away from that big crack with its whistling cold air. "Why don't you get the man you rent from to fix under that door?" I asked as casually as I could, pointing to it.
"Huh: We can't git him to do nothin'."
"That's the other bedroom, is it?" I inquired, motioning toward the room beyond the wall with the cracks.
"Yes, that's it. I'd show yo' it--but Harry's wife thar's brother, who drives a taxi at night is in thar sleeping and we might 'waken him."
"No, no, please don't do that by any means," I said, turning back into the sitting room. The two boys had made their exit out the front way.
"How many are in your family, Mrs. Dunlap?" I asked, getting a good look at the girls while the light was not in my eyes.
"Thar are nine of us now counting Harry's wife thar Stanley, he made ten befo' he got, killed. Now, I jes got four boys and two girls of my own. Thar's eight of us here now. My husband, he's away, you know. Harry, he's the only grown up one now. He's twenty-three and he's married as I sed befo'; that's his wife thar," she said, failing to specify which one.
"She is Harry's wife, isn't she? I asked, indicating the one sitting nearest to me.
"Yes, she's Harry's wife. Her name's Lucy. She and Harry stay in that room by the kitchen whar her brother is sleeping. That is Lela, my oldest daughter, sitting by her."
I imagined Lucy to be about twenty years of age. She wore a work uniform of blue trimmed in white.
Lela, I noticed had, good teeth, bright gray eyes and a pleasant smile. She could not have much done to her hair like most girls, but it looked vigorous and clean and was neatly arranged. She wore a simple gingham house dress which looked as though it had just come off the ironing board. She was tall and her figure had evidently surrendered its wiry, boyish, slenderness slowly under the belated curves of maturing womanhood.
We had taken our seats around the little stove again.
"You'd better put sumthin' in that stove, Lela, befo' it goes out."
Thanks to Lela, she did so and. as the fire picked up, things seemed a little bit more comfortable.
Just then Bobby re-entered the room followed by a little girl.
"She's Della", Mrs. Dunlap told me.
"Hello, Della", I greeted her. "Come here and talk to me."
"Go talk to the man, Della", her mother urged. But Della stepped back through the door and a gust of wind was evidence that she had not stopped in the kitchen.
Bobby had been digging around in the things upon the bed.
"Here they are!" he ejaculated, holding up the toy hand-cuffs. "Put 'em on me, ma."
Mrs. Dunlap obligingly complied, snapping them around his wrists placed together behind his back. A broad grin swept over his face and a keen sparkle shown within his eyes as he started to struggle to free himself. He had the rapt attention of everyone's interest and was making the most of it. After what he portended to represent a terrible struggle he suddenly brought both hands before him, holding them up for all to see. One hand was free and the handcuffs were swinging helplessly from the wrist of the other.
"Here, you han'cuff me, Lela," he said, triumphantly, turning to his sister.
As Lela fastened his wrists behind him,
I sincerely hoped that his experiences with handcuffs would end there with those toy ones, and that the real steel ones would never figure in his life as they had with his father now in a prison oamp serving the remainder of a tan year sentence started three years ago, and his brother, Stanley, an escapee from the atate penal Institution who had been alain as a bandit In a volley of gun fire.
"Della goes to school, docan't she, Mrs. Dunlap?" I asked, returning to the aby little girl who had quickly departed at my attempt of friendliness.
"Yes, Della goes to school but she don't like to study much", her mother said. "She's jes' in the second grade."
"How old is she?" I asked.
"She's nine years old," Mrs. Dunlap an swered. Then added as if in defense of Della against unspoken thoughts, "She dion't git to go to school until she were seven Take Bobby thar now, he's doing right good in school and likes it. "Course he's jes six years old and in the first grade.
"Take Henry Junior now; yo' aint seed him yit; he's the smart one. He's twelve and in the seventh grade. He gits good reports and he likes to study. I shore hopes I can git to keep him in school. He's got his heart set on going to high school.
"Lela, she had to stop in the seventh grade and so did William William, he's smart but he had to stop school and git work to try and help me out."
"William I think I know which one he is He is the tallest one of these two boys la here a while ago, isn't he?" I observed, "The one that stood nearest the foot of the bed?"
"Yes, he's the one. He's a good boy, but he can't git much work., it seems. He worked for the mechanic shop man from April 'til Nov- ember this year. He made 20 cents an hour."
"That was Sharppoint saw and Tool Shop." Lela added.
"Yes, that's so," agreed Mrs. Dunlap.
"Things git a little dull wid him in the middle of the winter and he don't need no help. William, he's got a turn fo' that kind o' work and I shore wish he could git a regular job in some shop. He's jes' crazy to work 'round air ships."
"How old is William?" I asked, thinking of the nearly six foot neatly-dressed good-looking boy who I judged to be just about the age of his brother Stanley when he was first apprehended upon a criminal charge.
"William, he's sixteen now. I shore wish he could git sum' thin' to do", she added, earnestly.
"Yes, I hope so," I replied sincerely. I was right about his age. Stanley would have been 21 next birthday which was just a month off, which would have made him around 15 or 16 when he had made his criminal debut. It's an important age in a boy's life. He must keep company like the other fellows--and that takes money.
"Lela helps me all she can", Mrs. Dunlap said. "But she only makes $8.05 every pay period, or $16.10 a month and you know a girl her age has got to have things. She can't git a job like most girls do 'cause she aint got no high school education. An' she got to have that to git a job most any whar 'cept the mills and they aint been putting on no new ones."
"Where does she work?" I asked.
"She works for the NYA. In the sewing room. It's the only thing she can git to do. I don't know what she'd do without it--an' she gives me a dollar' an' a half of that every pay day."
"I see that what she gets means quite a bit to you both", I said.
"Yes, but 'fo' she got on wid NYA, I used to draw $38.00 a month relief from Mrs. Rogers. Then when Lela got on wid NYA she cut me down to jis' $25.00 a month."
"Mrs. Rogers is the city and county relief administrator, isn't she'?" I asked.
"Yes, that's it, city and county direct relief, I thinks. they call it. It aint enough to give us what we need but I'm thankful for it find wid' out it and what Lela gits I shore don't know what would 'come of us."
"Harry and his wife eat with you and help run the table don't they?"
"No, he can't. She aint got no work and Harry, he only git to work 16 days a month for the WPA, and gits $37.12. They cook and eat in their bedroom and pay me $3.00 a month fo' it.
You see, he can't help me none."
"Do you think it's a help to parents to have just one or two children or six or eight of them? It seems on the whole, that, there used to he larger families than there are these days."
"Yes, it do seem that thar were. It would he a help to parents to have more children if they be prepared to git better jobs. However, large families seem to git along jes' about as well as the small ones do." Then with a far away look within her eyes, added, "I'd shore hate not to have any one of my children, although it's been a hard struggle."
I was silent a moment, somehow, I felt that she saw Stanley in that far away look. Saw him as a boy again, in that very house, which was home to them. An orchid to the bravery of this frail little woman of 42, I thought.
Silence seemed good, just at that time. The girls were motionless. Bobby, after the second demonstration with his toy hand-cuffs, had left to join his little Dead find playmates. The woman with the shawl hid not moved; her gaze remained riveted upon the little stove before her. Currents of cold air played a relentless game of hide and seek, within the room.
My eyes roamed over the room. A child's crude out-of-proportion crayon picture took up a big space over the little mantle. A camel was supposed to be traveling toward the background, but instead it was drawn almost squarely across the road.
Then there was another picture upon the wall which I could not make out. I got up to study it. It was a picture of a lake, with a plain shore line, and an unusually wide waterfall in the distance. Underneath was the inscription, Where There Is Peace. I stood there a minute with strange emotions commingling within my heart.
"I saw a motto in the parlor as I came in," I said, as I turned to face them. "I like mottoes. I wonder if I may look at. it, and make a copy of the verse?"
"Yo' shore can," said Mrs. Dunlap. "Git it for him, Lela."
"No, don't bother,' I begged. "I'll just step in there", I said, moving toward the door to the parlor.
"I can tell you what it says," Lela spoke up with interest, rising to accompany her mother and I into the parlor.
"Can you?" I asked, matching her en- thusiasm. "That's fine, let me write it down as you say it."
"All right," she agreed, warmly, and waiting until I was read with pen and paper, then quoted:
MY MOHTER
"You built a home and filled it
With your courage and your cheer,
And year by year my love returns
To You, My Mother Dear."
"That is beautiful, and I think it's grand that you know it by heart," I said, sincerely, as we went into the parlor. "You didn't miss a word," I congratulated her, looking at the motto.
"Thank you, sir," she said, beamingly.
"She reads it nearly all the time," her mother said.
We did not linger in the cold room but returned to our places around the little stove. Everything was faded and worn about the house.
That phrase I had heard started its struggle for recognition again. I almost had it-- then--as a shrill, knife-blade of air stabbed me in the back, and I involutarily shivered, it came to me. "Ill--Housed, Ill--Clad. Ill--Nourished." And something more about the lowest standard of living which could be raised far above the level of mere subsistence. As I thought of how true the words were in this instance, their source also came to me. I had read them In the second inaugural address of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
"Mrs. Dunlap", I said, "You remarked that you weren't getting money enough to do what you ought to do for your family. How much do you think it would take to do that?"
"I jes' don't know. I aint never fig gered it all out. But I know it would take about three or four times as much as I git now. I'd say 'round 'bout 15 or 17 dollars a week."
"What do you think is your greatest need?" I asked.
"A bigger and a better house," she promptly replied. "Then I could git the proper food."
"May I ask what you usually have, Mrs. Dunlap, if you'll pardon me?"
"That's all right," she replied. "We have potatoes, beans and cabbage, mostly, We allers have to fry the potatoes or boil them, we don't have no milk or cream to fix then any other way. The children need milk but I can't git it fo' them."
"How about eggs, and butter?" I asked.
"I git a pound of Nucco once in awhile and 'bout dozen eggs a week. I git some fresh meat about once a week. I know we needs more of this kind of food. That's what I mean I could do what I ought to do if I had more money."
"Yes, I see that you love your children, Mrs. Dunlap and want to see them do well, and to take good care of them."
"Yes, I surely do, I feel so bad about Stanley. He jes' got in the wrong bunch."
"I guess I must be going," I said after a pause, rising. I didn't mean to stay so long, and I thank you for all your courtesy. I'll come back again sometime before long, if I may?"
"I'd be glad if yo' do. We've all bin glad to have yo'."
"So," I said to myself, as I made my way down that gullied sidewalk, "these quiet, soft spoken people are the family of a young out-law who had so recently been killed in a pitched battle with the law, that had also cost the lives of two officers."
I left that drab little house in its trash littered surroundings there behind me on Dead End Mills Avenue. But the faces of William and little Bobby, of that sad mother and her problems were still in my mind and heart.
What of the shy little girl, Della, who found it so hard to learn? What of Lela, and Harry and his wife? And what of Henry Junior? Do you suppose that he and his mother will realize their great desire of his going to high school? Will William find himself in mechanical work?
These and other thoughts still haunt
me.