Professor Tom Terrill, of the University of South Carolina at Columbia, has located another version of "The Oil Field Cook" in the WPA Papers, in the Oklahoma Historical Society, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. That version is dated June 24, 1939, and the interviewer is identified as Ned DeWitt.
THE OIL-FIELD COOK
"Lots of people act like they think I'm off my nut when I tell 'em I'm in the oil game, kind of. They got the idea that the only thing there is to oil is a bunch of guys drilling a well, cussing and hollering and getting drunk payday, but it ain't. One of the most important things 'bout oil or anything else, far as that goes, is eating, and I kind of made it my job to see that all the guys 'round the oil field get enough to eat. These smart punks that think eating ain't connected with the oil game and that the field ain't no place for a woman can go to hell far's I'm concerned; I'll back what I say by the guys that's eat with old Sadie Duggett --- that's my full name, but ever'body calls me 'Sade' --- all these years.
"And if you think I'm lying about them eating with me you oughta been here when this Oklahoma City field was wide open, and I'd just started up this eating house. Why, I've seen the time when this place wouldn't hold the men that wanted to eat with me, and this is big enough to feed a hunnerd men. They'd drive for miles to get here, and come crowding in, shoving and pushing, and all of 'em hollering at Lovie and me to give 'em personal attention, and that kind of stuff would keep up for hours, with the cash register dinging like a patrol wagon bell. Me and Lovie would be wore out by the time the noon rush was over, and before we could get the place cleaned up and now plates put on and roust the cooks up to get the food cooked, why it'd be evening again, and time for 'em to come back. But that was when there was a boom on; not it's so quiet you can hear the cockroaches walking 'round. Not that I got a lot of cockroaches, but it's just that quiet sometimes.
"When I first started in this cafe business, it was good. There was boom oil towns and camps all over the country, and all I had to do was figgar just which one I was going to light in and set out. The men that was working in them towns was just honing to set their tooth in some home-cooked meals, and they didn't mind paying for them neither. They all made good money then, too. Marry's the time I've set a platter of bacon-and-eggs or maybe has-and, and ring up a dollar on the cash register. But most of the time, until I got Dan to watch the register for me, I used a cigar box or whatever was heady to keep my money in. I didn't trust nobody then, or any other time either, and I always keep my money in something I can carry 'round with me. And I'd get a buck-and-a-half or maybe two for a dinner and supper, and didn't any of the boys mind paying out their hard-earned for it either. They liked my cooking so much that lots of 'em told me they'd give five dollars a platter if they had to --- my cooking was worth it.
"But sat Godamighty! I never saw anything could eat like those men could then! They could set down and eat a half-dozen eggs, a side of bacon apiece, four cups of coffee, and push all of that down with a loaf of bread and a couple of pieces of pie. I run lots of family-style eating places --- where all the food's on the table, and everybody ehlps themselves --- and lots of times I had to jack up my prices to come out even. But they don't eat enough no more, not like they used to. I don't see how some of these guys can go out and work all day on what they get to eat nowadays. Most of them get married and their wives think they can work on the same kind of food that they eat, but they can't. No man a-living can do a real day's work on the same things a woman'll fix for herself; there just ain't enough to it. But if they ain't got enough sense but to get theirselves tied down to some little fly-by-night hussy that don't know anything but toast and coffee and orange juice, then it ain't nobody's fault but their own.
"You might say I was brought up on food, practically altogether. I always had plenty of it around me when I was growing up, and so it come kind of natural for me to go into running a cafe. My folks lived on a farm down in Georgia, and even if we didn't have much money we always had plenty to eat. You had to have lots when there's nine kids, and all of 'em working from can see to can't see --- like the niggers usually say. I'd had to turn my hand to the cooking ever since I was a little bit of a thing, and I liked it, so I didn't mind at all. I was as fat as a pig, from working in the kitchen and eating so much, but I wasn't bad looking by a long sight. They marry 'em off young down there, and I had a bunch of those country boys hanging 'round the house before I was more'n twelve or thirteen. But I couldn't see 'em for the hay in their ears; I didn't like the looks of the women that had spent all their lives on a farm, and I didn't want none of it.
"We went to the county seat one Saturday, like all farmers do, just to see the sights and get in the week's buying, and so forth. I had a little money I'd made picking peanuts for a neighbor, and while the rest of the family was going around to the stores I decided to try some city cooking. I went into a cafe there and ordered a plate lunch. Well sir, that was as poor a meal as I ever tried to eat. There wasn't much meat to it, and what there was wasn't half-cooked, and the vegetables looked like they had the hookworm or pellagra or both. The manager waited on me, and he saw me looking at the food and kind of turning it over with my fork. He ast me if there was anything wrong with it, and I said, No, nothing in particular but a lot in general. I told him that if that was a sample of the best food he could put out, it was a wonder he had any business at all. He got kind of worked up about it, and ast me how I'd fix the food, if I knew so much about it. I was mad, too, because I was hungry, and so I said I'd bet him a dollar to a piece of his pie that I could take the same kind of food and fix it so somebody could eat it without puking. He said he'd just take me up; for me to get behind the counter and get to work. I thought he was joking at first, and then I got mad and hopped around there and pushed the cook out of the way. He was a dried-up old man that looked like he stayed drunk all the time, so I shoved him out of my way and ast this guy what he wanted me to cook for him.
"When he saw how I took hold of things he kind of laughed and said he'd give me a dollar and a half a day and my board. I thought it over a minute, just a minute, and I said all right, wait till I told my folks I wasn't going home with 'em. I went out and found my sister Laviny and told her to tell the folks for me, and for her to send other dresses in the next week. Then I went back to the cafe and started work.
"I worked for that guy about six or eight months, and then I quit because he was always trying to get his hands on me. I learned a lot about cooking, though, and I worked in another cafe in that town. I got tired of that one and went to Atlanta and worked a while, and then over to Louisiana. There was a little boom town over in Texas, and one day a feller was eating there in a cafe where I was and he said anybody that could cook like me ought to be in that boom town; I could make a million dollars. I was already tired of the place I was in, and I had some money saved up, not much of course, what with cooking in little towns, and I ast this guy all about the oil fields. Well, by the end of that week I was in that boom town, and had put me up a tent and started a cafe of my own.
"I had to pay so much down for my tent and to rent enough ground to throw it on I didn't have a whole lot of money left for groceries. I specialized on pancakes, and those oilfield workers ate 'em up. 'Fore long I hired three girls to wait table and I did all the cooking. I worked about sixteen hours a day most of the time, sometimes all night if the boys needed lunches put up for 'em or something like that, but I cleaned up all right. Before long I had enough money to build me a shack out of sawed lumber and put in a better line of food. I still did all the cooking, but I hired men waiters; the girls weren't worth a damn in a boom town because they don't want to have to work for a living. And when I got better groceries in the boys didn't mind paying six-bits for a stack of cakes and a buck and a half for supper. The food was good, and there was lots of it, so they didn't mind at all.
"I saw the boom was going to die out there, and I sold the cafe for three thousand, and followed the oil to another town. I put in a pretty good place there, and went to making money hand over fist. When that boom started to die I went to another one, but I thought at first I was going to get sunk on that one. The oil companies were putting in camps for their men; they served lots of beans and rice and potatoes, filling things, but not very tasty. I had to compete with the, so I put in a family-style cafe. I did all my own cooking and buying groceries and things like that, but I still had a pretty hard time of it. But it wasn't long till the guys working there got to know me and passed the word along, and then business started on up. I got six-bits for breakfast here too, and a dollar and a half for dinner and supper, like the other towns I'd been in, but had to pay my waiters thirty a week to keep 'em. I had a hard time getting any waiters at all, 'cause most of those guys wanted to be out in the field knocking off some big money, they thought, and the birds I did get drank all my lemon extract and vanilla till I couldn't make a pie or anything half the time. Couldn't get girls and I didn't want 'em anyway after the time I'd had with the first batch of 'em.
"One afternoon I just sat down on a stool, so damned tired I didn't know which end was up. We'd had a big noon rush and right in the middle of it I had to put up forty lunches for some guys working on a lease quite a ways out of town. I was hot and sweaty and feeling mad and all when in come a girl and set down close to me on a stool. The minute I saw her I knew what she was, or thought I did, I'd seen so many women 'round the booms, but it was all right with me if she wanted to eat in my place and had the price. I never barred nobody if they had the cash. This girl set down and ordered a cup of coffee, and kept looking at me. Finally I said, Been in town long? She shook her head but didn't say anything. That made me kind of mad, her not saying anything, and I said, where you holing up? She just looked at me, kind of tired. Then she takes a sip of coffee and says, You need a girl? I laughed like hell. Me need a gir; what the hell do you think I am, a queer? I ast her.
"She just kept on looking at me till I got through laughing, and then she ast me again, If I wanted a waitress. I said, No; because I didn't want any women hanging 'round my place egging the men on. She said, I'll work for my room and board if you'll just give me a job. That kind of knocked my props out from under me. I looked her over again, and she didn't look quite so bad as she did at first. She looked tired, like she'd been out on a week drunk, and kind of dirty and draggled, but not a bad sort after all. I ast her if she knew anything 'bout hashing, and she shook her head and said, No, but she could learn easy.
"Well, I gave in and put her to work at ten a week and room and board. I was saving 'bout twenty a week on her, so I couldn't lose much. That was how I met Lovie --- she's the kind of thin girl back there with the short red hair, filling the salt shakers. I didn't know much about her, of course, but I thought I'd give her a chance and see if she really wanted to get away from the hotels. I ast her her name, and she said it was Dove Something-or-other, one of those foreign names. I couldn't keep from laughing again, tired as I was; a name like that, Dove, and she looked more like a sparrow that'd fell in a slush pit and had just come up. But she turned out to be a good worker and all, and it wasn't long till I got to calling her Dovie, and then after while Lovie, when I found out how she was with the men.
"She wasn't what you'd call a bad girl, you understand, not a regular oil-field whore, but she just couldn't say no to any guy that kept in after her. She didn't want money or anything like that, but they always give her something, but that was just about the only way she knew how to get any fun out of living. That's the way I figgered it anyway, but it wasn't any of my business. All right for her, I guess, but I couldn't see it that way. But she drummed up business, not really meaning to I don't suppose, for the cafe, and I didn't care what the hell she did after she got off work anyway, just so she worked all right. And she did, I'll say that for Lovie; she always gets her work done, and she don't mind staying a while to finish up either. She's always done like that, and I just kept her on.
"Well, we made just about all the oil booms there was in Texas. When I closed up a place Lovie would ast me where we was going next, and she'd pile right in the train or in the truck, if we'd got some truck driver to haul us, which we usually did to save paying money for train fare, and she'd go right along with me. There wasn't any use trying to shake her, and since she was a good worker and since I'd used all girls after I hired her and didn't want to have to put up with just any kind of girls I could find 'round a boom town, I let her come with me. She got married several times down in Texas, too; she had a husband in damned near every town we stooped in, I guess. She was kind of like a cat; she wouldn't of knowed her husband that she married three years ago if she was to serve him a lunch right now.
"She never did ast 'em to marry her or even hint at it, I never heard her lead 'em on to it anyway, but I guess they just kind of took to that red hair of hers and blue eyes and the way she kind of switches when she walks. The first thing I'd know about a new one she'd come to work one morning all pale and big bags under her eyes and say she'd gone off and got married, and more'n likely, just got in from celebrating it to go to work. The guy'd come 'round and eat at the cafe and all, but Lovie always made 'em pay cash; she didn't let her night work mix in with what she had to do, which is something you can't say about a lot of people. And when we'd leave, she'd just pack up her grip and light out with me, and never say a word to her husband or anybody else.
"She got caught once. I had a bean joint down in Longview, Texas, when it was booming, and she got a knockdown to a roustabout there. He was a good-looking kid, 'bout six or eight years younger than she was, but she fell for him and they was out together every minute they was off work. God knows when she got time to sleep, but there never was no complaint 'bout her work; she did that all right, all the time. And somehow'r 'nother, she never did get 'round to marrying this guy, or maybe it was the other way, and it wasn't long till she said she was going to domino. She never had thought nuthin 'bout knocking a kid before, but this time she kind of waited 'round and didn't do anything when she was supposed to. Maybe she liked this guy better'n the rest of 'em, I don't know, but pretty soon it was too late. She up and had the kid, a boy, and course she had to lay off a couple of months.
"This guy had already shoved off so there wasn't any use looking for money from him. She never did get real acquainted with him; I mean, she didn't know a whole lot about him, so it didn't make much difference anyway where he was. She didn't know anybody else and nobody else give a damn about her, just like an old cat, you see? It was up to me. I did what I could for her, pain on her bills and so forth, and when it was all over she showed up one day and put on her apron like nothing had happened and went to work. I said, Where's the kid? She looked at me and said, He's gone. Well, and you know that was about the last time she ever said anything about it. And it was about the only time we got sore at each other. I kept on at her about it for a couple of days, but she wouldn't say anything. Come to find out she'd left the kid on a hospital step, and they'd had to take it in, naturally.
"I give her hell about it; I said I'd of took care of the kid if she'd let me know she was inteding to dump it, but she got plain red-headed about the whole deal. I got mad, too, when she started talking back to me, and I told her to go chase a rabbit --- I'd got along damned good 'fore I met her and I could still do it. So she left that night, and I didn't see her for quite a while.
"I kind of forgot about her after while; I hired another girl, but I had to pay her more, and got busy stuffing everything I could get my hands on in my sock. I had a pretty good wad too. You 'member long in '29 and '30 there wasn't a whole lot doing in the oil game; well, when the Oklahoma City field come in most of the boys left from Texas and around and hit out for the new field. I'd wanted to get shet of that place I had in Texas for a long time and when I heard the good news, 'bout the new field, I made up my mind I was going to hit it. Business was poor as hell down in Texas there, and I was kind of stumped how to sell for a while. But a guy came in one night and got to talking with me. He'd heard about the town there and was looking 'round for something to put his money in that wouldn't take a whole lot of his time. He was an old buzzard, and there was just him and his wife. They thought if they could get hold of some kind of business all they'd have to do would he to sit down and in a year or two they'd he millionaires. They was from some place in Colorado; don't remember just what town it was now.
"Well, this old bird come by one night and stopped and give me the chin. I told him business was on the boom, but it was a lie. I had 30 tables and 26 stools, and when he was in there, it was on Friday night about eight o'clock, there wasn't but two people in there beside me and him. And one of them was the dishwasher, who'd just got off and was reading the paper on the last stool. But I saw what an old codger he was, and that he didn't know 'bout anything in an oil field, so I acted like I had a gold mine. I finally broke down and told him my husband was waiting for me in Oklahoma City, and that if I could get a good price I'd sell out and go with him.
"I didn't have a husband but the old man bit on it, but he didn't like the looks of all the empty stools. I seen him looking around, just like he was getting ready to make me cut a liar about all the business I had, and I said, You come 'round here 'bout nine o'clock, when the shows let out, and I'll show you what a rush there is. You can't hardly get in the door, people crowd in here so. He says, Yes? Just like he didn't believe me, but wanted to awful bad. And I said sure, you just come 'round 'bout nine or a little after and you'll see. Course I made my pile at breakfast and at noon and night, but he didn't have to know. I only kept open at night to kind of keen my hand in.
"So he moseyed on, after promising he'd be back. I knew he would, because he just had to see for himself, you know how people are; they'll believe something if they can just see it. And he wanted the place pretty bad, too. I served plate lunches and short orders and had an ice cream fountain and all that, and it looked pretty good to anybody that didn't know their way 'round. So when he went out the door I went to the cash register and got all the money out of it. I took about fifteen dollars in ones and halves and quarters and told the dishwasher to watch the place a while. I went out and rounded up all the ginks I could and told 'em to come in and drink on me, and I give those that I knew eat with me some money, so they could act like they was paying me for what they got.
"Well, you know there's always a helluva lot of guys out of work in a boom town, and there was plenty of 'em in town that night, just loafing 'round on the streets. It was bad enough 'bout them not working before, but it was worse when the boom died. A lot of 'em had come in off the farms or maybe quit a pretty good job some place else after they heard about how the guys in the oil fields was getting rich, and maybe they got in a few days or a few weeks work, and then it was all over for them. That's one thing I don't like about the game; it drags in a lot of people that ain't got no business being there in the first place, and they just clutter up things till a guy can't move 'round.
"Anyway, when this old feller come back in, right around nine o'clock, he couldn't hardly get in the door; there was roughnecks and roustabouts, and drillers, and pumpers, and bums, and women, and kids, and everybody that'd been out on the streets. Looked like half the town was there. And they was all talking at the top of their voices, and some of 'em running out and bringing their friends back with 'em, and so much noise that this old guy got so excited he couldn't hardly talk. And I'm a liar if he didn't grab hold of me and holler at me and want to close the deal right then! He just couldn't stand it when he saw all those people guzzling, and when he thought about all the money that'd roll in my register. I told him I'd think it over, and for him to come back in the morning if he was still interested, but I had to wait on my trade. I knew I had him hooked, good and proper.
"Well, next morning he was there, bright and early, with his checkbook out and his fountain pen ready. I'd kind of thought about getting somebody to act like he wanted to buy the place too, only there wasn't anybody 'round that I'd trust with my roll. He'd of had to have a roll to flash around in front of the old guy. Lovie was as honest as the day's long, but she wasn't there and I didn't want a woman acting like that anyway, so I just let it go. I fidgeted 'round with this old guy like I didn't really want to sell, and finally I let him think he'd talked me into selling for four thousand, which was about twice what it was worth, with business like it was. I made him go up to the bank and get his check cashed into bills --- I always like my money that way, or maybe in a cashier's check --- and then I pitched off my apron and turned it over to him. I showed the old woman how to mix ice cream drinks and stuff like that, and then I left out on the next train for Oklahoma City. I rode the cushions that time, because I'd drew all my money from the bank and had it on me. I had a little over thirteen thousand in my kick right then, and I was going to try to run it up to a million.
"But I ain't much closer to that million now than I was then, when I was just thinking about it. Course, I've gone ahead a little bit, but I ain't rich yet by a helluva lot. They'd already dealt out the hands when I got up here in Oklahoma City, in the spring of '30. The town looked like a regular boom, but it wasn't. There was the usual number of leg-joints, where you could get anything from a drink of bad whisky to a swat in the puss, and whore houses, and cafes, and supply houses for the oil companies, and all the rest of the boom-town stuff. But it was run some better. What I mean was the places wasn't showy like you'd expect in a town as big as Oklahoma City is, and people acted like the boom wasn't anything so much after all; like a bunch of farmers, you know. And there wasn't so much hell-raising either.
"But I knew if there was any money here I'd get my share of it or know the reason why, so I went out right on the edge of the oil field, on the southeast part of town, and staked me out a lot and put up a big eating house. Prices was higher'n a cat's back for land and lumber and anything else; person'd think there never had been a stock market of a depression the way they charged for things here. And the people that'd been on the ground had first pickings too; I'd horsed around so long down in Texas I almost let this boom get away from me.
"I had a lot of friends working here, though, fellers that'd eat with me in other towns, and soon's as they heard I was here they come in and brought their friends with 'em. I got along all right after a while, right up till times got too hard for me 'r anybody else to make anything, and I kind of begin to look around for something else to put my money in. I didn't know anything but cafes, but I reckoned that if I could make money off them I could make it off something else. I looked around town, and finally I decided to give hotels a go. I got a real estate agent and we walked around the whole damned town. And you can mark me down for a liar if I didn't meet Lovie in one of 'em.' Yessir, she'd followed the oil right up here in Oklahoma City, and since she didn't know nothing else either, she went to work in a hotel. She was the same old Lovie, but she didn't look quite so young as she had when she was working for me.
"She ast me where I was located, and like a damn fool I told her. It wasn't more'n two days later she turned up out to my place and said she wanted to go to work. Well, I started to ast her about the kid again, the one she'd gone off and left down in Texas, and then I thought what the hell, it ain't none of my business anyway and let bygones be bygones. So I put her to work, and she's been with me every since. She's a little bit quieter than she was, but she hasn't changed so damned much that she don't size up the boys when they come in. Guess it's got to be kind of a habit with her.
"I didn't buy the hotel after all. I ast around and found out what I'd have to pay for protection and all, and I decided I didn't want any of it. Lovie told me some about how they run 'em, too. I put my money in real estate instead. Like to have lost ever damned penny I had, too, but now there's a boom on in real estate I'm going to come out in the clear with a pretty good profit. I got married, too, during the depression. Times got pretty tough in '32 and '35, and I wasn't making everything I thought I ought to in the cafe, so I put up some beaverboards in the rooms upstairs in my place and rented 'em out to the roustabouts and workers in the supply houses. That helped out con-five thousand and some-odd dollars. He said, What would you do with it, Miss Purley? Purley was my name 'fore I was married; Sarah Purley. I said I'd use it to buy some real estate. I had my eye on a piece of ground that I just felt in my old bones was going to be worth something some day. He said, All right; you think you can make something out of it, go ahead. But there's one condition; we'll have to do it together.
"I laughed, and said how would we do that; he was an oil man and didn't know nothing 'bout real estate. He said, No, he didn't, but I did, and would I marry him? If I was his wife, maybe he could learn too. That kind of floored me for a while. I'd had lots of guys try to make me, lots of times; I'm not so bad-looking, I mean I wasn't when I was a little bit younger, and there was always somebody hanging 'round trying to put his arms around me or something like that, only usually they wanted more'n that. But I always figgered they was after my wad, and I never did warm up to any of 'em much. Course I ain't no old main, nuthing of the kind, but you understand I ain't like, well, say Lovie. I kind of pick my own man to sleep with, instead of him me. And that ain't been very often neither.
"So when this old Dan Duggett ast me to marry him, I was kind of knocked off, because I seen he wanted a home and all and not just a woman. He was stove up pretty bad, but I figgered it out and finally I said, Yes. He was a nice dependable sort of a guy, and I liked him; he was easy on my nerves and all. When we got married --- we run off to a little old town south of here, like a couple of kids --- he had his compensation check all endorsed to me, and handed it over to me before we started. That kind of got me, too, his trusting me like that. Damned few people I'd trust, not even him for very much and I had all my property made out in my new name the day after we was married. But he knew he didn't have so very long to live anyway, what with being crippled and all, and he knew I knew he didn't, so he just let me take care of my money and his too. That's the way we've handled it ever since; he kind of takes care of the roomers, all of 'em's men, and sees that they pay off prompt and all, and I handle the money.
"I got kind of used to Lovie being around, too, and I guess I'll look after her long as she stays with me. I always kind of looked after people, I guess I always will. Lovie's a good worker, too, and I could get another girl that'd do all the work she does for her ten a week and room and board. Course her room don't cost me anything, cause this property's all clear and in my name, and if she wasn't using it, it might be empty anyway. But I wouldn't think of charging Lovie rent anyway; it's kind of nice to have a woman around that you know and feel comfortable with, like Lovie, even if she ain't so smart or anything. But she doesn't want much, and I'm willing to put up with her tom-catting around, so long's it ain't with my roomers, so neither one of us has got any complaint.
"About the only thing I ain't satisfied with is the way they run things now. You take all these Government things, there ain't no sense in half of 'en. 'The WPA 'specially; I can't git a girl to work out here in my eating-house 'cause of the WPA, and I'm willing to pay a dollar a day and board. But can I get one of 'em? Hell no. Excuse my French, but that's the way I feel about it. I couldn't get one of 'em less I wanted to pay 'em like the WPA does; work half a month and then knock off, but draw a month's pay for it. Who ever heard of such a damfool thing?
"And ever last one of 'em turns their hand in politics, too, not just the men and gorwn women and all, but the kids, the girls that work out here. Oh, course they don't run for office or anything like that, but now then the girls even has to pick 'em out somebody for governor or president that they like, instead of leaving things like that to people that've always mixed in it. Everybody you see has got 'em some candidate; the churches, even, they dabble in politics and anything else they can get into. You see in the papers every now and then where preachers going up to Washington to speak on this'r that, when they oughta be home saving somebody's soul, like Lovie's.
"I never did have much to do with churches or politics or anything else like that, but if other people want to, why let 'em, only don't be mixing in something you don't know anything about. Keep things where they belong, and let other people alone, too.
"Way they oughta do things would be to let everybody run his own business, like me here, and everybody else keep the hell out. If they'd do that for a while, wouldn't need all these star-spangled things we've got now."
