Professor Tom Terrill, of the University of South Carolina at Columbia, has located another version of "The Driller," in the WPA Papers, in the Oklahoma Historical Society, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. That version is dated May 22, 1939.
THE DRILLER
"Drilling today ain't anything like it used to be. Nowadays, they work it all out on paper, right down to where the men're going to stand while they blow their nose. These big companies won't take a chance on anything; it's got to be a cinch before they'll drop a nickel. But twenty-thirty years ago a company'd spend half a million, just taking a chance it'd pay sand.
"I got my first job in the oil fields in California about 1908. They were paying roustabouts five and six dollars a day, and that was better'n I could get at any other work. I hit it hard for a while, and learned how to drill. Seems like it was easier to learn in those days --- like people were more helpful than they are now. Anyway, I got to where I could run a rig with the best of 'em, cable tools or rotary.
"I guess I should've explained at the start that there's two kinds of drilling machinery. There's cable tools, which used to be used so much they were called 'standard,' and the rotary rig. They both make holes in the ground, but they do it in different ways. Let me have a pencil, will you? I'll do a little paper talkin' ---
"Now, this --- this thing here is a cable-tool derrick. It's made out of wood generally, and it ain't as tall as the rotary because it don't have as much weight to support. It only has one boiler, too, where the rotary has three or even more. This outfit up here at the top is the crown-block; it's on a dead-line, straight up, with the hole you're drilling. If it ain't, you've got a crooked hole. The block has cables running through it connecting up with your bailer and tools at one end and winding up down here in your machinery, around your different reels, at the other. This thing hanging, here, about half-way between the crownblock and the floor is a casing block.
"This overgrown teeter-totter over here is a walking-beam. It's got a turnscrew with a drill-cable running through it and fastening on to the tools at one end. The other end hitches on to a revolving arm that makes the beam move up and down --- let's the tools raise and drop, See?
"Ordinarily, in drilling, your tools will consist of a bit, a set of jars --- to give the tools extra motion --- a stem, and a socket for the cable; weigh five or six thousand pounds all together. Of course, there's other tools for fishing things out of the well, for drilling inside the pipe, and a lot of other jobs.
"The size of the bit you start drilling with depends on how deep your hole is going to be; on an average you'd probably start in with an eighteen-inch --- Well, as the bit rises and falls it keeps turning, striking at a different angle each time. It pounds a hole, it doesn't bore one. It's the drillers job to see that the bit strikes full force, but no more. If there's too much slack in his line the hole will be say! A cable-tool driller knows more knots and splices than any six sailors you can find.
"Not all cable-tool drilling is done with derricks. They've got portable machines with masts that are put together in sections and take the place of a derrick.
"There ain't a whole lot of drilling done with cable-tools any more. Most everything you see is rotary --- they're so much faster, and they can go deeper. They're pretty complicated, though, like a lot of machines that do a hard job the easy way. And they cost plenty money. A good cable-tool outfit'll run you about forty thousand dollars, but a rotary comes closer to a hundred thousand.
"Look here, now, how much taller the derrick is; it's made out of steel, too. And here's three or four boilers to the standard rig's one. The rotary drills with pipe, see --- it rotates it. And when you've got a mile or two of drill pipe to whirl you've really got something.
"The first joint of pipe has a bit fastened on to it --- what you call a fish-tail. When the pipe is rotated it bores a hole, just like an auger would. As the hole gets deeper the driller just keeps adding pipe. There ain't no pulling out for water sands or to set casing.
"Yep, that's about all there is to it --- Bailing? You don't have any. These big pumps --- mud hogs --- force water down inside the pipe and wash mud up the outside. About the only time you have to pull out your tools is to change bits. A lot of people --- especially cable-tool men --- claim that rotaries mud off a field; ruin the oil sands. But I don't take much stock in it. Sometimes they will run through a sand crooked; if there ain't enough he won't make any progress. As the bit makes hole, the driller turns this screw I mentioned ago --- letting the tools go down farther, see? When he's drilled the length of the screw or as much as he feels is safe without bailing out, he unhitches the screw from the cable, so that it hangs free from the crown-block, and reels the tools out.
"I forgot to mention that you drill with water in the hole: the pulverized drillings are turned into mud. With the tools pulled out, the bailer is run down, and all this mud is bailed out. Then, the drilling tools are let down into the hole again, the turn-screw is screwed back to starting position and hitched on to the cable, and you're ready to drill again.
"Ordinarily, you'll put a string of pipe into the hole each time you strike a water sand. If you've started off with an eighteen-inch hole, your first pipe --- casing --- will be fifteen inch. That means that when you start to drill again you've got to use a smaller bit --- Get the idea? The casing and the hole keeps getting smaller the deeper you go. It's kind of like a telescope with the big end at the top.
"Well, so that's the way to drill with cable tools, or a simple explanation, anyway. A fellow could write a book about it, if he wanted to. A good cable-tool man is just about the most highly-skilled worker you'll find. Besides having a feel for the job --- knowing what's going on thousands of feet under the ground just from the movement of the cable --- he's got to be something of a carpenter, a steam-fitter, an electrician, and a damned good mechanic. And rigging --- without knowing it, though. They can't always tell just what they're drilling in, see, like you can with cable-tools.
"If your hole ain't straight when you're drilling with cable-tools you're plumb out of luck --- you can't get any motion on the tools, and the casing won't go in. But a crooked hole don't mean anything with a rotary; they're crooked more often than not. They have to take acid tests and all that to find out just how crooked they really are. Sometimes they drill 'em on a slant to get oil out from under a location where they can't put up a derrick. That's what they call whip-stocking, and it's practiced a lot. When the north Oklahoma City field was being drilled in, near the State Capitol, the governor claimed that the oil companies were whip-stocking their holes and drilling the oil out from under State land. So he leased the State land to the companies, and that's why you see those wells out there all around the Capitol.
"I learned all the tricks to drilling that the boys out there in California could teach me, and in 1912, I heard there was a helluva boom down in Mexico. I jumped my job in California and hit out. Well boy, what I'd seen of oil-field work and tough living wasn't anything with what I seen down there! They used cable-tool and rotary both down there, and since I could use both of 'em I got along fine as far as the actual drilling was concerned. But the things that went with the job! We were down in the Tampico field, the biggest one and I guess about the only real field in Mexico. There was more money invested in that one field than there is in the whole Mid-Continent field, and Mister, that Mid-Continent stretches a helluva long ways! But in some places in Mexico the companies were wildcatting---drilling test wells in unproved territory---and those places were generally just plain hell. A man'd have to wade through swamps where the mosquitoes were big as mules and twice as mean; chop your way through jungles; and then climb mountains that'd make a goat dizzy! And damned few white men along, either. Just a bunch of Mexicans gobbling along and all around you. Drive a man crazy if he didn't shut his ears up and not pay any attention to it.
"Why, one day we got orders to move a rig to a location that we could hardly find on the map. I was working for the Aguila Oil Company, British-owned, and we got all our orders from London. Well, those damned Britishers had already drilled there once, but some smart Limey got the idea that maybe they hadn't gone far enough or that if a well was sunk a few feet away from the first one it'd show samples. They wrote us a long letter, and most of it said, Git the hell away from camp and drill that well. We packed up and hit out.
"Of all the plain goddamned misery we had on that trip! We moved everything! I don't mean we just picked us up a tent and skillet and some little things like that and set out for a weekend camping trip; no sir! We packed every damned thing we'd need to drill a well --- boilers, wrenches, picks and shovels, pipe, casing, rope, steel, timbers for the rig floor, tin for the boiler house and the belt house, everything --- and packed 'em on burros. Burros! Little jackasses that didn't look big enough to haul a guinea egg, and about as sociable as a piece of cactus. But that was all there was to haul the stuff with, so we had the Mexicans round us up enough to make the trip.
"Away we went one morning. That was something to see, let me tell you! Our camp was on a kind of flat plain between mountains, and when the first part of the bunch was up in the mountains --- I was a driller, so course I was in the lead with the rest of the officers of the camp --- well by God, the middle and rear end of that bunch of jackasses was just gitting started! We had a string of 'em several miles long, and you could hear them Mexicans singing and cussing up where I was. There was more'n 2,000 Mexicans; teamsters, roughnecks, roustabouts, hands for the picks and shovels, and some of them that was supposed to work but just come along for the hell of it. Those boys knew that with such a helluva big bunch there'd be aswell chance for a fiesta when we made camp.
"We finally got to the location. We put up the rig where the geologists in London had said we oughta put it, got the boilers set up, and begin work. The Mexes had to have their fiesta first, of course, and then we went to work. Hell, we didn't get enough oil out a that hole to wet our tools! We all cussed London and the Limey bastards that had sent us out there and then we pulled up and come back. Before we left I asked the general superintendent what he thought it cost the company to make that little pleasure trip. He said it must have cost more' n $40,000! Jesus Christ, can you imagine a company now that'd spend that much money to try and get a well down without making somebody else kick in? I can't, and I've been working at this a long time.
"Another thing about working down there in Mexico was the food. We didn't get slop like American companies used to put out in the boom days in this country; no sir! We ate just as good as the Limeys did hack in London. Those English companies allowed $2.00 a day for each man for food, and we didn't get cheated out of a damned penny of that allowance either, let me tell you! All the food was shipped over from England, and if what I ate there was any sample, those Britishers eat damned good. Christmas dinner? Man, they fed us meals you couldn't buy for five dollars any place in the world. They put out enough to sink a battleship for each man, and then topped off with big plates full of pickled walnuts and candied fruits, from England, and India and Persia, and France. By God, when I come back to the United States after working for those Britishers my teeth was just about worn down to the gums, I'd eaten so much and so good!
"The only thing I really didn't like about working for those British companies was that you never could get very high with 'em. All the head offices were held down by Englishers, and an American was damned lucky if he ever got tops with 'em. Most of them hadn't forgot how we shoved 'em out in the Atlantic in '76. You take one of those Britishers who'd just come over from the Old Place, and he wouldn't have a damned thing to do with an American, or anybody else for that matter, but another Englishman. If he didn't know something, he'd just stew along until he stumbled on the answer, but he sure as hell wouldn't ask anybody that didn't have a little English blood in him. I worked for the three biggest companies down there: the Aguila, Shell, and Sinclair. The Aguila Oil Co. used Englishmen for all their head offices; the Shell used Hollanders and English; and Sinclair didn't give a damn what country a man come from or if he had his afternoon tiffin --- Sinclair wanted the job done, and they'd hire anybody and pay him a good wage if he could do it. That's one thing I liked about Sinclair, and any other American company.
"Most of the companies paid about the same --- $250 a month when you first went down there, and then on up. When I quit I was making $350, and could have got more I guess if I'd hit 'em up about it. We always got paid in United States' bank drafts, drawn on the Chase National Bank in New York City, and they were as good as gold down there too. Drillers got the best pay, like they do anywhere. If we'd got paid in Mex money, we'd of been working for nothing most of the time. When I was down in Mexico there was three bandits chiefs that had the country split up between 'em. Old Zapata had the country 'round Mexico City; Pancho Villa had Monterey and the country south of there; and Carranza had Tampico and what was around the oil fields.
"We had to carry three kinds of Mex money with us all the time; just went around leaded down with big Mexican bills 'bout as big as soap-wrappers. When we'd get up in the morning Zapata might own the town and his money would pass for good. By the time we'd eat breakfast and went out to buy a pack of cigarettes Villa might have taken the town, after shooting a couple of men that didn't have enough sense to get out of the way of his soldiers, and his money would be all that was good. And "by the time we knocked off at noon, Carranza might have licked Villa and his money had to pass. When any of 'em got heat, his money wasn't any good, then or any other time. When one of 'em got hack in power, by licking the other two, he just printed some more soap-wrappers. Nobody ever thought of taking up the money that'd already been printed. You can see what a helluva shape we'd been in if we'd been paid in Mex; didn't nobody know from one hour to the next just what was legal money.
"Most of the time the Mex was worth about what the paper cost. United States money was worth about 200 to 1, on an average. One time I was in Tampico, staying at the hotel. Next morning I ate breakfast and went up to the clerk to pay my bill. The breakfast, just an ordinary one, was worth $4 Mex, and my hotel bill was a little more'n $1,200! Boom times, huh?
"Most of them Mexicans didn't care 'bout their money, or anything else. All they wanted to do was make enough to have a good time at the next fiesta, and they was satisfied. And the fiestas usually come 'bout once a week, sometimes two or three a week. That was the Mexicans that worked as hands, of course; but there was a helluva lot of good Mexicans, fellows that a pretty good education and knew what the hell they was doing. Someof 'em had been to the United States and learned about how to drill and how to run a refinery and all, and of course most of those kind of guys had good jobs in Mexico City or somplace. We didn't run into a helluva lot like that, though. Most of what we had were peons, Mexican workmen. Most of them didn't know a drill-bit from a temale shuck. We had a helluva hard time with some of 'em when I was first down there.
"The Mexican government had a law that there had to be three Mexes to every one white man on the rig, and there wasn't a damned thing we could do about it except put 'em to work. Well, some of those damned Mexes didn't know what we were talking about half the time. We'd say we're going to change towers --- change shifts you know --- and those damned fools'd begin tearing down the rig. That was one thing they really enjoyed, tearing something down. When the Mexican government took over the railroads the Mexes had themselves one helluva time. Put one of 'em in an engine he thought he was Jesus Christ, and everything had better get out of the way. Most of 'em were nervous, too, besides being show-offs, and it was plain hell for a white man to ride on the trains. I wet my pants more'n once. Got so after a while there wouldn't be a train for a day or two; some Mex engineer had got drunk and rammed his engine into something.
"They thought everything that was on the railroad tracks was something daring them, and there wasn't a one of 'em that wouldn't take that dare. They'd come busting down the track, ninety miles an hour; maybe somebody else had switched some boxcars on a siding and forgot to close the switch. You think that engineer had his brakie go see about that switch? Hell no. He just come blaring down and more'n likely piled up the whole damned train. After a while there wasn't a helluva lot of engines or cars left, and the Mex engineers and firemen and brakies were getting kind of scarce too, what with so many of 'em getting killed.
"But the worst Mexicans were the bandits. Boy, the country was running over with them. You see a bunch of men lathering their horses along the road you better get to cover; more'n likely it was some bandit gang coming from a raid and feeling frisky enough to shoot hell out a enything they saw moving. Many a time I've seen a bunch of bandits come riding hell-for-leather past the camp, the Regulars --- the soldiers --- pounding along right behind. The bandits'd run into the jungle; in a few minutes here they'd come again, only this time the bandits'd be chasing the Regulars. Sometimes, if they was outnumbered, the Regulars'd go over to the bandits, and then they'd all come hellin' into town to shoot it up.
"One time the United States come in and took us all out. That was in '14, right when there was so damned much shooting and killing going on. The Government brought us up into Texas and we stayed there several months. When it quieted down we went back down into Mexico, and started back to work like nothing had happened. We were drilling a well about nine miles outside a little town just north of Tampico; it was a wildcat and we were going to try to prove up the country. Everything looked pretty peaceful, and we began working like hell to complete the well so we could get another job. We had four drilling crews, and were working two towers --- one from noon till midnight, and the other tower worked from midnight till noon. We were really balling the jack.
"'Long about 11:30 one night, when we was just getting ready to go relieve the other tower, we heard a helluva noise coming towards us. Sounded like a whole damned army. We waited; we couldn't of done anything less we had a couple of cannons. About 80 or 90 Mexicans, bandits, come hell-roaring into camp, shooting and yelling. Half of 'em run through the mess-hall, where we ate --- the pushers, drillers, workmen and all --- and scared hell outa the fellows there. The rest of 'em went for the bunkhouses. I was in the bunkhouse, just getting my shirt on to go to work. In they come like a pack of mad dogs. I Hollered, 'Let 'em go, men; we can't do nuthin!
"They frisked us for money, took all we had, and then begin tearing up our bed-ticks to see if we had any saved. The company had had those bed-ticks made especially for our camp cots, and shipped 'em all the way from England, and by God I almost yanked one of them bandits by the scruff of his neck when I saw him take his machete and rip hell outa my tick. They dumped the stuffing out of 'em and kicked it around, and then folded up the ticks --- they were pretty bright-colored and Mexes like colors --- and took 'em with them. There was a boy we'd picked up in Texas, a fellow named Lonnie something-or-other, I can't remember his last name. I remember that he came from Waxahachie, Texas, though.
"He was a good-looking kid, kind of tall, and looked exactly like he ought to be a boss or something even if he wasn't. He could speak damned good Spanish too. Well, one of the "bandits hollered out, 'Who's the boss here?' I was kind of translating it in my mind when this Lonnie speaks up and says, 'I am; what the hell do you want?' He wasn't, you see, but I was. But that kid knew that if they took me the work'd be slowed up, because I was general superintendent for the company. So before I could say anything, just after I kinda figgered out what the hell all that Spick meant, this bandit says, 'All right, Gringo; we'll just take you along.' He turns to me and says, 'We want 5,00 pesos for this Gringo; you don't send 'em to us in 24 hours we'll send you his ears. Then his legs, and then his arms. Savvy?' And before I could say yes or no, they hustled him outside and lit out.
"The others had already run through the mess-hall and taken everything there that they thought they could use --- including all the whiskey and gin that the English company had brought to us --- and they all hit it off down the trail. They put Lonnie on a horse, and they led his horse with 'em. The other tower had heard the ruckus and hid out just over the hill near the rigs. The bandits must've known there wouldn't be anything worth stealing, to them, up there at the rigs and they didn't even go up there. Well, this other tower heard all the noise and laid low. The Chinese cooks we had was squealing like stuck pigs; you could of heard 'em a mile, because the Mexes had grabbed 'em by their pigtails and was swinging them around and making them dance by shooting at their feet.
"I run up the telegrapher's office after they left and sent word to the company offices in Tampico what had happened, and told them we had to have the 5,000 pesos before morning. They told me to get the company boat --- we had a big motor boat up there on the river by the camp --- and beat it down to Tampico and they'd have the 5,000 pesos waiting for me. I got in the boat and went a-helling down there, got the reward money and beat it back. I got back in camp 'bout noon the next day, with the 5,000 pesos in a big sack, weighing me down. But I didn't need the money after all.
"Lonnie knew the jungles pretty well --- that is, he didn't get lost very easy wherever he was, and he could always find his direction by the stars or the sun or something --- and he beat me back to camp. He said that the bandits rode hell-for-leather for three-four hours, and then they begin to get tired. They stopped off beside the trail --- there was just a big trail there where all the horses and tractors and burros and everybody had to travel, because the jungle was on each side --- and they all piled off and spread their ponchos and covered themselves with our bed-ticks. They put five Mexes to guard Lonnie. He said they untied him because he told 'em his arms was numb and his legs, but they put him in the center of the guards.
"The rest of the Mexes was all drunk on our whiskey and was pretty tired anyway, and Lonnie said it wasn't more'n ten minutes till the whole gang was snoring till it sounded like a thousand buzz-saws working. The guards weren't any wider awake than the rest; they watched Lonnie for a few minutes, then they begin dropping their heads and nodding off. 'Bout half-an-hour of this and Lonnie wormed along on his belly about a hunnerd feet; then he got up on his hands and knees and made another hunnerd. When he was a good ways from the Mexicans he jumped up off his hands and knees and headed for the timbers. All that night he fought through the jungle, and come daylight he wasn't more'n fifteen miles from our camp He hoofed it on in, and beat me back from Tampico.
"A 'Missionary,' a fellow who was half-French and half-something-else, I don't know what, acted as a kind of referee in these things. I got in touch with him before I left for Tampico, and he set out after the bandits. He knew where most of them held up and all. He made a deal with them, but of course they didn't say anything 'bout Lonnie already being gone; they thought they'd put a good one over on us. Well, that damned missionary was one surprised human when he come back and told us what had happened; how he's sacrificed his time and all and got them to promise to turn Lonnie loose for the 5,000 pesos. I let him tell his story, and then I sent for Lonnie. There wasn't anything for him to do but beat it, and I helped him a little with my boot, because I figgered he was in cahoots with 'em.
"The bandits come by a couple of more times after that, but they didn't stop long enough to kidnap anybody so they could hold him for ransom. They just took all we had---whiskey, and clothes, and food and all; even made us trade boots with 'em, and it got so we wouldn't wear anything but the oldest clothes and boots we had. But that kind of stuff got to be too much. The company was losing money on their stuff, even if they did have some pretty good producing wells, and they sent us orders from London to abandon those particular wells.
"We went out on other locations, some of them not quite as good as those we'd had to leave to the bandits, but still they were all right. But I'd had just about enough. I'd seen lots of bandits and just plain thieves down there; I'd been in the shelling of Vera Cruz, you know where the United States warships shelled the whole damned town, but there wasn't much to that. We just hid out and finally got away into the rush. Didn't have much time to wonder 'bout what was happening; them big shells begin screaming over a man's head and busting right in front of him where he's getting ready to plant his feet --- he don't stop to think what's right or wrong.
"I'd seen enough of that kind of stuff, and besides I was getting kind of homesick for the United States. Only times I'd been out was when the U.S. soldiers come in and took us out to save us from the bandits. So I left Mexico in '17, and came to the United States. I went to Mineral Wells, Texas, where there was a little boom on, and worked there for two months. I got a splinter in my thumb while I was splicing a wire cable on a standard rig, and, got blood poisoning. I had to lay off a while, and then I came up to Duncan, Oklahoma.
"There was a little excitement 'round Duncan, and I stayed there a while. I had a friend on the Corporation Commission here in Oklahoma and he wanted me to go up in northern Oklahoma and drill. I rode around with him for several weeks and finally landed in Garber. I went to work on a rotary rig there, for the Sinclair Company. Rotaries were taking over everything, and there wasn't any place for a cable-tool driller. Sinclair shipped in ten rotary rigs from California to the Garber field, and I really caught hell that next winter, '18 it was.
"That was the year most everybody caught the flu; remember? Me'n another fellow were just about the only drillers in that whole field that didn't come down with it. There we were, by God, trying to run every damned rig in that whole field by ourselves, and working farm hands and clerks from the towns and anybody else that had strength to lift his hand. And it snowed so much that year that lots of times me and this fellow, Johnnie Williams, had to hitch six horses on one little light farm wagon to go into town for groceries. When we got off work nights, we'd go to the bunkhouses and act as nursemaids for those who had the flu. We emptied so damned many slopjars, I smelled like a sewer, and I cooked so many eggs and flapjacks and stuff I could've got a job in a hash-house when I got through. There wasn't but two doctors in the whole country and those poor devils was on the jump day and night. They'd come and prescribe some nasty-tasting stuff, and they was so tired and worn-out --- more'n likely they had the flu themselves --- that half the time I bet they didn't know what the hell they'd given a man.
"Most of the boys pulled through all right, but that was one helluva winter for me. I kind of roamed around after that, like most drillers do, following the booms. I drilled in Drumright, Cushing, Kiefer, and all around. And those fields I didn't drill in I knew all about because I worked with so many fellows that had drilled in 'em. From '23 to '85 I was in Wyoming, drilling for Carter Oil Company. I was working north of Casper, in a new field. They had a gasser there that was about the biggest I ever saw, or heard. You could hear that damned thing blowing off --- letting the gas blow free --- clear up to Buffalo, twenty miles or so away. All the horses and cats and dogs 'round there went deaf from hearing it; the horses'd have to look back over their shoulders to get their orders. No lie; that's what they did. That was pretty good production up there, too, but it wasn't drilled as heavy as it has been since then.
"When I came back from Wyoming I went to Stroud and Ingalls and Ripley; I amde $20 a day in those fields, and that was tops then. First part of '26 I went down to Seminole and drilled some wells, then I got a job down at Sasakwa, south of Seminole, drilling a well in the middle of the Canadian River. That was a real job, drilling in that damned treacherous river. Liable to lose everything we had in a sudden rise We had the feet of our rig peired up on concrete footings, and the roughnecks built a long runway from the bank to the rig, about fourteen feet above the riverbed. One day the pusher looked around and told the head teamster that he'd better move all the loose stuff up on the rig floor or on the bank. We'd left lumber and pipes and stuff like that down in the rig cellar and around on the riverbed below. The teamster snaked the stuff up, and by God, before my tower went off there came a rise in the river that damned near washed up over the rig floor. I don't see how that can happen; there won't be a cloud in the sky, and yet there'll come a rise that'll wash houses and everything else that isn't bolted down with the water. I've seen the same thing happen down near Newcastle, and Blanchard, and up on the Cimarron River, where I drilled some more riverbed wells.
"But seems like there's always some good production in those kind of wells. I don't believe I ever drilled in a duster --- one that wouldn't make a showing of oil --- in a river. Most of those river wells come in good in February '26 I went to Seminole again and worked there that winter and summer, then I moved up north and drilled a well in the Cimarron River. Drilled a couple over near Cushing, too, that winter. By that time I had a helluva lot of experience. I'd worked in between times at Burkburnette and Breckenridge, Texas; in Carter County, Oklahoma, near Ardmore and Healdton; and down around Walters and Waurika and Duncan, Oklahoma. Most of the time I'd been drawing around $15 a day, and I'd managed to save some of it.
"I came to Oklahoma City in the last few days of '29 and waited around to see what was going to happen. Looked pretty bad; most geologists said there wouldn't be a damned thing in the Oklahoma City field, and when the discovery well came in there was a helluva scramble for leases, and for drillers and hands to drill the wells. I drilled the second well in the Oklahoma City field; it made a good showing of oil, but there was so much gas pressure that the company decided to make a gas well out of it. They sold gas to the rest of the drilling companies and the next couple of dozen wells that were brought in used the gas from my well to drill with.
"Doesn't seem like any time since this field was drilled here in Oklahoma City. I guess that when a man gets older, times goes a lot faster for him. It does for me, anyway. But I think this field here would have been better off if just a few of the biggest companies had got all the leases and developed it; there wouldn't have been so damned much cut-throat competition, like there is now and has been ever since they opened it. Nobody can make any money when these little fellows get in here and have to cut the price of oil and gasoline to get enough money to pay their help. Besides that, they ruin the field by drilling so damned much and so often.
"In '32 I was working on a steam line, trying to get it hooked up, and it broke and threw me off. There must've been about 500 pounds pressure on that line, because when the line broke it threw me about 75 feet away. It broke my ribs and bruised me up a lot, and ruptured my appendix. I had to have two operations in the next eleven months, and course I wasn't worth a damn when the sawbones got through with me. I couldn't do anything; I was too weak to get out on a rig floor and get the job done, and drilling was the only thing I knew.
"Funny thing about those operations too. I'd been around gas so damned much the doc couldn't knock me out with that weak gas stuff they used in the hospital. He tried about an hour; he emptied up a drum or two and he says to the one that was helping him that I was about one case in ten thousand that couldn't be put under with gas. I raised up and said, 'You mean ten-thousand-and-one don't yon Doc?' Well, you oughta seen that old bugger's face when I raised up and said that! I'd insisted on having gas instead of ether, because I don't like the damned stuff, but after that happened he made me take ether. When I got out of the hospital that damned ether had turned my hair white, like it is now. Hell, if I was to go out now and strike up some contractor I didn't know, which ain't very likely, he'd take one look at my gray hair and say nuthing doing.
"I got married in '19, while I was up at Garber. My wife followed me wherever I went after that, Wyoming, Texas, and all the boom towns here in Oklahoma. When I got hurt we had some money saved and I got some compensation, and we bought an oil station out on SW. 29th St. We got along pretty well, too, for a while. One day a fellow came along and wanted to put in a nickolodeon, a machine to play records. I didn't think it would pay me, but I let him. Well sire, you know when people got wind of it, that they could dance out here, they packed the place till you had to fight your way in. We had the only place outside the city limits for a while where they could dance, and we drew the crowds. The state passed the 3.2 percent beer law about that time, and it helped a lot. Had to enlarge the place about five times to take care of the crowds.
"My three girls---yeah, all three of my children is girls, and I wouldn't trade any one of them for a whole houseful of boys---they got married and left home. One of them is working for Standard Oil Company in California --- oil in her blood, see; and one is married and lives in Garter, Oklahoma, and the other lives with her husband here in Oklahoma City. Well, the girls were all gone and we didn't mind much what we done for a living, just so we got along and didn't have to take charity. Running a dance hall and beer joint isn't much, but we do all right.
"I meet a lot of the old-timers here, the drillers and roughnecks and roustabouts I used to know; they all come in to see me. I reckon old "Judge" Payne --- they've always called me 'Judge" but I don't know Why --- is acquainted with about every old-timer in the fields. And another thing; I get to meet the cattlemen out here too. A lot of them come in and get to talking with me, and they all act kind of surprised when I can talk their language. But I ought to be able to. Why, goddamn it anyway, when I was a kid up in Idaho, I won the world's championship in rodeo performing! I was the world's champion cow-puncher for several years. I had lots of experience in that line; that's what I really am --- an old cow-hand.
"I was born in Santa Barbara, California, in 1875. When I was just a kid, about two-three years old, the folks moved to Idaho. 'Course all I knew from then on was cattle. Cattle and Indians. Helluva lot of Indians up there — Piutes, Cheyennes, Modocs, Shoshones, Blackfeet, and about ten other kinds. I saw a lot of them. When we moved into Idaho it wasn't but just a short time after the Custer Massacre, and all the Indians were feeling pretty cocky. The folks had to watch their step then.
"Well, I punched cattle from the time I was big enough to fork a horse until I got ambitious. Pay wasn't much for a cow-puncher those days, and I heard about the wages paid the roustabouts in the oil fields. I quit my job, like a damned fool, and went to California, and got a job as roustabout at six dollars a day. Worked there till I went to Mexico.
"Where I really belong is back in the cow country. I like the work, and there's something about that country out around Idaho and Montana and Wyoming that keeps a man kind of hungry to see it again. But of course I had so much work in the oil fields that I can't quite get it out of my system either. Even now, I get to feeling that what I'd like to do is get out on a rig floor again and feel the mud-hogs bellowing all around me and kind of feel the floor shake with the motors, and pour coffee grounds in the samples to fool the geologists and chemists. Those days are all gone, for me anyway, but if I was any younger I'd damn sure take about the same road that I did.
The Driller	Oklahoma	Excellent
Discussion of types of drilling, with story carrying driller through various colorful jobs-now runs gas station and boer joint, as accidentally incapacitated him for work.
