Worker: Mr. Wm. J. Sadler, Raleigh.
Interviewed: Mrs. J. W. Sadler, 5071/2
Pace Street, Raleigh N. C.
Written: November 25-30, 1938.
MRS. WILL CASTEEN,
Mrs. Will Casteen sat in the neatly but not expensively furnished living room of her modest three-room apartment inone of the less desirable residential sections of Raleigh, her work-worn hands crossed patiently in her lap. Her gray hair was neatly combed, her house dress was clean, and her shrewd brown eyes gleamed behind metal-framed glasses.
"I don't know why you should think the story of my life would be of interest to you or anyone else," she stated in a quiet, kindly voice, "but I'll be glad to tell you anything I can."
She had greeted me with courtesy when I knocked at the front door of her part of the small duplex house, and, when I entered, had offered me a seat in what proved to be a very comfortable chair. It was one of three pieces comprising an "overstuffed" Suite, obviously of an in expensive type. She made no excuses for the outside looks of the house, and certainly none were needed concerning the appearance inside.
Everything was scrupulously clean.
The remainder of the room's furnishings consisted of a well-worn cloth rug; an end table pushed against a wall behind the davenport, holding a table lamp, a couple of what appeared to be family pictures in neat frames, and a few books between book-ends, each of which was flanked by a vase of flowers;. an old-time "secretary" fairly bulging with books of almost every description, and topped with another flower-laden vase; a day bed with an attractively colored cretonne cover; a medium sized table radio; a few tasteful pictures on the walls; a floor lamp standing near another comfortable looking chair; a "Heatrola," and various other articles which made the room exceedingly livable.
"Your living room certainly looks nice," I complimented her.
"Thank you," she replied. "I think the appearance of a home, no matter how small it is nor how poor a person may be, helps keep us cheerful."
"And so do I," was my comment. "I wonder if you would mind letting me see the rest of your home?"
"Not at all," she said, rising to lead me into an adjoining room.
"This room's rather crowded," she said, adding: "You see, my grandson and I have to sleep in here. My oldest son, who lives with us, sleeps on the day bed in the living room."
The bedroom was crowded, as she had said, but it did not present a picture of confusion. The two double beds were arranged to the best advantage in the small space the room afforded; there was a bureau, a chifforobe and a sewing machine, as well as two or three straight-backed chairs. Here, as in the living room, everything was neat. Green covers were on the beds, and a clean, stiffly-starched scarf covered the surface or the bureau. A tinted picture of two attractive young boys, both smiling, was on the chifforobe.
From the bedroom we passed into the combination dining room and kitchen. This contained an oil cook stove, a kitchen cabinet, a small table covered with a green and white cloth, a small electric refrigerator, and four straight chairs painted green. In one corner was a kitchen sink, and beside it was a built-in stand apparently intended to hold dishes after they had been washed and were draining. Off the kitchen was a bathroom, used jointly by Mrs. Casteen's family and members of a family living in the other part of the house.
"I should think your little home would be mighty comfortable," I told her when we had returned to the living room and seated ourselves again.
"We manage to get along right well," she said, "It isn't as large or as well furnished as we'd like, but we don't have enough money now to do better. As the widow of a Spanish American War veteran, I get a $30 a month pension from the government. My son, who once made a good salary, doesn't earn very much now, and has to give half of what he makes to his wife. They're separated, I'm sorry to say. I get a small sum each month from my grandson's father to pay for his upkeep. He and my daughter are separated, too. I may be mistaken, but, taking advantage of a other's privilege, I must say that I think both my son and daughter have right on their side. My daughter has married again. She and her first husband were divorced."
I saw that, although she was somewhat embarrassed over making these disclosures, she was, <text not clear>protective, and I sought to turn her mind into other channels.
"How old are you, Mrs. Casteen, if you don't mind telling me," I asked.
"I'll be 69 years old next March. I was born right here in Raleigh in 1870. I don't feel that old, though my health hasn't been of the best in the last year or two."
"I suppose you know a lot about the Raleigh of those days, "I prompted her.
"No," she replied, "I was kept too busy. My father was a poor man, and there were four other children younger than me. I went to school only about four years. I had to stop when I was around eleven years old to help my other take care of my brothers and sisters. I stayed at home until I was married in 1886, about five years---"
"What?" I couldn't help interrupting her. "That would make you only about sixteen when you were married!"
"That's right," she replied calmly. "Folks married much younger then than now. I was married two months before I was sixteen. I'd been helping take care of children for so long that I felt like I was much older.
"I practically took entire care of my brothers and sisters for five years between the time I quit school and when I was married. I worked mighty hard; washing, ironing, cooking, and all the other things that have to be done when there's a family as large as ours was. And we didn't have all the new-fangled things that women of today have to help them in their housework. There was no running water in our home. Not even a pump. I had to draw all the water we used from a well.
"Electric or gas lights were almost unheard of during my childhood. We had about half a dozen kerosne lamps, and it was almost a full-time job keeping them cleaned and filled with oil. We didn't have a refrigerator, not even the old style kind that uses ice. If we had anything that we thought would spoil, we'd put it in a pail and let the pail down to the top of the water in the well.
"When I see all the modern conveniences, it sometimes makes me wonder how we got along as well as we did. But when I look back, things then didn't seem so hard. Ie just did without what we didn't have, and made the best of things as they were."
"Do you think those modern conveniences have lessened housework for the women folks?" I asked her.
"I suppose they have," she answered, "but personally can't tell much difference. I manage to keep busy most of the time. Food still has to be cooked, beds have to be made, floors have to be swept, clothes have to be washed, ironed and mended. I don't have to worry about finding something to do."
I was interested by her statement of having been married at such an early age, and asked her to tell me what her feelings were in that respect.
"Well," was her reply, "I didn't think at the time that it was unusual. Lots of my friends were getting married, and many of them were no older than I was. My husband was only 20. And I was a full grown girl, too. I guess what first attracted me to my husband was his voice. How he could sing! And he wasn't bad looking, either. There weren't any phonographs or radios then, and lots of young men in Raleigh would form singing groups. They went around town, especially at Christmas, time, singing and playing on guitars and banjos. It was real pretty, too.
"The first time I saw my husband was on Christmas Eve night, less than two months before we were marriad. He was in a bunch of young men who were parading all over Raleigh. They would stop on almost a very street corner and sing a song or two. Our house was on one of the corners where they stopped. I went out on the porch so I could hear them better. The man who was to become my husband happened to be standing so that the street light on the corner was shining directly on his face. He had his head thrown back, and his high tenor voice seemed to rise above all the others. I honestly believe that if he'd grown up during these days and had the same voice, he could have made a fortune singing over the radio.
"When the young men finished singing, they started on down the street, and passed by our house. The young man whose singing I'd liked so well was walking on the inside. As they went by, our eyes met, and he raised his hat and smiled. I couldn't help smiling back at him. I expect my father and mother wouldn't have liked that very much if' they'd known about it. Parents were very strict in those, especially with girls.
"The next day, Christmas, just after we had finished dinner, someone knocked on the front door. One of the children went to see who it was.
"'Is Miss Sally in?' I heard a man's voice ask.
"I got right nervous, because I was certain in my mind that it was the fellow who had smiled at me the night before. I remember wondering how he'd found out my first name.
"When my sister or brother--I've forgotten which it was--came back and told me somebody wanted to see me, I walked to the front door. Sure enough, it was will Casteen, as he introduced himself.
"'I hope you'll excuse me, but after seeing you last night, I felt like I just had to meet you,' he told me. 'A friend of mine who knows you told me your name.'
"I was pretty flustered, I tell you, but managed enough politeness to invite him in. Then I excused self, because I knew I'd have to tell mother and father about the young man's visit. They were real nice about it, and both of them shook hands with Will when I introduced him.
"Well, we were married in less than two months. Will was a moulder, and worked in one of the big foundries in Raleigh. He made about $15 a week, which was good money for a laboring man in those days. We rented a small house, furnished it the best we could, and moved in. I felt a little funny about leaving my parents and brothers and sisters, but knew I could see them real often.
"Not quite a year later our first baby, a boy, was born. We named him for his father. I guess I was Just about the proudest thing in the world, maybe too proud, because little will died before he was six months old. He had diphtheria, and lived only a few days after he was taken sick. I was to know much more grief than that. Seven of our eleven children died, most of them before they were a year old. I've worried many times about whether something I did or didn't do might have caused them to die.
"In the next three years we had two more children, but they died. And I thought I'd die, too, when my husband came home one night and told me he'd had an offer of what he thought would be a better job in Goldsboro. He said he had just about made up his mind to take it, but wanted to talk to me about it first. At first, it seemed like I just couldn't stand the thought of leaving the town where my babies were buried, and where all the relatives I had in the world lived. But my husband was still a young man, and said he wanted to move around some. He didn't, say it in so many words, but I think he didn't want to stay it in the town where our babies bad been born and died.
"Anyway, he took the job, and left a few days later for Goldsboro. I stayed in Raleigh until he could find a place for us to live. I went there about two weeks later, and lived in Goldsboro just a littleless than forty years. It was in 1890 when we moved, and I came back to Raleigh in 1930, about two years after my husband died.
"He died on election night in 1988; you know, the year Hoover and Smith ran against each other for President. He'd been a Baptist preacher during the last fifteen years of his life, and would have voted against Smith if he could. But he was unconscious from the time he had a stroke on Friday until he died the next Tuesday night.
"My husband was a good-hearted man and worked hard all his life. But he never made what you could call big money, and we never were able to accumulate much. He would give away his last cent if he thought it would help somebody who needed it more than we did. We had our fusses, and quarrels, just like I reckon all married folks do, but we lived together almost forty-two years without a thought of being separated or divorced. Seems like to me that divorce is considered fashionable by a lot of people these days.
"By the time we'd been living in Goldsboro a year, I'd made a lot of friends, and was feeling pretty well satisfied, although I did get homesick now and then. My husband was working full time and we were getting alone all right. In the next six years, three more children were born to us, but only one of them lived. That was John, who is my oldest son now.
"Soon after we went to Goldsboro, my husband joined a National Guard company, and a few months after the Spanish American war broke out, he had to go to Cuba. John was a little bitty thing then, and I was scared to death. I was afraid my husband would be killed, as I reckon all women feel when their menfolks have to go to war. Twenty years later I was to see John go off to another war.
"Well, my husband wasn't at all anxious to go, either, but his enlistment had more than a year to run, and he had to. The soldiers camped in Florida for several months before going to Cuba, and men in the camp there were dying almost like flies. I believe my husband said it was malarial fever or yellow fever, I've forgotten which. He caught it, but got all right after being sick a few weeks.
"When I got his letter saying the company was going to Cuba, I don't. know just exactly how I did feel. I got right weak, and I guess I cried more than I should have. Then I thought to myself: There are other women right here in this neighborhood whose husbands and sons have got to go, too, so the best thing I can do is to let things run their course; if will is killed, I can't help it, and I'll have to do the best I can; if he comes back, I'll be mighty thankful.
"I felt a whole lot better after I'd decided to think about things that way. I just kept on praying that he wouldn't be hurt or killed and he wasn't. His company didn't do any fighting at all. They just stayed in a camp near some city in Cuba--I've forgotten the name of it.
"Will's army pay was small, but he sent most of it to me, and with what little we had saved, the baby and I managed to get along all right. It didn't take much for me to eat am John was a breast baby. He got mighty sick after his Father bad been gone a fell months, and I thought I was going to lose him as I had lost all my other babies. But I didn't write Will about it. I didn't think he would be allowed to come home if I did, and I didn't want him to be worried all the time.
"Old Doctor Smith, who had been with me when John was born, was just as nice as he could be. And so were all my neighbors. Dr. Smith stayed with the baby all night long two or three nights when he was so sick, and finally pulled him through. The old doctor is dead now, but he'll always have a corner in my heart.
"Will was gone almost a year. When he came back, John was healthy and just as fat as he could be. You ought to have seen that mail when his baby would start walking around. Will would strut like a peacock, he was so proud. And I was proud, too. I prayed every night that the Lord would let John live, and not take him from us as he bad the rest.
"The second child we had to live was Edgar. He was born in 1901; then in 1905, Janet came along, and Marilee was born in 1909. Edgar has a ten-year-old daughter and a two-year-old son, and Marilee has a four-year-old son. John has two daughters. One of them finished high school last year and has a right good job in an office here; the other one is in her last year in high school.
"I had six grandchildren, but one of them, Elbert, who was Janet's youngest boy, was killed by an automobile almost three years ago. He was the brother of the grandson who lives with me now. That was a horrible thing. Elbert was about ten years old. Late one Sunday afternoon, he rode his bicycle downtown to a bakery to get some bread for his aunt, as he'd done many times before. On his way back home, he was struck by a car and killed instantly. It was awful. The poor little thing's head was crushed almost to a pulp. He and his brother were living with me. The man whose car struck him carried him to a hospitals quickly as he could, but it was no use. The doctors said he never knew what hit him.
"Elbert's mother lived out in the country, and it was late before we could get in touch with her. She didn't have a telephone. Some kind neighbor went after her. It was an awful blow to her, and I thought Elbert's aunt would go crazy. She held herself responsible for his death because she'd sent him off. We didn't, have a cemetery lot in Raleigh, so we carried him to Goldsboro and buried him in the family lot there beside his grandfather, my husband, and several of my babies who had died in Goldsboro. That picture you saw on the chifforobe in the bedroom is of Elbert and his brother. It was taken about two years before he was killed. I often take it down and look at it for a long time.
"Well, I'm getting ahead of my story. I got to thinking about Elbert while I was talking about the other children, and wanted to tell you about him. He was one of the most lovable children I've ever known.
"I was kept pretty busy in Goldsboro. In addition to keeping house--and that included doing all my own washing, Ironing, cooking, making clothes for the children, and many other tasks--I took several boarders for a number of years. That brought us a little extra money which came in pretty handy. But I was happy, in spite of all the hard work. My children were normal and healthy, and I was willing to do anything in the world I could for them..
"I reckon the maddest I ever got with my husband was one time a few months after Marilee was born. John, our oldest boy, had just finished six grades of grammar school, and had made mighty good marks year after year. I wanted to see him finish high school and go to college if that was possible. During his vacation, just after he was twelve years old, he was offered a job as a messenger boy with a telegraph company. I agreed for him to take it, because it would, give him some extra money, and I thought it would last only during his vacation.
"A week or two before school was to open for the next session, John told me the manager of the telegraph company wanted him to stay on. I said: 'No, siree, young man! You're going back to school.' He begged and pleaded and cried, saying that he was learning to telegraph, and that he could earn good money when he did. His father sided with him, and John didn't go back to school in spite of everything I tried to do. I'll have to admit that I was proud of him a little more than a year later when he was made an operator by the company. The Goldsboro paper had a piece about him, saying he was the youngest telegraph operator in the country. He was less than fourteen years old at that time.
"When my children started growing up and going to school, I got to thinking about how little education I had had when I was young. I didn't want them to be ashamed of the way I talked or spelled or wrote, and many a night after they had gone to bed, I would get their books and read and study for two or three hours, no matter how tired was after a hard day's work. I kept that up for years, and I'm glad now that. I did.
"John kept on working his job as an operator in Goldsboro for about two years. Then he got restless. One night he came home and told me that he had been offered a job with the same company in Raleigh. He said the job would pay $30 more a month than he was making in Goldsboro. He was so young--he was still wearing short pants--that I didn't want him to go. But I knew that if I didn't agree to it he might be mad and be do things he shouldn't. So I told him I would agree for him to go for three months. I thought he'd get homesick and be glad to come back home. But he didn't, and since that time he has worked all over the country.
"When the United States declared war against Germany, John was working in Raleigh again. He enlisted in the Navy, without saying anything to me or his father, and showed up in Goldsboro a few days later with the news. I was scared to death. I thought about all the anxious hours I'd spent when his father had gone to Cuba. But there wasn't anything I could do about it. He stayed in the Navy all during the war and until nearly a year after it ended, but didn't get hurt, even though the ship he was on made a lot of trips between here and Europe.
"I loved my husband but I was ambitious for my children to do well, and sometimes when he couldn't or wouldn't see things as I did, it made me pretty mad. Edgar, our youngest son, finished high school in 1918, while his brother was in the Navy. I was very proud of him. He'd been captain of the high school football and baseball teams, and was president of his graduating class. He'd worked mighty hard during his vacations am even while he was going to school. I remember one job he had was night work. He would hurry home from school so he could get his lessons before going to work. Sometimes he wouldn't get home until one or two o'clock in the morning.
"We didn't have the money to send Edgar to college, but I wanted him to continue hid education. A prominent man in town who'd become interested in him because of his school record, saw the Congressman from our district and arranged for him to go to the Naval Academy. I thought that was fine, but Will didn't want him to go, and his consent had to be given. It seems that my husband had seen some drunken sailors in Norfolk years before, and had formed a lasting bad impression of the Navy. I argued and argued, but it didn't do any good.
"I decided to write to John and ask him to see if he couldn't get his father to agree for Edgar to go to the Naval Academy. I did that, but it was a long time before I got his answer. My letter just couldn't seem to catch up with him. I was disappointed with his answer. He didn't want Edgar to go into the Navy, either. He said he hated it, especially the way some of the officers acted. He said he had run across an officer who had gone to school with him years before in Goldsboro, and that the officer acted like he had never seen him before. It hurt him and made him mad, too.
"Well, that was that, but I will always regret Edgar's not taking that chance. I believe it would have changed his whole life. He's managed to make a living, but that's about of all. None of my children who lived have made much of a success, but I love them just as much as if they had.
"There wasn't much of interest to happen during the next ten years, except that my three oldest children got married and several grandchildren came along. I always had enough work to keep me busy. My oldest girl didn't finish high school, but my youngest one did.
"I've told you about my husband's death in 1928. I felt mighty lonely for awhile. My youngest daughter was working and we got along all right. In 1930 she was transferred to Raleigh, and I came with her. By that time my oldest daughter and her husband had separated, so she and her two boys came along, too. After she married again, I kept the boys. youngest daughter also married, and she and her husband lived with me until a little while after Elbert's death. Then they moved off to themselves, and my grandson and I continued to stay together.
"We don't have much, but we are doing all right. I hope I can live long enough to see my grandson at least finish high school. I've worked hard all my life and had a lot of grief, but I reckon there are millions of other women who have had even harder times than I have, so I'll have to be satisfied."
Mrs. Casteen was still sitting quietly with her hands crossed on her lap. I hadn't interrupted her for more than an hour. When she had finished, I thanked her and left. She accompanied me to the door and the saw of her she was standing there with a look of <text not clear>on her lined face.
