September 14th, 1939
Charlotte Greek study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer.
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser.
Charlotte Chapter
Of
Sons of Pericles
Sons of Pericles
The Sons of Pericles is a National Greek-American organization of more than two hundred Chapters with a membership of over eight thousand in the United States and Canada. The first Shapter was organized in Manchester, N.H. in 1927. Its growth has been steady and inspiring. A National Convention is held annually. The 1939 convention being held at Providence, R.I., the 1940 convention being scheduled for Seattle, Wash.
The Charlotte, N.C. Chapter was organized in June 1934- with Nick Pappas as President. Its initial membership was nineteen. Members are given unlimited opportunity for free expression of their opinions regarding spiritual, educational and political matters.
The Charlotte Chapter with the following officers! Nick Papas, Pres., Jas Anderson, Vice Pres., Steve G. Pappas, Sec, Jas. Floros, Treas., in District No.3 embracing the following states: North Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, District of Columbia, Maryland and Delaware.
The object of this society, according to the wording of their charter is, "To promote better citizenship and to keep alive the ideals and customs of Greek parents, and to blend into a closer harmony the uplifting elements of Greek- American understanding". To this end a strict censorship is demanded of all prospective members and no boy who has had any criminal or moral entanglements is permitted to Join.
In order to stimulate interest in the Chapter and to broaden the scope of its endeavors, they are publishing a newspaper which has proved to be an instrument of news and education to other Chapters This paper, the "Victorian" is published quarterly in Charlotte and has a circulation of four hundred copies, pays its expenses from its advertisements and is sent to all parts of the United States.
It is the only paper of its kind in the United States, other Chapters use the mimeographeform, while the "Victorian" is printed on high grade book paper in magazine style.
The Charlotte Chapter is co-operating with other organizations in purchasing ground for a park to be used as a recreational center for the development of sports, including basketball, baseball, track and field sports, in which many Greeks excel. One member of the local Chapter has been awarded a scholarship at Elon College, N.C. and expects to play baseball during his college career.
The young Greeks are exceedingly proud of their organization and, as their President expressed it: "We hope to make it an important link in the chain of American educational and fraternal societies."
