June 5, 1939
J. F. Jones (white)
Huntersville, N. C.
Farmer
Mary Wilson, writer
Mary Northrop, reviser
"Always Used to Drinkin' Liquor."
Original Names	Changed Names
Grandpa Jones	Grandpa Smith
William	James
Ernest	Clyde
Charlotte	Riverton
Mocksville	Yandle City
Wiley	Pink
Bessie	Mary
Dr. Tom	Dr. Joe
"Always Used to Drinkin' Liquor."
"I did have 'leven children but only eight of 'em is livin'. The other three died when they was small.
"I made it better when they was all little and with me than I have since they got grown. I was livin' on a farm up the country when the first four come. I never heard no quarrelin' from my wife about havin' children, so I guess it was all right. As for me, I was sure proud of 'em. It give me somethin' more to work, to have a good livin' for.
"Both my grandparents was in the Civil War. My daddy was grafted* to go but the War broke up before he was called. My grandpa Smith didn't have to serve. He was a prison guard for the Yankees at Salisbury. Sometimes there was as many as a hundred captured at one time and drove into the prison yard like a bunch o' hogs. Some of 'em was released when the war was over.
"All the learnin' I ever got was out in old log school houses, a-sittin' on slab benches. Sometimes when we had big snows, a bunch of us kids would take them benches out on a hillside and use 'em for sleds. It was fun goin' down but a horse of another color cornin' back. I didn't have a chance to go to school much because there was a great bunch of us and I had to help make the livin'. When I was goin' to school we didn't have no grades. They give us a blue back speller and when we went through it we started back at the beginning and went through it again. We had to study all the books over and over till we'd wore 'em out. I wouldn'ta minded goin' longer but I knowed there wasn't no use to say anything about it. My folks raised tobacco and I was needed at home. I shore did need what education I did get after I went to work for the Southern Railway.
*Note: Grafted was the word used.
"I went to work on it the twenty-eighth day of March 1907. I had been workin' at a lumber yard and veneerin' plant. Our shop was about fifty feet from the railroad so I used to see the section boss might near every day. He told me one day he needed an extra hand and I knowed it was dangerous workin' 'round the vat in the veneerin' plant so I quit and went to work for him in Yandle City at ninety cents a day. I worked three years for that much and then was raised to a dollar. I worked a year for a dollar a day then was promoted to relief foreman. That paid $1.30 a day. I stayed on that job a year. I was transferred to Willowboro and was made regular foreman. That paid me $132.50 a month. At first I lived in the section house up there beside the railroad. The company sold that house to a rich man uptown and he moved it and had it fixed up for his son to live in.
"I saved my money and bought fifty acres o' land and built this house on it. Three o' my boys was old enough then to help me. I never owned an automobile until after I built the house. I knowed from the way other folks lived that I'd be better off with a home than a car. I've bought two brand new ones and one second-hand. The boys ripped and raked and run around in 'em till they was soon tore up. I give my youngest child, James, the last one I bought, just to get rid of it.
"I was always used to drinkin' liquor. My daddy give it to me when I was little. One o' my boys, Clyde, and me went off one Sunday and drinked too much. We failed to go to work on Monday. Clyde was a foreman up the line. Both of us got laid off, or in other words, just plain fired. I always liked the work but I don't see how his wife coulda liked the man I had to work for.
"I didn't worry much about losin' my job, just went to work on the farm. I didn't have only two boys to help me but we done pretty well. Naturally I felt strange farmin' after workin' on the railroad twenty-five years.
"I never voted nothin' but the Republican ticket in my life. I was born and raised to be that and never had sense enough to change. There is good and had on both sides.
"I'd much rather talk about somethin' besides politics. I saw a man on the street in Riverton today offerin' to put the Lord's Prayer on a penny for a nickel. No, I didn't have him do it. I didn't want to swap a nickel for a penny even if it did look pretty. He had a machine to cut the prayer on the penny but I still don't understand how it could be done.
"I didn't never pretend to be no Christian. I always tried to do the best I could and treat everybody right. I have attended services at the Baptist church when I went at all. I sit here on the porch lota of evenin's now and listen to the nigger Holy Rollers shout and carry on. Believe me, they sound like they're tear in' the church down. It don't sound like church music, more like dance orchestra.
"I've spent a big pile of money for doctor bills. Some o' the family's been sick all the time, most. My wife was plumb down for three or four years and my oldest daughter, Mary, had to do the cookin'. Then Maw got high blood pressure and never got rid of it as long as she lived.
"Hard work and exposure is mostly the cause of my health bein' like it is now. I don't never aim to work no more if I can keep out of it. I got in a little trouble about liquor awhile back. I've always kept some for my own use. The law come one day and found 'leven jars hid under my corncrib. They took me to town and locked me up. I had a half-pint in my pocket that they didn't find so I drinked it while I was waiting to get out on bond. No'm, I got off pretty light. It ain't no use for anyone to tell me not to drink it for I'm goin' to do it as long as I can get it.
"Up till the time I went to workin' on the railroad, I never knowed what it was to go to the store and buy anything except flour to make bread. It was hard to get used to buy in' my rations but I tried to get things the children liked to eat. Maybe it wasn't what they should have everytime but at least their appetite was satisfied.
"I'm by myself a lot o' the time. My son's wife works up here in the cotton mill and when she ain't here to fix me somethin' to eat, I do without ruther than make a fire in my old Home Comfort to cook for myself. She's got a pretty new oil stove but I ain't never struck a match to it yet. I'm scared somethin' might get wrong with it and I wouldn't know what to do.
"There ain't no use to ask me whether I'm proud of what I've got--I couldn't help but be. I built this house in 1921. I already owned a house and lot up in Yandle City, so I sold it and put the money on this one. I told Maw I never intended to go back to live there unless I was run off and had to go. I thought six rooms was a plenty. Some folks don't like a porch all 'round the house like I got mine fixed but it shore is nice in the summer-time when I'm a-wantin' a cool place to rest.
"I didn't have electric lights for three or four years after I built but I wouldn't do without them now for anything. I got a light switch at the head of my bed. I have it right there handy so I can turn it on any time. I used to have a half a dozen lamps, but since I had the house wired they have disappeared. I don't even know what become of 'em.
"I guess it'd be mighty nice to have a bath-room but it's a lot o' trouble to have one put in. I'd have to have an electric motor to keep it cleaned out. I just ain't got in the notion much of havin' it done. There's three little small rooms besides my six big ones; either one of 'em could be fixed up for a bathroom. I keep a lot o' junk in 'em that I don't use much.
"Come on in the house. I've got a pretty dinin' room suit I'd like to show you. I paid $125 cash for it. I've sold it to one of my boys for half-price but he don't want to take it while I'm livin'. 'Tis nice, ain't it? Pink is the best child I've got, to me. He's the one I sold it to. He's been workin' on the railroad between twelve and thirteen years. Everyone of my boys has worked on the railroad some but Pink is the only one that's stickin' to it.
"Three of my boys has been pretty rowdy but they seem to have plenty o' friends. They will drink liquor and get drunk. I guess they took their likin' for drink after their Paw. Clyde is my oldest child. He was born in 1899. He's had to work mighty hard and he's helped me a lot. He's been workin' in the mill since he got fired off the railroad. He drinks a right smart o' whiskey bat I ain't never knowed him to lay out on his job. I just tell you right now, my children can't do no wrong as far as I can see. I guess most parents feel that way, leastwise I hope they do. I know I'd do anything in the world for mine.
"Mary come along next in 1901. 'Long then I used to bird-hunt with them old northern men. They'd give me a dollar a day to guide 'em around. Sometimes there'd be a whole lot of 'em but I didn't get no more pay. They did give me a gun and ammunition and all the good red rye liquor I could drink. They always had plenty to eat too. One o' the men was deaf and dumb. Everybody else was scared to go with him but I reckon I hunted with him ten years. He always had good luck. He sent me a fine new twenty-two rifle one time. One o' his friends told me he finally lost his mind and hung himself with a towel in an insane asylum.
"I lost my wife go in' on three years ago. She was go in' to Riverton to see the Christmas lights. Pink was takin' her. She had some snuff in her mouth and went to roll the glass down to spit. She took hold o' the wrong handle and the door come open. She fell oat, breakin' her arm and gettin' fatally hurt internally. The doctors couldn't do much for her. Anyway, she didn't live more'n three weeks after the accident. Life don't mean much to me since she left me but I have to grin and bear it.
"I haven't farmed but one year since she died. I've been rentin' my farm, to that nigger you see out yonder cultivatin' cotton. I shore hope he works better'n he done last year. Lots o' times when he needed to be in the field he'd be off pickin' berries. God knows how much he took out to the T. B. hospital up the road.. The hail ruined what little stuff he planted last year. I guess you remember that storm. It blowed the top off every out-buildin' I had. I've had 'em fixed since then. That nigger works the place for half he makes. From the looks of things now, he'll have a good crop. This land is sandy and easy to work.
"You ought to be here some day when I get my wood-saw started up. I've got a four-horse power railroad motor to pull my saw and it shore cuts up the wood in a hurry. There ain't so much wood on this farm but I ain't never had to buy none yet.
"You'll have to excuse me while I take some slop to that squealin' pig. 'Pears like if there ain't one thing needin' attention, it's another. I bet I got one of the biggest chickens you ever saw. That rooster is tall enough to stand on the ground and eat corn out o' my hip pocket. I have to watch him when I feed my pups or the pups won't get nothin'.
"Maybe you wonder why I have screen doors on my house and leave 'em standin' open, but I want the flies to feel free to come and go as they like. I don't think we sure bothered with them much, considerin' the hog pen and mule bam right here on the lot.
"I get a lot o' pleasure out o' talkin' with them patients from out here at the T. B. hospital. There's some of 'em that go for walks every day and they come here to my pump to get water. I let 'em help theirselves out o' the orchard too and they like that. There's a pretty big crowd o' patients at the hospital but not many of 'em are able to get out. They have a pretty place to stay, though, and I understand they are treated awful good.
"I've had a time with my foot. Doctor Joe said I wouldn't be able to walk on it for a long time but I'm try in' already. I had a little too much to drink and fell down. It'll get all right, I reckon."