Professor Tom Terrill, of the University of South Carolina at Columbia, has located another version of "The Pipeliner" in the WPA Papers, in the Oklahoma Historical Society, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. That version is dated June 15, 1939, and the interviewer is identified as Dan Garrison.
THE PIPELINER
"I'm waiting for the Rock Island freight to come by so I can get out of Seminole and get to Oklahoma City so I can grab the Frisco for East St. Louis. And I ain't going to stop in East St. Louis. I'm going to grab myself another freight, the B & 0, which will put me right in the Illinois Field. There's lots of work going in those new oil fields in Illinois, and that's just what I'm looking for. Work. And lots of it.
"I wouldn't have come to Seminole at all, if it hadn't been for my old man. He's a goddam fool. Seminole is dead. Most the folks in the county is on W.P.A., or relief, or stealing for a living.
"But Seminole ain't always been dead. There was plenty of work here in '28 when I got my first job in the oil fields. I was only fifteen, but I told the pipeline superintendent I was eighteen. The Carter Oil Company won't work a man under eighteen. I was big for my age, and as strong as I am now. Damn if I don't believe I was stronger. I et more often --- three squares a day. Now I'm lucky if I get one good meal a day.
"Before I tell you about all the work I've done, I better tell you about my old man and where I come from.
"That's what you want to know, ain't it?
"My name is Billy Bates and I was born in Webster county, Missouri in 1913. My birthday is next month. July 5th. Just missed the Fourth of July an hour. There was three of us boys. Carl, he was the oldest, then came me, and then Finley. We was raised by our grandpa and grandma out on the farm. Ma was sick all the time, and the old man only came home when he was broke and half-dead.
"My old man ain't worth a good goddam. He wouldn't farm, and he was too mean and ornery to keep a job. He tried something of everything. He was cooking for a repair crew oh the railroad when Carl was born. And about two years later when I was born, he was panning gold somewhere in Colorado. When Finley was born about two years later, the crazy bastard was in the State pen at McAlester for breaking in a store. He ain't no good.
"When he got out of the pen, we thought he was a changed man. He come home and joined the church. And he whooped to Jesus louder than the whole congregation put together. We was all proud of the old man. They had taught him to write a nice hand at the pen, and of an evening he would help us with our homework. He would do all the adding and taking-away in our arithmetic lessons, and tell us more about the United States than was in our geography books. My old man was a first-rate scenery bum. He had seen most of the country from the top of a box-car. And for the past few years, I've seen one helluva lot of scenery myself. He knew lots of history you don't get in a history book, too. About Frank and Jesse James, Belle Starr, Wild Bill Hitchcock, lots of Indian and cowboy stories and the like. Us boys thought he knew everything. He even told Bible stories, and made us pray before getting in bed.
"Never seen such a change come over a man. It kind of had me scared, because I really thought he had the Holy Ghost right inside of him. He told us he was full of the Holy Ghost, and the preacher said he was full of the Holy Ghost. Every time Ma looked at him, she said, 'Praise God!' Ghosts are something to be scared of, even a Holy Ghost.
"The old man was so damn good, that Uncle Orville offered him a job in the oil fields. Uncle Orville is Ma's brother, and veryreligious. He always gives one-tenth of all the money he makes to the Baptist Church. Now he feels as if he has a first mortgage on God Almighty Hisself. Uncle Orville worked his way up to be a chief engineer of a Carter casinghead gasoline plant in the Burbank Field. Carter #9. He had come back to the farm to see the old folks, and tell them what a big success he was in life. He put on a fine show. Us boys thought he was a double-rich oil man. He had nice clothes and a nice new car and a wife who looked like she hadn't done a lick of work in all her life. She was way younger than Uncle Orville. She couldn't of been over twenty-five. Us boys had thoughts about her, especially at night when we was in bed. But that's something else.
"So the old man went back to the Burbank Field with Uncle Orville and his fancy-looking wife. Ma and us boys were to come later. Uncle Orville said to wait and see if the old man was man enough to stick to a job and provide for his family. He gave a long sermon on the duties of a man to his family, and he gave this windy right before the old man. He said if the old man didn't toe the mark, stay sober and the like, he'd fire him just like he would fire any other of his men who didn't put out the work and act like a human being.
"Uncle Orville believes a man ought to be so grateful to a company for being allowed to work; he will work till he drops in his tracks, and praise God and the company for giving him that right. Uncle Orville was full of all that kind of crap. Like the old man, but in a different way, he was a goddam fool.
"The old man showed every sign of settling down. He worked in the yard gang at the gasoline plant, and put out a fair day's labor. And he only got drunk off the job, and only messed around with the whores. Which was all right. Ma had woman's trouble and couldn't do the old man no good, so she didn't begrudge him his whores. And drinking off the job was such an improvement from being drunk all the time, Ma didn't begrudge him his drinking. She didn't begrudge him nothing, as a matter of fact. She was too sick to fool with him. She did the housework when she could, and tried to teach us boys to be decent, not like the old man.
"The family moved to Burbank, and I saw an oil field for the first time. And from that first look, I've been sold on the oil fields. You couldn't tie me away from them. The family lived in a two room shack in a Shacktown near the gasoline plant. There was lots of kids in the Shacktown and we got in lots of trouble, and had one helluva good time. Carl, my oldes bud, was the ring-leader, and the orneriest one in the gang. He was just like my old man. That is, my old man before he got religion, and after he lost his religion.
"About the worst trouble us kids got in was when we clesed a gate-valve on a high-pressure gas line. You can guess what happened. The line whipped out of the ground and blew to hell and gone. You could hear the noise for miles, and part of the line was found over 100 yards away. And you can guess what happened to us kids. We got the hide whipped off of us. Uncle Orville said the next kids that messed around any of the company's belongings would he arrested and sent to the reform school at Granite, and that their old man, if he worked for Uncle Orville's company, would he fired.
"Let me tell you this before I forget it. Us Bates was told not to call Uncle orville, Uncle Orville. We was to call him Mr. Hefley. You see, a foreman, chief engineer, superintendent, and the like ain't supposed to work his kinfolks, even by marriage. So Uncle Orville wasn't Uncle Orville. He was the old man's boss, a guy by the name of Hefley. Ma even had to tell the neighbors, when they asked her what her name was before she got married, that it wasn't Hefley, but Wrenn. That was grandma's name before she got hitched to grandpa.
"At first I didn't understand the real reason why we was no longer related to Uncle Orville, but it suited me just fine. I didn't like the smug, important-acting bastard nohow.
"We was only in Burbank a short time when Mr. Hefley was transferred to Seminole to take over a gasoline plant the company had built there. The old man decided we better go to Seminole too. It was the best way of making sure he'd stay working for the company.
"So we upped and moved to Seminole, and lived in a tent the old man had traded for our shack in Burbank. We lived in that tent most of the summer, till the old man, us boys, and some of the neighbors got a two-room shack built. What lumber we couldn't swipe off the company leases, we had to buy. And lumber costed plenty of money in Seminole during the boom. When the shack was all finished, we had an open house. A box supper and a square dance.
"The folks in the Shacktown were always giving square dances at their shacks. It was lots of fun. We young boys would stand outside and look through the windows. We was too timid to dance with the girls. So we would stand on the outside and make nasty nasties about the girls, and grab each other and play the fool, then go laughing and whooping into the scrub oaks to hide, because one of the men inside dancing would always see us. He would come charging out into the yard, cussing and roaring like mad, forgetting the women folks could hear him. The old man would give us boys hell later that night. But it was lots of fun. I sure was ornery when I was 13.
"When I was 15, I was just as ornery. I wouldn't play the fool with the other boys no more. Us boys were messing around the girls. We were taking the girls behind tanks, in boiler houses, in the scrub oaks, and loving them up. I was wore out most the time, and Ma would beat me out of bed with the broom. I just couldn't come alive till after the sun went down. I was sure enough petered out.
"Us boys was going to school all along, but we didn't learn nothing. A kid can't study books in a boom town. There's too many things going on to keep his mind off books. The madness of an oil boom gets in your blood, and you go hog-wild yourself. Us oil field kids played hookey nearly every day, we fought like wildcats just for the fun of fighting, we stole everything we could get our hands on to sell for junk to get money for shows, chewing tobacco, cigarettes, and whisky. We'd even pool all our money together and get a whore to take us all on. We had lots of fun, and most of us had clap before we had hair on our body. If a boy of mine didn't mind his conduct no better than I minded my conduct when I was 15, I'd bust his dam fool head wide open. But between you and me, I had one swell time. Though them kind of carrying-ons ain't right for kids.
"Before I tell you about pipelaying, I want to say something about the folks that lived in Shacktowns. Because folks stay in shacks and live like animals, it ain't no sign that the folks ain't no good ---riffraff. The best people in the world live in oil field shacks. Just because some of the folks get drunk as hell and trifle on each other, it don't mean there ain't some decent folks living in that same shacktown. To show you how good and kind the folks was in the Shacktown we lived in, I'll tell you about how they treated Ma.
"Ma was sick all the time. She had a cancer and it was slowly killing her. There was nothing nobody could do to keep her from dying. She did die in the summer of 1931, and if the folks in Shacktown, who was working at the time, hadn't taken up a collection among theirselves, the county would of had to bury Ma. No one in our family had work at the time. But even before Ma died, the different women in the Shacktown would come over and take care of Ma, and cook meals for the old man and us boys. They would come over and take care of Ma, and cook meals for the old man and us boys. They would even put out our wash for us. And they was always bringing pies and cakes and the like to the shack. Those folks were fine people, ain't none better nowhere. I know, because I've been on the bum over most the country, and it's only them kind of folks, like the folks that lived in oil field Shacktowns, who will treat you like a human. Treat you like one of the family. Half-decent,
"Of course, there was some loose living, and some fights, and even a killing or two. But you will find the like in any group of people, whether they live in shacks or uptown houses. Simple folks seem rough and double tough because they ain't trained to cuss, fight, trifle, and kill in a refined way.
"And if anybody has something nasty to say about them folks who live in Shacktown, and hear them pop-off, they've got me to whip. And I don't mean maybe.
"Now to get back to telling about my work and how I've been trying to keep working. I got my first job in the oil field when I was 15. I've told you about that, ain't It How I had to lie about my age? Well, I got away with my lying because I was big enough and strong enough to put in a long day of hard slaving. I could hold my own with any pipeline cat on the line. And that's all the company cared about.
"We call the pipeliners, cats, if you're wondering what I'm talking about. There are lots of pipeline terms a man who ain't been around an oil field won't know. It took me some time to catch on. But I ain't going to try to explain the terms. I tried to explain them once to a man, and he didn't know no more what I was talking about than before I started all my explaining.
"The important things about pipelining is laying the pipe, digging the ditch, and burying the pipe. Some times we paint the pipe and wrap it with a certain kind of paper so the pipe will last longer, won't rust thin too quick.
"In the old days when we used nothing but screw pipe, companies and contractors worked different size gangs, depending on the size of the pipe. One rush job I worked on there was over 100 cats on the gang. It was an 8 1/2 inch line. We sure rolled pipe on that job.
"Today most of the lines are electrically welded, and it takes only a few men to lay a line. Pipe-laying and ditching machines have put lots of men on the WPA or on the road. Machines have took all the life and fun out of pipelaying. Most of the old main line cats have disappeared. You run across them once in awhile in some jungle, sleeping off a drunk, or scheming how to get more canned-heat or bay rum or just anything that's got a kick for another drunk. Being idle is killing the old main line cats off.
"When I went to work for the Carter, there was an old main line cat, called Fox, doing the stabbing. A stabber is the man who runs the pipelaying gang. He stabs the new joint of pipe into the joint just laid, and gives all the orders to the cats. Fox was skinny, flat chested, and looked like death on stilts, but he was as strong as an ox. He sure could handle pipe. I learned all I know about pipelining from him.
"There are other pushers, or foremen, on the job besides the stabber. One old boy is in charge of the right-a-way gang, the gang that goes ahead of the pipelaying gang to clear away trees and brush. Another old boy will be in charge of the ditch digging gang. And still another old boy will be in charge of the gang that paints and wraps the pipe and lowers it in the ditch. The old boy in charge of the ditching gang usually takes care of the back-filling, covering up the pipe. Over all these pushers is the pipeline superintendent.
"Now we'll lay a joint of pipe so you will know how it's done. We'll let Fox be the stabber. This is something like how he throws his voice:
"All right, cats, let's get going and roll some pipe. You pipe-hustlers, bring up the next joint. Come on get the lead out. All right, cats, up in the round-eye. Let me feel it. There she is. Catch her there, jack. She's loose as a goose. Wrap your tails around her, cats, and give her an honest roll.'
"All that's happened so far is a new joint of pipe has been stabbed by Fox into the Joint just laid. The men put ropes, tails, around the pipe and roll up the slack. When the pipe gets tight, the cats take off their tails, and put on the lay tongs, or hooks, and roll the joint till she's plenty tight. Then the cats take off the lay tongs, pick up the other tools they use, and rush to the next joint to he laid.
"Fox would tell the cats to do what I've just told you, put on the tongs and all the rest of it, like this:
"'Take off your tails, cats, and put on the hooks. Deuce and four. Ace and three. Now all together. Hit her like you live. Hard. High like a tree and down to the velvet. Bounce, you cats, bounce. Load up on them hooks, you snappers. That's high. Ring her off, collar-pecker. Up on the mope. Out, growler-board, Next joint.'
"That'll give you an idea of how a joint of screw pipe is laid. On a welded line you don't have no stabber singing out the orders. And you don't have no laughing, proud-of-their-work cats. On a welded line only the welder is proud of his work, because it's the weld that puts the joints together, and not the muscle and sweat of a strong-back, weak-minded pipeline cat.
"There's a saying in the oil field that when a man can't do nothing else he goes to pipelining. And thare's a lot of truth in that saying. Pipelining ain't no picnic. Even if I do sound like I'm bragging, it takes a real man to be a good pipeline cat. The work will kill the average man, and lots of men have tried pipelining, but only for a spell, They can't take it. Digging ditch all day ain't no snap in itself, hut us cats dig ditch to rest up between pipelaying jobs. Yen, a man goes pipelining when he can't do nothing else, but he don't last a helluva long time.
"Pipeline cats is considered the lowest of the low, but we know more about how an oil field runs than all the punks in all the offices put together. And we didn't get what we know out of a book. We got it by laying pipe. You see, there are different kind of lines; oil, gas, water, steam, electric conduits, gasoline, and some others. Pipelines in the veins of the oil field. Oil lines from wells to oil batteries to storage tanks to loading racks. Gas lines from wells to gasoline plants, or gas lifts, back to the wells. Some lines are vaccuum, some high-pressure. Thousands and thousands of miles of pipelines from one oil field to another oil field, from oil fields and gas fields to cities. And some of them cities are thousands of miles away. It's something.
"And us pipeline cats, the lowest of the low, riffraff, laid all them lines. And we're goddam proud of our work.
"I worked for the Carter from 1928 tille the spring of 1930. It was in 1930 that the depression hit the oil fields, and thousands of workers was laid off. Most of the companies did away with their pipeline departments, and contracted out their work. And the men who went to contracting were no better than scab-herders. They cut wages way down and worked the men like hell to get the job done quick, and when the job was flanged up, the men were run off.
"The depression sure put the skids under my family. The old man was laid off. Carl, who was working for the Bulf, was laid-off. And I was laid off. Finley never did get to work. The family was flat broke, we hadn't saved a dime.
"Then Ma died, and the neighbors helped to put her away. Carl went to stealing oil field equipment in a big way, got caught, and was sent up. Finley took out on a freight to look for work, and I heard he was killed in Amarillo. An old boy I used to work with said he was catching the same freight out of Amarillo for Denver that Finley was catching, and the freight was too hot to grab, but Finley tried to grab it anyhow and was thrown under the wheels. The old boy had the name of being a liar, so I ain't sure what happened to Finley. I ain't seen him since he left home in the summer of 1932, right after the old man married that eighteen year old girl.
"The old man after he got laid-off went to the dogs. He lost his religion. He said he had been trying to do the right thing by his family for years. He had worked hard, kept a roof over our heads and food on the table. But nobody, not even God, gave a good goddam how decent he was living. What was his reward for a righteous life --- starvation! The old man went to drinking in a big way. He was never sober, He went to bootlegging so he could have enough whisky for his-self. And then he married an eighteen year old girl. The old man was bughouse.
"I horsed around Seminole for a time, picking up a pipeline job now and then, but not getting enough work to live. So I took out. I've "been all over the country. I did a little pipelaying in East Texas, Lousiana, New Mexico and Kansas. But I didn't make a big enough stake on any job to keep me off the bum. I've been leading a dog's life. And if I wasn't still young, I couldn't take it. And if I had good sense, I wouldn't take it. I'd go to hijacking.
"Not being sure where I'll be next, I ain't never gotten married, though I've lived with a couple of women. When I get married, I want to make a home and have lots of kids. But it don't seem like I'll ever have a home.
"I come back here to Seminole because I was lonely. I wanted to see the old man, no matter if he is a goddam fool, and I wanted to see if any of the other boys had come home. But our shack is even gone, and I can't find no trace of the old man. All the neighbors know is he has upped and left months ago. The eighteen year old girl had quit him.
"The old man might be up in Webster county, Missouri, but I doubt it. Because grandpa and grandma ain't on the farm no more. I think grandpa is dead. I know that grandma is living with Mr. Hefley. I can call him Uncle Orville now, but he'll always he Mr. Hefley to me. Mr. Hefley is somewhere in Illinois, working for the company.
"And that's where I'm heading, but I ain't going to look up Mr. Hefley. If I can't get work on my own, I Just won't get work, that's all. One thing sure, I'll get by.
"Boy, I'd give anything if I could get on a screw pipe job, with 100 laughing and Joking cats, and an old main line stabber, like Fox, throwing his voice.
"'Up in the round-eye, cats! Catch here there. Jack! Wrap your tails around her, cats, and give her an honest roll!"
