Crew Farm 
Pleasant Hill, N. C. Jan. 10, 1939 B. K. H. 
DONA BALMER MALE, "WHITE 
"Come in if you can get in. We're tore up, wait in' to move. For two weeks I been packed up ready, hopin' every day 
Charlie would come in and say he has found us a place to move to. Looks like we ain't goin' to get no house this year. 
This un belongs to Mr. Winfield Crew; he's done give us orders to get out, but you can't move right out in the road 
'less you're put out like my sister was. Yeh, Mrs. Jordan is my sister; the law moved her things right out in the 
highway three years ago this March." Dona Balmer Male, without removing her soiled slat bonnet, sits in the corner of 
her dirty fireside. 
"I don't blame Mr. Crew nary bit, for we ain't done what we said we'd do. He ain't neither, but that don't free us. We 
come here last year with the understandin' we was to tend a few acres round the house on shares. Soon as crop time 
come, he said he'd have to plant grain here so some o' the rest o' the tenants could have the acreage, but he'd give me 
hoe work to do, and we could stay on here in the house for five dollars a month. I told him I'd do 
5679 

it. He never give me a day's work the whole year. Every penny I made was three dollars and sixty cent. I give him that. 
If I hadn't been in the horspital from June to August I would o' made more some way or 'nother. 
"Before Christmas, Mr. Crew come and said he hadn't been here to ask us for the rent, for he knowed we didn't have 
it; we was welcome to the five dollars a month we had promised to pay, but he needed his house this comin' year for 
somebody else, and we'd have to get us another place. Even if he did give the rent to us, I don't feel right about it when 
I bargained to pay five dollars a month• 
"One thing that's ail the country right now is rentin' land to the governor. Everywhere Charlie goes to look a farm, they 
tell him he's got too big a force. It use to be you didn't have enough force for 'em. When my daddy sharecropped in his 
life-time, they was fourteen of we younguns to work, and we use to make good crops too I'm tellin' you. Now they say 
it pays better to rent the land out to the governor, and they don't want sharecroppers with more'n two or three hands; 
big fam'lies is a drag and dead expense since the cotton acreage has been cut. 
"They's nine of us, 'sides my brother there in the corner. He's named Jim Balmer, after my daddy. Up to the 

-3- 
time he got disable to work he had a job on the road, but now he's too old and afflicted. He's blind and he's got— 
other trouble. I took him here with me. to look after him best I could. They's seven younguns—David Lee, seventeen; 
Thomas Jefferson, sixteen; Charlie, fourteen; Louise, 'leben; Alvin, nine; my two twins, William Henry and Clayra 
Virginia, seven apiece. One died when he was a baby. 
"All but the two oldest is in school to-day. David Lee knocked off in the third grade, and Thomas Jefferson in the 
second. Looked like Thomas Jefferson was the backwards child I ever seen. When he use to set down at night and try 
to read his lesson over, looked like he'd go all to pieces 'cause he couldn't get it. He'd slam his book shut and get out in 
the air. None never got past the fou'th grade. **otise is in the fou'th now, and Clayra Virginia and William Henry in 
the second. I'm the one wants to see the chil'en go to school. I sees the need of it. Charlie never went but three years; I 
had to stop in the fou'th reader. It was a pore chance to get to school when I growed up; it was too far to walk, and 
they wa'n't no time neither. The truck comes by and hauls these younguns now the seben miles to the Seaboard school. 
"The main reason they ain't been reg'lar is 'cause 
- - 
5681 

they ain't had nothin' to wear. This summer I went to the Roanoke Rapids Horspital and had a bad operation. When I 
got home in August the doctors told me to lie around five weeks, not to lift nothin' or do no work. Soon as I could, I 
went to the kitchen to help Louise out. I could set at the stove, keep a fire goin', and 'tend to what was on the stove. 
Louise does hate cookin'. Some nights when I'd tell her it was time to make a fire to fix supper, she'd say it hadn't 
seemed like five minutes since she come out'n the cook room. Soon as I could half way take holt, she'd run to the 
woods and stay hid till supper was cooked. Louise done mighty well to be only just 'leben though. She cooked and 
washed and tended to the house the whole time I was gone. She could wash the everyday rags so they'd pass, but the 
step-out clothes was all lyin' here dirty and nobody to wash and iron 'em for the younguns to wear to school. So 'fore I 
got out'n the bed good, I had 'em bring me a cup tin o' water where I could set down and wash out a few pieces at the 
time. Then I set still and let 'em bring me a hot iron so I could fix enough clothes to start some of 'em to school. I 
couldn't have my younguns goin'to school dirty. They didn't have changin' clothes, that's the truth, till two of the 
teachers, Miss Long and Miss G-arriss, got the welfare to bring 'em 'nough 

to wear to school. 
"Miss Garriss is a good creetur. She's been givin' me one of her old dresses and some shoes every winter till this; she 
hain't sent nothin' yet. These shoes I got on is gettin' old now, but if I oan get a little strip o' leather to patch the 
bottoms with they'll go me another twelve months. This dress she give me I kept long as I could for step-out, but it's 
drawed up and faded so from the tub I had to let the hem out; they wa'n't no white thread in the house how come I to 
tack it up with black. It's too little round the waist now. You can see I'm swelled up; look here under my jacket. This 
knot that goes from my stomach clear down to my side has been here every since my operation. My sister thinks I'd 
ought to go back to the horspital and have a X-ray to see what it is, but I think it's my kidneys swelled up. 
"I ain't tellin' you no lie; it's the truth if I'm settin' here: we ain't got nothin' I Like I told the welfare when she come to 
see me, if you don't believe me search the house. We got three beds; three sleeps in two of 'em and four in the other. 
They's just two rooms, 'sides the log kitchen there at the back. That old bureau, the trunk, the chest in the hall, these 
chairs we're settin' on—it ain't much of a load when our stuff's movedt 
5683 
-5- 

-? 
-7- 
give you some thin' feat sometimes. So I'm bound to say the governor has done some good. We get a little somethin' 
now. Last time Charlie got his slip from the relief he was allowed a sack o' flour, three pounds o' butter, a box o' 
prunes, and raisins. It helps, but it don't go fur enough, not with ten to feed. Jim gets seven dollars and a half from the 
old age pension a month. That come from the governor too, I didn't vote for him. I ain't never voted in my forty three 
years. I don't believe in it, not for women. It's out o' their place. Charlie ain't voted in two year. Last spring Mr. Crew 
come by here in his car huntin' for Charlie to go to Pleasant Hill with him and vote for Mr. Horace Ellis against Mr. 
Stephenson. He picked up the boys and rode round right smart lookin' for Charlie. 'Tain't no use for pore folks to vote 
nohow; money's goin' to carry it. My vote 
weighs as heavy as the rich man's? It may, but things is always worked out the way the money man says. The pore 
man's vote don't get him nothin'. 
"I don't even go to church, much less to vote. I'm ashamed to tell it, but I ain't been but once in thirteen year. That was 
one night last year when the meetin' was goin' on at Bethel. Charlie and all the younguns that's old enough belongs at 
Bethel, but I'm still a member at 
i)B85 

Elam I reckon. The younguns walks the four mile to Bethel, hut the last time they come home at sunset so broke down 
they ain't tried it since. The reason I quit church was 'cause I didn't have nothin' fittin' to wear. 
"One reason we never had nothin' is 'cause so many folks we've worked for ain't treated us right. When me and Charlie 
got married eighteen years ago, Charlie sold out his share o' his daddy's farm, six or eight acres, to his brother Andrew. 
Andrew promised him if he ever wanted it back he'd sell it to him dollar for dollar. Now he says Charlie shouldn't 
have it for twice what he sold it for. My own daddy never owned any land, but he stayed on one place 47 years. After 
we was married we commenced sharecroppin' for William Cook over at G-umberry. We had six acres planted in 
cotton, and that year we made a bale to the acre. When the crop was in, Cook taken every one o' them six bales and 
left us without ary single thing. Mr. Zeno at Gumberry told Charlie he wouldn't stand for it, he'd go to law. I begged 
Charlie to, but he wouldn't say a hummin' word I 
"Then we moved to Mr. Matt's place, Dr. Stephenson's son. While we was there we got everything that was due us. 
Mr. Matt is dead, but I can speak my word for him; 
5686 

-9- 
he was a good fair and square man to deal with. From Mr. 
Matt's we went to L. C. Cook's, William Cook's brother. 
Like Mr. Matt he was a fair man. He was mean to his self 
and to his fam'ly, but he shore paid his debts. If he 
owed you five cent he'd walk to your house to bring it to 
you. I picked cotton for him, two hund'ed and fifty and 
three hun'ded pounds a day along then and every Sad-d'y 
here come Mr. Cook to pay off in full. He's dead, but he 
shore was a honest man when he was livin'• 
"Next we moved to Mr. Will Massey's. He's dead now 
too, but I can't speak no good word for him. We tended a 
one-horse like we had been doin' at the other places. All 
the summer we kept the farm in good shape and laid it by 
nice. Mr. Massey told us when we went there if we'd clean 
up a new ground we could have what we'd make on it the 
first year, and he'd give us five dollars. We dug up roots, 
busted up stumps, broke up the ground, and made one more 
big crop o' corn on that piece o' cleared land I Then Mr. 
Massey come down to our house and forbid us to touch the 
corn. The five dollars I wa'n't 'spectin' nohow, but I 
told Charlie the corn was mine, and I was goin' to take 
my sack and fill it up with roas'in'years I didn't care 
what Will Massey said I Do you know Charlie wouldn't le'me 
-get nary year? 
56S7 

-10- 
"While we was waitin' for the cotton to open so we could house the crop, Mr. Massey's cotton opened and they started 
pickin'. Ours was slow a-openin', and Mr. Massey saw a way he could get us out o' our crop. He accused us o' not 
tendin' to our farm. So he had Sheriff J'yner come over and serve papers on us to make us move out. Sheriff said 
looked like we had done everything we could unless we had picked off the green bolls, and it was a mean trick to 
order us off, he thought. But we had to move out in September and leave all we had worked for a whole year, and I 
mean worked. I told Mr. Massey if he didn't mind I'd live to see the day when he'd tote his little bucket to the store for 
two pounds o' lard and a little piece o' meat, just like I had to do. He admitted he had treated us wrong, but he said 
folks had treated him wrong too. I told him that wa'n't no reason for takin' it out on us. You know I lived to see the day 
that Mr. Massey had to tote his little bucket to the store for a pound or two o'lard just like I had to do I I thought about 
what I told him, and I reckon he did too. 
"We moved to the Shaw place, but we couldn't stay 
-
there. It was ha'nted. One day while I was in the hall, 
5688 

-11- 
I heard somethin' fall like a sack o' corn from the ceilin' 
of the room where my baby was asleep. It woke her up and 
she started cryin1. I went in to see what in the world 
had fell. They wa'n't a thing out o' place. Then I heard 
-somethin' like a sack o' corn bein' drug along the floor. 
I grabbed the baby, run out in the yard, and wouldn't go 
back till Charlie come home. One night we wanted a drink 
o' water, and Charlie said he'd go to the well and draw 
a bucket o' fresh. I asked him if he wanted me to go 
with him. He said naw, he wa'n't afraid. I noticed he 
wa'n't gone long. Next mornin' he told me when he got 
to the well a man without a sign of head stepped up close 
to him. Others has seen that headless man. Nights when 
we'd lie down we'd hear somethin' out on the back porch 
go 'Oo-oo-oo-oo-oo I Oo-oo-oo-oo-oot' A colored woman 
who lived there 'fore we did told us it was her husband, 
that he made a fuss 2>ike that when he died on our back 
porch. We couldn't stay there. 
"Next we sharecropped with Mr. Walter Hancock, a good 
man. When we was there we got everything we was due. 
From there we went to the Woodruff house, which folks says 
is ha'nted. One night we made a pallet in the hall, but 

-1Pbefore 
we went to sleep they was a funny fuss in one of the rooms; sounded like somebody openin' a squeakin' door. I 
told Charlie to get up; we was goin1 over that house 'fore I was willin' to close my eyes. Not a thing was out o' place. 
Soon as we lay down again that same squeaky noise started. We never aaw nothin' while we stayed at the Woodruff 
place, but we heard plenty. 
"The last man we sharecropped for was Mr. Eugene Vasse*. He furnished us $15 a month from the time we 
started the crop till July. Then he cut off, and all we 
had to live on was what we could work out by the day. We went ahead and housed the crop, and Mr. Vasser sold it. 
We asked him for a statement of how we stood; he refused to tell us. We kept on after him about settlin' up with us till 
we got him fretted, and he ordered us off the place. We kept stayin' on, waitin' for a settlement. Then he had a writ 
served on Charlie to appear in magistrate's court. Charlie knew 'twa'n't no use to go, and didn't, but the law sent him 
word to get out in seven days. Since then we've lived 'bout and 'bout. I couldn't say how many times we've moved— 
right smart I know. Last year we come here to farm with Mr. Crew, but got knocked out o' that. So this makes five 
year we ain't farmed none." 
suee 

In the pause while Dona adjusts the dirty slat bonnet on her head, Charlie Male drawls in a flat monotone his estimate 
of mankind, Charlie—with thin reddish hair, watery blue eyes, a pasty face devoid of animation— states his case as a 
matter of fact, without resentment. 
"I've had dealings with a lot o'men. Two thirds of 'em is crooked. They's a few good men, but in business most of 'em 
takes advantage. After we lost out a-share-croppin' five year ago, I begin to cut pulk wood all th'ugh the country. It's 
the hardest work in the world. If you get anything done it means you got to go to the woods early and stay late, 
'specially when the days shortens. I've cut more pulk wood than any man in the state. I reckon I've walked more miles 
than any man. They use to call me the fastest walker in the country, but gradually I've slowed down some. I had to 
buy me a bicycle to get about on. We never had no car. 
"Me and the boys makes about five dollars a week cuttin' pulk wood. Durin' November and December we cut for 
Eugene Yasser here close to Jack Swamp. We told him 'stead o' payin' us by the week we wanted it all in a lump sum 
just 'fore Christmas. We knowed if it come in by dribbles it'd get away from us, and we wanted some clothes and a 
little money to spend for Christmas. Just 

-14- 
before Christmas, we went to Mr. Vasser and asked him to square up; he owed us |J5* He said he wa'n't goinf to pay 
us; he never give no reason. So it meant two months o' hard work come to nothin'." 
"It meant we had not nary thing for Christmas Day but a hoe-cake o' corn bread, that's what it meant I" Dona 
exclaims. "And it meant my baby had to wake up Christmas mornin' and find no Santy Claus here. Clayra Virginia 
come home from school on Friday and said Santy Claus come to their room that evenin' and told 'em he'd bring all the 
little girls and boys whatever they was mint to ask for. She asked Santy for a big doll and a tricycle? I told Clayra 
Virginia you had to pay Santy for him to come to see you. 'No, you don't, mammy,' she said, 'He told us all we had to 
do was ask for what we wanted.' 
"One of the younguns got this little Santy Claus," Dona reaches to the mantel for a miniature plaster paris Santa with 
an empty bag, "off'n the Christmas tree one year at school. Clayra Virginia wanted it took off'n the mantel-piece and 
hid, 'cause one of the boys told her if sure-'nough Santy come and saw another one here he'd go back and not leave 
nothin'. 'Mammy,' she said to me 'fore she went to sleep, 'don't forget to hide that 
5692 

-15- 
Santy on the mantel.' 
"Next mornin' when she woke up she looked all around the room for a doll and tricycle. She really thought it was goin' 
to be here. I couldn't help water comin' in my eyes when I saw how put out she was. 
"It takes every bit o' what Charlie can make cuttin' wood to go on the table. Most time it means just bread, no meat. 
Charlie sowed a few turnips, but he didn't have nothin' to 'nurse 'em with; so the turnips failed this year. If I hadn't 
been sick, I'd o' scraped me up some 'nure from somewhere, if out'n the road. I always raise a gyarden when I'm up 
and about. This summer 'fore I went to the horspital my butter bean vines was mighty green and pretty. I'd hear folks 
passin' 'iong the road say: 'Look a-yonder. She ain't had a bug on her vines this year, and they've pure eat mine up. 
That's what I call luck.' I wanted to hollder back: 'Yen, if you'd had as many backaches as I've had, your vines'd be 
green too.' I had bugs all right, but I kept 'em picked off; I had to, 'cause I didn't have no pizen to put on the vines like 
other folks. 
"We got a few chickens still, no pigs, no cow—I wouldn't have a cow, not for my part. When I was in the 
. 

horspital, Dr. Jarman would ask me every day if I was i'arin' all right. Finally I told him I was gettin' plenty o' vittles, 
but I couldn't eat 'em unless they left out the butter and milk. He turned to the nurse and told her to see to it that I had 
vittles fixed the way I liked it. Next day the stuff still had milk and butter in it. Some of the others told me they'd 
raise the devil if they was me, but I said I didn't go to the horspital to have no argue with 'em. I can't stand milk and 
butter on nothin'. The younguns likes it all right if they could get it. Charlie does buy 'em a can o' milk sometimes. 
"Even my collards failed me this year, the first year I been without greens to boil. Some days when we get burned up 
with bread, I go up to the collard patch and hunt around till I find some collard stalks and a few buds and green leaves; 
then I come home and make us a pot o' soup. 1 told 'em all the other day the hogs wouldn't pick over what I found to 
make a meal out fn. They's a sayin': 'Little goat, if you are able, Please bring me my little table.' I tell 'em my gyarden 
has well been the little goat here. 
"The boys thought they would have 'em a little extry money for Christmas; so they caught 'em four 'possums 

and sent the skins to a fur house up north. A check come for twenty cent, five cent a 'possum, and now nobody won't 
cash that check. They're dryin' more 'possum skins now, but it shore is disheartenin' at five cent apiece. 
"Ne'er mind! When the lizard crawls again I'll be with 'eml" ^ona laughs, and her face is transformed by the sudden 
animation and spirit. "When it's warm enough for lizards and snakes to crawl I'll get out and start atain too. I ain't 
afraid o'work. Hard work is my pleasure. Mr. Hancock told me one time I was tougher'n any mule that brayed, don't I'd 
done been under the clods. I've done some o' every kind o' work a man ever done except ditchin'. I've cut pulk wood, 
I've busted middles—I admit I never could run rows, but after they is laid off I can plow good as a man—I've cut and 
penned cord wood, hoed, picked cotton, shook peas, cleaned up new ground, shrubbed land—you can't name nothin' I 
ain't done some of. 
"If you had come last summer 'fore I got sick you wouldn't believe this is the same place. I had pretty flowers growin' 
in the yard. Folks would pass by and say it was the prettiest yard along the road. It ain't been swept but once since 
June. We're leavin' the house 

-18- 
and yard in bad shape for the next ones that moves in here, but that's the way we found it. Where we go we'll find a 
mess; so I just well to save myself to clean up there. No since in breakin' myself down on this old house, weak as I 
still am from my operation. Some of 'em said soon as I come from the horspital I would kill myself workin', but I told 
'em naw, 1 was goin' to set on it. And I have tried to favor myself all I could. 
"These cracks in the floor gets so cold sometimes I stuffs rags in 'em to keep my feet from freezin'. I don't want no 
pneumonia here. Except for my operation, we've had right good health lately. Thomas Jefferson use to have fits, but he 
outgrowed 'em. My two twins had some kind o' spells—what'd the doctor call 'em, Charlie? Yen, that's right, 
conjustions. I think it was spasms. They'd get stiff as a board when the fits'd take 'em and then limp as a dish rag. I 
set with Clayra Virginia on one arm and William Henry on the other a many a night till my arms would ache off 
near'bout. Last one William Henry had was here last summer. Dr. Vick come once and give 'em some big white tablets 
to swallow without any water. He said soon as I saw a fit comin' on to make 'em swallow a pill, dry. But I was afraid 
it would choke my babies; so I melted the tablets 
5696 

-6- 
I'm tellin' it just like it is: we ain't got nothin'." 
The two iron beds are covered with dirty guilts• Ragged old coats are stretched over the lower sashes of the windows. 
The floor, in which big cracks admit damp air from under the house, is stained with grease spots and snuff-dipping. 
Flies swarm around two green 'possum hides that hang in the hall. A stench of unwashed bodies, tobacco juice burned 
on dog-irons, rats' nests, squalor is over all. 
"Back yonder when the dispression was on, we was in a wus' fix than we is now. We didn't have a rag o' clothes, 
nothin' to eat, no mattress to sleep on. I went in the fields, got hay grass, and covered it with gayno bags for us to lie 
on. Mrs. Ramsey was the welfare then, and she was one good woman. When she come and saw the fix we was in, she 
brought us mattresses, bed quilts, clothes, and boxes o' food. My two little twins was babies then, and she fitted them 
out in nice clothes. I hated it when she lost her job; looked like nobody couldn't done no better than Mrs. Ramsey. 
"Do pray don't get Hoover back in I It was 'eat and wear if you can' when he was there. I don't know nothin' 'bout the 
man that's in now; he may be all right; he does 
r - 
5«84 

-19- 
in some water and let 'em take it that way. 'TwAi't nothin' but asfidity nohow. We don't have the doctor here. They's 
nothin' to pay with; so what's the use to send for him? All we can do when we get sick is to tough it out best we can. 
I've really suffered for the doctor since I come back from the horspital, more'n once. 
"We don't go nowheres. The boys hunts and gets to a picture show once 'n awhile. I been to one in my life and liked it 
fine. Hard work is my pleasure. I go to see my sisters sometimes, but they're scattered round so bad it's unconvenient 
for me to get to 'em often. Louise stays over in Halifax County, the one that married June Harlow. Louise couldn't stay 
with her first husband. June had been a-courtin' of her some time when she fell in love with another feller and married 
hinu June said to her the day she was married: 'All right, you can ride gaily to-day, but before a year's gone you'll be 
brought back to your daddy's door.' Shore 'nough she was. 'Twa'n't long after she was married she taken bad off. 
Nothin' they done wa'n't no good. Finally she got so low they put her bed on a wagon and brought her back to her 
daddy's, just like June said. 
"One day June Harlow come in to see Louise and told 
5637 

-20- 
her if she'd marry him she would shore get well. Louise said she'd do anything to get her health back. June went in the 
field, dug up nine little marvels, and brought 'em in to Louise. 'Here's the conjure,' he told her. 'This is what's been 
your trouble. Somebody buried these little marvels, and you never would o' got no better if I hadn't found 'em.' She 
married him after she saw she couldn't live with her other husband. 
"My brother's wife was conjured one time too. A woman come to her house to borry some meal. While my brother's 
wife was out gettin' the meal, the woman slipped some wads o' paper in between the slats of her bonnet. My brother's 
wife got bad off and had to go to a conjure doctor. He told her where to find the conjure and warned her never to borry 
or lend anything to that woman no more. Tou know if it hadn't been so, the doctor wouldn't known nothin' 'bout that 
wad o' paper in the bonnet." 
"They's a feller down the road—Alvin Garrison's his 
name— that's in a terrible shape right now from bein' 
• conjured," Charlie asserts mildly. "Isaac Mayo, a 
colored man, had a spite at old man Garrison some years 
ago and conjured Alvin. He got wild, tore his clothes 
off'n hisself, and was in a rage. One day when Isaac 
come to shave Mr. Garrison, he patted Alvin on the head 
[>B!>8 

-21- 
and said: 'You been tearin' your clothes and ragin' long enough now.' Alvin got all right for awhile. Since then Isaac 
has conjured him again and put him back right where he was. Alvin is so wild they aimed to take him to the insane 
asylum in Raleigh yesterday, but they didn't get off. I believe in conjurin'; they is such a thing." 
Dona follows the visitor into the front yard and confides: "I didn't tell you in there, but they took all my female organs 
out at the Rapids this summer. I got in the horspital th'ugh my son James; he was born five years before I was 
married. James works in the mill, and he paid for my operation* 
"This yard looks like the buzzards has had it, but you wait: When the lizard crawls again, I'll come out J" 
LE 
¦
5699 

