FROM THE MOUNTAINS FARING
"Calvin and me come from the mountains, for Calvin knowed he could make a living in some way or another about town doing odd jobs. So we left the farm. We fared on down to Knoxville. Our times has not been easy here. But then times has always been hard with us. We was both born poor. Lived poor all our lives. All in all though, it's a lots easier making out here than it was back there on the farm. We ain't never had to ask a penny off of no one. Never asked the government to put us on relief, neither."
Lola Rucker rocked slowly as she talked. Large bony hands rested on the arms of her chair. Her drab gray calico dress was tucked close under her to clear the floor.
"Calvin's handy with tools," she said, "and always has been. He can fix a chair or whatever kind or furniture you've got that looks past doing, and it will be stout as new. He can build things, just anything, from the ground up. He's good on porches and stairs steps. Most anything about a house that needs righting, Calvin can git it in shape. He does a heap or patching screens and painting roofs. He's not a regular plumber and electrician but he does some of that work, too."
She pushed a dangling hair pin back to place. Her straight black hair, streaked with gray, was tightly braided in one plait and balled on the back of her head. Her thin face was lined and worn but there was no hardness in her expression.
"This place here we live in, it's not any great shakes or a place. But we're going to stay on as long as we can. Every time we've moved from here to somewheres on the edge of town, Calvin's lost work. Here he's in close-catch of town folks that wants a job done right off. The biggest trouble about living in a basement like this is they's not any room for spreading. Well, three rooms is enough for me and Calvin and Cap, even if they's not big rooms. This here sitting room is space enough to hold the parlor furniture and cap's bed. Cap's just only fifteen but he's near outgrowed that bed back yonder. He has to lay catercorners of it now. Ought to be some way Calvin could stretch it out, seems to me. I don't see no way we could put a double bed in that space even if we had cash to buy it--which we ain't.
"Me and Calvin takes the back room. They's no grate in it, but some heat comes from the kitchen. That kitchen has a sink with running water, and that's the closest we ever come to having a bathroom. Well-a-day, not having such means less to us than most. Coming from the mountains, we is use to a wash pan and a tub for cleaning up. We has a half-way sort of a little water privy in the kitchen closet, but it don't flush right. I can tell you, though, it beats trotting out in the back yard in the weather.
"The last of the three rooms we has is damp and cold without you keep a fire going all the time. And we can't do that. The basement's about all that's brick about the whole house. That's the reason our rooms stays that way. The house up above us is in awful shape. The roof leaks. It lets the water come right down the side of the walls. when a hard rain comes they's water all over the kitchen floor. I just reach the broom out. I keep sweeping it to the back door. The walls stay so wet half the time that wallpaper just pops off everywhere."
Lola shifted her position. She pointed toward the ragged corner of the ceiling. "And look at that plastering back there in the corner. Dropped smack off last week. Ah Lord. "
"I guess we can't expect just a whole lot for the rent we pay. The landlord never misses coming a Monday for our two-fifty. But fixing things up is another tale and it's never told. He won't do a blessed thing about this wetness and it matters not how much we howl. Tells us now that the government is planning to tear down every house in the block and put up some sort that ain't tenements. Well, 'twon't be no trouble to tear down. Just give a push, and not such a hard one neither, and the last one of these houses will come down and never a wrecking tool needed to holp out. And the neighborhood is worse and far worse than the houses. Oh, I know it's no place to bring a youngin up at all. I thank the Lord that me and Calvin has got but only the one, and that's Cap. We can manage him all right with both or us studying on it. Most of the families in this block has from six all the way to ten youngins, and all sizes. Seems like about half of the mothers is sick. They just let the youngins run around as filthy as cow-dab. I tell you, most of these youngins learn to cuss and swear and take the Lord's name in vain when they's little buggers of five years old and less. They start fighting amongst one another. Before long the ma's and pa's take sides. It ends in a cutting scrape or one or the other taking their leave of the street. Me and Calvin stays clear of it all.
"We don't want no more trouble with neighbors. That's the main reason we moved from the mountains. Trouble with neighbors. Trouble betwixt Calvin and the Ogles over what they'd done to Calvin's coon dog. Drum was a night-running dog and I will freely admit it, but he wasn't a chicken killer. Ben had trained him about chickens to where he'd leave them alone. Why I've see that Drum flatten out on his belly and whine like he was scared to death it a chicken so much as passed him near. Calvin had trained him so he was really feared of a chicken. But it was something using around the Ogle's place of nights and taking their hens. So they says 'twas Calvin's Drum. They'd shot him but they dassn't, for they just knowed what a hasty-passioned man my Calvin can be when it comes to his coon dog. So they tried one of their sneaky tricks. They caught Drum off in the woods and they docked his tail right slam up against his rump and they cropped his ears down to his head.
"Calvin flat-out accused them Ogles of doing the job. They swore they didn't but you could see the daylight through what they said. So it was a hardness sprung up and before long Calvin hopped all over an Ogle and beat the corn out of him. Then the whole tribe ganged on him and came close to beating him to death. Looked like it was going to have to be a killing on one side or other. We didn't have enough kin to fight that Ogle bunch. Calvin and me both knowed wasn't room for him and the Ogles on the same mountain. So me and him pulled out and come faring down from the mountains to Knoxville, and ain't never going back again."
Lola's light eyes were far-shot and she nodded her head slightly. "I miss them mountains sometimes. Yes, I miss that steep old land.
"Me and Calvin growed up in the same neighborhood. The schools wasn't much we went to. Still they learned us to read and they learned us to write and how to say words as we should in talking. Calvin and me took a heart-burning for each other when we was in that school. Then Mammy died and I come down to Knoxville and I got me a job in a steam laundry here. No place there or ome for me, for Pappy brought in a new wife and started in on a new bunch of youngins. I made four dollars a week. Worked ten hours a day in the damp wash end. It wouldn't be a dry rag on me at the end of them ten hours. Most of us that worked there was girls come in from the country and down from the mountains. We managed by rooming together and doing all our own cooking and washing. NOW, you hear folks talk a heap about the way country girls goes on with men when they come to the city. Ah Lord' We was so wore out by the time work hours was over that we was good and glad to fall into bed and sleep. At the laundry r worked up to the finishing room and I made five dollars and fifty cents. But the hours was longer and I was so tired all the time I'd just as soon been dead and done with it.
"Well and all, it was right after the war that Calvin come down from the mountains. He talked me into going back and keeping house for him. It didn't take a powerful lot of talk. I was sick and tired of working like a slave. But I guess I'd sort of lost track of things I'd once knowed about living on a farm. That's a hard life. Anyhow, I went. I never had it in my mind that it was a thing wrong about me going. But the neighbors talked about us living together. Five years after I went to keeping house for Calvin, Cap come. I don't see no difference in the way me and Calvin feels about Cap because we never did have the time nor money to git a preacher or justice of peace to say a few words over us. It costs a lot of money to git married. More than five dollars some places. We never seen five do ahead till we come down here to Knoxville. Then it seemed like a plumb fool waste of money. They tell me that some good lawyers says a common-law marriage is just as good as a church or court one any day. So I ain't noways ashamed that me and Calvin has never got around to the regular kind. He's past fifty and I'm near to it and ain't neither of us ever trotted around loose like half the ones that blows about wedlock and such. We is poor but wets decent.
"Being poor ain't easy nowheres, but it's a sight better in the city than on a farm. City folks just don't know nothing at all about what country folks puts up with. Me and Calvin rented the farm we had in the mountains. It looked like it took the biggest part of what come from it to just meet that rent. Every cent from the tobacco crop went for rent.
"We never did git ahead to the point of having stock of our own. Had to borrow from the neighbors. That meant they'd git theirs plowed when the weather was right. Even if the ground was as hard as a brick, Calvin had to do plowing when he could borrow some mules or some horses. I didn't git nowhere trying to make extry with a garden. Pigs and chickens seemed like two thing it just wasn't no way for us to keep from dying. The sort of cows we could pay for wasn't worth the feeding. Wels had more butter and milk and meat and eggs here in town than we ever see on that farm. Farm living is plain slaving from one month to the next, from morning to night. And they's nothing left to show for all the hard work you do. Winter comes and you got to start toting wood for the fire. Have to tote it yourself when they's no sign of horse or a mule to holp you. Then every bit of the water you've a use for must be drawed from a well or fotch to the house from a spring. Here all you have to do is twist at the hydrant and out pours the water. Neither one of us ever wants to go back to farming.
"Calvin gits plenty 'of work here in Knoxville. He works cheap and that's the reason, I guess. He's not what you'd call a skilled worker. But he can do as good work as the best of them, I don't care what name you call them by.
"They's more folks here in Knoxville that wants cheap repairing than any other kind. The rich folks is the same I way. Calvin knows where he can git supplies cheap. He can take a contract lower than most and still come out on top.
If he could just go straight from one job to the next, why I bet he'd make close to twenty dollars a week. Like things is now, he makes about ten. He loses money looking for jobs and figgering on gitting things in shape to git the contract. Old customers has always stuck to him. But things ain't going to keep dropping to pieces about the same folks' house if they's fixed right. And Calvin always fixes them right. Sort of cuts his own throat, but he does it.
"I do all the washing and ironing and cleaning and cooking. And I can stretch that ten dollars out for the three of us. Rent and coal and kindling and food eats up about seven of it. That leaves three for other things and the clothes we wear. It don't take no more than fifty cents a day to feed the three of us. We's country folks. Glad to git corn bread and beans and potatoes and greens. I've heard some doctors say you could live on corn bread and vegetables without meat. I doubt it. Not and be hardy. I try to git meat for us at least twice a week. Fix an egg a piece for us at breakfast. I pay a nickle a day for a pint of milk for Cap. I know he ought to have it, a growing boy like he is. We never have had to spend a red cent on doctors' bills for no one of us. Not even when Cap come. It didn't cost me nothing because the midwife was a friend of mine. She wouldn't hear of me paying her for holping me through."
Lola got up from her chair to straighten the worn strip of carpet her rocker had wrinkled. She shoved back the old parlor furniture, upholstered in red plush and placed at regular intervals in front of the fireplace, smoothed the rug, and sank back in the rocker.
"Me and Calvin wasn't only thinking about easy going for our own selves when we come to Knoxville. We knowed Cap would have a better chance at schooling here. And do you know what? That boy ain't turned sixteen yet and here he wants to quit school and go to work. Some ways I don't blame him. As hard as we work it looks like it just never is anything left over for us to throw to him to spend for fun. And they ain't a soul lives around here I care for him to run with. Well, both me and Calvin carries burial insurance. It'll git us out of his way without cost if anything happens to us. I don't see no sense in paying out for that on cap yet. He's not going to die no time soon. If he's going to start out for his self, I want him to have some sort of a good job. He can have every penny he makes for his self, too. I don't believe in milking your children.
"I told him it's got to be some good straight job. Some boys git it in their heads that they can make a sight of money selling liquor. The law cracks down on them almost as soon as they git a start. We see it happen every day around here. You've got to keep the law paid off a good and plenty or else the penitentiary is where they's going to land. Now if they does pay off, where is the profit left from selling? Ain't none. So there they is. I told Cap if he had it in his head to do that, he better be clearing his head of it right now.
"I don't blame him one bit for having his mind set on making a little money to have fun on. Seems like me and Calvin ain't never done a thing ever but work hard all our lives. Some folks find pleasure in going to meeting on Sunday. But it's no church I've had sight of here in Knoxville where the ones coming in and out ain't dressed up fit to kill. Some says it's all the same in the eyes of the Lord about how you dress. But I knows if He's got sense at all, he knows our clothes is too wore out for Sunday strutting. I know they's shabby in my own sight.
"Calvin and me both can read right well. In times back we use to read the Bible pretty much. But seems like you always come across something you can't make out straight. So we just stopped reading it. Looked a pure shame, as wore out as we was, to read things that upset your head.
"I guess I got on to the main of it, though. I know that Jesus Christ died to save sinners. And all that me and Calvin have to do is trust in Him. And we do. And we believe on Him. I don't see where they's any way to keep me and Calvin out of Heaven. Calvin moved away from the mountains to keep a killing from happening. That clears what's said about not killing. We ain't never stole and have always told the truth. We never brought false witness against nobody. They's more to it, but I counted them off one day and we is all right. Calvin and me ain't never harmed a living soul in our lives. So I ain't bothering about Hell if I never gits inside the door of a Knoxville church. When me and Calvin gits there I'd be more than glad to do what I could to holp others git in.
"They's some folks, not a thousand miles away from here, that are going to need a heap of holping. Ah Lordy, yes!"
Dean Newman
Jennette Edwards
and Aswell.
(Text Not Cleared)