Brandon Mill Village
Greenville, S. C.
I. L. M.
IRENE
She seemed so young and. school-girlish as she sat there talking that I could, scarcely believe she was the mother of a ten-months old baby. She would, have come sooner, she said, but to have attempted to leave the house before her step-father departed for the mill would have brought trouble on her mother as well as herself. When she came back home with her baby, then three months old, he had told her that if she left the house her mother would suffer the consequences. This was the second time she had been outside of the yard since her return seven months ago. But even after she had said these things it was difficult to think of Irene as other than a schoolgirl who had dropped by a neighbor's house on her way home from school.
It was Nancy Malone who had made the meeting between Irene and me possible, who after little neighborly visits to the Tucker house over a three-day period had finally persuaded Mrs. Tucker to let her daughter Irene meet me at Nancy's house. A few minutes after Irene's arrival, she tactfully cleared the room of her mother-in-law, her four children, and herself, leaving the two of us to carry on our conversation unmolested.
Irene was clad in a simple blue skirt and a gold short-sleeved sweater, and her hair worn in a long bob was rolled into soft curls about her face. Her deep blue eyes, set wide-apart, were framed by dark brows in a high, natural arch. She smiled with the gladness she felt from being for a little while away from home.
"I'd like for yon to talk with me," I said, "and tell me about yourself and about your baby too. Mrs. Malone tells me it's a very pretty child."
"Oh, it is," Irene responded at once. "She's got the sweetest little old mouth and nose you ever saw. And the brightest eyes. I was awful uneasy about her last week though. She kept cry in' and cryin', and I wanted to have a doctor with her so bad but I knew my step-daddy wouldn't let one come. Then Wednesday my brother and his wife come to spend the day and night with us, and their baby got sick. They sent for the doctor for him, and while he was there Mama asked him to look at my baby too. Dr. Stokes said she wasn't gettin' enough nourishment from me and told Mama what to get. Mama had saved up a little money of her own so she got the food for little Sarah. Since then she hasn't cried a bit. I don't know what I'd do if anything was to happen to her because I've sure learned to love her."
"You didn't love the baby at first then?"
"Not a single bit. I wanted to give her away to a woman here at Brandon, but Mr. Hudgins, he's the man that runs this home that took me in, wouldn't allow any of the girls to give their babies away. It was when the little thing started smilin' at me and seemed to know she belonged to me more'n to anybody else that I started lovin' her. Nobody could get her now."
"Tell me about this home you spoke of. How did you happen to go there?"
"After my step-daddy knew for sure I was that way, he told me I had to get out and get out quick. He had been callin' me a whore and such names as that and. hadn't let me out of the house for over four months, hut I didn't start a showin' much until I was six months gone. I'd been go in' with Bud Simpson for over a year and Daddy had never let him come to the house. When I met him one night at a school play I asked Mama if he couldn't come to see me, and when she asked Daddy if it would be all right he told her no sirree it wouldn't, he never expected to let any boys hang around after me and Henrietta. Henrietta's my sister, just a year younger than I am. Laughed and said he'd be jealous of a boy that paid us any notice. So I started slippin' off to meet Bud every time I got a chance, and we got along fine until one night I just give in to him, and after that I slipped off more than usual, seemed like I was so afraid when I wasn't with Bud that I got to where I took chances on meet in' him. One day one of my step-brothers saw me and him ridin' together and he told Daddy on me. He forbid me leavin' the house again, and after I found out I was pregnant I never could get any sort of word to Bud. They can't make me believe Bud wouldn't have married me if he'd knowed what trouble I was in.
"I kept hopin' that maybe somethin' else was wrong with me, and seemed like I'd try to push the idea out of my mind, tryin' to make my own self believe I hadn't done anything that would cause me to have a baby. After a while I couldn't deny it to myself, but no matter how Daddy jeered at me I stayed just as quiet as could be and wouldn't own up to a thing. Sometimes I'd just stay at the window and look out, wonderin' what on earth was to become of me, and if he'd catch me he'd say, 'Lookin' for some man to get thick with, ain't you. A nice little whore you are.' Finally, when I knew I couldn't deny it no longer I told Mama.
"Mama cried and said she was sure sorry I'd turned out that way, and she hated to see me drove out of the home but she knew that was what would happen. That night Daddy told her he wasn't goin' to have a whore around his four little girls and I'd have to move quick. Him and Mama has four children.
"I knew I'd done a awful thing and I was sorry for it, but I didn't think he had any right to be too hard on me. Every since I was fourteen, whenever he'd come in drinkin', he'd try to drag me to bed with him. And then Henrietta when she started grow in' up. Many a time Mama has scuffled with him until she had black places all over her, fight in' to take me and Henrietta away from him when he'd caught us up and started with us to the other room. I was scared to death to go in a room where he was by myself. What hurts me now is to see him lookin' Mary Lou up and down every time she comes around. She's thirteen and beginnin' to develop right much. Mary Lou's the youngest one of Mama's first set of children."
"Why has your mother stayed on with Mr. Tucker when she knew he didn't have any respect for her daughters?"
Irene's blue eyes opened wide. "You know I used to wonder how Mama could live on with him knowin' for certain that if he could he'd ruin her own daughter's, and the only way I could figure it out was that she didn't know how else she could make a livin' because she'd let him throw away every single thing she had and had nothin' to start out on again. We was livin' on a farm out at Henrietta when Mama married again. Papa had been a pore man, rented land all his life and had a hard time gettin' along, but he left Mama two thousand dollars in insurance. She put it in the bank and wouldn't touch a cent of it for nothin', and she kept on farmin'. Us children was too small to be much help but she managed to get along. In about a year and a half some woman brought this Mr. Tucker to see Mama and pretty soon they got married. Everbody says he married Mama to get hold of her money and I know it's the truth because he sure don't love her. He couldn't beat her and knock her about so if he'd ever had any feelin' for her. He's younger than she is and real sprucy and Mama's not dressy stall. Well, he got the money and spent it all drinkin' and gamblin'.
"We moved to Brandon four years ago, but Daddy had been workin' here for a right smart while. He'd board and come home sometimes of a Sunday. He's got a good head on him about work, one of the best loom-fixers in the mill. He draws twenty-four dollars a week but he throws away a good part of it on drinkin' and women. He had four children by his first wife and three of 'em's old enough to have jobs now. They all live up there in the house with the rest of us. It's a big crowd and they make lots of work to do. That's how come they took me back in; Mama's health had got pretty bad and she couldn't do the housework.
"I stayed up at the home six months, three before and three after the baby came. You wanted to know how I happened to find out about the place, didn't you? Well, after Daddy said I had to leave, I came out here and told Mrs. Malone, asked her if she knew what I could do. She'd heard about the Hudgin's Home for Girls so she took me up there and got me in. They were awfully kind to me but about all I had to do was to sit and lay around, and think. We kept our rooms clean and then all of us did the cookin' together. There was eighteen of us when I first went there, two girls just thirteen years old. One of 'em had been ruint by her stepfather, and the other one went off with a crowd of boys one night and she said she didn't know which one of 'em got her in trouble. She had a sort of dazed look about her all the time and somehow you couldn't help feelin' sorrier for her than any in the crowd.
"They took me to the hospital a week before my baby was born. I had a awfully hard time and seemed like I would have give anything to have somebody around that really cared for me. Mr. Hudgins sent Mama word when the baby come and in about a week she came to the hospital to see me. They wouldn't let Henrietta come at first but after I went back to the home she slipped off and came anyway. She'd come up there every once and awhile but after Daddy found out he said she'd have to get somewhere else to stay. Mr. Hudgins let her stay in the room with me a while but they were so strict on her she couldn't get out anywheres to look for a job so she left. She did the best way she could, and not always the right way, till she got a job in a cafe over at Monagan Mill. She'd let me come live with her but she don't make but $7 a week and both of us couldn't get along on that. But she's all time watch in' out for me a job and she says just as soon as she can she's goin' to get me out from under my stepfather. That's just all I pray every night, that God'll help her get me a job. Prayin' will help, won't it?
"Of course, I've never done anything except keep house but I'd sure try hard to learn. When I got old enough to work in the mill I begged Daddy to get me a job but he laughed and said he'd be jealous of me down there among all the men. I hadn't gone to school any since we left Marietta so all I did was to stay at home and help Mama. Daddy wasn't to say stingy, he didn't mind givin' us money but he wouldn't let us go anywhere to spend it. I know I done somethin' that was awfully wrong, and I'm not tryin' to clear myself, but seems to me if things had been different at home I might've stayed out of trouble.
"And since I've come back Daddy is meaner to me than ever. He just acts like the baby's not in the house, never notices it so much as to smile at it, and I don't guess a day passes that he don't tell Mama she raised two fine whores. I know in reason he must be the most evil-minded man that ever lived. Yesterday Mama was takin' a bath, just takin' a bath now, and he said to her, 'Gettin' ready to lay up with some man while I'm at work tonight.' And he knows good and well Mama never even looks at a man. Treatin' us that way and he's got him a woman himself.
"He goes over twice a week in the morning time to see that woman after her husband's gone to the mill, don't care who sees him go, and when Mama accuses him of it he just sets and laughs. The other week she told him she'd walk in on them some day and he said if she did he'd blow her brains out. She knows he'd do it too. I don't guess a woman was ever more scared of a man that she stayed with than Mama is of him.
"He tells Mama I'm not fit for anything but work and to keep me at it. I do all the washin' and ironin' for the family, and the boys has lots of shirts because they're all go in' with the girls and. they change often. Then there's four children besides my own baby. Besides that I do nearly all the cookin'. It's work, work, all the time and never any pleasure at all. It's like bein' in a cage with just so far to go, and then turn around to walk the same way again.
"If I could get out and find a job somewhere, and I could let Bud know where I was, I believe he'd come and try to make things as right as he can. I still love him and I know he loves me. There's been no way in the world for him to talk with me even for a little while."
Irene bit her lip and brushed at her eyes with her sleeve. Presently there came the sound of a child's voice from the kitchen. "Where's Irene? Mama wants her to come home right this minute and cook supper."
Irene arose instantly, stood looking at me. "If you was to hear of any sort of job I could get I wish you'd let me know." The child had stuck her head into the room. "Mama wants you to come right this minute," she said, and ran on back toward the kitchen. "It's a awful hard life to have to live when you're just eighteen," Irene said, and the next moment she was gone.
S. C. - Excellent (For what it is)
Irene (Unfortunate)
Human interest story - girl betrayed - pregnant - prevented by bestial stepfather from getting into touch with man in case. He is a drunken sot who has tried repeatedly to attack this girl and her sister, his stepdaughters - mother afraid to do anything.