Mary A. Hicks
<text not clear>
Peter Gournas, proprietor of the People's Cafe, was born near Pergas, Greece, in 1888, the son of a peasant farmer. There were six children in his family to be supported from the small but fertile farm. On this farm was grown a variety of things such as cotton, grain, vegetables, and fruits.
Peter attended public school for four years, then he began working on his father's farm. In 1912 prices dropped and a heavy depression struck the land. Starvation seemed to be facing the Greeks and many of them migrated that year. Most of them were coming to what they termed "the prosperous and blessed New World."
The Gournas family had friends scattered about over the New World from whom they heard now and then. Peter's parents, were anxious for him to come and join them over here where they reported plenty of work and that they were getting fat. But they were puzzled as to the source of Peter's finances for such a trip. Finally, in September, they sold all of their wine and most of their stores which they were saving for winter in order that their son might go into the New World to make his way.
There were many immigrants sailing that day for America, and Peter Gournas was among the many. The rooms on the steamer were damp and dirty, and they were going into a strange country; but they were happy.
The boat docked and Peter was soon through the Customs. There was no one in New York to meet him, but he knew where he wanted to go. He went to the station and asked for a ticket to Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; but no one could understand him as he knew not a word of English. Finally he found someone who could understand him, and that person purchased his ticket for him.
He arrived in Bethlehem and there was a friend to meet him. This friend took him to his home, and in two days Peter had a job in the steel mills, making $12 a week. He saved his money, and every time that he had saved $50 he sent it home to his parents. This continued until he received a letter from home, stating that his father had a job and that he need not send them any more. Then Peter began to save for himself.
By 1915 he had saved enough to start a business of his own, but he wanted to find some other place. So he started out to look for a good place to invest his money. Raleigh was the place he chose, and he established his cafe in its present location. He had his wife and two children with him then.
This place of business is located on one of Raleigh's main business streets, the street on which most of the business houses serving the country people are located. These places also serve a large amount of Negro trade. For this purpose Peter has two entrances to his cafe, one for the white people and one for the Negroes. He employs three people all of whom are Greeks.
Business wasn't so good for him at first, but he served good food at reasonable prices and soon built up his trade. He didn't know anybody in Raleigh, and most of the Greeks were not very friendly to him as they were in the same kind of business. But when his business became good he had plenty of friends.
He became a citizen of the United States in 1923 which made him happy. He could then vote, raise his children as Americans, and, best of all, he could remain here until he died.
Peter's wife died on August 6, 1932, and after she was buried he lit a lamp and has burned it ever since. This shows that one of your loved ones is out at night and the lamp light is to guide him home. It is done to show that he hasn't forgotten her and that he wants her back at home.
Peter is a member of the Greek Orthodox Church and votes the Democratic ticket. He likes to think of himself as an American and includes himself when speaking of both the Greeks and Americans. He is opposed to Greeks marrying anyone other than another Greek or an American. To marry anyone else is making his race even more foreign over here.
The upstairs of his place of business is used as his living quarters. The rooms are well-furnished. One room is used as a junk room, and the cooking is done downstairs in the cafe.
AHB

