Real names used with permission of subject
February 8, 1939
Bill Carlisle, (white)
Route 1, Charlotte, N.C.
Radio Hillbilly
Mary Northrop, writer
Hill billy Broadcast
The regulars move chairs around to the side of the studio because when Bill and the boys face the mike their backs are to the audience and hearing is not so good. And around at the side you can see Uncle Frank pick the banjo with his one arm. His campstool with the contraption on it and his shortened mike are right behind a big square pillar, so when you sit at the back you can't see the next best thing on the program. The best thing, of course, is Hot Shot. The regulars like to be sitting where they can see the audience when Hot Shot comes on. They nearly die laughing at some of those people's faces.
But the audience is pleased to be getting any kind of seat. The studio is small and there is room for only twelve or fourteen chairs. There is a window in the inner wall, and above it in the hall outside is a loudspeaker, and the latecomers have to be satisfied with being on the outside looking in. The hall is narrow and when ten or twelve gather there, the people who work in the station have trouble getting by and look put out. But then it only happens half an hour a day from Monday through Friday, and Bill is so nice they wouldn't think of complaining about his fans.
Bill and the boys piddle around with the announcement sheets and things like that and when there's about a minute to go before they're on the air they stand quiet until the announcer gets through and Bill nods to strike up the theme. The regulars look unconcerned and watch from the corners of their eyes for the green light, but it makes the newcomers nervous. Here they are right in the radio station, right in the very room with Bill and the boys, close enough to touch 'em if they'd reach out their hands, and it gives a funny feeling to be here instead of at the other end, a feeling of being in two places at once. Surely they must be sitting by the radio in the front room at home. Yet here they are!
"Well, all you good people" the announcer says, "this hurts me worse than it does you, but I simply have to admit that the next sound--the next noise--you hear, will be Bill Carlisle and His Mountain Music Boys! Take it away, Bill, as far away as you can get it!"
Bill says in his politest voice, "Thank you, Mr. Pringle. Let 'em have it, boys!" And away they go into She'll Be Comin' Round the Mountain, Charmin' Betsy. It sounds a good deal like She'll be Comin' Round the Mountain When She Comes, but Bill says he thinks Charmin' Betsy was wrote a long time before the other and when you listen real good you can hear it's not the same anyhow.
Bill whings away at his Spanish guitar and Shan whangs all over the banjo; Toad fiddles to beat anything and Uncle Frank's harmonica sings out gay while he pats his foot, pats his foot. The notes fall hard and swift as spring rain on an oil drum and the audience can't help grinning. Start off with a fast instrumental to wake 'em up and you've got 'em. Next is Flop-eared Mule. You can't find anything faster than that. Feet are tapping all over this county and the next, all over half the State.
The way Bill sails into that guitar he couldn't possibly do it with a coat on, but he does his best to make up for the rudeness by wearing pretty shirts. In his back pants pocket is a pretty handkerchief, too, folded as neat as the one in his coat. They match -- a white silk shirt with a white satin stripe, a'white linen handkerchief with a sateen stripe; a dark blue shirt with a white tie, a dark blue handkerchief with white plaid. The boys don't stand on ceremony -- Toad keeps his hat on the back of his head and Shan wears the same old grey sweater every day -- but Bill is as nice as he can be and yet be working.
After a fast number a sad one has to come.
"My friends," says Bill, "now we're goin' to answer a lot o' requests, and me and Shan will sing that beautiful old number, Put My Little Shoes Away."
Bill admits his main and best voice is soprano and uses that on the good sad numbers, Shan takes the tenor. The song is a pitiful thing about a little girl who has been crippled and tells her mother to put away the little shoes Santa Claus brought her, because she will not be here long and will never be able to use them again, but wants them put in the closet until her baby brother will be big enough to wear them.
"Well, after that, folks, I think we need a little cheerin' up. So Uncle Frank's a-gonna give us Groundhawg. Uncle Frank, you know, hasn't got but one arm, but does that hinder Uncle Frank? It does not: I wish y'all could see Uncle Frank pickin' this banjo! He does it better'n most men with two arms, as I'm sure you'll agree. Uncle Frank."
A red-faced dumpy little woman in the audience gets to her feet. "I got to see this," she says aloud. "I been wonderin' how he done it too long." She moves around the pillar and stands staring, hands on hips. The regulars grin.
Uncle Frank hunches down on the campstool and fits the neck of his banjo in a pronged stick nailed to the stool.
There is a side piece coming out the top of the stick and when he turns the banjo sidewise and pushes the neck of it against the side piece with his left shoulder--it's his left arm that's gone--that frets the strings and changes the tones. All the time he's playing his shoulder is pushing. The little fat woman clucks her tongue and says, "Ga-a-ah! Did I ever!" She is so close it goes on the air, and no one cares.
"Meat in the skillet, hide in the churn,
Meat in the skillet, hide in the churn.
If that ain't groundhawg, I'll be durn.
Groundhaw-aw-awg!"
The tune is a funny thing, more Chinese than hillbilly. It sounds full of quarter tones and all the lines end on ascending minors. Uncle Frank sounds like a Chinaman too, high and nasal, and the words might be Chinese or anything, coming through Uncle Frank's false teeth, but there's no kick from the listeners. And when the boys make personal appearances Uncle Frank is a riot. People just can't get over how he frets that thing with his shoulder and a stick.
He can do it with his feet, too. He used to make his living doing that on the street. A one man band, picking the banjo with his toes and accompanying on the harmonica. But of course he couldn't do it in cold weather. He makes a lot better living with Bill and the work is steadier.
"Aint that sump'm? Thank you, Uncle Frank. And now I'm a-goin' to bust your ears wide open and do a song for you that gets right in my craw and nearbout kills my Adam's apple. But so many have asked for it that here it comes-- Ramblin' Jack!"
He's been in the workhouse, been in jail, he's been out on bond and out on bail, but when he hears that whistle (whoo-whoo-oo) and sees that old smokestack, he has to go, they call him Ramblin' Jack, yo - de - ady - adledy - adledy - adledy - oh.
The fast yodelling over with, Bill has to give his tonsils a rest. "Down Yonder!" he cries, and up comes another instrumental number.
"Whew, that was a fast one! Boys, let your hands hang limp while I tell the folks where they can see us in the flesh and throw things at us. Let's see, now, friends, on Tuesday, January 28th we'll be at Fairhaven School, five miles northeast of Stony Corner, sponsored by the Epworth League, and the show starts at 8 o'clock sharp. We want all our friends for thirty miles around to come."
The announcement covers the next two weeks of personal appearances. The broadcast is over at 3:45 so the boys can't give shows farther away than a three hour ride.
"And now, Shann Grayson, the boy with the wavy hair, is gonna do us a number. We've just had a telegram from Miz F. X. Washam of Mint Hill, asking for Shann to sing that lovely song, It Makes No Difference Now, and dedicate it to Mr. Washam. So Shann is gonna oblige."
"I also want to dedicate this song to Miss Wanda Hargett, Miss Louisa Redwine, and Miss Annie May Little." Shann reads the names of fans who have written in to ask that he dedicate songs to them. He mourns that all his love dreams have faded and that the fickle girl can do anything else she wants to, because it makes no difference now. He plays his own guitar and Bill's takes the tenor. Bill does that to make the solo prettier. All the boys get a solo spot on any program of Bill's, because if they weren't good enough for spots of their own they wouldn't be on the program.
Today Toad doesn't get a solo because his bass gets almost as good as a solo chance in the hymn.
"Life's evenin' sun--" he booms.
"Life's evenin' sun--" Shan and Bill echo in soprano and tenor.
"--is sinkin' low--"
"--is sinkin' low--"
"A few more days--"
"A few more days--"
"--and I must go--"
"--Yes, I must go--"
But Toad does a solo number on his fiddle, and a good one, too. Listen to the Mockingbird. That's one a fiddler can take to town, if he knows how, and Toad does. Since he's been with Bill, Bill's made him practice. He's only a kid and his hat's too small for his pudgy face and his open vest is sloppy, but he can make that mockingbird out-tweet its own self.
"Hoodoo--!" Bill yells. "Ain't that sump'n? And now we got that out our systems I want to thank all you nice folks for the nice letters you sent us, I want to thank Miz C. G Kennedy of 1413 West Washington Street, and Mr. Emery L. Hodgson of Mt. Tom-- With one eye on the clock he reads as many names as he thinks he has time for. It slows things up but the people who wrote in are listening for their names. Everybody listening is hoping some name they know will be read out.
"And now, folks, Hot Shot's tard o' sittin' over there in the corner and wants to get up to the mike, we can't do nothin' to stop him. All right, Hot Shot, might's well come on up and let's get it over with."
The regulars turn to see how the audience is going to take it.
Bill turns from the mike and with his hand half over his mouth starts talking. The voice that comes out is nothing like his own.
"Ah-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah-- Aw. Hunh. C-c-course Ah gets tard a-settin' over thar. Tain't whar Ah b'long, neither. Ah. Aw. Hunh. Ah guess Ah got a raht to talk in this mike. Ah-ah-ah-ah got mah rahts but don't nobody wanna gim tummy. Hmp." Bill sniffles straight into the mike, a plain old bad-cold sniffle.
"Oh, come on, Hot Shot," Shann says. "Nobody's tryin' to take your rights from you."
"Hmp. Haw. Eh-eh-eh-eb-body's jiss jellis o' me sence all them gals writ in an' said fly' all not to take me off'n this pro-grumm. A g-g-g-g-goodlookin' thang lahk me. The mos' bewchous thang in Hawg Waller. Hmp. Haw."
"We know you're goodlookin', Hot Shot. Don't get worried. What you been doin'?"
"Ah-ah-ah-ah-ah been rahtin' a snory book. A snory book."
"A snory book! Don't you mean a story book?"
"A-a-a-a-ain't thaht whut Ah said, a snory book?"
Shann laughs.
"I'd like to see this story book if it's anything like the last one you wrote. What kind of stories is in it?"
"Snories 'bout me. If Ah-ah-ah-ah-ah don't raht about myse'f, who is go raht 'bout me? A-a-a-answer me thaht."
"Well, I'll be one of the first ones to buy the book when it comes out in print. How 'bout a song?"
"I'll play for you, Hot Shot," Bill says in his natural voice.
"Ah-ah-ah'll sang 'bout mah rooster," he answers himself. He plays some kind of old tune and mutters in one low tone full of breath and adenoids.
"Ah luhv mah roo-ooster. Aw. Hmp. Hah.
Mah roo-ooster luhvs me. Haw. Hmp. (Sniffle.)
Ah luhvs mah rooster. Hmp.
Cock-a-doo-oo-oodle doo. Hmp. Haw.
Ah luhvs mah duck. Haw. Ah. Hmp.
Ah cher'sh mah duh-uh-uck.
Quack - a - wack, qua-aa-ack. Hmp."
Somewhere in the residential suburb across town, or fifty miles away, a group of girls are playing bridge. Madge remarks that it's nearly time for the news broadcast and switches on the radio.
"Ah'll sang 'bout mah rooster," Hot Shot tells them.
"Ah luhvs mah rooster. Aw. Hmp. Hunh.
Mah rooster luhvs me. Haw. Hmp." (Sniffle.)
"Good Lord, turn that thing off quick, that's that drooling idiot!" cries Jane.
"I don't see why they let him go on the air," Lucy says. "I don't see how anybody can stand it!"
Madge cuts Hot Shot off and a ruffled feeling hangs over the room. The girls will laugh at The Mad Russian, Parkyakarkas, and Bob Burns, at almost any dialect comedian on the air but Hot Shot. He is too close to home. They know who he is. He is that dirty overalled creature who leans against the grain-and-feed store downtown, who watches their legs when they get out of the car, who spits and says something to his companions that makes them cackle and look at him half-ashamed, half-admiring, who stares with insolent eyes and knows they see him when they pretend they don't, who makes them feel depressed and a little frightened.
But there's scarcely a house on Mill Hill where Hot Shot isn't greeted with broad grins. Bill, Shann, Toad, and Uncle Frank are fine, but the few moments of Hot Shot are the spice of the program. They like him because he is so close to home. They know who he is. He is that roosterfaced smart-aleck whose answers are perky with "dumb" jokes, whose outlandish bragging is done with a straight face. The crowd around the stove in the filling station or the store can't get him told--he can always come right back with one better. He keeps the girls screaming. Any fellow that tries to kid that one gets the laugh turned right back on himself. He's a case. And Hot Shot is that man, exaggerated just enough to be simply killing.
"Ah cher'sh mah duck.
Quack-a-wack, qua-aa-ack-Hmp.
"Well, see y'all t'morra, folks. Goom-bye."
"Thank you, Hot Shot," says Bill. "Peas 'n' Cornbread in the key of C!" And they're off again on a fast instrumental that fades into She'll Be Comin' Round the Mountain, Charmin' Betsy. A word of farewell from Bill and they're off the air.
The audience shoves forward to speak to Bill. He signs autograph books for two young girls who pretend to ignore Shann and Toad. Two or three say, in amazement, "Why, Mr. Carlisle, I never drempt you was Hot Shot," and Bill smiles as cordially as if he'd never heard it before.
Hot Shot came into Bill's head one night on the stage in Louisville. The act wasn't going so good so he just started clowning and the thing went over big. He wasn't trying to imitate anybody special. He is tickled by the numbers of people who tell him they know a durn fool who talks and acts a lot like Hot Shot.
Hot Shot's been on the air more than three years now. Bill gets an average of fifty fan letters a day and most of them are addressed to Hot Shot Elmer. A year ago their sponsor offered eight packages of flower seeds in return for the top of a cough syrup box and the response was poor. Hot Shot invited the radio audience to send their letters to him instead of Bill Carlisle and within the next three days eighteen hundred box tops arrived.
Hot Shop claims to be an authority on love, how to land your girl- or boy-friend and how to hold 'em. A large part of his mail is love letters. Most of them are frankly sent as a joke, but occasionally one is serious.
Once in a while some one who thinks Hot Shot is a real person writes in to complain about him. "Do teach Hot Shot to talk a little better," said one, "if you can. Without him you could get along better, he talks like a spoiled child, that is mad at everything tell him to do better or quit. Your friends down this way just don't like him. I'm afraid he's going to hurt my radio tubes and I just had them replaced."
Bill never answers any of his fan mail but once he printed a letter by Hot Shot and with a picture of himself in comic makeup, sold it for 10. Over a period of time he sold 7,000 of them.
"My Dear Friend," it said.
I want to fank ye fer buyin' my pitcher and story of my life. I don't know I had so many friends til I started sending my pitchers out to them. I am shore you will be surprised to see sech a good looker after the rets of the gang makin' sech much fun out offen me. Please write me to the radiator station and tell whut you fink offen my pitcher.
CHAPTER ONE
HOT SHOT'S ADVICE TO THE LOVE SICK
I were borned in spencer County nar Brier Ridge, New Ided States Offen America, Kentucky, so fer back in the sricks 'at they America, Kentucky, so fer back in the sticks 'at they had ter pipe the sunshine back at me; and I you ain't a-agoin' to belive. Thad a gal back home, jest like any human bein's got, she were big at the little an bottom at the top and purty as a pitcher. She looks sumpin' like me in the face.
Naw sir, I hain't bean withouten a gal sense my maw got me out to sparkin'. She wus as tite on me as some of your maws is. She got me out a-sparkin' when I came twenty- one years old, which were bout backer settin' time. and I have ben a-sparkin' an kissin' an a-slobberin' ever sense.
Oh year, talkin' about kissin' an slobberin'. I hain't braggin, nor boastin' but when it comes to kissin' an slobberin' I hain't so slouch-Foot-fire naw, I don't take my hat off to nobody when it comes to kissin' an slobberin'.
Now I want to tell you how to win your gal's love or you gals can try the same fing on your fellers. Find out a game they like to play, then play this game with them, take a game like tag, button, button, who's got the button or postoffice. Speakin' of postoffice, I won my gal playin' this game. I went to a play party one nite and we got to playin' postoffice. The way they play this game is, give everybody a number, then they put one gal in a room by herself, then she calls a number an' if it is your's you have to kiss her; but if you don't want to kisse her, you have to give her twenty-five sents. Well I didn't have any money so I had to kiss em all. My sister was there too, and me and her look so much apart we can't tell us alike. I jest told you if you didn't want to kiss a gal you had to give her crenty-five cents. Wal my sister come home with fourteen dollars and hebenty five sents. Frankin you again fer buyin' my pitcher and story.
Hope you like it good enuff to buy my next chapter.
Much obliged to you,
Hot Shot Elmer.
Bill was born at Briar Ridge, in the southeastern hill country of Kentucky. "I'm no fake hillbilly," he says earnestly.
The house sat high on Salt River Hill, looking down the swift Salt River that flowed to the Ohio fifty miles away. Halfway down the hillside an old animal trail called Buffalo Walk made the road, but it was more like a narrow flat clearing than a road. The children rode mules along the Walk to Ashes Creek School, seven miles away. Once when Bill was only a little thing his brothers put him in a wash- tub and scooted him down the hill over hard-crusted snow. He'd have gone on down Salt River to the Ohio if he hadn't hit a tree and bounced out.
There were seven children and they all liked music. Their father taught it in the winter when he couldn't be farming but Bill and his older brother, Cliff, took to it without lessons. Bill picked up a guitar when he was only seven years old and struck a harmonious chord. He learned part-singing the way he learned to breathe--he just did it without thinking.
That was in the tobacco country, and when the neighbors had tobacco-strippings Bill and Cliff were called on for duets. People liked to hear them do the songs they already knew--Barbara Allen, Froggie Went a-Courtin', Old Joe Clark, When You and I were Young. That was the beginning of The Carlisle Brothers.
When Bill was fifteen and had finished the seventh grade in school the family moved to Louisville where they could all get jobs. His father and oldest brother went to work in a mill and he and Cliff had odd jobs between vaudeville engagements at small theaters in and around Louisville.
All that time a riot of tunes was going around in Bill's head. When he was seventeen he composed his first song, Little 'Dobe Shack. He made up the words as well as the music. At that time he had never been out of Kentucky. But then, he says, it was no sillier than those Yankees writing mammy songs. He has never yet been west of the Mississippi but he wrote Blue Arizona Moon.
Still he hadn't exactly found himself. He had taken to blues in preference to hillbilly and that was about the time when blues were hardly more than straight moaning and people wanted their blues records sung by Negroes and the vaudevillians to do it in blackface. Bill and Cliff never cared for blackface so Bill went to work in the Ford plant in Louisville.
He stayed there three years, composing songs and making records of them on the side. He was making pretty good then and stage work had been irregular. He thought he ought to stick to his job as enameller in the factory but he was not satisfied. He was pretty much upset the whole time. Finally it was decided for him on the day the tip of his left index finger was cut off while he was at work. A job that might fix him so he could never play again was out.
The family moved to a little town on the Ohio River in 1931 and he went with them. His mother's father was getting old and wanted them all to be there. One Sunday Bill was standing outside the church when a pretty girl came out. "I bet I can talk to her," he told his companion.
"It's a pretty day, is it not," he said to the girl. She looked him straight in the eye and turned up her little nose, and Bill knew right then he was gone.
He got a proper introduction about a week later and took her out in a rowboat on the Ohio. The river was mighty at that time and neither of them could swim, but who cared.
He had his guitar and they sang till the fall of darkness, but even with his singing it took him five years to get her.
It was in those five years that hillbilly (when Bill says hillbilly he doesn't mean people who live back in the coves of the mountains, he means hillbilly music or people who sing hillbilly music) began to grow popular on the radio. The Carlisle Brothers rejoined to take advantage of it. They have broadcast at stations in four southern States, and, once, when they were in New York to make records, they went on the network as guest artists on Tex Hitter's program. That was before Tex went into the movies.
Cliff had married and had a son. At the age of three they sat him on a table and let him sing on the air. He had no idea what the mike was doing. Cliff and Bill decided they would each make more money if they had separate units and broadcast on different stations. Now Cliff gives Sonny Boy Tommy, who at nine has been on the air six years, equal billing with himself and they broadcast at a station not a hundred miles from Bill's. They split in 1935 that year the girl Bill had been courting since he was twenty-two came over from Kentucky to marry him.
Since that time his troupe--the boys--has constantly changed. He likes Shann and Toad and Uncle Frank better than any he has had. They're livelier.
Uncle Frank, like himself, is a real hillbilly. When he was a little boy about five he was hanging around some timber men cutting on a mountain top. They hollered at him that a tree was falling and the noise scared him so he ran towards the tree instead of away, and it fell on him and took his arm off clean.
He was full of music and it worried him sick that he would not be able to play. His mother hated to see him grieve and thought of what she could do. One day she set him on a stool and put a banjo on the floor and took off his shoes and stockings.
"Learn to play it with your feet, son," she said. "You can do it if you try." And she kept him at it till he could, though it took him five years to learn his first piece. After that it was easy to learn the harmonica, and his music has been his living.
Shann didn't come from the mountains but he is a good hillbilly. Bill was in a little town one night calling on some friends and Shann was there. He played and sang with Bill's guitar and has been with him ever since. He was nineteen at the time. He is a tall, black-haired boy, slender, and with a well-shaped head. On the handbills he is listed as Shannon Grayson, The right of the Strings. He can play any kind of guitar, the banjo, mandolin, fiddle, and bullfiddle, and Bill thinks that if you'd set him down at a harp he'd play it like an angel. Toad doesn't cut much of a figure but he can do plenty of tricks with his fiddle and can sing a healthy bass.
The boys are booked fairly regularly from October to June. Their charge is sixty-five percent of the box-office receipts and the admission is from fifteen cents to fifty cents. They have no scenery and never appear in costume-- that's so common now, Bill says, that people like you better without--so they can give a show anywhere at all. One thing he emphasizes is that their shows are strictly clean.
"If you are a church circle," he says, "and you want us to help you raise money, you needn't be scared to risk us. We don't never say a word or do a thing'd make you shamed to look your preacher in the face. We are fit for the youngest member of any family."
There has never been a girl in the group. "Trouble. That's what they are. And talk. I can hear the people now. 'My goodness, here it is 'leven o'clock now and she's goin' back with 'em and it'll be two-three o'clock in the mornin' when they get in. They say he's in love with her-- and he's married.' No sir, no girls."
It's a funny thing about hillbilly, Bill thinks, the way people think it's suddenly come into fashion. It's been in fashion ever since there have been white people in the mountains of the South--and before that, as anyone can see, because the very oldest of the so-called hillbilly songs were brought over to this country with them, so they're really Scotch songs or Irish songs or English songs.
And they were different from modern hillbilly. They were long songs and told a story. Some people still love them and write in for him to sing them over the air but he can't do it often because they take up too much time. If he cuts out any verses the songs don't make sense because some of the action of the story is lost. Those old ballads are dying out because of the radio. It is teaching isolated people new songs now and they don't have to fall back on only the/ones they have ever known. There isn't a cove so dark that there isn't a ten dollar radio in somebody's store or cabin. Look at it one way and it seems an awful shame for those pretty old tunes to be forgotten, but those people way back there can't be blamed. Everybody likes new things and change. That's the way they are about music. Now they get hobo songs to make them think about the world outside; blues songs with strange rhythms to stir them up; sad songs to make them pleasantly melancholy; crazy songs to make them laugh.
Those who write in for ballads are the old people. They remember hearing them at gatherings where they were hung from the rafters in blankets to be swung to sleep when the beams shook from stamping feet. They grew up to sing them at their own parties. But young people want the new and strange. Young people have that itch to go. Ridin' on the Santa Feel They don't know whether the Santa Fee is a Christmas sled or a mule, but let 'em hear it sung about and they want to get on it. They hop on board with the hobo in the song. Who cares whether you and I are growing old, Maggie, when that's in mind?
Most of the folks who listen to those hobo songs have never been farther than the next town and they never expect to because they haven't the money or the time for travel. In a showdown they'd more than likely be scared to if they had to. But they stand and watch people whizz by in the long trains and they like to think about going too. They like to hear someone that talks the same way they do sing about it. It makes them feel that someday they, too, might---
It's a funny thing how big the jail songs go. Maybe it's because prison songs make them glad just to be alive and free. Four walls and a ceilin', Lordy what a feelin'-- just a mean old lowdown jail, separatin' me from everything but the evenin' mail. So many calls come in for Birmingham Jail, The Convict and the Rose, Behind Cold Gray Walls, Oh Warden, I've Just Come to Get My Baby out of Jail. It's fine to sit on your own front porch and hear those songs coming out the parlor window. No, nobody wants to hear The Prisoner's Song any more. It was done to death.
It's kind of for the same reason that they like the sad songs so much. Sometimes it makes you happy to feel sad. Everybody likes The Little Rosewood Casket.
Now, love. Of course you find love in hillbilly songs, new and old. It's the thing you find the most. Bill himself has composed many a lovesong. Dreamy Eyes, Why Do Blue Skies Turn Gray, Still There's a Spark of Love (he has had more royalties from that then from any record he has made), Are You Gonna Leave Me, Lil, and plenty of others. Hillbilly takes in moon songs too. Waitin' Beneath the Texas Moon, When It's Moonlight in the Rockies, Blue Arizona Moon, Colorado Moon, anywhere moon.
But cowboy songs, well-- There's a cowboy group yippi- yi-yi-ing from every radio station in the land. Cowboy has just about left the hillbilly class and gone into popular.
Look at the way some of those songs made the hit parate-- Boots and Saddles, Git Along Little Dogie, and Old Faithful. And that everlasting Home on the Range. There is little request for cowboy music in the South and Bill and the boys rarely sing it. If they did that in this part of the country people would know they were phonies. Aren't they advertised as The Mountain Music Boys? Would anybody be likely to think it was the Rocky Mountains? No, they would know it was the Blue Ridge, because the boys and Bill don't sound like cowboys; they don't sound like anything in the world but southern hillbillies.
For that same reason they never sing popular music. A hillbilly singing popular music is nothing. Bill has known many a promising hillbilly to ruin himself that way. A genuine hillbilly can not do justice to either sweet, dirty, or swing. He can't get away from his own familiar rhythms, and most often he is nasal and has a colloquial way of speaking. He is laughed at by the crowd who like popular and resented as being stuck-up by hillbilly fans.
But that works two ways. The hillbilly crowd won't support a fake one. If some crooner from Wisconsin or California takes a notion to cash in on hillbilly, he thinks all he has to do is get some old songbook and butcher the music to become a hillbilly. Ruin any kind of music--and you're a hillbilly! As much sense to that, Bill thinks, as if singing Negro spirituals would make you colored.
At least once a week Bill includes a spiritual on the program. He gets a great many requests for them, mostly from Negroes. Sometimes he is asked whether the Mountain Music Boys will appear at colored schools. He answers "no" as politely as possible. The Ladies' Social at Buxtonbury wouldn't want to sponsor their show if they had appeared at the Buxtonbury Colored High School the week before. Bill thinks one reason colored people like his program is that he sings spirituals the way they were meant to be sung. Many Negroes on the radio sing them in new arrangements with too orderly rhythms.
Most hymns on hillbilly programs are different from old-time hymnbook tunes. They sound like all the other hillbilly tunes, and if you weren't listening to the words you'd never know them for hymns. There is the same fast guitar-banjo-mandolin accompaniment and fast, beating rhythm. Quite often the tunes are the same. The hymn The Great Speckled Bird is sung to the tune of Blue Eyes (I'll Never Love Brown Eyes Again). Among Bill's own hymn compositions are If Jesus Should Come Today and You Can't Buy Your Way to Heaven.
The funny songs are based on anything anybody thinks of as a joke--hard-Charlie mothers-in-law, henpecked men, bantam men, ugly girls with big feet, anything at all.
There's Seven Years with the Wrong Woman, Old Dan Tucker, I Wish I was Single Again, and a thousand others. There's Longleaf Pine. The title sounds all right, and maybe a little fine, but the words go, "I had a little mule and his name was Jack, I rid on his tail to save his back--high pine!" And how about Just Let Me Keep My Skillet Good and Greasy All the Time! Bill has written a good many, things like I'm Wearin' the Britches Now and Big at the Little, Bottom at the Top.
He says it isn't hard to compose a hillbilly song. You figure out a simple four-line tune and fit some words to it and that's all. Unlike popular music, the first verse is used as a constantly repeated chorus. You sing it after each verse, and the verse and chorus have the same tune. You sing it over and over again. The listeners like to hear it often so they won't forget it.
He has recorded every song he ever wrote, for the principal recording companies, Brunswick, Victor, and Decca. He never sets down the music so none of it has ever been published, but he has the songs copyrighted so no other hill- billy can pick them up and record them for another company without paying for the privilege. It brings him in a neat sum every year.
If ever anybody enjoyed his work it's Bill, What could be more fun, he says than making your living by singing and playing and writing songs like this:
Shoein' My Gal
<Text Not Clear>
I mar-ried a gal in Lou-ie-ville, Her name was Sweet Marie,
<Text Not Clear>
Ev-ry time I made a dime She said, "It be-longs to me."
<Text Not Clear>
I've put up with it thirty years But I won't for thirty more,
<Text Not Clear>
I'm gon-na sock her in the eye And knock her through the door.
2. When I go to buy her shoes
I buy her number eights.
I hafta buy an extra pair
Because her feet ain't mates.
Her right foot takes a number eight
Her left a number nine.
It's just like stockin' up a store
To shoe that gal of mine.
3. It makes me mad, so doggone mad
When she calls me honey,
Because I know she's puttin' on
And all she wants is money.
This married life 's a-gittin' me,
It's more than I can bear.
To keep that gal o' mine in shoes
Would break a millionaire.
No Letter in the Mail Today
<Text Not Clear>
No let-ter in the mail to-day, No answer from my love.
No-bod-y knows what I've been through No one but God above.
1. This is what I wrote to her,
"I know that I'm to blame,
I know that I have broke your heart."
And then I signed my name.
Chorus:
2. These final words I wrote to her,
"Oh, give me one more chance.
Just let me prove my love for you,
Oh, give me one more chance."
Chorus:
3. I'm walking down the lane today,
Yes, walking my last time.
If there's no letter in the box,
I'm leavin' this world of mine.
Chorus: