Mary and Angustus DeRoy
Republic Alabama
Nettie S. McDonald.
Birmingham, Alabama
MARY WORKED IN THE HINES IN BELGIUM
“‘Come over to America and yea can make a fortune,’ is what my father-in-law wrote hack to us in Belgium,” said Mary DeRoy.
Mary DeRoy is a large, dignified woman, still proudly erect, though seventy-three years old. Her soft, white hair was combed straight hack from her forehead and fell in deep, natural waves. A little curl nestled beside her widow’s peak. Her clear brown eyes nearly closed when aha laughed. She wore a clean, faded percale dress and her apron was tied around her large waist.
Mary and Augustus DaRoy keep house in two rooms, but in their kitchen is where they really live. It’s a large, comfortable room painted cream color and it is very very clean. The floor is completely covered with bright flowered linoleum. A three-burner oil stove, two cupboards full of pans and dishes, a table with red and white oil cloth, a few kitchen chairs, a sewing machine and three large rockers with soft cushions on the seat and on the backs, furnish the kitchen. Crisp red and white curtains make the room very gay.
Mary DeRoy got her big, black pipe, filled it, placed a large bowl beside her chair, lit her pipe and started puffing away. The smoke seemed to carry her back to her early life in the old country.
“Let me see, now,” She began, “It’s been nearly thirty-five years since we got that letter from Augustus’ father. We sold everything as quick as we could and me and Augustus and the two children (the other two died the year before) set out for America the ‘promised land,’ and from that day to this, we never have had enough money to take us back there. My old father and mother told me that they would never see us again if we went so far away. I couldn’t believe it, but they sure were right, for they died twenty years ago without ever seeing us any more: A slow tear coursed down her broad cheek as she looked away. Then she shook her head and went bravely on:
“Since I came over here, my life has been different. When I was just a slip of a girl, I started to work in the mines in Belgium. Oh, sure girls worked in the Belgium mines! Young girls and pretty, too. We all worked in pants. God knows we couldn’t do a thing with skirts swishing around our legs. When we went into the mines, we had to take two safety lamps along. These lamps are just like the ones the fire bosses use in this country. I could carry both of mine on two fingers on the same hand.
“We’d go down, down, down seventeen hundred yards in a cage. Then after we got out of the cage we had to walk at least a mile before we’d get to our work. I’d put one lamp on one poet and the other one on a post close by. That would give me plenty of light to work by.
“Oh, they’d give us girls ‘most any kind of work to do-pushing care, stopping cars and turning the wheel that pulled the cars onto the cage. Turning that wheel was the hardest job I had. I used to brace myself against the poet and push for dear life. It took a real woman to do that job. I sure was proud for not many of the women could do it; and besides that, it paid fifteen cents a day more than any other job.
“Sometimes other girls would try and try, but they couldn’t turn it. They wanted to make the extra money and because they couldn’t, they’d turn up their noses at me, because I could. I remember the worst fight I ever had in the mine was when a girl sent me word that she would slap my face for taking her job at the wheel. I waited for that girl, and when she saw me, she started in to beg me to wait till her sister got there to help her, but I didn’t wait. I got her up against a post and I gave her one good beatin! I always said ‘don’t start a fight you can’t finish.’
“I kept on working in that mine until I married. When my first baby was five months old, my brother asked me to come back to the mine and help him out for a while. I paid my mother-in-law to keep the baby and I started back to work. I did fine until my breasts filled up with milk and hart so bad I couldn’t use my arms. Then I’d stop and draw cut the milk with a pipe. That used to make me feel awful bad. There I was, wasting the milk that my baby was at home crying for.
“I kept that work up for a year-until my brother didn’t need me any more. Then I opened up a little store and I carried everything to eat-but not a thing in cane. Salt, pepper, tea, bluing, starch-everything was loose in jars and had to be weighed. I kept paper sacks of all sixes. Oh, I was a real business woman all right. I peddled too. At first, I had a great big Belgian dog to pull my cart, but he was too fast, so Augustus sold him and bought me a jackass. He was lots better.
“I had all kinds of fruit-apples, peaches, plums, grapes, and I had potatoes and oysters in the shell. I made up a song about my fruit and as I’d ride along, I’d sing it. Those were happy days. They could hear my song for a mile and when my customers heard that song, it was too bad for the other peddlers for they couldn’t sell a thing. I made jokes with my customers and that kept them in a good humor and then they’d buy more.
“After I got through with my store peddling used to go home and make sandwiches to sell that night. As I think back, I can’t help laughing about some sandwiches I sold once. It was at night and there was a big dance under the tents. I made lovely horse liver sandwiches with plenty of onions. The boys and girls would come over and buy sandwiches between dances like the boys and girls nowadays buy a Tom Collins. Well, that night my sandwiches tasted better than ever. A real pretty girl came over to me and said, ‘Now, you’re sure these are cow liver sandwiches and not horse liver?’ ‘Oh,’ said I ‘you know I wouldn’t sell you something I wouldn’t eat myself.’ She smiled and bought another one. But I dont mind telling you those were horse liver sandwiches.
“I believe that’s one thing that makes the Belgian people so strong. Horse meat really makes you strong. Sure, it’s good. You can’t tell the difference between horse meat and cow meat to save your soul. A nice steak from a horse leg is good eating. I just can’t eat this meat they sell in tins. You know yourself they don’t can the best of the meat and I wouldn’t doubt that half the canned meat they’re all fussin’ about from that foreign country, is canned horse meat.
“Belgian people eat lots of fish and oysters, too. When the peddlers brought fish around every Friday, all the bones were taken out and it was clean enough to eat without washing it, if you wanted to.
“When we first came to America, we moved to Trench Town in Pratt City. I had plenty of friends that vent to the same church spoke French. Ion see there isn’t very much difference between the Belgian and the French language. If you can understand one, you don’t have any trouble with the other. I think Trench is softer and sweeter than Belgian. When we first moved to Trench Town, there were 104 families there, and we all belonged to the Trench lodge. Once a year, we would all get together and have a big picnic with lemonade and sandwiches, and we’d dance till way late. Now, nearly all our friends have either died or moved away, and it makes me too sad to go over there, now.
“After we had lived there in French Town for five years, oar house caught on fire and burned up everything we had-even all the pretty pictures and lace-not one thing did we save. But the worst of all, we didn’t have a place to go. Not one single house was to be had for love or money. Pratt was on the boom then. We looked and looked and finally we found an old house, Negroes had occupied. Negroes are dirty people and this house was filthy. I scrubbed it from top to bottom. After I had finished scrubbing the walls the floors, I went out and borrowed a step ladder to get to the ceiling. I was getting on just fine, when I looked around and saw the doctor. He gave one look and yelled out at me, ‘don’t you know you’ll kill yourself if you don’t get down off of that ladder?’ Well, he scared me so had that I fell from the top to the floor. My twin boys were born that night, two months too soon. They lived just four hours.
“I had plenty of milk and to spare, but not for long. A friend of mine heard about my babies and brought her little poor, sickly month-old baby to me and offered me fifteen dollars a month if I would nurse and take care of that pitiful baby. I just couldn’t refuse and I Iked to make money, anyhow. Well, those days were plenty good. She bought me everything that was good to eat. She bought beer, and the best fruit and candy. The chocolates came from France. She wanted my milk to be extra good and it was. In no time at all, that baby didn’t look like himself. Its own father and mother would have to look at him twice to make sure he was their baby. They couldn’t get to see him but once or twice a month. I kept him for fifteen months and I got to feeling he was mine. Believe me, I sure hated to give that baby up. He’s grown and married now, but every time he sees me, he throws his arms around me and kisses me - he’s that glad to see me.”
Mary DeRoy leaned back in her chair with a faraway look in her eyes.
“Women can’t make business over here like the can in the old country,” she went on. “About the only business I could get here was taking washes.
“You know one thing, I’ve heard so much talk about sickness and operations that I even got to thinking that the pain in my legs and back wasn’t rheumatism maybe, so I decided to go to a doctor, myself, but not to one of those doctors that work at a hospital, where it’s so handy just to step in and operate. I heard about a fine Negro doctor up in the country that just tells what’s the matter with you. Well I got my daughter to take me and when we got there, we found cars from five different states. Finally, my turn came. I went in and he stood there and looked at me. Then he looked at my fingernails and then at my eyeballs. Then he told me I didn’t have rheumatism like I thought I did, but I had female trouble-what ever that is, I don’t know. This doctor gave me four quarts of terrible smellin’ herb medicine and it tasted as bad as it smelled. He told me to come back when all my medicine was gone and that’ll be next Saturday. I feel fine already and I sleep lots better.”
About that time Augustus DeRoy finished his fence and came in to sit a while in the kitchen. He’s a little square-faced man with thin sandy hair, and straggly mustache. His face is rough but kind. His hands are calloused and he walks a little stiff.
“I was just saying when you came in, that I’m about well,” she said. Now that’s when the trouble starts, for they all come out on strike until he decides to pay accordin’ to what he gets. It never takes long, because other miners won’t come and work until it’s settled. As long as the strike lasts the union pays the strikers the interest on the dues paid in.
“Yes, all the workers have to go down in cages; twelve cars at the time. As the coal is loaded on the cages, it is brought out and twelve empty ones go down - then when they’re filled, the empty ones come back. They keep that up all day and lots at night. Sometimes the rope that pulls the cages gets out of fix and that means we’ve got to stay down there till it’s fixed. That’s when an hour seems like a day. When you’re seventeen hundred yards down in the ground it’s bad enough even if you know you can get out, but when you can’t get out, that’s the devil!
“No, I never did do anything in Belgium or here except follow mining. That’s all I know. Over here just like back in the old country, work gets slack in one place and whenever that happened I’d go to another mine. I was livin’ over at Pratts when work gave out and I had to go off and look for work. We never have been able to save much, so I’d have to go to the old woman and get some of hers. I remember I sure made her mad. It was back when she was nursin’ that baby for Mrs. Briar. She had saved up some all tell you just about the same thing - and laugh - they’ll tell you that they’ll try this one and if they can’t get along, they’ll get a divorce and try it again. I think it’s awful.
“Back in Belgium, the girl has to be at least eighteen and the boy at least twenty-one before they can marry. Besides that, they have to have the written permission of all four parents. When me and Mary got ready to marry my father was in America and we had to write for the papers to come all the way back. Then when a baby’s born, they give you just twenty-four hours to post the birth certificate. A divorce over there la not heard of. I sure do wish it was stricter here. It’d be better in every way. And another thing you never hear of a suicide in Belgium. About the only crime you ever hear of is a real good fiat fight, and there’s plenty of them. All the quarrels are settled that way. The law is mighty strict about owning a gun, a knife or any kind of weapon. And that’s a fine thing. If you can’t get hold of a weapon you sure can’t use it.
“I don’t believe half I read in the papers here about people killin’ each other. Paper can’t get up and walk off. It has to stay still and let you write on it. These writers get paid to write whatever people read, so you can’t blame them, but I don’t take heed of half of it.
“Oh, you don’t have to go just because I have to go back and finish my work in the yard. I want to have all my work caught up, if they call me back to work at Republic mine. They promised to let me know when they’re ready with some more work. My garden’s all caught up and the fences are fixed and when I finish the ditch around the house I’ll be ready. I haven’t had a day’s work in the last three months. I aura hope it won’t be that long again.”
Mary DeRoy went into the next room and came back with grape wine as clear as crystal and perfectly aged. “When August was talking about those brickettes a while ago, my mind went back years and years ago,” said Mary, as we drank the delicious wine. “I was stacking brickettes on my wheelbarrow just as high as they would go and wheeling them down to the river to load them on the boat. Well, this day I’m talking about, the board walk was as slick as glass and it was awful cold. Just as I got to the boat, my wheelbarrow slipped, and into the river went brickettes, wheelbarrow and all. I stood there with my hands on my hips. The boss came up and wanted to know why I wasn’t workin’. ‘Well, I said, ‘you don’t think I’m riskin’ my life for a darned wheelbarrow, do you?’ He gave me a new one.
“I always said that me and August could work in the mine and around the mines, but I didn’t mean for one of the children to do it. Well, I’ll tell you how it turned out. Both of my daughters married coal miners. One of my boys works at Hamilton Slope - one of the worst. I always say that’s where all these gray hairs came from. Every time I see a crowd or anything unusual out in the road my heart turns over. I know then and there that they’ve come to tell me Johnny has been killed or hurt.
“Now, the other boy, Bob, started in the mine to help August when he was fourteen. Well, August wanted to teach him and make a real good miner out of him, so he fussed and ha cussed when Bob did anything wrong. The more he complained, the better I liked it, for Bob got to where he was scared to death of the mine. He’d come home and cry and tell me how seared he was. I couldn’t stand that, so I put on my heat dress and went over to Pratt to see one of our rich Trench friends. I asked him to take Bob into his machine shop and let him learn a trade. He took him right in and started off payin’ him twenty- five cents a day while he was learain’. He kept on raisin’ him and raisin’ him until he got to making five dollars a day and now he makes eight dollars a day as a boilermaker. I sure made that man and his wife some fine dinners for helpin’ my boy. I’m still thanking God that my boy got out of that mine before somethin’ terrible happened to him. I believe when you’re scared of a mine, you’re being warned. The other boy, I guess will work in the mines as long as he lives. He loves it like me and August and he's not scared.”
As I started to leave, Mary DeRoy walked toward the porch with me. She insisted that I take care when I got to the yard and started up the road. “That road,” she said was on the level with the yard before the Government tore it up. Now the road’s high and the yard’s low. I can’t see they’ve done it any good - just spent a lot of good money. When you start up that road, you take your life in your hands. They tell me I can get some steps built up to the road, if I’ll go in town and tell them what they’ve done. But I say, let the people that buy this house worry about how they’ll get to the road.
“I’m sellin’ this house and the one next to it. My daughter that lives here with us, has bought some ground up the road a piece and me and the old man will move when they do. I can’t stand to have the air cut off from me, like that road has done.
“Oh, yes, I like America fine, but I do wish with all my heart that I could go back to Belgium for a visit. Just the thought of a trip to the old country makes me choke up with a sort of a longin’ and then I get trembly all over. Don’t you see, when I was in Belgium, I was a real woman - no pains - and stronger than any other woman around where I was. I guess I’ve aorta worshipped that part of my life. You know you can start back rememberin’ and after a while, all the bad things have a way of slippin’ away and things that used to he had, get to be wonderful instead. That’s what your heart does for you. Bight now my heart’s speakin’ and sayin’, ‘Mary DeRoy, if you could only go back to Belgium and get one of those good horse liver sandwiches with plenty of onions, yon could dance again and yon could sing as you’ve never sung before.’”
7/14/39
MS
