The following two life histories. "Weary Willie" (pp. 12671-12676) and the untitled interview on pages 12677-12684, are related. "Weary Willie" is an interview with Robert Maynard, a CCC worker. The untitled life history focuses on his family.
Paris, Tennessee
October 7, 1938
N. G. T.
WEARY WILLIE
Robert Maynard had just come in from his day's work in the field. He was still in his blue CCC work uniform. "This is better clothes than I ever had at home." he said, "before I got to the CCC. You see, at home they was so many of us, we couldn't have much clothes to wear and in summer time we jist didn't wear no shoes, and no shirts much, nor nothing else much.
"Let me git you somewhere to set if you want to talk a while. Hey, Sarge! kin I git a few minutes off to talk here to this lady here? Okay, Sarge."
When asked about his family, he said, "Well, my mama she come from Henry County. She was a De Hart. My papa, he come from Benton County, over here nigh Camden. They live at Phillipi now and been there about two year. I ain't got so big a family to keep up, not so big as lots of the boys has. I jist got five brothers and one sister. I'm the oldest and I ain't but nineteen year old.
"My brothers, they's named James Capliner, Jessie Vernon, Hildon Eugene, Charles Mozelle, and David Junior. My sister she's named Annie Myrtle and she's thirteen.
"We's farmers and renters. Ain't ever owned no home as yet. We lives at Phillipi now with a Mr. Earl Trim. We've got two big houses on each side of us and they's shore pretty, too. We ain't got so big a house to live in -- jist a small house, but my mother she's a good housekeeper and keeps everything spick and span. Ain't much trouble, you know, with a little house to keep it clean. We ain't got so much in it neither. Jist enough to make it comfortable for us. We got plenty of beds, though, arn bedstids, and all. You know jist like most any pore farmer's got, but enough to do us all.
"I ain't never been much to school. Jist went to the second grade, that's all, excepting what I learned here in the CCC. I could have gone, I guess, but for some reason didn't keer nothing about it. Jist didn't want to go. I would have went if I wanted to. They didn't make me not go. We jist didn't none of us go. I got one brother that went to the second grade, too, and my sister she went to the first. Then she quit. We jist wasn't a family that like school.
"I quit that old second grade when I was fourteen. I left home and went to work. Been on my own ever since. I went down here to Centerville and went to work on a farm. The man he was sick and not able to work and had to have somebody to help him. That's why I got to work so long, and even got the job at all. Got twenty dollars a month."
I asked. "Would you go on to school and finish now if you had the chance?"
"Don't know whether I could or not. I would really like to learn." He flushed and scowled. "The boys they make fun of us when we can't read the funnies nor nothing. I look at pictures in books, and things like that in the recreation hall, so they won't laugh at me. I wish I had gone on to school now and would go as far as I could if I git the chance. Guess I couldn't git much learning now though, could I? I'm too old most to learn now."
I asked if he wanted to stay with the CCC.
"Yes'm as long as I kin, because I git plenty to eat here. I didn't always at home, not the same kind of stuff, anyhow. Guess we had plenty, such as it was, at home, but it jist wasn't good like this, nor enough of it for the kind it was. I git to go more, git to see more. I'm learning too. I watch the others, and then, I have more clothes and can keep cleaner too.
"You see where we is at home they don't go to school. None of them has gone any since they moved to Lake County. They's three at home now to go to school, but they ain't went none and guess they won't ever. I got higher'n any of 'em. My littlest brother, he's three year old now. I git thirty dollars a month and send twenty-two of it home to them. They need it! My papa he don't make enough to do for all, jist renting and farming like he does.
"You see, my pap drinks some. Not all the time, but he gits drunk at times, and that makes it hard on mama. I got drunk a few times. First time I jist all at once didn't know what was wrong. I jist couldn't walk, so I set down and went to sleep. I don't drink now. I quit since I got in the C's which I've been in nineteen months now.
"I ain't never voted yet. Ain't old enough and don't think I will till I git old enough, neither. My papa, he's a 'Publican, but I'm going to be a Democrat myself. He don't vote in every election neither. But I'm going to when I git old enough. I'll take them all in as they come.
"Do I go to church?
"Well, no'm. Not now. While in the C I do. The chaplain preaches to us two times a month, and I like to hear him. He makes tears come in my eyes, too. I quit drinking all on account of him. I'm a good boy now. I don't go to church at town much because I'm afraid they'll laugh at me. My mother she's Baptist, but I jist go to any of them. I always give some money when I have it to give.
"Down home it's different. I've rambled all over that place and they ain't got no churches down there. I been there two years and ain't ever seen no church yet. Some of my little brothers ain't never seen no church yet.
"No'm. Ain't ever been sick to speak of. Ain't never had nothing but measles and 'pendicitis and had them both in Camp and got my bills paid. If I'd been at home, I wouldn't had no operation, couldn't have paid for it. I skipped all other sorts of being sick. I ain't never had pneumonia sickness yet. I jist about got all the doctor bills at home paid up now because I sent my whole check home and done without going to shows or smoking and everything to git them all paid up. The family's sick lots."
"Are you ever homesick?"
"Yes, heck! I have enough to eat, but by gosh, when the rest gits to raising cane to go home, sometimes it makes me homesick, too. I don't git there much because I jist can't pay my way. I like to Bee my mother though. You see, at home we have peas with bugs and weevils in them. We have sweet potatoes and I don't like peas, and sometime we have pudding and meat when mamma has time to make pudding for us.
"You ought to go to my house some time. We got a pump, and the water ain't much good. But mom she's clean. They jist don't make them no cleaner than my ma. And I got a girl at home. She jist lives half a mile of me. We go walking every time I go home, because we ain't got no car. We go boat riding sometimes, but I don't like swimming. I can't swim and, anyway, I don't want to see my girl in swimming and nearly naked like most of them goes. I ain't going in for anybody looking like that. I kissed her last time I was home, but didn't do that till after dark. I ain't never asked no girls here at Paris to go with me nowhere. I'm afraid they won't. Anyhow, I'm going to marry some day when I git a good job to keep her up. It would be too many children to keep up on what I make now. Mama needs what I make for the ones at home."
"What does your father do?"
"Blame if I know. Nothing. Jist sets around the house after he gits off work at night. You see, he farms. After the crop is laid by, he don't do nothing much. Jist sets around. He might go out to the stores some. They's three or four little stores around there, about half a mile apart. He won't let me go off in a car. I went riding in one one time with my girl and a whole lot of us. It runned off in a ditch and I ain't got in no more. They take the by-roads and fields down in there. I jist ain't going no more. I'm afraid.
"I git up about five in the morning, eat breakfast, go to morning classes, then go to the field. I don't work nearly so hard in this as I do in the field at home. I git to be with lots of boys that I wouldn't at home. They help me lots, show me how to do things I wouldn't have never knowed about. I like all my bosses and I like all the fellers. They tease me sometimes, but they like me, too. They call me Weary Willie. I guess it's because I look so sleepy-headed. I go to the shows some and I guess I make much as I need. I spend every blame penny I git my fingers on. I got eight dollars a month to spend. I sure do run through with it. Bet I could spend twenty dollars without half trying."