Hester Frye
Tishabee, Alabama
Ruby Pickens Tartt
Sumter County
Livingston, Alabama
NO LAWD I AIN'T READY
"Hit too late now," she said, "but I wish to do Lawd you had or got 'em a long time ago, fer they ain't never done Mr. Charlie no good, nor nobody else, of you ax me." She walked slowly into the room, through the door I had entered, and out the back. "De front door done been boa'ded up," she added, "caze don't nobody never come here no mo'," putting into that cryptic sentence all that one somehow felt.
I followed her down the back steps and across the narrow plank walk to a small cabin which I had somehow not seen on the far side of the house. "If this is your house," I said, "won't you let me come in and talk with you awhile, and tell me something of your family, and what you do and where you came from?" Her dialect I had noticed, was different from that of the usual Alabama Black Belt Negro.
With an apparent distrust, not only of me, but of life In general, she sat down on the steps, and in that same haunting voice said, "Tain't no use to come in case I ain't got nothin' ter tell, 'cause I don't know nothin'. My name is Hester; jes' lack I said, Hessie Frye is what X goes by. I ain't never been married ter nobody, that is I ain't had what you might call no reg'lar husband. 'An all I does is jes' stay here and look after Mr. Charlie. I ain't never been no fiel' hand.' stays in de house. I ain't got no folks, days all gone too long ago. My mammy's name was Lucy Frye. She came out here in slav'y time wid Marse Bob, from Char'ston, South Ca'lina in a wagin. Didn't none uv her folks come wid her,' her by herself, en she say she didn't never see none uv 'em no mo'. Den I was born here, right here in dis yard, and didn't never know no pappy, but I was here 'fore Marse Bob died, on 'fore his two boys, Mr. Joe and Mr. Johnny died too, en once dey's ain't no comin' back. I can't recollec' Miss Ca'line much, case my 'membrance is shaller, but she was us old Mistess. I knows she had or heap or troubles: I hear mammy say dat. I used to wash and iron de shirts en look atter de house in dem days, jes' lack Marse Bob lef' hit, dat's jes' lack he found hit. But ain't nothin' lef now to look atter. Ev'ything done drunk up an' in ruination. Mr. Charlie mos' done come to de end uv de row, en my tiredness done come down on me too. I don't 'zactly know how ole I is, but I knows I is gettin' on, but you better go 'long now, Miss," she said, "caze I'se got plenty ter do 'fore dark en hits mighty nigh fu'st dust now.
I apologized for having taken up so much of her time, and then remembered to say that I had been Invited into the "great house," as she called it, by en old Negro man. "Must err been 'Okay,'" she said. "but he don't b'long here no more en you does, he jes' roams about caze he ain't got no place ter stay at, en he's sorter fransy-mindad too. He can't do nothin' much 'cept chop little wood now en den."
A straight mulatto girl came up the path carrying a battered oil can and a small bundle of broom straw. "Here's the kerosene, me," she said to Hester." Mr. Charlie say fill up de lamp 'fore he get here, but he say he specks ter be late caze he gwine to de chicken fight over in Green."
Encouraged by this I decided to find out more if possible about thin pathetic old Negro. "Doan take data green broom straw in de house. Rose," said Hester. "De fros' ain't fell on hit yet en I'se done had 'nough bad luck 'thout that. Us can make de broom outside, I reckon Don't reckon Mr. Charlie give you no money did he, Rose?" asked Hester. The girl untied the corner of a large smudged handkerchief and displayed a twenty-five cant piece. "This all he gimme for de church supper," I recalled the Negro church that I had passed in the woods near the big road.
And so I asked if she were a member of Good Hope Church, and if she was going to the supper with Rose. If she had heard some bad news she could not have looked more bleak. She sat motionless for a few seconds, then slowly raised her head, and looking not at me but far beyond said:
"No's I ain't goin' to no church wid nobody. I ain't J'ined no church, case I ain't never had no b'lief an'no 'sperience, and you can't jine 'thout you is got 'ligion. Hit's too late now I reckon.
I used ter want ter jine, but Mr. Charlie say 'ligion wuz jes' a packer foolishness, en dat all dat shoutin' en whoopin' en hollerin' what folks did, wa'n't nothin' but foolishness neither." She paused a moment, then added "En I thought he knowed. No'm I didn't never Jine en hits too late now I reckon. I b'lieves Heaven's a good place to go though, but I can't tell you how come, caze I doan know nothin' 'bout hit. I ain't never 'fessed no hope In Christ, ain't never sung none uv dem old songs lack I hear 'em sing.
'De folks keep a-crowdin' on de gospel ship
There's no use a-waitin' for de 'scursion trip.'
"En I know dere ain't, dere sho' ain't, but I feels de need ter be baptized caze hit soon be time fer me ter ride on de Jordan tide an I ain't ready, no Lawd I ain' ready! I been settin' here thikin' 'bout dat en I b'lleves my time is mos' out sneezed las' night wid my mouth full of vittles en dat's a sho' sign er death, hit doan never fail hardly, en what is I gonner dot I hear: folks say Christians kin view God-er-mighty, en git happy if dey jus' 'fesses Christ. Some folks tells me dey kin hear little moans en kin walk 'crosk hell on a spider web, but I ain't never seen hit done. 'Fore mammy lef' she tole all us chillun on de plantation ter live fer Christ, caze she said hit wuz de onliest way, but I didn't pay her no mind.
"You see. Miss, Marse Bob didn't 'low none uv his colored folks to go ter no church in dem daya, er to no meetin', on didn't 'low 'em to have no books er no schoolin' caze they say he wuz feared uv a uprisin' mongst 'em Dem wuz sad times, en Marse Bob said 'ligion wuz a lot er trash jes lack Mr. Charlie do now, en both them got book larnln', Mr. Charlie en dem is, an' Mr. Charlie he know dem books by heart. I ain't neven been ter no school. I doan know whut de Bible say 'bout hit, eaze I can't read no printin'. I used to try to pray sometimes when I get lonesome lack, en I'd shut de door en put my head down in de wash pot so hit could kech de soun', den pray easy lack so Mr. Charlie wouldn't hear me an' fuss. I reckon ef I could er prayed out loud I could er got 'ligion but hit's too late now; hit look lack I jes' can't hardly b'lieve somehow. Dropped her hands between her knees and said no more.