Another version of "A Dead Convict Don't Cost Nothing," entitled "Jim Lauderdale: River Wreck," can be found on pages 369-37.
Jim Lauderdale, Jack Kytle
Talladega Springs, Ala.
"A DEAD CONVICT DON'T COST NOTHIN"
"All my life I slaved an' made a good livin' fer her. I giver 'er a place to live fer goin' on 45 year, an' she didn't never hurt fer nothin' to eat. I slunk aroun' like a hound, takin' things off'n her, when I ought' er' ‘ve busted her with a hick'ry limb. Now look what it got me. I'm here by myself, dyin' by th' graduals, an' she'a gone."
Jim Lauderdale slouched there on the front porch of his pine-board ahanty, in the straw-bottomed chair. His thick, knotty fingers trembled as he placed his hands on thin, denim-covered knees. His bald head glistened in the bright morning sunlight, but his skin was a puffy, pasty yellow, seared by deep furrows.
He said, 'Th' ol' Man'll be comin' fer me any day now, an' I couldn't tell you who'll bury me. Doe Grimes says my heart's cuttin' up sump 'un terrible. I'm a ol' man--I'm 76--an' I ain't of no use to nobody. That woman took ever'- thing I had, an' now she's gone to Sylacaugy to live with our girl. They work in th' mill up thar. They make $22 a week between 'em, but they don't help me with none of it. They don't never come to see me."
He raised a shaking hand to his stubbled cheek, as if shielding a secret. "Ora turned my girl an' my boy ag'in me. She done it. She told 'em a pack of dirty lies 'bout what I done, an' I ain't done half the things she said. She has throwed up to 'em a million times 'bout me bein' sent to Kilby, an' she told 'em that I allus did run atter sorry woman. Nov, I ain't got nothin' to say 'bout Kilby--ever 'body knows I had to go down thar--but th' other is a Passel of goddamn lies. She knows it is. She started p'isenin' their minds when they was little things.
"If it was a shame fer me to be in prison, she can thank herself for it. I'd a never done it if it hadn't a been fer her. They's ways I coulda got by, but it's diff'runt whar thar's somebody else. I was pushed to it. When I quit work at th' mines, I had enough to come off down here an' live by careful savin'. My heart was bad, an' I knowed I couldn't do no heavy work ag'in.
"When I got here I had a little better'n $3,000 in cold cash, an' I wanted to find a place to put it. I allus did think that ol' Man Mitchum was a good friend of mine; he had a head full of sense, so I knowed he was keepin' his money whar it was safe. I went an' asked him whar to put mine, an' he told me th' safest place he knowed of was th' bank at Sylacaugy. I trusted him, an' I done what he told me. He ought a knowed 'bout th' bank, fer he was mixed up with runnin' it in some sort of way.
"Well, it seemed I hadn't no mor'n got my money in thar than it went busted. Course, th' first thing I done was to go to ol' Mitchum; I don't know why. I should've knowed, he didn't give a damn 'bout what become of me, but when I seen him, he looked all down in th' damps. He said he'd lost most of his money, too, an' that he was worse s'prised than anybody in th' world could be. He said he wasn't up on what was goin' on at th' bank, an' that he didn't know they was a thing wrong.
"He was a goddamn liar. He Knowed that bank was goin' under, an' I bet he didn't lose one red penny in it. I thought he was my friend, but I tell you, they ain't nobody yo'r friend when it comes to money. Anybody'll beat you. What happened was that ol' Mitcham an' th' other big wigs in that bank took th' folks money an' than lived high an' wide on it. They ain't a way to prove it, but that's what they done. Atter I was busted flat, I'd see that ol' man sittin' on th' porch up thar at th' Springs in his big brick house, livin' on some of my $3,000! an' it was all I could do to keep from goin' up thar an' stompin' him. I never did speak to him ag'in, an' I wasn't sorry when he died. It was good riddance.
"If you ain't lest no money in a bank, you don't know what it does to you. They wasn't nothin' I could do 'bout it but r'ar an' cuss, but I knowed I had to make some more to live on, an' I couldn't do no hard work. It all ended up with me goin' to Jess Stone an' j'inin' up sorter as partners with him. He was makin' popskull down on Peckerwood Creek, an' we fixed it so I'd sell it at th' Springs. I gived him what little money I had left to buy sugar an' shorts, an' th' way we had things worked out, I stood to make a little profit.
"I oughter've knowed they was trouble comin'. Ora is one of these damn holy roller kind--crazy religion, an' 'fore th' third customer had come by th' house she was raisin' hell. She said so help her God that she was go'nter report me. I knowed she was th' meanest woman that ever lived, but I didn't think she'd take bread out'n her own mouth. Well, I's wrong.
"I was sittin' on my front porch one Sunday evenin' when a automobile driv up, an' out hopped a bunch of depitys from Talladega. They come runin' in th' yard like they was somebody bein' killed, an' some of 'em started pokln' aroun' in th' weeds out at th' side of th' house. Bob Burke, th' chief depity, was with 'em, an' he come up to whar I was sittin' on th' porch. He says, 'We're sorry 'bout this, Jim, but we got a report you're sellin' likker.'
"It was all as clear as water to me. I didn't move one inch, but I looked out t'ward th' weeds whar th' others was searchin', an' they was makln' out like they was havin'trouble findin' th' stuff. I told Bob, 'Go on an' git it; you know whar it la. They ain't no use makin' out you don't know 'bout it when you done been told.' He laughed a little, an' then he walked out thar an' Picked up th' jug.
"Nobody but Ora could have told 'em, fer ahe was th' only one 'sides me that knowed whar it was. She was in th' house when they come, but I never even said howdy to 'er. I jes' went with 'em to Talladega, an' stayed in jail till I got Oscar Johnson to go my bond. My case come up at th' next term of court, an' that's why I had to go to prison. She sent me thar, an' now she is p'isened my children's min'e ag'in me.
"Why I ever got married to her, I don't know. I'd knowed her ever since she was a strip of a gel, but I never knowed she was a devil. I ain't got no excuse, though. Her daddy come to me 'fore we was married, an' he says, 'Jim, they's sump'un you ought'er know. Ora's mighty nervous-like, an' sometimes she does things that make me b'lieve she ain't got good sense. She's got a good face 'round you, but she can raise more hell'n a mean mule. I don't like to talk 'bout my own flesh an' blood, but I jes' want you to go in this thing with yo'r eyes open.'
"That ol' man was tellin' me th' God's truth, but I didn't b'lieve him. I thought he was jes' wantin' to keep his gal at home, but I know now he was a good friend tryin' to save me. He tol' me that when she had one of her spells she'd take a dress an' rip it to pieces. That tickled me, fer I thought Ora was th' best hearted woman in th' world. Well, I've seen her tear up dresses. I've seen her tear up a lot of 'em.
"It wasn't a week atter we married, 'fore she was r'arin'. They wasn't nothin' that'd suit her. I was workin' at Hope's Quarry than, makin' $35 a month, an' that was party fair money in them times. We didn't pay no rent, an' I'd bought up a little furniture. We had plenty fer our bellies an' backs, but that wasn't enough fer her.
"She got atter me right off to go to Mr. Hope an' tell him he'd have to pay me more. She got to talkin' 'bout him an' him folks ridin' in their fine buggies an' wearin' their fine clo's, while we was makin' out with nothin'. Well, you know a man can't go to his boss an' ask a raise right off’n th' bat. He'd git fired quieker'n you can bat yo'r eye; but Ora didn't give a damn 'bout that. She was jes' full of ol' hell, an' she didn't like fer things to be quiet.
"When she seen they wasn't go'nter be no more money, she startad waggin' her tongue. She tol' ever'body that come to see us how hard it was to be married to a po'r man, an' she said she wouldn't never marry me ag'in. That got next to me, but I stood it till she started carryin' tales 'bout Mister Hope. She went aroun' tellin' that she seen him fall off'n his horse, he'a so drunk. That wasn't nothin' but a lie, fer Mister Hope never drunk none; but th' tale didn't do me no good with other men at the quarry. Course their wives tol' 'em about it, an' I guess they couldn't understan' why I didn't put a stop to it.
"I knowed I'd hav'to git Ora away from thar. Didn't nobody come to see us no more, an' it was gon'ter be Jes' a matter of time till Mister Hope got hold of one of them tales. He liked me, but I knowed be couldn't put up with nothin' like that. I started castin' out my lines, an' one day I got a chance to go to th' Red Diamond mine close to Birmingham. I'd never fooled none with coal, but I's ready to try anything.
"Well, sir, it looked like that move was a good'un i's makin' $60 when I first went thar, but it wasn't long 'fore they put me to guardin' the convicts an' give me $65. Ora seemed to be th' gal I'd courted fer a while, an' she was havin' a good time with th' extra money. It didn't cost much more to live in Birmingham then, fer it was jes' a little town, 'bout th' size that Sylacaugy is now. It wasn't long 'fore Ora was go'nter have a baby, an' I thought my troubles was over.
"I got my first trainin' at handlin' men when I's watchin' than convicts. They was a bad crowd, an' I had to be bad with 'em. I hadn't been thar two weeks when I got atter a buck nigger 'bout how he was buildin' a scaffold that keeps th' roof from failin' in; an' he sassed me. They'd done told me never to take nothin' off them bastards, so I jes' went over to him an' nearly heat his brains out with my club. That nigger wasn't able to dig no more coal fer a long time.
"They was a lot of people back then who was causin' trouble 'bout th' convicts. They said it wasn't right fer th' State to hire 'em out to th' operators, an' they kept on till they put a stop to it. But I don't know if they was right or not. A man wouldn't be so ready to rob or kill somebody if he knowed he was goin' to th' mines. When he was hired out back then, they wasn't no pamperin'. I remember they told us to shoot quick as hell if anybody got rough, or tried runnin' off. They said they was lots more whar these come from, an' that when you knocked one of 'em off it was no worse'n killin' a hog or a cow.
“I never did have to kill nobody. A white man started runnin' off one day an' I let him have a load of buckshot in th' legs, but he got well. We had one guard, though, that'd killed a fleck of 'em. He was a big, raw-boned man name of Giles, an' he had th' convicts so skeered of him that they'd start tremblin' when he was aroun'. Be told me one day that when he leveled down on one, he aimed to kill him. He said th' company'd rather have a guard do that than to jes' wound one, fer a dead convict didn't cost nothin' fer medicine.
"We done some things that wasn't right, I know. When I was bein' watched by th' law myself, I thought about that, an' I was thankful I waited till I was a ol' man to git in trouble. We useta keep a big barr'l out back of a shed at th' mine a, an' when I think back on it now, I know we whooped niggers jes' to have fun. We'd pull their britches off an' strop 'em across th' barr'l by their hands an' feet so they couldn't move, an' then we'd lay it on 'em with a leather strop. I've seen niggers with their rumps lookin' like a piece of raw beef. Some of 'em would pass cut like a light, but they'd all put up a awful howl, beggin' us to stop. It wasn't right fer us to do that.
"Th' company had lots of ways to make a bad convict work, but us guards didn't follow 'em much. Didn't nobody want to put a convict in the sweat box, or feed him on bread an' water, fer they wasn't no fun in watchin' that. We had one white man that was servin' a term fer robbery, an' he was one of th' stubbornest devils I ever seen. He was put in th' sweat box, an' he was whooped a time or two, but still he loafed aroun' lookin' like he was wantin' trouble. Well, one day 'long 'bout quittin' time, he got it.
"They'd put him in silea' gang--that'a whar they put most of th' bad 'uns. Giles kept tellin' him that he was go'nter make him work if he had to kill him, but th' convict either didn't b'lieve him or he didn't care. Well, it kept up like that fer a good while, an' then Giles got some handcuff a an' had 'em bring the con to whar he was. He handcuffed th' man's hands from behin', an' then he took him back of a shed.
"I won't never see nothin' like that ag'in, fer I couldn't watch it now. Giles backed the con up to th' shed, an' when he started hittin' him, th' blood splattered ever'where. Giles was jes' usin' his fists, but he was strong as a bull, an' he hit a awful lick. He beat this eon's face till it was a mess of blood, an' he wouldn't let him fall. When th' feller's legs give 'way, Giles caught him by th' throat with one han', an' kept on beatin' him with th' other. In jes' a few licks, th' con's nose was broke an' it looked like his teeth was all knocked out. Somebody, asked Giles to stop 'fore he killed him, so he hit him one or two more good licks an' let him fall.
"They tried to make that feller work next day, but he couldn't do it. He couldn't see, His eyes were as blue as a pair of new overalls, an' they was swelled tight. It wasn't right to beat him so bad, far they was other ways of makin' him do th' work. I don't know what ever become of him.
"Things ain't like that now. Coarse they still beat 'em in some of W gangs, I guess, but th' big prisons don't do it. When I was at Kilby, ever'body treated me nice. They took it fer a big joke when a man was sent thar far makin' likker, fer they all drank it when they as off'n duty. One guard told me he was comin' down to Talladega County some day, an' he wanted me to have five gallon ready fer him.
"As I said, I was gettin' along fine with Ora th' firet month or wo at Red Diamond. But all of a sudden she started buyin' up new things fer th' house--sofas, tables, an' th' like--an' I knowed I'd never pay fer 'em if she kept it up. Th' baby was on its way, an' that was go'nter be a good bit of expense. I stood her buyin' spree long as I could, an' than I asked her one day to kinder ease up so we could cool off. Well, sir, she went into a fit, teared up a coupla dresses, an' took a hammer an' beat the new sofa till it was nearly ruined. Lots of folks would've thought she was gone crazy, but I knowed it was jes' th' ol' hell poppin' out'n her.
"I put a stop to that buyin'. I done it by jes' not givin' her th' money to buy with, an' refusin' to pay fer anything she got on a credit. I hated to do it while she was carryin' my baby, but I guess it was one of the best things I ever done. It was th' only way fer me to save any money. She took a lot of tales to the neighbors, an' she tol' enough lies to damn my soul forever, but it didn't hurt me none. Th' people livin' 'round us got onto how she was, an' they didn't pay no 'tention to her atter awhile.
"Our first baby was our girl, an' Ora was hog-crazy 'bout it. She started peetin' her from th' very first, an' when th' boy come three year later, she was th' same way 'bout him. She never did want me to git close to either one of 'em. Lots of times when they was little. I'd bring candy or some toys home to 'em, but Ora'd take th' presents an' tell th' children she bought 'em. I never had sense enough to know then how she was workin' in with 'em. I wouldn't raise no sand 'bout how she acted, fer I wanted to keep her temper down if I could. But I know now that she started p'isenin' em ag'in me from th' time they was able to walk.
"A man ought'er pay more 'tention to what's goin' on in his own family. I'd like to go over them days ag'in, fer I'd run my place diff'runt an' git in better with my children. But I was too busy makin' a livin' to think of much else. Things was lookin' up in coal an' iron then, an' Alabama was boomin'. I scratched ev'ry nickel I could an' I saved some of 'em. We was workin' at th' mines in 12-hour shifts, an' they wasn't no such thing as a union. We kept them convicts humpin', an' we got things done.
"They ain't much I know 'bout unions. They may be all right, for they've got th' hours down to nothin',an' th' wages is better. But back in ay day, it was diff'runt. You didn't ask no boss fer more pay then, fer if you got unsatisfied they'd jes' throw you out. I was lucky to have a good bossman. I never did ask Mr. John fer more money, but he paid me fair. He kept me on th' payroll when I's too sick to do much work, an' they don't do that these days.
"I know one thing fer sure. We couldn't a done sump'un back then that I seen at th' mill up at Talladega a few months ago. They was havin' a strike thar, an' they wouldn't let nobody go in th' mill to work. If anybody'd tried that on Mister John, they'd a been plenty of shootin', fer he didn't monkey 'round 'bout nothin'. I remember they tried to git up a union at Red Diamond once, an' they sent soldiers in thar to break it up. A few heads was cracked then, but it wasn't nothin' as bad as I've heard of since.
"Unions wouldn't a ever suited me, I don't reckon. I allus tried to be on th' boss' side in ever'thing, an' maybe that's why I was allus treated good. That's why I kept gittin' better money, till I was makin' $150 'fore my heart got too bad fer me to work. I guess it was a good thing that I was happy on my job, fer I wasn't havin' no peace at home. It was hall ever'whar I turned, an' even when I's makin' good money, Ora was still complainin' 'bout havin' to marry a po'r man.
"I jes' let her rave till th' children was growed up a little, but then sump'un happened that got her turned ag'in me from that time on. She was goin' to a church whar they got down on th' floor an' cut up--whooped and hollered an' jabbered--an' jes' acted crazy in ev'ty way. I was worried 'bout her mind, but I didn't say nothin' till she started tryin' to take th' kids down thar.
"Now, I figgered they was as much mine as her'n, an! I made up my mind that she wasn't go'nter take 'em into that mess. I don't go to no charch--I never did--but I b'lieve thar's a God an' a life beyond this'un. I jes' don't think a body has to go crazy to git to heaven; th' Lord don't want a gang of fools up thar.
"Well, when she tried to take th' kids to them meetin's, I took a stand ag'in her. It was on a Sunday night an' shewas dressin' 'em up, goin' on crazy- like while she was doin' it. I went in to whar they was, an' I told her she wasn't go'nter take 'em outa th' house. When I said that, she jumped up an' run up to me shakin' all over. She says, 'You mean yo'r go'nter 'pose th' Lord?', an' I told her th' Lord didn't have no toleration fer this sort of thing. I said I didn't aim far my own little children to git mixed up with a bunch of crazy people.
"Fore we finished the row, ever'body but me was a cryin', an' she was hoggin' th' kids an' takin' on over 'em. Po'r little things, it wasn't their fault. I ought'er 've knowed right then that their minds was bein' sot ag'in me, but I jes' let things rock on till they was gone too fer.
"That sort of thing kept up long as I lived with her. She got th' children to b'lievin' that I wouldn't giver'em no money, but that I was spendin' it all on sorry women. She told 'em that I'd allus boon mean to her--that I'd beat her when they was little--an' all them sort of lies. Now, Iinever laid a hand on her in my life, but I should a done it. When she first started carryin' on I should a got a stick to her.
"I never will fergit th' day when I's laid off at the mine. I'd been pokin' about fer a long spell. My heart was bad, an' I's coughing purty awful. I guess that coal dust gits in a man's throat an' makes him cough that way. Anyway, I's past doin' ay part of work, an' whan Mister John come up to me one mornin', I knowed what it was all about. He was mighty nice, but he told me how things was. He said th' company was go'nter give me a month's pay, 'sides what I had comin' to me, an' that I could stay on in th' house till I got myself settled ag'in.
"No, sir, I don't think he could a done me no better. A laborin' man is jes' like a horse--when he gits wore out an' so old that he gits in th' way, they ought'er take him out an' shoot him. I'd been drawin' my paycheck thar better'n 35 year, an' some of th' checks was mighty good. No, sir, it ain't Mister John's fault that I'm whar I am today. It ain't nobody's fault but Ora's an ol' Man Mitchum's.
"If I could a kept my $3,000 to go on, I'd be all right. I'd still have my family, I guess, fer long as th' money was flowin', Ora stuck aroun'. She wasn't go'nter leave no good thing, but soon as I was broke, she got out'n here fast as her legs'd carry her. Oar girl was already workin' in Sylacaugy, so Ora went up thar an' housed up with her. The boy is stayin' with 'em an' doin' odd jobs aroun' in garages an' things like that. No, sir, they didn't git much schoolin'; They done like I did--fell out 'fore they was finished. Ain't neither one of 'em married, an' I don't guess they will long as Ora lives. I guess they'a seen so much hell in bein' married that they think ever'body is like that.
"You know, a man's a goddamn fool. I know that, fer I helped Ora stack up a good ease ag'in me. Now, like I told you, I ain't never had nothin' to do with sorry women--I jes' don't like 'em, an' I never would have no part of 'em. But I've hit th' likker bottle pretty hard, an' when a man is seen full a coupla times, people's ready to b'lieve anything that's said 'bout him. Children ain't no diff'runt from other folks, so it was easy fer Ora to make 'em b'lieve that I was bad in a lot of other ways.
"I wouldn't tell you this, but I jes' want to show you how she could make a thing look awful. Th' children wasn't here when it come up, but they's seen other things like it. I was fishin' down on Cedar, an' Jess Eatris come by with a jug of syrup likker. We hit it up a little, an' you know how that kind of stuff gits you. Weren't no time 'fore we was pretty full.
"Well, sir, I come in quiet-like that night. It was right atter I got out of prison, and I didn't want to git no 'tention. I was in ny right head- I wasn't even staggerin' much--an' I figgered I'd git in th' house an' lie down awhile.
"I might a knowed better. I ought'er 've jes' stayed on with Jess till I was cold sober, fer I hadn't no mor'n hit th' door when Ora started carryin' on. She yelled as bad as if I's beatin' her, an' maybe I rose my voice a little; but they wasn't nothin' callin' fer so much noise. She run out on th' porch, takin' on an' wringin' her han's, so ever'body in bearin' diatance knowed 'bont it. She wanted 'em to know.
"Ever' thing would a been all right if it hadn't a been like that. But first thing I knowed, that damned preacher that lives over thar crost th' road was here, an' he took a han' in it. He didn't even try to fin' out what was cauain' it, but he come bouncin' up to me, yellin', 'You better be on yo'r knees beggin' fergiv'ness 'stid of sittin' thar in that cheer'. Well,that runned all over me, an' I told him to git th' hell out; that it wasn't none of his damned business.
"They might as well of called out th' fire wagon at th' Springs to make it a good show. It wasn't no time 'fore that ragged-tailed p'liceman from over thar come runnin' up with a squirrel gun. He asked Ora what I'd been doin', an' she says I was cuttin' up so bad she was skeered to stay 'round me. Now mind you, I was purty sober by that time, but he wanted to ac' smart. He took me into th' Springs an' locked me up in th' callaboose.
"Nex' mornin' in that little two-by-four mayor'a court over thar ol' Man McKinnon fined me $5 an' give me a good talkin' to, while ever'body in town packed in to lis'en. When I come home, Or'd done gone, am' she's been gone ever since. They sent a truck down here ' bout a month ago an' took nearly ever'thing I had in th' house--Ora said th' stuff b'longed to her, though I paid fer it. I didn't raise my hand ag'in 'em, fer a ol' mam like me don't need nothin' but a bed to sleep on.
"I reckon all th' folks 'round here blame me fer none of my family livin' with me, but it's got to whar I don't care. I don't have nothin' to do with nobody, an' it ain't go'nter be long 'fore th' ol' Man is comin' atter me. I'm ' bout ready to go, too, but I'd like to git things fixed up so's they'd bury me good.
"One of th' things I wish fer mos' is a chanct to git even with that goddamned p'liceman. I'd like to give him a bellyful of hot lead, but I can't 'ford to do that. He thinks he's smart as hell goin' aroun' puttin' people in th' callaboose; but he'd run like a black snake if you ever jumped at him in th' dark.
"I had a chanct a few days ago at ol' Cardan, that preacher over thar crost th' road. I was sittin' right whar I am now, an' he was out on his porch tryin' to read. Well, they was a little ol' dog over thar too, an' he was sick or stunp'un, fer he kept howlin' an' wailin'. The more he went on like that, th' madder ol' Carden got. His face turned so red that I could see it shinin' from over here.
"Well, air, he slapped at th' dog a coupla times, but that didn't do no good. It jes' kept up its howlin'. Then all at onct, ol' Carden got a hammer from some'rs there on the porch, an' he went over an' beat th' dog to death. He didn't kill it at th' first lick, so he jes' kept chasin' it an'hittin' it ag'in, an' he was ragin' mad.
"Attar it was all over an' he'd sot down again, I jes' went out in my yard an' yelled at him. I says, 'Don't you git on yo'r knees an' ask fergiv' ness when you till a po'r little dog like that!' He started out'n his cheer like he was go'nter do stunp'un big, but he ain't done it yet. He knowed he'd done a worse thing than take a few drinks of likker, an' I hope he roasts in hall fer it.
"I'm sorry 'bout you havin' to go, fer I don't reckon I'll live to see you ag'in, 'thout you come hack mighty quick. Doc Grimes says I'm liable to go out any time 'less I stop hittin' ay bottle, an' I'm too ol' to be stoppin' that. It's got to whar it takes some far me ever' day--I think it does my heart good. Won't you come in an' have one? It ain't th' bes' in th' world, but it's good shinny.
"I wish whan you git back that you'd ask them Gover'mint folks 'bout what they go'nter do fer th' ol' people. I keep hearin' talk of it, but if they don't rush up, it ain't go'nter do me no good. These welfare women'll have me starved to death 'fore my pension gits to me."
8/8/39
S.J.
