Rose Shepherd
No. 175
February 24, 1937.
JACKSONVILLE - Early County Fairs)
 Mrs. H. H. Simmons,
43 West 8th-st.,
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mrs. Simmons says: "My husband, Mr. H. H. Simmons, who died from an accidental gunshot wound in 1936, came to Florida from Beaufort South Carolina, as soon as the quarantine on yellow fever was raised date in 1888. He had a peculiar throat affection – diagnosed as erysipelas of the tonsils – his throat almost closed from swelling and so irritated be could not swallow, and came to Florida seeking health, so ill he was almost in despair of even surviving the trip, but prepared for the inevitable as he remarked “He would just as soon die in Florida as anywhere else"
“He placed himself under the care of Dr. Williams, and in short order recovered, ever being booster for Florida, and especially Jacksonville.
"He become interested in real estate and established a most successful business, now continued by my son, Ralph.
"I well remember the first Duval County Fair, Which he put on, <text not clear>might say, single-handed, in the old Seaboard Railway Depot at the foot of Hogan-st, in the Fall of 1903, going out and getting people interested in exhibiting products from their farms, and even persuading the women of the County to offer their fancy-work and home sewing for exhibition. One of these good ladies tells me Mr. Simmons gave her as premium for her exhibit a small rug, 24 x 36"-which she highly prized and is still using.
"This was a start and much interest was stimulated by this endeavor. The Duval County Fair Association was organized and the next Fair was held in the old Chamber of Commerce Building, Main and Adams-st.
"Out of this grew the Florida state Fair Association, grounds are secured in the Brentwood section, buildings erected and Fairs held regularly for many years, funds being contributed by the Government, State and County.
"At its organization, in 1917, Duval County's contribution to the <text not clear>Association, according to the Circuit Clerk's office, was $10,000.
“The Florida farmer in its issue of November 15th, 1927, ten years later, gives the following information:
The 10th annual Florida State Fair will open November 17th for a num of nine days, Sunday, November 20th, excepted. F. C. Groove is president of the State Fair Association.
The International Harvester Company will stage a mammoth display of power farming machinery, while the Jacksonville Auto-Dealers' Association have arranged for their biggest automobile show in which between one hundred and fifty and two hundred cars and trucks will be exhibited.
Besides the exhibits in the Varied Industries Building, the Negro <text not clear>other permanent departments of the Fair, there are to be habits on the Boy Scouts Showing their many activities, and the Jacksonville Motor Club will have a "Safety Exhibition."
The 124th Infantry Band of the Florida National Guard will play three concerts daily during the Fair, while the University of Florida Band will also play one day.
Dr. Fons Hathaway, head of the Florida State Road Department, will so have a display of the work of his department.
H.H. Simmons is Manager of the Agricultural and Horticultural exhibits. Thirteen Florida Counties will exhibit at the Florida State Fair.
Some of the South's finest cattle and hogs will be brought to the <text not clear>the Livestock Department being in charge of a well known expert, J. J. Logan.
'The Boys' and Girls' Clubs of the State have entered between 800 and 1,000 pigs. Mr. R. W. Blalock, Boy's Club Agent of the co-operative extension work in Agriculture and Home Economics at the Fair, is much pleased with the interest manifested in this Department. Winners in<text not clear> Divis on will receive many special prizes in addition to those of <text not clear>by the Fair Association. Among these is the Frank E. Dennis <text not clear>awarded in the grand championship pig contest. If a boy wins, will be given a $250.00 scholarship in the College of Agriculture in University of Florida. If a girl, wins, she will be given a scholarship at the Florida State Collage for Women at Tallahassee.
"Mr. Simmons, in addition to his interest in the County and State <text not clear>was also an extensive pecan grower in this section and was in<text not clear> in forming the Georgia Florida Pecan Growers Association, which later affiliated with the National organization.
"He was also one of the first men in Duval County to promote a program of cattle tick eradication, later taken over by the State of Florida, in operation with the United States Government."
