SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: THE COLLINS FAMILY.
Date of First Writing January 2, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed Jules Collins nad son, Jim (colored)
Street Address  62 Collins Street,
Place Fairmont, S.C.
Occupation  Mill Worker (Picker room)
Name of Writer  Ruth D. Henderson
Name of Reviser Regional Office
Date of second revision March 23, 1939
THE COLLINS FAMILY.
"Well, Miss," said Uncle Jules, "but I sho' thought you one dem women frum de gov'ment offices. 'Cose I ain't disappointed much, hut you look jest like Miss ---, can't call her name now, but I bet you knows who she is. Yes, I put in fer my pension last March, but I ain't hyard a word yet. I thought when I seed you coming dey's mtt sending at last to 'vestigate me. Dem women take me in a little room and ax me all de questions dey can think of; den dey say somebody would be sont out to 'vestigate. I ax'em if dere's anything else dey want to know, and dey 'low t'warn't nothing else; and dat's de last I ev'r hyard frum it." Uncle Jules smiled wanly as he sat in his rocking chair, the only article that offers a semblanoe of comfort in the ramshacklee house. When he smiles he shows his only teeth; and, as he says, "one pints no'th and t'other so'th."
Short, black, and moon-faced, <text not clear> a gray stubby beard that curly on the ends.
No place could be seen on his tattered overalls that had not been patched and repatched. Not a single button was <text not clear> on his garments, but safety pins, dangled here and there He pushed aside his home-made cap and scratched his gray head.
"Sho' 'nough Miss, I thought de gov'ment had done sont you to see 'bout my pension; but being it ain't dat way, I'se be glad to tell you anything I'se can. Maybe you could tell me something about it, anyways.
"Oh yessum, I'se plenty old enough to git de pension, all right. I'se been gwine on sixty-five ever since I give it to 'em down dere last March, We runn'd up my age and found dat I wuz bawn 'bout de time war wuz over --- when dey freed de slaves, you know. I sont by Mr. Gaston and told him to ax 'em if dey had any pleas aginst me. I knows too much to be sassy -- don't git no-whar dat way. Dey jest say dat dere's nothin' wrong, and dat's all I know to dis day. You knows you jest has to do de bes' you can and dat's all.
"Slavery? I don't 'member nothin' of slavery time, fer dat's 'bout de time I wuz bawn, but 'cose I'se hyard mammy and pappy talk 'bout de war sometimes. I wuz one of de little 'freedmen'. My mammy wuz a slave of old Gen'al Miller dat lived down at Moore's. My pappy, be belonged to Mrs. Van Dyke, but he changed his name to Collins - dat's his pa's name - atter he wuz a free man. Same spell it wid a 'g', and den some spell it jest like Collins' Bee Hive. Don't make no diff'uns.
"My mammy and pappy got married befo' they wuz sot free. I'se hyard talked how dey married back den; some say dat dey jumped over brooms and things like dat, but hit wuz all changed time I got big 'nough to git married. Mammy said de slaves wuz treated purty good and dey had plenty to eat - sich as it wuz - but dey had to work mighty hard. When I wuz a little chap, I used to go to de Nazareth Church with my mammy holding my hand. I'se members dat right good. De colored folks all sot in a corner to demselves. Mr. Reid wuz de fust man I ever hyard preach. He preached dar at Nazareth fer a long time. I knowed his son well. His name Mr. Whit, and he's one of dem men dat measured off land -- surveyors, yes, dat's it.
"De slaves worked 'round de house fer a while atter dey's sot free. I used to be one of de little house-boys fer Mr. Joel Miller. Atter I got older dey sont me down in de lowlands to make it de bes' I'se could. 'Cose, de rest of 'em had to git out too. Dey had to furnish everythin' and de land; and de slaves - now freedmen - got one-third of what dey made. Sho' wuz hard times back in dem days, and de houses den wuz made of hewn logs, wid a door in one side and a winder in t'other. Jest plain old mud wuz dabbed in de cracks to keep out de cold and rain. All de cooking wuz did on a great big open fireplace. Dey used pots and ovens to cook in. Coals wuz raked out'en de fireplace and de oven sot on dem; den some coals wuz put on top of the oven, too. I'se sho' et some mighty good eatings cooked on de open fire.
"In de fields dey raised jest 'bout what dey does now. I'se made a good hand in de wheat field -- I'se been cradling all my life. De cradle has a whole passel o' fingers on it, and you jest sweep it along and cut de wheat. De binder comes along and stacks it up, den de stacks is put in de stocks, atter dat it's carried to de thrasher. 'Cose, dam times done changed now -- fust day used yoke oxen, den dey use horsepower, and now dey uses engines to pull de machinery.
"My fust memory be when I wuz sont out to 'thin grass' and tote water. Dat's what de little younguns had to do. I'se went to school jest a little, but soon's I'se got big 'nough to work, den dey sont me to de fields. Time I got fifteen I'se made a good hand, and I been at it might near ever since. I had brothers and sisters dat helped out on de farm, but soon as dey got big 'nough to leave dey scattered out and I'se can't give no 'count of 'em now. I had three or fo' sisters, dere names wuz Sally, Emily, and Katie. Had 'bout fo' brothers, too, I think. Let's see; Mike, Nelson, Henry, Mose -- dat's right, Adam, dat's makes five. Mike's de oldest? he wuz bawn, I 'spects, 'bout fo'ty-five."
Jules was more interested in finding out about his pension than he was in relating his life history. At every opportunity he would inquire: "What does you spose dey gwine do 'bout us old folks? Looks like time is I'se be hearing something frum dat pension money," Then he would furrow his brow and reluctantly try hard to recall his early life.
"When I'se wuz 18 years old, I'se had to start paying road tax, I paid dem tax on and on till I done got two years past de age 'fore I'se knowed it, I told Mr. Scafe Gaston and he went and seed Mr. Harper, and he's de man dat got me off de tax."
"No suh, dey ain't never give back de extra money what I pay done wuz my fault. I shoulda axed 'em 'bout it.
"When us hands used to be working way down in de bottoms of the farm we's don't come to de house fer eats. De cook sont it to us. We had plenty to eat most de time -- had lots of corn bread, peas or beans, and de like of dat. S'pose no spring wuz close 'bout where we'tins worked den dey brought water fer us, too. We had a well at de house -- yes'm, dey used a rope wid a bucket tied to one end, like dey still does sometimes. Dem boring wells jest come out in de las' few years, we didn't knows nothin' of dem den.
"Yes, I 'spects times is better'n dey used to be in some ways. If a person got as much as twenty-fire cents a day, dey thought dat wuz a whole lot of money. Trouble now is too many people - two to one to what dey used to be. Why, when I fust comes here, dere wuz no houses a-tall, hardly, Dere's five or six to one house here in Fairmont to what dere wuz when I comes here. So many folkses - don't knows how in de world dey is all gwine to be tooken care of - dey jest gwine here, dere, and everywheres.
"I ain't never so much as been out'n de county but one time - dat wuz fo' I'se married. I decided to go to Asheville, so I sot out walking, I jest wanted to go and see a little of de world, "When I got to Landrum I waited fer de gravel train. I wuz aiming to cotch it and ride de rest of de way, but dat train got off de tracks same place down de road and never did came; so I had to walk all de way. I sho' felt like I wuz gittin' out'n de world when I got dere. Fust man I seed on de street wuz Mr. Dave Cohen, from 'round where I wuz - he one dem Republicans. Oh, dat's a man dat can lawfully marry people and sign papers and things like 'o dat. He says, 'Jules, what you doing way up here, no wayf' I feel kinda impor-tant like, and I say dat I jes' looking 'round de world a little. I walked on a little piece and stepped in a restumrent and -- who does I see? Nobody but Mr. John Mucklerath -- he marry one of my mistress's daughters. I told him whar I'se wuz gwine to stay aai everythin' so he could tell my folks back home, in case dey jest wanted to track atter me fer somethin' or n'other.
"Well, I done jest a little of everythin' while I wuz in Asheville, Fust job I landed wuz in a quarry -- dat's whar dey blasted rocks out of de ground, I'se got fifty cents a day den, as hired help wuz hard to find. Atter dat, dey put me to cooking fer de men in de camp whar dey slept and et. I stayed up dere in Asheville from August till Christmas eve. I wuz kinda gittin' a little homesick and it got so cold up dere I'se figgered de bes' thing fer me to do wuz make my way back home. I got myself all bundled up and went down to de station, but fo' I stopped at a frolic fer a spell, De wind got to blowing -- Lawd, how it blowed."
Here Uncle Jules rounded his thick lips and made a buzzing sound, imitating the wind.
"I said to myself, I says, 'Jules, chile, hit's high time you'se gittin' to dat station.' So's I struck out. Well, when dat train pulled in, it wuz kivered with snow as deep as my hand. Den 'bout time it started peppering snow all over de place, and wuz I glad to git on de train, never gladder in my life. By de time we got to Spartanburg, de snow wuz two hands high on top of de train, but hit wuz aginning to rain here. Dat jest goes to show you de diff'uns in de climates of de two places. Us don't have no big snows down here like Asheville folks do. I bet hit's snowing up dere right dis very minute.
"T'warn't long atter I come back 'fore I got married. Dat's when my trouble rightly commenced. Ever since den I sho' is had hard times -- Lawdy, hit's been something awful. 'Cose, fer de fust twelve or thirteen years we got 'long sorta smooth sailing like. During dis time our chilluns wuz bawn. But atter dat, things got worser and worser.
"I done heared 'bout people up in dem mountains git boun' in by de snow. Dey tell me it snow so deep sometime it cotch de people in dey houses so dey ain't kin git out till all de snow melt in de springtime. I ain't want none er dat, so,
"Nancy, dat's my wife's name, she jest got so she wasn't satisfied no place no time. Atter while she got so she wouldn't 'tend to de chilluns and wouldn't do nothin' a-tall. Jim, here, he'll tell you de same thing.. He knows I jest as good to Nancy as I could he to my mammy. He knows I'se had a hard time."
"Dat's sho' is right, I'se don't like to say it'cause she's my mammy", said Jim. "I had to larn to cook and do might' near everything a woman has to do 'round de house. Po' little Roxie, dat's my sister, had to make bread when she had to clamb up in a chair to reach the table. Yes, us all sho' had a hard time; den dere's Joe - he's my brother - who is 'round two years younger dan me, he went and most lost his mind and we had a awful time wid him."
"De way it wuz wid Nancy," Jules continued, "atter so long a time she went plumb crazy. She talked 'bout eating jay birds and sich crazy talk. She got so bad dat everybody got scared of her, 'kaise we couldn't tell what might happen. 'Cose I wuzn't 'xactly afeared of her, but tain't no use taking big chances. One time she got atter some foiks'es chillun and runn'd it all over de place; right den and dere we knowed she had to be sont off.
"I'se went to Spartanburg and seed the sheriff, and he got some doctors to 'xamine Nancy, and dey say she sho' wuz crazy. Jest to make deirselves co'vinced, though, dey kept her in jail fer a day or two. Dey put her in a cell wid a 'nother woman to watch and see what would happen. De other woman wuz not crazy but wuz in jail fer stealing - some jewelry, I think - and she say to Nancy, 'What fer you in here?' Den Nancy say, 'What fer you want to know, and more'n dat, what is you doing in dis jail?' The sheriff is listenin' all de time, peepin' through a hole to see how Nancy would act. Nancy grabs de woman and dey tangle up; fust Nancy's on top, den de other woman, up and down, 'round and 'bout. De woman commences to call fer help and dey has to take Nancy out and put her in one dem solitary cells. Next day dey sont her off to Columbia.
"Oh yes'm, she got better and come back. When I got de word she wuz coming home, I sont fer her in a buggy. Somebody had seed her on de road headin' home, dat's why I sont somebody fer her. When she come in, I say, 'Nancy, I want a little talk wid you.' I wanted to see what kind o' mind she wuz in. So we walked up de road and talked fer a spell. I told her I had forty dollars in my pocket, and if she would come home and stay and do like she ought to do, I would give her de money to buy her some new clothes and anything else she wanted to buy wid it. But she only say to me dat if I had dat much money I ought to spend it on de chilluns. She say dat she gwine to get herself a job cooking some place and den she could buy her own clothes. She say, too, dat she didn't want to fool 'round no home and dat she would come and git her younguns. So Nancy got a job cooking fer a lady dat lived over yonder on de hill. Den one day Nancy comes back and axes de chilluns what dey 'tends to do. Dey's knows Nancy ain't 'sponsible fer her actions, so's dey tell her dey gwinna stay wid their pappy and dat her place is home wid her chilluns.
"Nancy started throwing one of her fits when de chilluns showed her dat dey cared more fer me than fer her. She says, 'Dey ain't none of your chilluns, dey is my chilluns, but you'se turned 'em against me; you'll pay fer it one of dese days.' Every time dat she started raging she would deny dat I wuz deir pappy. I sometimes believes her, but it don't worry me none 'kaise I thinks 'bout as much of 'em dat anybody could. She left without the chilluns and never did come back atter dat, not e'en when she got sick.
"You know what -- dat woman went and married agin, sho' did. Dat wuz atter she comes back frum Columbia. Den she went down agin and got past going. Roxie went and waited on her till she died. She sho' stuck by her mammy through all of her devilishment. Den Roxie come back home, but hit wuzn't long atter.dat Roxie got married and moved off frum us fer good. She moved up de road 'bout two miles on de Anderson place and she's been thar ever since.
"Nancy's been dead 'bout - let me see - Roxie stayed wid her right atter she got her fust job when she tooken sick, nearly two years. Then she got better and got a'nother job, but hit didn't las' long neitherj so Roxie went to her mammy agin and stayed wid her de rest of her days which nigh close to fo' years. Dat make it six years." (Jules added all this up by his fingers, counting the first two and adding the last four.)
"Back twenty or twenty-five years ago mill help was skace and a Mr. Gibson comes out to de farm to see 'bout gitting Joe and Jim to come to Fairmont and work fer Mr. Thomas in the mill. He told dat dey could make more money in de mill and -wouldn't have to work so hard and such long hours. Den when we'se moved I'se wuz failing in my health and wuz no 'count on de farm anymore. Mr. Thomas put dem in de picker room working long hours, dat is, until here lately dey won't let 'em work but a certain number. Ain't dat right, Jim?"
Seeing his father's fatigue, Jim, who had been a silent listener, took up the story. Jim is very large. He, too, is black but bears little resemblance to his father, if Jules is his father. Jim explains everything he tells by motions of his hands. He goes so far as to get out of his chair to mimic the actions of those about whom he is talking.
"Our farming days wuz hard ones. I'll tell you. 'Way back yonder durin' de World War," Jim began, "my pappy wuz manned out from a white gentleman's house jest 'cause he wouldn't tell a lie fer him. You see, die gentleman had a cow and she went and got out and gits into another white gentleman's crop and jest 'bout et it all up. So he tells my pappy dat if he don't swear dat it wuz somebody else's cow, dat he will have to move off his place, Dis not all he does, he sets the law on me fer not jining the war. He had a son dat jined and he didn't want him to. He claimed dat I'd been dodging it, but dat ain't so, Dey comes and gits me all right, and puts me in the calaboose. Didn't dey, Pappy? Dat's not the wurse part of it; dey fined us. You see, dere wuz more dan me in it. 'War dodgers' dat's what dey called us. Den we had to pay a fine of fifty dollars apiece. Atter we'se gits out of de jail dey 'xamine us and everythin' and den the man sont us home to wait fer a 'call card' that never did came, jest like pappy's old age pension he put in fer, it never come yit, either."
With this last sentence, he let out an obstreperous laugh. Jim had been reticent, but now his mood had suddenly changed and he wanted to talk. Jim's temperament is quite different from that of Jules. He smiles almost continuously and keeps his hands and arms in motion all the time he is talking.
Questioned about his early life, Jim said: "I never went very fer in school, 'bout de fo'th grade, I'se specs. You see, since mammy and pappy wuzn't stayin' together, I had to take de part of de woman. I had to hope brang up Roxie; den I allus had to be takin' oare of Joe, kaise his mind wus bad. I went 'round on de hill and worked fer white folks when I had any spare time. I used to scrub dere floors fer dem, and dey got so dey called me 'de little colored gal'. Dey liked my scrubbing 'kaise I'se git de floors jest as white as snow. Den when I gits through wid one house, dere allus be somebody waitin' fer me to go to dere house and scrub. Fust I puts soap in hot water and lets it melt; den I gits me a bucket of sand and wets it real good and throws it on de floor. Atter dat I po's de hot water on de sand and starts to work. Dat's de best way in de world to git a floor clean -- hit sho' makes 'em shine. Dey all tells me dat I do's a good job. Some gived me a dime, and some fifteen cents."
"Jim, I would like to know something about Joe. Where is he now?"
"Well, Joe, he wuz allus 'off' a little bit, but as he got older he got wurse. I allus tried to keep him in and not even let him out in de yard 'kaise white girls wuz afeared of him on 'count of him laughing at dem, but once in awhile he gets out anyway. One day while I'se at work, Joe slips out of de house and goes down to de mill store, and as he wuz such a big, strong, and believed-crazy person, all de people runned out and leaves de store wid him. He picks a long meat knife up from de meat block and lays hit across his arm and walks 'round and 'round looking at different things. Mr. Nat Thomas, card roam boss, comes up to de picker roam and tells me 'bout Joe. I'se runned down to de store as fast as I could, but stopped as I reaches de door and peers through de crack fer I knows Joe has a long knife and I'se didn't want to enrage him. I stands and watches him. He walks over to de radio and turns hit on and walks over and picks up a big bottle of gingerale. All dis time, I'se watching and thinkin' how to git to him. Somethin' gived me strength, so's I walks to de door and tells him to lay de knife back on de meat block. He wuz a little slow in doing hit, but final he 'beyed and laid hit down. Den I say, 'Joe, what fer you leave de house,' Den he say, 'Jim you's ain't mad wid me fer leaving, air you? I jest having a little fun.' Den I say, 'Cose not Joe, you ain't did any crime.' I noticed dat Joe had kept dat ginger ale so's I say to him, 'Joe, lets go out yonder tinder dat big tree and drink dat ginger ale.'
"Well, we went out and sot down under de big tree and commences to talk, fer I knows good and well dat de white folks done gone to town atter de law. If Joe knowed what I did, a pack of hounds couldna cotched him. It wuzn't long before I hears a car motor and I knows right den dat dey's coming atter him, Joe's paying dem no mind when de cars drives up, jest looks at me kinda sad-like.
"Den de police comes up and grabs Joe by the arms - two on each side of him - but he's such a powerful man and jest throws 'em off, jest like you could a baby; den he starts to git up and 'fore he does I'se knocks his feet out from under him, den de law nailed him good and mighty. Dey puts him in one of deir cars and carries him to de Spartanburg County Jail where he stays till pappy goes to de judge and gits de permit papers so's dey can send him to Columbia. Dat wuz three years ago. I'se went down to see him jest once since he's been dere. Dat wuz my fust trip to Columbia, too. I'se ain't never been many places, and never did ride on a train. I'se ridden the P. & N. (interurban electric line), though, and de fust time I rid it, it sho' did scare de fool out'n me. Hit started so quick dat hit slinged me right over the seat; den when hit stopped, it might nigh broke my nake. De fact is, all de places I'se ever been is Campobello, Greenville, Pelham, Forest City, Gaffney, and Columbia."
Jim confessed to being superstitious; and he told of a trip to Spartanburg with his foreman, Mr. Thomas. He and Mr. Thomas were on their way down the road just the other side of Fairmont when a black cat ran in front of the car. He said that he asked Mr. Thomas to turn around and go some other way because a black cat was the sign of certain bad luck. Mr. Thomas just laughed at Jim's warning. When they arrived in Spartanburg, Mr. Thomas became suddenly ill and had to see a doctor. He was having a chill - one after another. Finally, thinking that he was all right, Mr. Thomas and Jim started back home, but more bad luck struck them. A tire blew out. Jim got out and proceeded to fix the puncture. He hadn't quite finished it, when Mr. Thomas called out to him to hurry because he thought that he was going to have another spell. Expressing it in Jim's words: "So's I'se jest throws the patch on hit and hurries to get Mr. Thomas home. And you knows what, Mr, Thomas wuz in bed sever'l days atter dat. But still dat man don't believe dat black cat wuz 'sponsible fer our's bad luck, but I sho' do. I'se allus did know and allus will know dat black cats is bad luck, Yes'm, and I ain't never gwine to change my mind, either."
At this point Jim looked at the clock on the mantel and remarks that it's about time for him to get down to the mill. He opened the door and said, "I'se sho' hopes dat dey don't do pappy as bad as dey did me 'bout sending me a 'call card' fer going to de war. Do's you think dat he'll ever git dat pension?"
"Of course, he'll get it, but they may be some time getting around to it. You see, there are probably a hundred ahead of him. But I am certain that he will, in the near future. By the way, Jim, if you don't mind telling me, what do you make in the mill? Is it very much more compared with the farm wages that you remember?"
"Well, I'll tell you, Miss, hit sho' did work de life out'n po' old pappy dar on de farm, 'Cose I'se works purty hard in de mill, but hit ain't hurt me none. I'se makes $8 some weeks, dat's when I'se sont out and only gits part-time, den sometimes I'se makes more. Hit sho' is better dan living on de farm whar you has to git up way 'fo day. Here I sleep late as I wants to in de morning as I'se don't has to go to work till 2:30 in de evening, I'se 'specs hit's jest 'bout dat time now.

