GREEK STUDY
Subject: Jimmy Patellos.
Address: Wilmington, N. C.
Occupation: Confectioner
Writers: Maurice B. Haskett
Frances L. Harriss
Editor: Edwin Massengill
Few people in Wilmington would tell you that they know Demetrius L. Patellos, but if you ask them if they know Jimmy, the genial Greek who runs the store at Eighth and Redcross, many of them can answer you in the affirmative. Jimmy Patellos--the "Demetrius" was anglicized soon after he came to this country--has successfully operated a business here for some sixteen years. The business is nominally a confectionery, but a visit inside discloses something of the nature of the old time general store. Jimmy's Negro customers--most of his business comes from this race--are sometimes hard to handle. After dark the store is often an unpleasant place. Drunken darkies have tried to wreck the place.
Jimmy was born on the rocky little island of Icaria in 1902. His mother and father, both of whom, are still living, belong to the peasantry. Jimmy himself was a son of the soil until he went to sea in the Greek merchant service, having left school at an early age. Soon after the young man had gotten his sea legs in the waters of the Aegean and Mediterranean, he decided to come to the united States. An older brother, Nicholas, had come to Wilmington in 1912 and was proving himself successful in the retail grocery business. A first cousin, Peter, had been a successful confectioner and restauranteur in the same town for even longer. Young Jimmy knew the poverty of existence in his mountainous little island of Icaria and longed for the economic security of the New World. So in the Spring of 1920 Jimmy, then nineteen, set out for New York. He had saved some money of his own and his brother had lent him some.
After landing in New York, Jimmy came straight to Wilmington. His brother Nick met him there and took him in hand. Jimmy knew no English, so he quickly procured a Greek-English Dictionary and set to work. Immediately upon reaching Wilmington, he enrolled in a private school. At the end of this time Jimmy considered himself sufficient master of English to discontinue his formal schooling and begin work with his cousin in his confectionery-restaurant.
His facile mind had absorbed the rudiments of English in an incredibly short time. Jimmy worked with his cousin Peter, whom all his acquaintances know as "Gabriel," for about three years. Then he went into business for himself, at the same location he now occupies.
Up until the time of his marriage two years ago Jimmy lived with a private American family who lived near his business. He had a clean but small and poorly furnished room for which he paid the generous rental of $12 a month. The landlady described Jimmy as a modellodger. She says he was so afraid of putting her to trouble that he would not even shave or bathe at the house, doing both these things in a back room of his store. He would, come to his rooming house late at night and leave early in the morning to be back at his work. She wept when Jimmy took himself a wife and moved away from her. He had befriended her and her family in so many ways that she said she didn't see how she could do without him.
Jimmy's wife (nee Christine Sandlin) is an American woman some five years younger than himself. Hers is the dark, rather full-blown beauty that appeals so strongly to Levantine men. She was an operator in a beauty shop for several years when Jimmy, the most ardent of fiances, lent her the money to establish herown business. Working for the other man had always been anathema to his creed, and he wanted the girl he planned to marry to be as independent as himself. He spared no expense in the matter of the new beauty shop. His credit with a local industrial bank is good, and he insisted that his sweetheart's shop be as good as the best. The shop has stayed steadily on the red side of the ledger.
Christine was reared in the fold Of the Southern Baptist Church, but Jimmy's devotion to his own Greek Church was such that he would hear of no one marrying him but an Orthodox priest. The marriage was performed in the Junior Order Lodge Hall, sometimes used by the Greek colony here. The glittering appointments and stately ritual of the Eastern Church completely dazzled the Baptist bride.
The store which Jimmy operates at the corner of Eighth and Redcross Streets is rented from a Negro fraternal order.
He does, however, own his home, which is a large combination store-and-dwelling in a white residential section. The dwelling houses the wife's beauty "salon" on the lower floor and has living quarters upstairs. The store part is rented to a dealer in antiques. Jimmy thought at one time of moving his own business here but decided that he was too firmly established at his old stand to risk a change.
The Patellos family now boasts one son, David, who is about a year old. Jimmy thinks that families should be neither large nor small, but "medium-sized." The Patellos have a large number of American and Greek-American friends.
They go out socially very little, however, as both of them work and work conscientiously. The lavish parties which the local Greek colonyhave from time to time are their greatest amusement. Jimmy subscribes to one Greek paper printed in this country, the National Herald.
He has never returned to his homeland since he left it in 1920. He loves his country, he will tell you, and speaks of it with wistfulness and a trace of nostalgia, but America he considers his real home. Here it is that he has founded his business and his family. He has a brother, a cousin, and numerous friends of his own Greek blood here with him. A little southern town on the banks of the Cape Fear means more of home to him than the tiny Aegean island that gave him birth. He is a good man and a good citizen.
