BESSIE MAE BOATWRIGHT
In an otherwise identical version, the following comments appear on the top of page 12687: "Ex--but not usable? WTC." On line five of page 12687, the following words were written in after the period: "-and the egg."
There are three different versions of the following interview. A third untitled version can be found on pages 14744-14754. The interviewer, Nellie Gray Toler, visited Bessie Mai Boatwright on more than one occasion. Thus, the different versions, in part, are the product of different interview sessions. However, a careful reading also indicates that an effort was made to weave the two interviews together.
Most significantly, the version on pages 12698-12705 was not filed with the other life histories, but in the personal papers of the Project director, W. T. Couch. In selecting the life histories to be included in these Are Our Lives, Couch chose to exclude "a number of extremely sordid stories," arguing that though they were important, other material merited first attention.1 William McDaniel, the Tennessee Project director, on the other hand, had argued for the inclusion of this interview. (It is not clear, however, which version he had in mind.) "Bessie Mai," he pointed out, "represents a general class of people in the South and that they have a definite influence on social and economic conditions cannot be denied."2 Nevertheless, Couch rejected the story. He had long combated.
1 Federal Writers' Project, These Are Our Lives (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1939), p. xii.
2 McDaniel to Couch, February 6, 1939, Federal Writers' Project, Papers of the Regional Director, William Terry Couch, in the Southern Historical Collection, University of North Carolina Library, Chapel Hill. the idea that the mass of poor white and black Southerners were hopeless degenerates.
The entire discussion is revealing of the reasons Project officials wanted to collect and publish life histories of ordinary Southerners. This incident and related issues are extensively examined in the guide.
December 8, 1938
Pretty Lady,
Paris, Tennessee
Interviewer - Nellie Gray Toler,
Revised by Aswell.
BESSIE MAE BOATWRIGHT
Bessie Mae was piled up in bed in a snarl of dirty ragged quilts, startlingly in contrast to the cheap new bed, dressing table, and dresser which crowded the frowsy little room. Bessie Mae's face, streaked with breakfast egg, might have been pretty but for its emptiness and the puffiness about her eyes and jaw. Her slack heavy lips quirked in a smile as she tossed aside a copy of True Confessions and pushed a tangle of bleached hair back from her forehead.
"Whyn't you set and visit?"
She thrust one bare foot with red-painted nails from beneath the covers and pointed her toes in the general direction of a chair.
"How do you like Buzzard's Roost?" she asked lazily. "Ain't much of a house, or much of a neighborhood with all these niggers living all around and like that. but it suits my fancy, I guess. Nobody never complains."
She laughed, "No mind what a place is like, just so long. as Besaie Mae's there the men don't have no kick coming, I guess.
"You know," she said, "there's not much about my life I don't reckon that's so funny or different from other girls, but I bet I've had more fun than the next one. I ain't lived much in years, just 19, but I'm good and damned if I ain't made up plenty in experience and how. Ain't sorry for none of it neither.
"Can't remember much about my family. Ain't never had nothing and never will I don't guess, but what do I care? Ain't no use to worry about it. Far back as I can remember, my dad was a drunkard and he and my ma never got along. They just fussed and fought like cats and fool dogs, always. Reckon they was legally married, though I don't know, but just guess so. If the kind of married life they lived was life. I don't want none no-how. Me, I can git the only good part without marrying and when I git tard of one man, git me another one. Ain't been blessed with no brats either.
"I'm the oldest child. Then there's Margie, Ruth, Mary Sue, and Billy, all younger. Four girls and just one boy. Billy he's crippled and eleven years old. He don't look more than six or seven, he's so little. He walks with a stick and twists back and forth when he walks. When he gits grown he can git a business course free because he's crippled. We won't never have to pay for it none because if you're crippled like he is you never have to pay for nothing here in this world or oughtn't to nohow.
"Reckon ma and pap had a fight before he was borned and that caused him to be like that. The rest of us is all right. I reckon. Don't nary one of us look alike, though. I reckon we ain't got the same daddy, maybe. I don't know. Guess he thought we was his'n anyway."
"Papa and mammy always got drunk and fought and bootlegged. Lots of times when we was little ones we used to take the liquor around in market baskets and deliver it like it was taking home a washing. I can remember toting liquor around to folks ever since I've been big enough to go from one house to the other. Used to go with mammy to take it to sell. Then she let me go sometimes alone. When I got bigger, we all little ones went. When you carried it in a market basket with clothes over it, nobody knowed it. When they caught up with and pap and got so bard on the then they let me take it nearly all the time. I was little and nobody thought of me like that except them that knowed I was bringing it to em. I learned how to do it up brown pretty quick, too, and without much trouble neither.
"Well my ma she was running around with a man. He bad a wife and so she got mad at my mammy and went and told my pap out on the Relief road where he was working. He didn't listen to it none because he didn't care if mammy got a little money out of it for him to spend.
"Well, it wasn't long after that till this woman's daddy comed up town in a truck one day. My dad was standing on the corner. This man asked him to go to the river with him to git some fish My pap got in and went along. They never did get to the river. Jest about ten miles from town the man turned the truck wheel loose and jumped. So the truck runned off down a deep bank and turned over and over and killed my dad. They didn't do nothing about it because we didn't have no money to do with, and anyway that man served a sentence in the pen later for killing a nigger, so maybe he got his rights. My mamma kind of liked the man too. so she wouldn't do nothing. I don't know, but I kind of think she was glad when my dad got killed. She didn't cry much. Never seemed to make no difference with her. She just went on and men comed there like they always did, only more, and she would go set in their laps. They'd all git drunk and have a big time.
"I don't remember the first man ever tooked me to be his'n. It was so long ago I can't remember much about it. Been doin' it so long I don't know. Well anyway, some of the blabbing old neighbors squealed and they histed me up before juvenile court and sent me to an Institution. Anyway, I didn't have the brat. Even if I wasn't only but thirteen I was too smart for them even then. I'd learned lots from watching my mammy. She ain't never had no more since my pap died. Maybe he was all our daddies after all.
"So I served my time in the Institution. The guards flirted with us, and things. It didn't do me no good--made me worse if anything and I just made up my mind that I didn't aim to do anything that I didn't have to soon as I could git out of three anyway. There ain't nothing to tell about Institution life. Reckon it's pretty good for some if you're sorry of what you done. I wasn't. I liked to do it. I knowed I'd do it again just as soon as I got out, anyway.
"I ain't never had much but an eighth grade education, so they gived me a business course while I was in the Institution. I took some typing and Gregg Shorthand, and I needed Business English, too and Spelling Think sometimes I'll finish it again soon. I ain't been out of that place so long, but I sure have had a good time while I been out!
"I find me a new man ever so often. Been going with one two years now. He lives over at McKenzie and he's married. His wife likes me a little better now than she did, but he's getting a divorce from her he says, but shoot! I don't aim to marry him then. Don't want to marry nobody. Hell, he makes about 299 dollars a month end used to be brick foreman at the pen. That was where I met him. Now he lays brick around town here and everywhere. He's a good man, believe me, too. He's about forty-five years old and he's got a good car. He don't like to dance, but he sure likes to drink, though. He funnels it! I used to take him home to his wife when he got drunk. Then I'd bring the car back and go after him in about a day or two when he had time to sober up again, and he'd come over here and stay two or three days with me. Still does, but I go with others, too.
"I drive his car all the time, and I ain't got no driver's license. They never did catch me but once yet, though. Got me close to Dickson. I had my dog and a man with me, and we was all three drunk. It cost me $6.50. The man paid it. It's lots more fun to drive it when you're drunk than any other time. I like to swoop up close to a car and watch them pullover right quick.
"Shucks, I get me a good-looking salesman with a lot of money and we go places. I went to Texas Centennial with one and Insert p. 6 (after first paragraph). Bessie Mae Boatwright.
"It use to be I'd just take anybody, just anyway, because it was fun then and I didn't care whether they paid me or not. Now I charge to everybody, even if it's only a quarter. Don't give it away, for they'll all pay, though some of them that's cheap will try to git it for nothing. I got sixty dollars out of an old Jew man once. Some, like the CCC boys don't have much to give me--only from a quarter to half a dollar. But you can take on a whole batch of them boys at once and make pretty good.
"One night I went down to the clay pit back of the camp and flipped off forty-nine CCC boys at fifty cents a head, come one, come all. The sergeant comed down and I had to git up and dust. I'd have got every boy there if he'd kept his old nose out of it.
"When you take them on by the job lot you're like to catch something. One of those boys that night was just about eat up. Well, I got burnt off of him and all the boys who took turns after him got burnt, too. When the camp doctor found it out, he canned them boys.
"I've got to where I don't pay no attention to Gonorrhea or the Clap or Old Ral, neither, no more than a bad cold. Come again, gone again. Had it so many times it's like eating green apples to me. Never had time to hurt me much I guess. I go take a shot or two and it holds up a while. Never did stop even when I had something. I like to burn everybody I can when I know I've got it. Burnt twenty-five men in a row one time, and every goddamned one of them a married man, too.
"I got burned the first time by a nigger, I reckon, but it's so long ago I ain't for sure. I remember one yaller nigger, though, that burnt me again, too. Mama liked him and he comed to see her, but one day she was gone and I was just a young one and he give me a dime, so I took him on. Now I've learned more sense. I don't take niggers, leastways not many, and then they've got to be yaller niggers. Anyhow, I got burned by him and got bad sick and they shot me off to the Institution that time.
"They cured me there. So I listened to the other girls talk and I sure learned a lot from them. So when I comed out, I knowed just how to do to pull in the men and how to take care of myself. I just use Zeptabs now when I've been with a man that's hot. Sometimes I go to an old doctor around here that will rid you of the trouble if you git caught with a brat. He'll give you a shot of something that will purify your blood for you. Sometimes he takes his payout in trade. He gits lots of business, too. we stayed drunk the whole time. One time I liked to got killed. He beat me up pretty bad because he found me in the room with another man and I didn't have nothing much on when he come in.
"All the Women and girls hates me because I'm good-looking. I know it. too! They're all afraid I'm going to take their men away from them. It's fun to git a man to trot after you. I never saw a man yet I couldn't git if I wanted him bad enough to, anyway.
"I could git a job down here at the Shirt Factory because I'm pretty. But why should I work when the men are meal tickets? When I want some money. I git me a date and throw a party. Sometimes I go to Paducah for the weekend and sometimes other places. My steady cusses all the time because I cheat on him, but I don't care nothing about him except for his money. I went up town the other night and got me a pint of whiskey at a taxi stand and charged it to him. He cussed me out for it, but he paid for it. I was so drunk when he got here from laying bricks that I was wrong side outards.
"Ain't no fun going nowhere unless you're drunk. My little sis here that's seven years old can drink more whiskey than most men. As much, anyhow, or near as much, maybe. She loves it. We all git drunk sometimes, and when mamma comes in from her work and finds us drunk the fur flys. we ain't scared and we do it again when we want to."
"This new bedroom suite here I got at Hunts, on the installments. My steady man has got it nearly paid off for me. One more payment and it's mine, and he can't take it, neither, because I bought it in my own name. Went in and got to flirting with one of the clerks and he sold it to me, and I gived him a date that night, too." "I don't never aim to work. I'll just run around and have a good time. that's all. The law can't bother me none now for what I do and I can do as I please. Age of consent. So I bring me a different man in here every day when I want to. That's why I can't never keep the bed made up. Stay in it too much. You was lucky when you come, not running up on me in a place where I couldn't open the door for you. I wouldn't care for you seeing me do it, anyway. Mammy sleeps on that bed over there with her a man and sometimes me and mine over here. The little ones is so used to it they don't think nothing about seeing me in bed with a man or drunk. But Margie is 15 now and she wants to do things too and mammy is hard as git-out on her. Won't let her have no dates. So she bas to Slip around a lots. She won't let her go with none of them CCC boys. So she slips out and meets them down there at the Church corner and courts there. It's kinda dark there and back: on this side of the church is the bridge and it's way dark. There and they court under the bridge where mamma can't see them. Sometimes she goes off in a car but always gits back in early unless we can git mamma drunk before she leaves. Then she don't know where she goes or what she does.
"The place to raise a girl is let her have dates at home, not on street corners and let them have dates come see them when they're young. It wouldn't be so many girls go stray if they did. live been raised like this, seen my mammy do it always. Of course, all the little ones will do the same thing no matter how hard mamma is on them now. It don't make no difference. They don't aim to care for that noway.
"My granddad died in the house poor. I've never known nothing but this kind of life. I don't want anything else. If I want anything a man will git it for me. I know that and the Red Cross will feed mamma. and thee if she don't make good working at the laundry. She's working some at the lauddry at the CCC. Don't make much tho, because here's three children in school and Margie ought to go but don't. She'll be just like me, but she ain't as purty. Mamma ain't so pretty now. She's getting old looking, so she don't git so many men to give her as she use to. Reckon that's what makes her so hateful lately. She knows she's slipping and that I can rope them all in just like she use to do herself.
"Some day I think I'll take a business course, finish mine if I ever get around to it, and be an office wife. I can get a job anywhere I want it by letting the men flirt with me a little. I've got what it takes to make any man do what I want him to. This 140 pounds of mine can make any man set up and look and when Bessie Mae tells them to do anything, he forgits there's any other woman anywhere.
"Though what's the use of working when I don't have to? I guess I won't ever, but I might marry some old grey-headed man with one foot in the grave and oodles of money when I git old. Then I could strut all I wanted. I don't aim to raise my babies for no man. Ain't no use. Just have a good time without it. When I git too old to play, I might settle down some then. I guess I will but it won't be because I want to. I just might have to."
Bessie Mae's oldest sister came dragging in, with her dress hem ripped half out, her face dirty and, her hair tauseled. A Negro girl who lives close to them was with her.
"They go double dating together," said Bessie Mae. "Hattie gits in the back with her date, sis in front with hers. They all git out and git drunk together and raise fun in general. She's more fun then a barrel of snakes, that nigger gal is."
The two girls ran out of the room when a car stopped outside and gave three short blasts on the horn.
Bessie Mae jumped up and began primping for her man. He would be back after he drove around the block.
"You'd better go along now." she said. "He don't like strangers around when we git together. Me, I don't care. Way I look at it, if you don't know what it is it won't hurt you, and if you do it ain't new to you, But my man's funny that way. But you come back and we'll talk some more sometime."