May 12, 1939
Emmet Johnson (Negro)
150 Berry Street
Athens, Georgia Carpenter
S.B.H.
THE CARPSNTER OF LICKSKILLET
The section now known as Lickskillet, once a fine residential district, has degenerated into the roughest spot in the city. Near the place where the noted journalist and orator. Henry w. Grady, was born, I passed a group of men who were quarreling over a truckload of scrap iron. Several school-age boys, wearing ragged overalls, were playing marbles in the street, and a woman clad in a soiled nurse’s uniform was sweeping a narrow front yard.
Crossing the street, I continued toward the railroad tracks, but met with little success in my search for the carpenter known as "Jim," until I came to an unpainted cottage where a slovenly garbed white woman was sitting on a sunny porch with no apparent occupation other than watching an engine switch freight cars up and down the tracks. "No, mam," she answered, "I don't know where he lives, but I'll ask Ma Brown. I betcha she'll know." Answering her shrill call, an old woman who hobbled to the door placed two fingers against snuff-stained lips and directed a stream of amber colored spittle toward the yard before she asked, "Now what is it you be wanting me to tell you?" I repeated my question. "Keep on going down that same street you'se on, cross them two railroad tracks and turn to your left, and you'll be right in the nigger section. Anybody down there can tell you where to find Jim."
I thanked her, followed her directions, and was soon knocking on Jim's door. A woman's voice answered, "Open the door and come on in." I entered a living-room where the woman was ironing.
"Have a cheer, Miss, and 'scuse me Whilst I keeps on with my ironing," I was glad to accept her invitation to sit down after the long walk, and when I had stated my mission, she laughed, "Huh, I thought you'd come to fetch us something, and now it turns out you wants us to do something for you." I laughed with her. "Lord, have mercy, miss, the story of my life wouldn't do nobody no good, for I ain't never done nothing but wash and iron. I've been at that nigh on to forty-nine year, and I'll be fifty-nine if I lives to see my next birthday. But I'm sho Jim'll be glad to tell about his life, 'cause he's done been places. He's been at the carpenter trade a powerful long time, and it's took him to more towns than I could remember in a long time. He's out yonder now building us a back porch to take the place of the old one that's done rotted plumb down. I'll call him."
She disappeared through a back door and I looked about the living-room. The imitation black leather upholstery of the three piece suite was much worn in. A gayly-patterned linoleum rug covered the floor, and the patches of bright-colored pictures on the dingy walls proved to be an assortment of calendars. There was no fire in the heater on this warm May day, and the haphazard arrangement of tables, chairs, and other furniture was doubtless due in part to the use of the living-room, as a workroom for the woman's ironing.
Jim came in and leaned against a bookcase. "This lady wants to write down the story of your life, Jim," his wife began," and she 'specially wants to know 'bout your 'speriences as a carpenter. You don't mind telling her them things do you?"
"I'm busy building our porch back," Jim asserted, "but since I ain't getting no pay for that I can take time out, and anyway I'm tired out." Addressing me, he said, "Let's go out on the front porch, Miss. Maggie's done got this room too hot with her ironing, and it's such a warm day anyhow. There's a little breeze on the front."
I followed him to the porch. "Have a seat in the awing, Miss, and let me get you a book to rest your notebook on so it'll be easier and more convenient for you to do your writing." He went in the house for the book. Jim was a tall, very black man of medium weight, and his hair was streaked with gray. His shabby blue suit had seen better days. With it he wore a soiled white shirt and coarse high-topped brown shoes. Perhaps it was nervousness that caused him to adjust his silver rimmed spectacles so often.
Close inspection of his one-story frame house showed that it was once painted brown. The home-made porch furniture, guiltless of paint, included a settee, a chair, and a swing that was suspended in a frame. The small lot was enclosed by a sagging plank fence and an ornamental wire arch spanned the section between the driveway and the walkway leading to the house. A tall privet hedge was trimmed to the shape of the wire arch. The gate swung on creaking hinges near a scattered planting of small flowers blooming away in the May sunshine.
Jim returned and handed me a book that, appropriately enough, dealt with the subject of architecture. He settled himself to a comfortable position with his legs swinging over the arm of a porch chair. Maggie had stopped ironing and seated herself in the swing beside me. She was lighter in color than Jim, and weighed well over two hundred pounds. An apron of brightly flowered material almost covered her ragged black broadcloth dress, and she wore tan cotton stockings with large tan shoes from which the lacings were "conspicuous by their absence."
Negroes in the shacks on the other side of the railroad tracks that ran in front of Jim's house, seemed to consider our appearance on the porch a signal of some kind, for they came out, one by one, in rapid succession and took seats on their own porches, casting questioning glances in our direction.
"Well, Miss," Jim began, "as far as the carpenter trade is concerned I've been doing that sort of work close on to forty-nine years. I was born in Sparta, Georgia, down in Hancock County on the farm where my folks lived. Everybody around little towns made their living chiefly by farming in those days - at least the coloredpeople did. Soon as I was big enough, to do anything a t'all, I helped my father with the farm work, and in school time I went straight to the field when I got home every day. Mother helped in the field too till she got her leg broke; after that she couldn't do much on account of that affliction. Her leg never did grow back right. It's been so long I just can't remember how it happened, but as she grew older she couldn't hardly get around.
"I went to school in Sparta till I made the fifth or sixth grade. No, mam, I never got to finish my schooling, but one thing sure, there's no reason why anybody, white or colored, should be ignorant these days, as much litertoor as there is to read-newspapers, books, and all kinds of reading matters Why you can just pick it up in the streets sometimes! As little boys used to say, I reckon it just come to me to read, for I've always been a great hand to read anything I come across, and when I took up carpenter work, I knowed that to be a good one it was necessary to have at least a good working knowledge of figures, so I set myself to learn how to figure. Now, I'll bet there ain't nobody can beat me at figuring costa on a building job, and at figuring ways, plans, and labor distribution neither. I studied architecture too, right in that book you are holding on your lap. If you don't believe I studied, you just buy yourself a lot, pick out your house plan, and let me figure the cost of building it for you. I'll bet I can build it right and not miss the cost I quoted you a penny.
"I served a 3-year apprenticeship under two Spartacontractors to learn the carpenter trade. I was 17 years old when I finished that apprenticeship in Sparta, and then I wentto work for a white man there. After he died, I went to work for wasa man that building the Southern Mutual Building here in Athens, but I'm sorry to say, however, that I had no part in the construction of that building, for he put me to work on a job he had in Augusta at that time. He worked me in so many places that I can't keep up with all of them.
"It's been so long since learnt my first money that can't remember what I spent it for. I forgot to tell you that I didn't get a cent of wages during the 3 years of my apprentice work. They gave me a set of tools, my room rent, board, and clothes - such as they were. The first pay I got was from Mr. Woodall, the first man I worked for in Sparta. He paidme$1.50 a dayto start, and in three weeks time he raised meto 2 a day. When I left him to work in Augusta I made the standard skilled carpenter's wage of $2.50 a day.
"Warrenton, Georgia, was the next place I worked at when I left Augusta, and the contractor there paid me the same wages. From Warrenton I went to Winder, where I did lots of building. I stayed there a long time before the work give out. After that I was in Memphis, Tennessee, when there was a building boom on there; then I went to Atlanta, Georgia, from there to Monroe, Georgia, andthefrom there I came on back to Athena to do some building in the Rock Springs section near the old peth (pest ?) house. I built the first house that was ever put up in that section, and when that house was finished there was plenty more to be built in that neighborhood. It was a long time before that work give out, but when it did things got mighty dull, and I just jobbed about looking for work, catching a job wherever I could find it.
"Things got awful dull in this town and I was wondering where to go when I heard of a big fire down in Union Point, Georgia, so I hustled down there, and sure enough, soon as I got there, I got a job to help rebuilt one of those business places.
"By the time we had finished the rebuilding at Onion Point I heard of some building going on about 15 miles from there at White Plains, and when I got there I found the contractors were man I'd worked for before. They took me on, made me foreman on the job of putting up several buildings, and they tell me that one of the buildings I worked on is the post office in that town now.
"My next work was with a Winterville, Georgia, contractor, who took jobs all over this country. I worked for him on dwelling houses that he built in Crawford, Washington, and other Georgia towns, and when his work give out, I come back here and loafed around awhile. When I was convinced there was nothing doing here I lit out for Atlanta and worked there 9 years on a stretch.
"Now don't misunderstand me; on all of those jobs I mentioned the work wasn't studyevery day, so I can't say I ever had a study job, 'oept whilst I was apprenticed. Rain, other bad weather, lack of materials on hand at the right time, and lots of things can hinder a carpenter from study work, and he is only paid for the days he works, when he works on day wages. Of course working on contract is some different, but then bad weather and things like that can make you lose lots of money on a contract,’ specially when the work has to be finished by a certain day or you lose a forfeit. Those forfeits always seem mighty big.
“During the 9 years of my work in Atlanta, I helped to build the chapel and the science building on the Spelman campus. Their building was financed by the Rockefeller Foundation. When I say I helped to build those places, I mean that my part of the construction work was specified in the contracts, and lots of m worked under me, but I worked too all right, and I didn't call myself no helper, for I had studied the work. The men working under me were paid by the hour, but I was paid by the contract.
"When the work at Spelman was finished I went to work on the David T. Howard High School. The Booker T. Washington school there was going up at the same time, hut I didn’t get to work on that, as I didn’t finish at the other school in time. I did lots of work for a colored undertaker who was building a fine place between Atlanta and Ellenwood. I don’t know what he made out of that place. I helped build a barn, a pavilion, and a swimming pool out there, and for all I know he may be still building away. He was the buildingest man I ever saw.
“If you are interested in knowing about the buildings in this town that I have worked on for colored people, I might tell you that I helped put up the Morton Building in 1910, and in 1916 we started work on the Good Samaritan Building and on Mack and Payne’s undertaking place. We finished those in 1917, and the First Methodist Church came later. We finished it in 1930.
"Now I didn’t specify half the towns where I have worked, for my work has taken me all over this State and into several others. The last 9 years I haven’t had anything a fall to do, it does seem like. I don’t know - why the contractors have made such a division between the white and colored labor and quit giving us colored carpenters any of the work, the white and black men used to work side by side on the same jobs and they never had any trouble; now the contractors tell me their white carpenters refuse to work along with skilled negro labor.
"I’ve had some terrible falls in my work on different buildings. Once a scaffold gave way with me down here at Winterville, Georgia, where I was working on a church, and I came mighty about near breaking my arm. I’ve tried to forget all the accidents, for if a man gets a job and gets to thinking about the bad falls he’s had on other jobs, the first thing he knows he’s falling again. Thinking about bad things that’s happened to you does things to you that ain’t for the best. It’s best to keep your mind off of danger.
"Once I was coming downa ladder, and as I Jumped offofit the weight of my body was on the foot that landed on the point ofa nail, and that nail went all the way through my foot. Soon as I felt that nail going in my foot, I fell like I'd been shot. If I hadn’t I would be a dead man today. All carpenters have got ideas about how to fall or rather how to land if they accidently do happen to fall. You have to land limber, for if you stiffen out your body, something is lots more apt to break.
"Another time a 3 x 12-inch plank fell on my left hand end tore it all to pieces. I was practically on the ground and was hard at work when that plank come sailing down from overhead. It was all over so quick that I can’t remember how it happened, but I do know that it was a long time before I was able to work any more.
For a long time I thought I was done for as far as any more carpentering was concerned, but you can’t keep a good man down, and I’m good as new again, even if these contractors do refuse to give work to colored men.
"One time when I was working on a house that had been sheeted, but not covered, I felt my scaffold giving away and I reached quick for the roof. The tin guttering was projecting several inches over the edge of the roof, and in my haste to grab something I cut myself right in the bend of the arm on that tin. There’s no telling how much I did bleed before help got there, but that was better than falling with the scaffold, for that meant a drop of from twenty-five to thirty feet, and it would have been mighty dangerous. Now that I’m getting old I have lots of troublein bad weather with broken bones that have mended and with joints that have been sprained.
"It's been so long since anybody paid me any money that I hardly remember just what was the least I ever collected for a full week's work; but I think I would be safe in saying I have made $30 as the highest and $15 as the lowest. That was when we were working by the hour. As I said before, working on contract was right risky, because if you had to lose a forfeit for failure to complete work on time, you were apt to lose money on the Job and have less after doing the work than you had when you started it. The contracting business is like 'most any other business: you make good if everything goes off right, but if it doesn't, then you are just out of luck.
"How about collections? Oh, my God, don't ask me that! A heap of folks right here in Athens owes me and won't pay me a cent. I'm going to tell you the truth. All the ones that owes me are white folks, but there ain't any use in my calling names, for there ain't no law to make them pay me if they don't want to. At least there ain't apt to be a lawyer in this town who would take a case to court where a Negro man wanted to sue a white man for wages. Since we all have to live here with the white people, what's the use of exposing 'em? But I'll tell you this much: if I was to get all that's owing me, I'd have money enough to sit back and take it easy for awhile."
He pulled a little book out of his pocket. "You see this sketch of a wardrobe," he said. "Well, a white lady hunted me up here at my house to find out if I could do cabinet work.
I told her I could make any kind of furniture she wanted. She had me sketch this wardrobe for her, and she was delighted with the plans and told me she wanted it made out of cedar, but that if I couldn't find cedar to go ahead and make it up out of maple. Now both of those are expensive timber, but cedar is so high that I got the maple. When I delivered the cabinet, she declared she was highly pleased with it. All right, I had made a definite price to her of $30 before I built the wardrobe, but after it was delivered she began to try to argue me down on the price. We had it up one side and down the other. She wanted to keep the wardrobe, but didn't want to pay what it was worth. Finally she decided to keep it and set a day for me to come back after the money. Really, I wore out a good pair of shoes going back and forth trying to get her to pay me and I never did get any more out of her than just about enough to pay the bill for the lumber - not a cent for my work and trouble. Now that's the way some folks will do you when they think they can get by with it.
"I sure could use some of that money right now that the white folks have been owing me so long. If it wasn't for my old lady taking in washing and earning a little money, I don’t know what would become of us..
"No, mam, I sho can’t figure out Why the white contractors will not work Negro carpenters, so I Just quit bothering them about work. We just do the heat we can trying to raise something to eat at home and to get little odd jobs of repairing to do. We have a good garden coming on and a hog to kill when winter comes. My old lady cans and persarves ever'thing we don't eat, and it all comes in mighty handy, scarce as money always is with us.
"Yes, mam, I own my house here, that is, if I can pay up my hack taxes. Tax money is awful hard to raise with no work to do and no way to earn anything. I bought this house ready-built, but I've done lots of repairing and improving on it. We have four rooms and the hall, and the hall is just like it was another room the way we use it. The only difference is that it has doors on every side instead of windows. Maggie will show you over our house if you want to see it before you go.
"I think I've done told you about all there is to know about my life as a carpenter. I know if I keep on spending my time talking to you, I can't finish my porch, and I did want to get through with that today. The White folks are talking about moving the place where they burn trash and such like that out in this neighborhood, but if they have it as modern and nice as they say it's going to be it won’t bother us nothing like the abattoir. When they're making tankage at the abattoir we just have to get out fromhere to catch a breath of pure-smelling air. That abattoir is something awful to smell at times.
"Maggie and me have been married about 25 years, and I'll tell you one thing:I wouldn't swap my wife for no other woman I ever saw, for I couldn’t get another to take her place. We have lived in this same house nearly 21 years. We've raised four children, and they are all grown, but, as far as we know we don’t have any grandchildren. We have one daughter and one son living in Athens, and the other children live up North. They all have good jobs as common, everyday laborers, and while that may not sound like anything to brag about, I think it’s worth something to be able to get and hold any kind of a job these days.
"You never asked me this, but I'm going to tell you, for I want you to write it down with the rest I told you:When I wasgoing from, place to place on contracting jobs, I always saw to itthat my wife and children were well taken care of right here at home, and that they was in good hands. Often, if I was to be in a place long at a time, I'd look around and find a suitable place for them to live with me in the town where I was working, I always tried to be a respectable person, and I’ve never been a man to let my family live in just any sort of community.
"I belong to Ebenezer Baptist Church," he continued, "I mean the Ebenezer Church right here in Athens, I joined the churchin Sparta when I was young, and I can tell you just how I was converted. A big revival was going on, and I went night after Night that preacher was preaching a powerful sermonand all at once something struck me. I didn't know what it wasabut I knew I never had felt that way before. It was different feeling to any I had ever experienced before."
Jim's eyes were beginning to take on a far away look and a strange smile lit up his features. "You know," he continued.
"Jesus said to Nicodemua: 'Ye must be born again.' Nicodemus wanted to know how a man of seventy could be born again, and Jesus said: 'The wind bloweth where it listeneth (listeth), and ye hear the sound afar off, but cannot tell whence it cometh or whither it goeth. So it is with the Spirit.' Bight then Divine Love struck me on the crown of my head and went through me to the soles of my feet. The change was made right then and there. Old things were done away with and new things had taken place in the twinkling of an eye, for the things I used to do, I don't do them now. I don’t dance, curse, nor drink. It's a new and different life that the change has wrought within me."
No one spoke for a few moments at the end of his discourse on religion. smile still spread over his face, hut after a little while he suddenly rose out of his chair, and was himself again when he said in a most business-like manner, "How, Miss, I 'clere to goodness, it's 'most nigh 1 o'clock, and I almsto finish that porch today. It's awful bad luck to leave anything unfinished on a Friday. Haggle'll show you over our house like I promised, and don't forget there's something powerful interesting hanging up in our kitchen, 'oept that what it is ain’t to be gone into till August when the crops are all layed by and protracted meetings are going on." He left the porch and went toward the back of the house.
Maggie began:"Conte on in, Mss. I ain’t got much time myself now, and bless goodness, look here, I've done let the shirt. I was ironing on when you come git dry as a paper bag. It's got to be sprinkled down again before lean iron it right." She opened a door that led from the living-room into a bedroom, where the furniture reflected the golden oak era. A bowl and pitcher were on the washstand. Sagging brown cardboard that covered the walls was decorated with photographs and other pictures of various kinds. Train smoke of many days was ingrained in the dingy marquisette curtains. "It don't do much good to wash curtains here," Maggie said, "'cause the smoke blows right in on 'em again the first time you opens your windows." The floor was covered with a cheap wool rug, a change from the customary linoleum and bare floors in homes of this type. Chairs of several kinds, a trunk, and a couple of small tables added to the general conglomeration of furnishings, and freshly ironed clothes, ready for delivery to the customers, covered the bed.
"Come this way," Maggie directed me, "this here’s the hall Jim was telling you about. Ain’t it about the handiest hall you ever saw?" The two tables in the hall held an old-fashioned clock and a water bucket. A boiler of greens was cooking on top of a laundry heater, and several smoothing irons were arranged around it. "I got them greens out of our garden," Maggie informed me. "Do you have a garden?"
Another bedroom across the hall contrasted with other parts of the house in its lack of cluttered belongings. A mahogany-colored iron bed, a dark oak dresser, and two chairs, in addition to curtains and shades, comprised its furnishings.
Wien I entered the kitchen, which is at the right of the hall, I saw what Jim had been talking about when he said, "there's something powerfully interesting hanging up in our kitchen." Almost over the table a ham, a shoulder, and a middling of cured pork were suspended. An oil stove, an ancient cupboard, a more modern kitchen cabinet, and several chairs were among the kitchen furnishings’
My attention was drawn to a large jar of preserves on the kitchen cabinet. "Them’s pear perserves," Maggie said. "Don’t you want a taste of ’em? They’s clean and nice, ’cause there ain’t no chillun here to get into things." I was about to accept the proffered treat, when a very black Negress appeared in the doorway, and said: "Miss Maggie, I was passing by, and I’m hot and thusty. You don’t mind if I gits me a drink of water does you?"
"No, help yourself," was Maggie’s reply.
Not a word was spoken while the visitor walked over to the kitchen sink and leisurely drank from the faucet. She east several longing glances at the jar of preserves and at the meat that was so conspicuous, then thanked Maggie and left as quietly as she had made her appearance.
"Now, ain’t that just like some folks?" snorted Maggie, as she reached in the cabinet for a saucer, and began dishing out preserves. "Here, have one of my biscuits to eat ’em with. I declare they’s just as clean and good as if they was cooked in the white folks' kitchen, more so than things you finds in some white folks' places."
I did not accept the biscuit, but Maggie continued totalk. "If that woman thought I was going to give her any of mysomething to eat, she's crazy, I had to work hard to get my stuff, while these lazy folks like her walks the streets. She knowed it was nigh dinnertime, or she wouldn't have come sneaking in here."
We left the kitchen and went hack through the hall.
Looking out the back door, I saw where the washing was done. The pots used for boiling the clothes were encased in a contraption that resembled a barbecue pit. Jim was measuring a pieceof plank much higher than his head. I told him good-bye and thanked him for his story.
"You're welcome, Miss," he said, "and don’t leave out the part where I said, I've been doing carpenter work for ’most 49 years."
I left the carpenter of Lickakillet, and when I told Maggie good-bye and thanked her for her part in the story, laughter shook her fat sides as she said:"I'm mighty glad you come, Miss, but next time when you comes, for the Lord’s sake, please don’t stay so long. I'll be slap till Saturday dinner getting through with these clothes."
