Federal Writers' Project
Room 36, Federal Building
Greensboro, North Carolina
December 21, 1938
William Oscar Torian (Negro)
812 Bennett Street
Greensboro, North Carolina
Janitor
Pitts Cobb, writer
reviser
JAMES JOSEPH FLORIAN
The early December air had taken on the sharp bite of winter and the wind whipped about the small house on the Florian farm in Person County, North Carolina. The Florians were one of the "decent, reliable Negro families of the community", as Julia Norris, a maiden white lady of "uncertain summers", who lived on the adjoining farm, would say defensively.
The Florians were eight in family; Pa and Ma, James Joseph, his brother Bob, and four sisters, Clara, Fannie, Jenny and Sara. Joe had just passed his 21st birthday, and had given some serious thought to his future.
On this particular December day Ma Florian was scurrying about the kitchen putting the last minute touches to the evening meal. Darkness had come early and the feeble light from an outmoded lamp cast eerie shadows about the room. The door to the back porch was open and in the panel of light that lay across the worn boards of the floor, Joe was washing up for supper.
The shaft of light passed out into the bare yard, kept free of grass by the chickens which during the day hovered near the doorway awaiting an occasional morsel thrown out by Ma as she worked about the back part of the house.
"Reckon it's time fo' me to be gittin' out on mah own, now", Joe called back through the open door of the kitchen. "Pa's go 'nuf t' take keer ob 'sides me", he continued between smothering dabs at his face with the towel which Ma had made from a discarded flour sack.
"Whar y'u figger y'u a'goin?" challenged his mother. "Y'u ain't nothin' but a farm han'. Y'u might as soon wuk on yo' Pa's farm."
"I ain't agoin' t' wuk on no farm. I's goin to town." He came into the room and closed the door behind him.
"Won't y'u be somping in town! Dem city folks ain't like us. Better stay hyar whar y'u git plenty vittles an' uh fire to warm yose' wid."
Supper was placed on the long kitchen table, covered with red checked oil cloth. Ma took piping hot corn pones from the skillet, as she said; "Call yo' Pa."
Joe stepped to the porch again.
"Y'ho, Pa! Supper!"
That was also a signal for the children who immediately clustered about the table like hungry puppies crowding together to nurse. Clara stuck an inquiring finger into a jar of jam.
"Ma, Clara's a'dabbin."
Ma struck at Clara's hand as she placed a dish of cabbage on the table. She was too slow for Clara who jerked her hand free from the blow, giggled and "made a face" at Bob who had told on her.
"Tattle-tale, tattle-tale, hope you----"
"Shut up!" Ma said sharply.
Pa came in and sapper commenced.
"Y'u hyar what Joe say 'bout goin' t' town?" Ma asked, as Pa cooled his coffee in his saucer.
"Hyar'd him dis morning an' all day.
He's a'takin a chanct agoin to de city in dese days. Tole him t'day dat dis is 1938. Taint like 'twas when I was a'comin along. Everythin's a-hustle and a'pushin' in town now. Seem he bent on agoin dough."
"Sho I's agoin -- tomorrow", Joe asserted with an air of finality. "Ain't fo' certain of I go to Wilmington or Greensboro. Gotta wait for a hunch. Whatever my min' say I'm agonna do."
His "mind said" Greensboro, and the next day he was on the train. It was dark when he reached his destination. The long shed along the track was bright with electric lights as he alighted from the car. The engine, two car lengths ahead, breathed heavily. Both the lunch room and the dining room of the Huffine Hotel, adjoining the depot, were brilliantly lighted and crowded with patrons. Joe made his way into the waiting room marked Colored. A Red Cap followed him from the tracks.
"Where kin a fellow git a room an' supper ‘roun' here?" Joe asked, as the Red Cap caught up with him.
"Y'u kin git sompin' t' eat at de lunch counter over dare. Better ask de cab driver right out de do' ‘bout a room."
Joe found the lunch counter for colored and ordered a sandwich and a cup of coffee.
Outside there were several cabs standing at the curb. As Joe stated toward the nearest one, a well-dressed man hurried past him and jumped into the cab, calling an address to the driver who pulled away from the curb before joe could reach him.
The second cab pulled up into the vacant space. The driver was an old Negro man. Joe felt a sense of security as he approached him.
"Howdy" said Joe, showing a slightly protruding row of large teeth; two of the center ones framed in gold. "Where kin a fellow get a room 'roun dese parts"?
"Go straight back dat a-way", he jerked a thumb over his shoulder, "twell you come to the co'te house. Dats Market Street; turn that-a-way", indicating east. "Anybody kin tell you whar dey's a roomin' place. I'll take you dare fo' fifty cent", he added, seeing a chance to make a trip.
Joe's suit case was not heavy; he had been riding the better part of the day and welcomed the opportunity to walk. Then, too, he thought twice before spending as much as fifty cents.
"I'll fin' it awright", he said as he picked up his bag.
The street was a brilliant corridor illuminated by electric signs, lights hanging at each street intersection and lights from the store windows. Just ahead in the second block the T-shaped electric sign of a clothing store extended the entire height of the store front.
At the top, outlined with electric bulbs, was a man continuously doffing a derby hat. This was the first animated electric sign Joe had ever seen. He stood for some minutes entranced by it.
Presently he passed on and reached "the square" where the courthouse stood. He turned to the right and made his way down East Market Street to the Negro section of Greensboro, where he arranged for a room by the week.
The following morning he started out to find a job. At the corner of Elm, the main street, bind Wrest Sycamore, just a block south of the square, was the Benbow Hotel. He entered the lobby and looked about. Four Negro boys were coming toward the door. The leader was dressed in a flashy suit and wore a bright red tie; the other three boys were also sportily dressed, but were not quite so flashy.
"Hi boy! What you doin' in a white man's hotel?" asked the flashily dressed Negro. His companions grinned.
"Lookin' fo' wuk" replied Joe.
"No use", came the reply. "We just seen Mrs. Summons and she wouldn’t even talk to us. You look like you dressed for hard work, boy. C’m on wi'd us and we'll show yo whar yo c'n git yo' kind o' work."
"Here’s a fellow what knows town ways," thought Joe. "Maybe he kin get me a job right now." He started to follow the quartet, when he reconsidered. "Better try fo’ myse'f", he thought and turned back toward the clerk's desk. A bell hop of about his own age was coming down the stairs into the lobby.
"Boy!" called Joe. The bell hop waited for him. "I want to see 'bout a job; who's de boss?"
"Go right back there," pointing to the rear of the lobby. "Mrs. Marjorie Simmon does de hireih and de firein'."
Despite the discouraging advice of the "city boys", Joe found the hotel in need of a hall boy, and he was given the job.
During the next six months Joe became accustomed to the routine of town life. But working indoors was irksome after so many years spent in farming.
One morning, shortly before Easter, he went to Mrs. Simmon's’ office.
"Come in, Joseph.”
"Mrs. Simmons," Joe began, "I t'ank y'u for gibin' me a job when I needed it. I likes de work fine, too, but it's too much fo' me; stayin’ in de house all atime. I gonna hafta stop Sat'day."
"Do you have prospects for another job?"
"Yesum! I'm agoin to talk t' Mrs.
Robert Davidson 'bout takin' keer ob her garden and lawn."
"That's fine. They own one of the largest mills in the world, you know. It's a nice place to work."
"Yesum, dey pays pretty good, too. She pay $9.00 a week. Dat's 'bout t'ree times what I make now.
"I'm sure you will get the job all right and that you are going to like it very much; and they will like you, too," she added confidently. "We are sorry you intend leaving, Joe," she continued, "Your work has been very satisfactory. If you want a recommendation, have Mrs. Davidson call me."
The following Monday, by appointment, Joe called at the home of Mrs. Davidson. The spacious grounds were surrounded by a newly planted hedge. The drives from the two entrances formed a horseshoe to the palatial house which sat well back from the street. To the right of the approach were tennis courts and flower gardens. Artistically arranged throughout the grounds were shade trees, boxwoods, and other ornamental shrubs.
Joe passed under the porte-cochere and around the house to the servants' entrance. A Negro houseman answered his summons and led him to Mrs. Davidson who was expecting him. Joe talked intelligently to her about the care of plants and flowers.
"I see you understand your work, Joe.
Your name is Joe, isn’t it?"
"Yesum, Joe Florion. I un’erstan’ plantin' and raisin' things, aw'right. I lived on a farm up to six month ago. Den I wuk fo’ Mrs. Marjorie Simmons till now."
After a few more minutes of questioning, Mrs. Davidson said:
"You may come back in the morning ready to work. I want some cleaning and raking done in the yard and garden, right away."
That was for Joe, the beginning of 9 years of service in one of the wealthy homes of North Carolina. It was while he was working here that he met and made a close friend of Sam Florian.
Though he bore the same surname, they were not related.
One Sunday in early May, Joe and Sam as usual attended church together. The sermon would have been interesting to Joe if it were not that he felt like a fifth grade school boy kept in by a too-grown-up teacher who couldn't appreciate the beauty of the season. He thought of shaded streams, fishing, and of cool water lapping about bare shins, and longed to be in the out-of-doors.
His gaze wandered quite often across the church to where an attractive brown-Shimmed girl was setting. He had first noticed her in that same pew one Sunday several weeks earlier. He had wished <text not clear> much to meet her. Ordinarily he would not have waited for such a minor thing as a formal introduction, but he had observed that each Sunday, immediately after services, she was joined by a young man whom Joe later learned was a student at the Agricultural and Technical College. Joe could not find an opportunity to bring himself between these two. At this time, however, he decided he would try to devise some pretext for engaging her in conversation.
Presently, the congregation arose for the closing hymn. Joe’s attention was brought back to the services, and he realized that his friend, Sam, was still beside him. Sam turned to him and said:
“I jes' seen a girl I know. How'd y’u lik' to meet her?"
“I don't min' ef I do," replied Joe, but with very little enthusiasm; then he added; "I been seein’ one girl here a long time I would lik' to meet.”
The two made their way to the door of the church.
"See dat chocolate colored boy over dare? Dat's her reg'lar feller, but I knows Virginny good; I'll "knock-you-down" to her ef you don’t mind de boy."
"Who--him? Say, he goes wid dat girl what I jes' tole you 'bout. Yeah--I'd lik' to meet her--I don't care nothin' 'bout dat boy."
Sam and Joe had stopped on the sidewalk at the foot of the steps. Virginia was just back of them in the doorway. As she reached them Sam said:
"Howdy, 'Ginnie--What y'u hurryin' fo'?"
"Lawdy! It's Sam--Where y'u been at?"
Virginia was tall; awfully tall, Joe thought, as he looked up into her face. She was head and shoulders taller than himself. He secretly wished he were a six footer instead of five feet-two. His attention went immediately to Virginia. He did not notice what she was wearing, but he was aware of the fact that her clothes were stylish, and that she wore them exceptionally well.
"I been roun’ 'bout”, Sam said, then added; "Miss Byrd, dis here's Joe Florian".
"Please t' know you". Then to Sam, "He yo' brodder?"
"No, no kin; but he awright, jes de same", Sam said laughingly.
"I'll walk along wif yoi, Miss Byrd, till yo' frien' ke'ch up, if you don’ min'," Joe said.
He had noticed Virginia's boy friend standing at the curb some distance away. Virginia agreed.
From that Sunday in May, the student's progress on the Road of Romance as far as Virginia was concerned was definitely impeded. Eighteen months later Joe and Virginia were married.
A few years later, when Spring had come again, Joe sat on his porch in his shirt sleeves attempting to smoke a short-stemmed pipe that refused to stay lit. Virginia, in the kitchen, was sinking De Ole Ark’s A-moverin; as she washed the supper dishes.
Joe's monkey-like face, wrinkling quizzically in meditation, was plainly visible in the gathering dusk as match after match flared above his pipe and smoke wreathed his head.
Raucous laughter floated across the small street from an opposite house. The hum of conversation grew louder and reached Joe's ears as neighbors, their chores completed, came out upon their respective porches for a breath of fresh air. The younger set passed by in pairs and in small groups on their way to an evening of recreation.
Presently Virginia came out and sat beside Joe. He said:
"I been t'inkin' 'bout gibin' up mah job an' goin to Co-nedicut. I got a letter f'om mah sister, Jenny, an' she say jobs pay good. She wanta know how come I don' come up an' git a job."
"Tain't no sense ob us a-movin' way up to Co-nedicut. You got a good job here."
You all-a-time talk 'bout us buyin' a house. How we gonna buy one ef I don' make mo' money? Jenny say Tom'll he'p me git a job."
"What kin’ o' place dey in anyhow?"
"Who? dem?--Dey in Stamford, Co-nedicut. Tom say he make big money. Jenny don' wu'k a-tall."
"Dats way up No'th, aint it?"
"Sho--its' up No 'th."
"Too cold fo’ me ef its any colder 'n No'th Ca'lina."
"Tain’t bad." Joe said defensively.
"Jenny say houses all built outa brick and dey use steam heat. You’ll lik' it."
"Yeah, I'd lik’ livin't in a brick house wid steam heat; but I won't lik’ snow and ice, and sleet and cold weader all-a-time."
"I done study it out", Joe said judiciously. "An’ my min' tell me to go to Stamford. We kin go now while it warm an' fin' out how we lik' it 'fore it git cold weader."
"Yo’ min' most generally tell you de truf, but I don' like no cold weader. Bad ’nuf here in de winter."
"Yo’ min' don't tell you t' go, an' mah min' do tell me t’ go, so we betta go."
"Sho yo' make mo’ money in Stan--what de placed called--Sta--?"
"Stamford" finished Joe "Co-nedicut--Yeah! I know I make mo' money. Efen I don't I kin come, back, can't I?"
"Efen you can't we ain't a-goin, I know dat." Virginia said defiantly.
"I got a letter right here from Tom, too, an' he say he makin' good money an' say I Kin too, efen I'll come on up." Joe knocked the ashes from his pipe. "I goin' t' bed early. Got lots ob work t' do tomorrow. An' I gonna tell Mis’ Davidson I leavin' Sat'day. Let's go in."
The Florians reached Stamford on Sunday and took a trolley to Jenny's, as neither she nor Tom, her husband, were at the depot. Their welcome, notwithstanding, was warm and effusive.
After supper that evening Tom and Joe were talking. Joe said:
"You didn't say where you wu’kin’. Reckon you ‘spect to get me a job at the same place, don't you”
Tom rolled nervous eyes toward the adjoining room where Jenny and Virginia were talking enthusiastically.
"Well, Joe, I ain't 'zackly wu'kin' fo' anybody; jes picks up a job here and dare. I wuks mos' de time, but I jes' ain't got a reg'lar job."
Joe's face puckered involuntarily.
"Den what fo' you write me, and Jenny write me, to come up here? you knows I got t’ wu'k. Here I is in a strange place and ain't got no money ahead to live on. De job I had at home wuz steady. I wuked dare nine year. What I gonna do up here?"
You kin' get work, awright", Tom said, trying to console Joe. "Deys heap ob fac'trys 'bout here. Dey's a 'ployment office. You won't hafta wait long fo' a job".
"Data a mighty cu'yous way t' treat a feller", Joe said, "But I allus has got a job when I needs it. Reckon I kin fin' one here, but" -- he added in a lowered voice--"t’aint no use t' tell Virginie you ain't got no wuk fo’ me. I'll look 'roun' tomorrow".
On Monday morning Joe and Tom left home early. Two blocks up the street they parted. Joe spent the day in search of work, but evening had brought no success.
The following day Joe selected a different section of the city. He was attracted by a large plant. Before going to it he thought he would inquire into the nature of the work. He stepped into a store and bought a can of tobacco.
"What kin' ob fact'ry is dat?" he asked of the clerk.
"Roller mill".
"Dat's where dey make flour, ain't it?"
Joe asked, remembering that the flour mills back home are called roller mills.
"No. Smelting plant for copper."
"Oh!"
As Joe approached the plant, he saw half a dozen men in line outside the gate. On the fence was a sign: Man Wanted. Joe got in line and waited. There were also in line two robust Italians, one Polack, and three Negroes. Joe was the smallest man in the group. Presently the gate keeper ushered the men into one of the nearby buildings where a large muscular man with an English accent met them. He looked critically over the applicants and motioned to Joe to come forward. After answering a few questions he was hired at wages of $12.50 per week.
Joe found that copper smelting was a very laborious business. What he disliked most was the acid treatment of the metal. His years of living in the open made him rebellious against confinement in the super-heated, acid-filled building.
But he lost no time from work when he left the roller mill. He applied at the plant of the Yale Lock Company at just the psychological time to be selected as one of the twenty-five janitors employed there. His wages were $14.00 a week.
Within another month Joe and Virginia had moved into an apartment to themselves in the home of a widow a few blocks from Jenny's. Three months after he started working for the Yale Lock Company Joe's quick, thorough work came to the attention of the president of the company who requested that Joe be appointed as the only janitor to clean the offices of the three top ranking officials. His wages were increased to $22.50 a week.
When Joe and Virginia had been in Stamfor for four years, and Joe had been with the Yale Lock Company the entire time, with the exception of the first six months, he came home unusually late one Saturday. Virginia was waiting supper for him.
"What make you late fo' supper? Been read fo’ a hour."
"What I got t'tell you is worf missin' supper fo'," Joe said jubilantly.
"Good news, huh?" Virginia asxed expectantly, "We goin' back to No'th Ca'lina?"
"Naw. Better den dat. Dey clone made me boss o' the janitors,” Joe announced proudly.
Virginia smiled broadly. "Bet dey done raised you again, too”. Her smile became even broader. "Has dey?"
"Dey raised me, awright, but yo' aint made no guess what it is. I know you neber guess.
Better tell you. You aint agoin' t' b'lieve it, but I'se gonna git seventy-six dollars an' seventy-five cent straight pay and extry fo' ober time."
"Dey ain't agoin' t' pay you dat much?"
"Sho' is. I 'sponsible fo' ever one ob dem janitors, an' I gotta keep 'em busy and keep dat whole plant clean as a pin."
"U-m-m-uh! De raise sho do come in handy, don't it? Jes' when we gonna have de 'spense ob havin' a baby, too. I wuz hopin' de good news 'ud be dat we goin' back home. De doctor been sayin' you know, dis part ob de country ain't good fo' me on 'count ob my t'roat. He say I ought t' go back to No'th Ca'lina."
"I wuz sorta plannin' on goin' back", Joe said apologetically, "but dis here raise mak' me t'ink we kin 'ford t' git de bes' doctors fo' you and maybe you won't haft a go back."
"I ain't tole yo' b'fo’", Virginia confided "but dis ol' woman ain't goin' t' let us stay in dis 'partment much longer. She done tole me couple weeks ago t' fin' 'nuther place."
"What matter wid her. We don't owe her nuthin'.”
"She say she ain't lettin' no chillun in here an' we better git settled now. I been a-look-in' fo' a place but ain't foun' nuthin."
The next day, Sunday, Joe went out to try to find a place. In spite of a shortage of rent houses he determined to find a suitable place at once, even if he had to move to another neighborhood. A few blocks away on the opposite side of the same street, he saw a man placing a To Let sign on a house. He hesitated, uncertain whether to apply, as Negro families lived on only one side of that street. However, he finally crossed over and accosted the man.
"How you do, mister," Joe said.
"Gooda afternoon". The man was Italian.
"Dis place to let?" Joe asked by way of furthering the conversation.
"Sure, I hava it for let righta now."
"To colored?" Joe asked.
"Sure. I lika to have gooda colored family inna my house. You wanta rent it?"
"How much rent?"
"Twenta-fie dolla mont'. Dat-a cheep for gooda house."
"I'll take it, mister," Joe said, glad to find a place so quickly. "I pay you now and move in tomorrow. Gib me a receipt for dis here money."
Following the advent of Little James, Virginia's physician recommended even more strongly that she return South.
"This sinus trouble of yours", the doctor had told her, "together with that infected throat, is poisoning your whole system, and is an extra tax on your heart. While the treatments here have helped you some, still, you should live in a milder climate."
Had he said that two or three years ago, she would have told Joe about it at once, and would have insisted on returning to Greensboro. But it was different now. Joe was engrossed in his work; was making an exceptionally good salary, and had during the past three years saved money for the future. Virginia did not intend to tear down what had been built up during these past few years.
They had not bought a home, although they both felt that a home should be their first investment. Virginia had, however, discouraged buying property in Stamford. She hoped that they would eventually re-establish their home in the South. Contrary to their belief that, the home should come first, Joe could not with stand the urge to buy an automobile.
He explained it to Virginia this way:
"Tain't lik' us not havin’ de money fo' de house. We's done got mo' ’en 'nuf fo' dat; we jes' ain’t ready t' buy it. So when I seen dat new Nash car I says: 'Joe, ’tain’t no use fo' you t' go on wid out no car when you got nuf fo' a car and a house too,' so I walks in an’ buys de car."
In the spring of 1922, when James had just passed his second birthday, an unusually severe heart attack sent Virginia to the hospital. It was not until this time that Joe, in talking with the attending physician, learned of the gravity of Virginia's condition. When she had recuperated sufficiently to enable her to stand the trip, Joe sold his household furnishings, resigned his connections with the Yale Lock Company, and the Florians turned toward the South once more.
Joe was in Greensboro only a few days when he went to work for a Mr. Barker, general building contractor.
He rode a bicycle to and from work while on the construction job. He prefered this to using his car for two reasons: it was economical, and it was also healthful exercise. He had been working for Mr. Barker about four months when one day while returning home he was struck by an automobile and his leg was injured.
For a while after he had been released from the doctor's care, he was unable to do manual labor, so he took up hotel work again as a bell hop at the O. Henry Hotel.
A few days later there was among the guests of the hotel a Mr. Auton, a large, immaculately dressed man over whom the clerk and officials made much ado. He was a wealthy corporation executive who made periodic business visits into this territory and whom the bell hops had early classified as a liberal dipper.
The bell hops who usually waited on Mr. Auton were all busy at the time, so it fell to Joe to bring in the baggage and to show Mr. Auton to his room. As Joe placed the baggage, Mr. Auton asked:
"Can you drive a Ford?"
"Yes, Sir!" Joe replied.
This was in the days of the pedal shift of the model T. Joe wondered why so wealthy a man as Mr. Auton should drive this type car.
"Then take these keys", Mr. Auton continued, “and store my car in that garage back of the hotel."
As a matter of fact, Joe had never driven any car but the standard gear shift type, but, as he said later; "Allus say you kin do what eber comes to han'. Ef you don't you sho will lose a heap ob op'tunities".
Joe found the Ford parked at a 45 degree angle to the curb. After some difficulty he succeeded in starting the motor. Releasing the emergency brake, the clutch fell into high gear and choked the engine. He again started the motor, this time holding his foot on the clutch pedal. The motor raced and he gazed in bewilderment at the three pedals wondering which was the reverse gear. He pushed on the one at his left foot. The car shot forward over the curb, and the bumper rammed into the granite base of the hotel. The motor choked. He looked about him helplessly. Bill, a friend of his, was passing.
"Bill", Joe called, "I sho’ glad t' see you. I wanta get dis car in de road. Show me how right quick."
Bill got into the lord and back it out into the street. He showed Joe how to reverse it, and how to shift to the different speeds. He then got out and Joe took the wheel again.
The car was headed in the oppostie direction from the garxage so Joe drove around the block. When he reached the garage he suddenly remembered that Bill had not shown him how to stop the car. Instead of driving into the garxage, Joe started on another trip around the block. He kept a look out for Bill, or someone else, whom he could call on for help. He saw no one he knew. After the third trip around the block, he decided to turn into the garage anyway. He left the motor in high gear, cut the gas as low as possible and drove straight through the length of the building, jolting to a stop as the bumper jammed against the back wall of the garage. Luckily the bumper was a strong one, and no harm had been done.
Joe took the storage check and returned to Mr. Auton’s room at the hotel.
"Did you get the car stored O.K.?" he asked Joe.
"Yes sir! Here's yo' storage check".
"What's your name?" Mr. Auton asked.
Joe wondered if Mr. Auton could have found out about the trouble he had had with the car, and if he wished to report him to the hotel manager.
"Joe", he said weakly.
"Well, Joe, here's something for your trouble. I'd like to have you wait on me while I'm here. I'll always call for you". He handed Joe a dollar.
"Yes sir! Thank y'u sir"
One evening soon after The Ford epreocle Virginia asked Jog how soon they could start building.
"I seen a mighty good lookin’ lot over by Bennett College today", Joe said. "I gonna see 'bout it tomorrow, and ef it ain't too high I gonna buy it an' build a house right away."
The contract for the house was let the next month. It was a well-built, one-story cottage of four rooms, with a porch all the way across the front of the dwelling. The living room was on the left; a bed room on the right, with a connecting door from the living room. This they always called James’ room. "It won't be long 'fore Jamas'll hafta have a room to hisse'f", Virginia told Joe when they were considering the plans.
Back of the front bed room was Virginia’s and Joe's bed room. The kitchen, at the end of a small hallway, was immediately back of the living room.
"When dey drove de las' nail dey wan't a cent owin' on dat house," Joe told a friend later, "An' when I had de house made bigger to six rooms de nex' year it cost me $1200.00 mo'. I paid dat cash, too."
With the new house and being back "home", Virginia's health soon showed marked improvement. Then Betsy was born. A neighbor came by to see Virginia and the baby.
"She sho is cute, Mis' Florian--Wat you name her?"
"Betsy. Dats fo’ my sister."
"Uh-huh! pretty name. I got six chillun. I has to stop and study fo' a name ever’ time nuther kid comes", she laughed heartily--"Sho' is a job a-feedin' 'em too."
"Joe makes purty good pay; 'taint no drain on us. Yet and still, we bofe say don’t hav' mo' ’en yo kin take keer ob."
"Ain’t it de trufe?" agreed the neighbor, as she started for the door. "Mis' Johnson, up de street, say she coinin' down an’ bring yo’ some ice cream t'day. You know her ole man wu'k at de ice cream plant."
"Uh-huh. Sho is nice o her t' think ob me. Well, you cum back t' see me."
Joe worked at the hotel until 1931. It was due to Virginia's influence that he eventually gave up this work.
"I tell you, Mis’ Johnson", Virginia explained to her neighbor. "Joe's a good man, but he gits in bad comp'ny at de hotel. Dese rich folks a-comin' t' town has parties in dey room wid lots ob liquor. Joe wales on 'em, an' dey all time 'sistin' dat he take a drink.
"Course, Joe don't min' takin' it, neither. Fact is, he lik' it. Heap ob times he come home right wobbly. Dat ain't mah way ob livin', I tell you. But dem folks pays fo' service an' he have t' do what dey say.
"Joe say some time he has t’ drive a drunk all night t' sober him up. Dey allus pay him good, but I don't want Joe t' git t' drinkin' reg'ler."
After Joe left the hotel his income dwindled to a very meager amount. He worked at odd jobs. One day he would do house cleaning; another day some laboring work. Finally be rented a building on East Market street, and opened a small lunch counter where he sold ready-made, wrapped sandwiches, cold drinks and the like. The city ordinance required too large a license tax where cooked lunches, cafe style, could be served.
Joe made arrangements with a prominent dry cleaner to act as his agent, in the Negro section. The commission vas small, but this, together with the income from the ready-made lunches, pies, cakes, cigarettes and cold drinks, helped meet current expenses.
Virginia was not able to do strenuous work, but she could stay in the score and wait on trade during the day, while Joe was out house-cleaning, mowing lawns and doing other odd jobs. At night he kept the store open while Virginia rested.
The Florians lived in the rear of the store and rented out their house, furnished. On Saturdays James worked for a grocery store. In this way they were able to get along fairly well. They managed to pay the taxes on their property and to keep out of debt.
In 1935 when the Florians finally gave up the store and began keeping house again, Virginia’s health was much improved. She was able to work out a day or two at the time. Joe had found regular work with a neighbor who was a wall paper contractor.
Early in April of the next year Virginia was house cleaning for Mrs. Webster, across town, where she often helped either in general house cleaning, or with odd jobs. It was nearly six o'clock. Mrs. Webster came into the kitchen where Virginia was finishing up her work.
"Batter hurry, Virginia, and get started home," Mrs. Webster suggested. "It looks threatening in the west. We might have a storm."
"I’ll jes' finish dis right here an’ den I goin'. I wants t' be home when Joe git dare.
I likes fo' us all t’ be t’gedder when it’s a-stormin'. I dreamed ’bout a awful storm las' night."
Virginia soon finished her work and left. She was in sight of home when behind her she saw a black funnel-shaped cloud. She increased her speed and reached the front gate just as Joe rounded the corner from the other street.
"Hurry on here, Joe. It's a cyclone.
Where de chillun?"
<text not clear>, Joe corrected when he reached Virginia. The two went into the house together.
James and Betsy were waiting for them.
There was a roaring as of the phasing of a freight train which amplified to terrific proportion as the tornado drew closer, cutting a path of destruction across the southern section of the town and reaching to within sight of the Florian home.
Virginia, looking out the window, saw a huge oak tree writhe, twist, rind leap through the air landing against an outhouse of a neighbor.
"It's jes' lik' do storm I drempt 'bout. Oh, Blessed Savior.” She stepped back to the leather upholstered divan and fell upon it.
Joe rushed to her just as the lights over the entire town went out, and sirens of ambulances and fire trucks screamed. The roar of the wind gradually subsided and calls of frightened neighbors rang through the air.
"James go 'phone fo' a doctor, yo' mu's sick”, Joe called out from the blackness that had settled about them.
"Betsy, see ef here's a candle in de kitchen."
For hours the family sat huddled in the darkness. At last an ambulance come. The attendants had flash lights. One of the attendants bent over Virginia and then turned to Joe and said:
"Nothing' to can do for her. I'm sorry. She died from a heart attack. All we can do is to take her to the undertaker's for you."
Stunned by the suddenness of this blow, Joe's first thought after it was all over, was to break up his home. A few weeks later he sent the children to live with his wife's sister in Virginia. He was unable to rent the house, so remained on there alone.
The next year business took a slump. He lost his job with the paper hanger and turned again to odd jobs. On his way home late one Saturday afternoon he became despondent and discouraged as he thought over his reduced circumstances. He turned suddenly from his course and went up an alley. Here he found a bootlegger from whom he bought a pint of corn whiskey.
"I'll git good an' drunk an' forgit 'bout my troubles", he told himself.
He had just settled himself at home and had taken a small drink when there was a loud knock at the door. He placed the bottle on the living room table and answered the knock. James stood there in the twilight.
“Well, Papa, I'se back. I wants to stay here wid you. I don't like it on de farm". He had not made any move to enter the house.
"Well sir! Come on in. I sho’ glad t’ see you, but you got no business leavin' yo' Auntie. How Betsy?" Joe was secretly pleased that James had come home.
The living room looked invitingly familiar to James. There was the divan beside the door where Virginia had lain that night of the tornado; the small, square center table with the Bible and ornamental knick-Knacks; the lounging chair with a goose-neck floor lamp beside it. Even the bright patterned rug, and the pictures on the walls around the room seemed to say, Welcome!
The partly used pint bottle of corn whiskey was in plain view on the table. Joe wished he had put it away before he answered the knock at the door. But how was he to Know James would be there? If he could slip it out of the room without directing James' attention to it.
"I ain't washed de dishes fo' couple ob days. Come out in de Kitchen and hep' me wid 'em’, Joe coaxed, hoping to slip back to the living room and hide his bottle. For the first time since Virginia’s death there seemed something in life for him.
Quietly he went back into the living room, and picked up the bottle, looking about for a place to hide it. He went into his bed room and opened the dresser drawer just as James entered from the kitchen.
"Papa, you ain't ago’n’ t’ drink dat is you?”, James asked as he saw the bottle. "Mama allus hated t’ see you a'drinkin’ liquor."
"No, I jes' puttin' it away for medicine", Joe explained, feeling guilty. We should a-had some in de house when yo' ma wuz sick."
With James at home Joe was aware of a certain feeling of responsibility. As he looked back later to those days, he knew it had been James' presence in the home that had kept him from falling back into the habit of drinking.
Shortly after James returned home Joe began looking for steady work. At the Interstate paper Company, a wholesale organization, which maintained a large local warehouse, he found a job as janitor, at $12.50 a week.
James completed his high school work in 1937. Betsy teased to come dome that year during vacation, to which Joe finally agreed. Just before school began in 1938, Betsy came to Joe one evening after supper where he was manupulating the butter and egg numbers from the afternoon paper in an attempt to determine what the winning number might be the next day.
"Paps, I'm not goin' back t' school die year," she announced.
Joe put down his paper, removed his short-stemmed pipe with one hand, and his glasses with the other.
"How come y'u t’ink y'u aint agoin?" he asked.
"I awready got mo’ education 'en you had when you went t' work. You said you stopped in de 7th grace. You always made good money and got along pretty good. I ought t' get out and start working reg'lar", Betsy explained.
"Edication is somethin' 'at allus comes in handy. I tell you how come I knows. Twice, after I quit school I want travelin 'bout de country. In Ohio I had plenty chances t' git good payin' jobs, but dey allus wanted somebody wid high school edication. Dey was jobs fo' Negroes, too. Same t'ing happened in Philadelphia when I went up dare.
"But lissen to die", he continued, "when I was in Stamford in war times, we had heatlees days, meatless days an' all dat. When de heatless days come along we did'en wu'k at de plant, 'cause we couldn't run de furnaces.
“Well, I allus put on my good clothes when I was off frum wu'k lik' dat. At de coal yam dey let us have jee' a little coal at de time. We had t' form in line an' wait our turn fo’ coal.
"I wuz in line between two fellers wid dirty, torn overalls on, but I wuz dress' up. I seen a 'ristocratic lookin' white man awalkin' up and down lookin' de fellers ober. He look’ at me and motioned fo’ me t' come ober t' whar he was. De fellow back ob me say he'd keep my place fo' me. I want ober to' see what he want.
'Do you use de typewriter", he asked me.
"'No, sir,'" I told him.
" 'I'm looking for a <text not clear> man what can use de typewriter and what Knows French. You look lik' a ‘telligent young man and I picked you out fo’ de wu'kl Do you know anybody what could fill the place?'
"'No sir, but ef I fin' anybody ober dare, I call you, I told him.
"You see Betsy", Joe said "ef I had akep’ on at school an had akep on at A & T College, I could-a had a good job". Then he continued with his story.
"When I got back in line, de man back o' me wid de torn, dirty overalls say:
"'What did he want?'
" 'He want a colored typewriter what know French,' I tole him.
"'Call him over here', de man say--'I like t' have that job.'
"I motioned fo' de man t’ come ober an’ dem two talk fo' a while in French jos' as fas' as I do in English. Den de man take dat feller wid him. De man already tole me whar his office was at, so in a few weeks I went by dere. De boss was out, and I talk wid de feller what got de job. He say he got $35.00 a week fo' de first two weeks, an’ beginnin' dat week he was gittin' $40.00.
"You ain't quittin' school. You-goin' right on. Ef you got a edication y'u got sumpin. Years is a pushin on me, an I can't git no edication now.
"My wages jes do cover ’spences ef I careful. De trouble is", he added "I ain’t very careful sometime. Dis here pay is jes’ trash t’ what I used t’ make. Many's de time I made in a day, by workin’ obertime, what I make now in a week.
"Seems t’ me we got war time prices an’ ain’t makin’ ’nuf to pay ’em. What I ought t’ be makin’ is twenty or twenty-five dollars a week, den we could live like we been used t’ livin'.
"If I could git jes' a little money ahead I lik' t' start a business ob mah own. Dat's de bes’ way t’ make money, but I don't see no chances fo’ dat now. We jes’ has t' trust in de Lord t’ git along.
"Yo’ Mama was right, she use t’ say dat. She say: "Trust in de Lord, wu'k an' pray, and He won't let you down". Joe's voice broke and he changed the subject.
“You ain’t a quittin’ school. You goin t’ study an’ be sumpin’.”
