June 5, 1939
John Benton (Negro)
726 Alexander St. Extension
Charlotte, N. C.
Disabled laborer
Cora L. Bennett, writer
<text not clear>
Original Names	Changed Names
John Benton	William Franklin
Union County	Alliance County
Matthews	Belt's Crossing
Mr. Stephenson	Mr. Long
Charlotte	Riverton
Morrow street	Jones Alley
Long Street	Handy Street
Allie	Delia
Orlenda	Jobina
Mary	Laura
Baddy Grace	Daddy Judah
<text not clear>
The Franklins live in a five-room house overloaded with shabby furniture, cheap stuff William bought during the war while he was making $95 a month with the Express Company and living high. That was the biggest time in William's life. Now everything is over; he's dependent upon his children end they quarrel with him about his religion. He is not cheerful about his trouble but neither is he bitter. It is simply a matter of fact and he treats it as such.
“Three years, three long years," he said, “since I worked a single bit. Had a stroke 'bout three years ago and never have been able to do any work since. I've made pretty good money in my day but don't reckon I'll ever be able to do anything else. I've got so I can walk around a little bit but can't use myself good yet. It's pretty hard on a fellow what's been used to workin'. And I been workin' hard ever since I can remember up till three years ago.
“I was born right down here in Alliance County, North Carolina, 'bout six miles from Balk's Crossing. My Mama died when I was 'bout fifteen years old and from then on we children stayed home with Papa. They was six children.
“Papa was a farmer. He rented a one-hoss farm from a man named Long that had a big plantation and had a lot of other farmers workin' on his place. We worked hard and never did make nothin' much for the work. It would take every penny we'd make to pay for our seed and fertilizer, and the only thing we'd have left would be our corn crop. We couldn't sell that or we wouldn't had nothin' to eat for the summer.
"And that's the reason I'm livin' in town today -- simply because you couldn't make a decent livin' on the farm. I love the farm and I'd of been out there right now if it had'a been so a fellar could'a made a livin' out there. Why, I remember one year we made seven bales o' cotton and didn't git but five cents a pound for none of it. You know that was a shame. A man couldn't work that hard for nothin'. Then when we sold it we was still in debt, 'cause the credit we had already used up at the store taken all we made to pay out.
"When I was little we didn't have no good school stall. We would have two months o' school in the summer and two in the winter. I didn't git to go much. I guess I went about five sessions in all.
"After I got married me and my wife stayed on with Papa 'bout two years fluid helped him on his farm. Then we moved out to ourself and got us a farm of our own. Then we did work hard. But we never did git nowhere. We couldn't make money enough to buy the children clothes. There was four children and three of 'em still lives. So I decided I was gonna leave the farm and git me a job in town workin' for wages.
“We come to Riverton about twenty-seven years ago. I got a job at the Express Company and worked there till I had that stroke. They started me as a helper on the express wagon makin' $35 a month. That was big money for a man just off the farm and not used to havin' any money a tall.
“Well, my wife didn't like it here and she wanted to go back to Alliance County but I wouldn't hear of it -- I was gonna git rich and that real quick off them wages. But I didn't have sense enough to know it was gonna cost me more to live in town. I soon found out. We lived in a little old three-room house down on Jones Alley and was payin' $3 a week rent. Well, I could at least meet my bills so I didn't think one minute 'bout goin' back to the farm.
"Then they raised my pay to $50 a month. A little while after that they moved me from workin' on the express wagon and put me on the inside of the buildin' sortin' out freight or callin' freight. Well, in war times I was matin' as high as $95 a month. We moved into a bigger house down on Handy Street and paid about $6 a week rent. We had a plenty of everything then. What I mean, we didn't really want for nothin'. We could sort of meet our bills and have a little bit ever for things we wanted. But after the war my wages went back down to $50 a month. We got along all right on it ’cause we never was a family to waste up stuff. I kept workin' steady at the Express office then.
"I sent all four o' my children to school. Two o' the girls and one o’ the boys finished the eighth grade. I'd of helped 'em to go on to school if they had wanted to go, but it seemed like when they finished the grades they wasn't interested in goin' no further so I let 'em alone. But I would of been proud if they'd finished up school and then they'd of been able to git good jobs somewhere.
"Both the girls has been married, but Delia's husband don't live with her so she come on back home. Jobina and her husband live here with us too. But now my son, he don't live with us. He's been married too and him and his wife is parted. They couldn't make it neither. Seems like young folks these days don't try to git along. Now me and my wife, we been married nigh onto forty-two years. Ain't that right Laura? Go git the Bible and we can tell exactly how long it's been."
Laura returned with the Bible and placed it in John's hand.
"Yes, it's been forty-two years ago we was married. It was in 1897. That's been a long time. But the least little thing that happens them young ones leave and think nothin’ of it.
"I had boy to die. He was livin’ in Washington and he come home. Never did get very sick but he had asthma and died what you'd almost call suddenly.
"When we first come to Riverton we didn't join no church for a long time, but we went to the Methodist church so much till most everybody thought we belonged there. Well, after my two girls were married they joined the Methodist church; but me and Laura didn't.
"When Daddy Judah come to this town about fourteen years ago I want to hear him preach and I just joined in with them. I tell you how it happened. I went to hear him preach one Sunday at the tent and followed 'em on out to the river where they was baptisin' that day. When I went out there I wasn't studyin' 'bout goin' in that water. Well, they was paradin' out to the pool to be baptised and Daddy Judah's power hit me so hard I come all the way back home to git me some clothes to be baptised in. And when I got back out there they was still baptising. Some o' the folks felt the power so strong they just went and jumped in the river with they clothes on and was baptised anyhow. Yes, they got the real power and they come all the way back to town in they wet clothes, too."
Daddy Judah, or Bishop Judah, as he prefers to be called by all who are not his followers, is a half-white founder of a sect appealing to the ignorant and superstitious. He claims to have powers of healing and to be a frequent visitor to heaven. Thousands of his flock throughout the southern States believe he is God Incarnate. He has been convicted and has served sentences for violation of the Mann Act.
"Well, some folks is always askin' me what'd I join Daddy's church for. I don't see where they's nothin' wrong with that church. Daddy preaches out the same Bible these other preachers does, don't he? How come his church ain't as good as the rest of 'em?"
We were joined at this time by his daughter Delia. "Now Delia there and my other daughter," William continued, "thinks they're toe high to go to Daddy's church. They go on all the time 'bout Daddy Judah not bein' this and not bein' that and try to git us not to go to his church at all. But it don't do no good. I expect to be a member of Daddy's church till I die."
"Oh Papa, there you go again!" Delia said waspishly. “You make me so tired talking 'bout Daddy Judah. That man don't mean no good. All he's after is foolin' everybody he can and gettin' all he can and goin' on 'bout his business. Ain't no way in the world nobody can make me see where Daddy Judah has got any religion at all. If I had my way with him he'd never put his foot in Riverton again!"
"But Delia, I tell you Daddy Judah don't try to take everybody's money. He tells us not to give him all our money. Look at how they treat me since I ain't been able to pay nothin'. They come here and has prayer meetin' with me just like I was a good financial member as ever. I bet if it was some other church they wouldn't even think 'bout me."
"Oh, shucks, Papa, what if they do come here and pray! Daddy Judah don't know you're even alive. I bet he wouldn't come here to see you. And if they're gonna raise as much fuss as they been raisin' I wish they wouldn't come back again. Last time they nearly tore up the house carryin' on. It ain't nothin' but foolishness. Talkin' in tongues end fallin' down like crazy people everytime anybody says Daddy Judah." Delia made a sound of disgust. "What kinds doin's is that? They're just fooled to death. And you kept on till you got Mamma mixed up in that mess. 'Course Mamma ain't studyin' about actin' like they set and I know that, but I hate to think she even sent her name over there."
William shifted in his chair and said, quietly, "I didn't keep on doin' nothin' to gat Laura to join. You know the night we had that prayer meetin' here Laura give 'em her name herself. She don't ever go over there. But I bet we'd all be better off if you-all would go over there and git a little of Daddy's power. You know good must be in that man. If it wasn't the Lord wouldn't let him have the success he does have. Now take our annual parade. Everybody turns out to that, white and colored. That man's got the power o' the Lord behind him and that's all."
But Delia put in, "Oh Papa, please hush talkin' about that parade. It's a disgrace to everybody. All those little children and old people not even able to hardly get about, walkin' around over the streets behind Daddy Judah while he sits up in that fine ear with all those diamonds on his fingers, is enough to make anybody mad. I doubt if you'd have had that stroke if you hadn't been goin' over there cuttin' up and gain' on. Goin' to church in a place that don't even have a floor in it! But you go right on with Daddy Judah and I'll keep right on goin’ where I've been goin'. But just don't never give 'em none of the money I work for, and I mean it." She switched into the house, the very set of her head showing her temper.
John continued apologetically, "Excuse us, Miss, Delia always do get mad when she hears me talkin' 'bout Daddy. I can't see what's wrong with the child. But don't you mind her. I don't let her worry me one bit. Daddy Judah's church is good 'nough for me and will be for her some o' these days when she gits old and they ain't nothin' more in her life."
