January 3, 1939
Adelpha Pollato (Cuban)
2315 12th Avenue
Ybor City
Tampa, Florida
(Cigar maker)
Stetson Kennedy, writer
(Written off-time)
ALL HE'S LIVING FOR
(ENRIQUE AND) AMANDA)
Amanda's house is several blocks east of the cigar factory, on a narrow dirt alley lined with unpainted frame shacks. A group of children playing marbles in the sand includes blondes, dark Latins, and Negroes. They scatter like a flock of chickens when they see our oar approaching. As soon as the car stops they gather around it, climb upon front and rear bumpers, and the running board.
Dark, stout, and smiling, Amanda shouts to the children and comes out to greet us. She hugs my wife Edith, and shakes my hand.
"I been wanting to meet your husband a long time." she tells Edith.
We enter the front room and sit in three rickety straight chairs. The other furnishings are a table, a new automatic-tuning radio, two calendars.
"You'll have to forgive our humble house," says Amanda apologetically. "I only pay three dollars a week for it, but it's near Enrique's job. They're planning to tear down a lot of these old 'shotgun' shacks. --You know, these old houses are called one-or two-barrelled shotgun shacks, according to how many apartments they hare. I heard they are going to build big new apartments for Negroes, and make them move into one section and not be scattered all over like they are now. I don't know as all of them will want to move, but I guess the city Will condemn their property if they don't.
"My husband Enrique made us a lot of furniture out of boxes and things; he made benches, table, cabinet, and ice box. He made the ice box out of tin; it keeps ice good, too. Enrique is good like that; he saves us lot of money. He makes wicks out of old carpet for the oil stove, and makes vinegar and wine with raisins.
"Some people buy pretty things and get in debt when they can't afford it and maybe the company takes it away from them and then they lose all that money. There's nothing I hate worse than to have collector men coming to my house all the time bothering the life out of me and keeping me broke. I rather buy good healthy food for my kids and a few little clothes for them to go to school; it don't make so much difference about the furniture. I think it's best to save and keep a little money ahead in case there is sickness or anything like that. It don't look like we are able to get much ahead, though."
Several children gather in the doorway, staring, and a small boy bobs his blonde head in and out of the door leading to a bedroom.
"Them's all my kids," Amanda says, "and they sure looks like tramps. There is no use for me to wash them in the afternoon when they come home from school because by night they have got all dirty again. I just leave them alone till night and wash them good before they go to bed.
"Besides these four kids here I got two more girls living with my cousin in Key West. She can take better care of them there; she ain't got no kids of her own. That blonde-headed rascal that keeps poking his head around the door is named Jose; he's five years old, and the other boy, Perico, is eight. Maria is nine, and Rosa--she's ay oldest--is thirteen."
Rosa says "How do you do?" She is small, thin, seemingly undernourished* Her delicately pretty face is unadorned by cosmetics, her cheap cotton dress torn in many places, revealing pink underclothing. Only her intelligent brown eyes are mature and interesting; they seem out of place in the child-like body.
"You know what?" asks Amanda. "Rosa, thirteen years old, is getting ready to get married. I wish I knew how to knock that idea out of her head."
"The sooner I get married and get away from here, the better," smiles Rosa.
"He's an Italian," says Amanda, "and I don't want no Italian son-in-law in the family."
"Well, you might as well get used to it," says Rosa. "I love Nicky and I'm going to marry him, no matter what anybody says. He's a very nice Italian. He has a mustache, dark hair, and tall."
"He's got blue eyes," adds Amanda.
"He has not!" declares Rosa. "His eyes are very light brown. I ought to know--I've been close to him!"
"I don't see why you can't marry a Cuban or an American--anything but an Italian," says Amanda.
"I do like Americans," admits Rosa. "Sure! But I can't do nothing about it. The only way to get Americans is to be high-toned and live in Hyde Park and I can't do that. I don't want any damn wild "cracker" from out in the woods, either. They're wild people. You can grow potatoes In their ears and scrape their heels.
"Nicky is a beautician in New York and he came down here to visit his family for the Christmas holidays. He has stayed so long he has lost his job, and now he wants to go back to New York and get a job in a restaurant. He wants to go back and get a job and then come marry me, but I want him to marry me first and take me with him when he goes. I always wanted to live in New York."
"She's only known him three weeks," says Amanda, "and says she's going to marry him. Well, marriage is like a lottery: you don't know whether you win or lose till it's all over. I was married when I was thirteen years old, just like Rosa. That's how I know she's too young to think about getting married. She ought to be in school."
"You think I want to start back to school now?" demands Rosa. "And go back to the seventh grade where my kid brother is now? Hell no! I wouldn't start back now for nothing!"
"Rosa sure was smart in school, too," says Amanda. "She made all A's from top to bottom--even skipped a grade. She quit school because she had fainting spells and the doctor said she had a weak heart. But now she goes to dances and everything and doesn't ever faint no more, so I think she must be all right and ought to go back to school. I used to have fainting spells like Rosa before I was married, but since I been married I ain't had any at all. Me, dark like I am, would get white as a sheet when I fainted. I don't know what that is--I never went to a doctor for it.
"When I was married my mother hadn't never told me nothing about life. I was as innocent as the day I was born. When she used to talk about those things she would look at me and I would have to leave the room. I didn't know nothing about how not to have babies--no wonder I had so many. I'm twenty-eight now and got six kids and I don't want no more. There ain't no use in having kids unless you can give them some of the things they need. The more kids you have the less there is to give them.
"I always had to have a chaperone everywhere. My date had to come to the house mostly and sit in the living room with the family and carry on conversation. We couldn't even get up and go back to the kitchen for a drink of water together; I always had to go get the water by myself. My date had to leave at nine-thirty, and I wasn't allowed to walk to the door with him; I had to say good-bye still sitting down."
"Cuban customs are crazy anyway," says Rosa. "I'm glad I was born in America."
"I was born in Key West," replies Amanda, "I'm an American just as much as you are. I may come from Cuban descent, but I'm one hundred percent American just the same."
"Real American people consider you a Cuban," retorts Rosa.
"What do I car a what they consider me so long as I am an American?" asks Amanda. "Heck yeah, I'm an American--ain't I on the WPA?"
"I've got a job in a sewing room," says Rosa. "Not the WPA; a Jew-store sewing room. I made two dollars and twenty-five cents last week, but you know I'm only an apprentice learning my trade; I'll make more money soon. There is a supervisor there watching us all the time to see that we don't rest. Sometimes when he is in some other part of the shop we stop a minute, but When we see him coming we have to start working quick or he docks part of our pay. The only way I can get any rest is to go to the lavatory. We aren't allowed to stay there but a few minutes."
"Here comes my husband, Enrique, now," exclaims Amanda, "he's been to the store." Enrique greets us cordially. He seems to be about forty years old, and appears quite active and virile.
Little Jose suddenly dashes into the room with a rubber ball and flings himself on Amanda's lap. He is pursued by a small, thin, bowlegged girl who tearfully accuses him, in Spanish, of stealing her ball. Amanda forcefully takes the ball, and returns it to the girl. Jose wails strangely.
"Jose's deaf and dumb," Amanda explains. "I took him to the doctors here and they said he was born that way and there wasn't nothing they could do."
"I rather be dead, than deaf and dumb like that," solemnly declares Maria.
Perico walks cautiously across the room, and turns on the radio. "I hope it isn't church music," he says.
"I don't spoil my children," continues Amanda. "When I go to visit somebody my children come along and sit down and behave themselves and don't run around hollering. They don't always ask for bread when I go visiting, either, like a lot of kids do.
"Jose eats candy all day. It's bad for his teeth and I ought not give it to him but he cries if I don't. He'll take all the pennies you'll give him, but he won't take no nickels or dimes. I guess maybe he never spent nothing but pennies in his whole life; he must think pennies is the only thing you can buy stuff with.
"He sure hates to take a bath. Sometimes when he knows he's going to have to take a bath he gets on the toilet and sits there for hours, just to keep from having to take a bath. You try to take him off the toilet and he hollers and hollers. The only way you can make him take a bath is to get a belt and make out like you are going to whip him."
"My kids know when I take off my belt I mean business," says Enrique. "They know I treat them good and buy them things and don't buy myself nothing. I buy my wife a dress and the kids two dollar suits for Christmas and me no buy nothing."
"Do you like grapefruit juice?" Amanda asks us. "I'm going to give you some cans of it I got at the relief station. It carries one pint in each can. Grapefruit juice makes very good drinks with rum. I get cans of it all the time--last time they give me five cans. I fixed it nice in glasses with ice and sugar for the kids, but they don't like It and won't drink it. They like the fruit, but they won't drink the juice.
"The relief station here gives away lots of good things. They give me nice clothes for the children; and they give us can meat, flour, and lots of things. It's real good stuff, too, and helps out plenty. I heard Roosevelt was going to give away lots more things, and sell things very cheap to poor people on relief. It sure will be wonderful if he does.
"Food is pretty cheap in Ybor City--I get milk for ten cents a quart--but even so, lots of people do not have enough money to buy to eat. I've seen people go to the meat market and ask for free scraps for dogs, and then use the scraps to make soup to drink.
"Enrique used to have a little 'buckeye' cigar factory of his own. He had twelve men working for him at one time, but you know he didn't have enough capital to keep going. He had to buy all his material for cash and sell for credit, so he needed more capital than he had. He is a good business man and was doing good for a while. But making cigars is like everything else; the big factories put the little factories out of business.
"When the depression came, Enrique tried to borrow money to keep his buckeye going, but the banks wouldn't lend him any because he didn't have enough security, and he didn't know nobody else who could lend him any. He wants so hard to start a buckeye of his own again; that's all he's living for...
"Look: he picked out this cigar box label from a catalogue. I think it was the prettiest one; nobody can use this label but him because he bought the rights to it. He's saving all these labels in case he starts up again. It looks like he never will be able to, but while there is life there is hope, they say.
"The main reason I wish Enrique could get started with his buckeye is so maybe he could make enough money to send the boys to college. If I had the means I sure would help him, because my one ambition is for my kids to get educated."
"Yes," says Enrique, "I would like very much to have my own buckeye again. That is about the only hope I have of ever making more money. Many buckeyes closed during the depression, and now those that were left are having to close because of the wage-hour law. The big factories make plenty of profit to pay wages like the law says, but the buckeyes cannot. Competition with the big factories, the machines, no market--it is all very bad. I don't know what can be done about it.
"In the factory I work in now, I make thirty cents an hour but it's not regular work all the time. The days what we are working we make about two dollars and thirty cents; that's not so bad as a lot of people makes. The smallest amount they pay in the factories is ten dollars a week. You have to work very fast on account of the wage-hour law making wages higher. Unless you can work fast and good the company will fire you.
"There ain't no young people--very young--working in the factories. The Government won't allow it. A few years ago they found two boys working who were seventeen years old, and they made the boys quit the factory and go back to school. Those boys wouldn't have been hired in the first place if they hadn't lied about their age. There is quite a few crackers working in the factories, most of them came from Georgia."
"You know what's the matter with them cracker people?" interrupts Amanda. "They live so far out the running water ain't got there yet."
"We used to make fifty-five dollars a week," Enrique continues, "but now don't nobody make much more than about eighteen dollars. I guess it's mostly because the machines eon make cigars so cheap; you can buy the best kind of cigar now, two for five cents. And ain't nobody smoking cigars like they used to; young people all smoking cigarettes. Cigars is going out of style.
"In the days when we made fifty-five dollars a week we didn't have no unions. Maybe that's why we got so much pay. When we used to strike we always won, but since the unions organized we ain't won a strike. We used to go on strike and everybody stick together good; you know, Key West and Cuba would send help, sometimes five percent of our wages, to take care of our families while we on strike. Of course, the people in Key West is all on relief now.
"There is a closed shop in all the cigar factories in Tampa. The factory owners like the A.F. of L. union because it does not demand much from them, so they make the dosed shop and nobody who is not A.F. of L. can get a job. But the A.F. of L, union is no benefit to us workers. Before we can strike we have to get permission from the Florida union officers, and they have to get permission from the national officers, and they never let us strikes. If we go ahead and strike without a permission we all lose our jobs.
"Roosevelt, he is the one mate the CIO. He don't exactly make it, hut he give it a chance to grow good. He say CIO is all right. He prove he like the CIO the way he put good men on the Labor Board and Supreme Court. Of course, most of us cigar workers like the CIO, too. But there is not much we can do about it. If we break up the A.F. of L. union and have a strike, the factory owners, A.F. of L. big shots, sheriff, police, judges, Ku Klux Klan, and American Legion would all he against us. And there is plenty of men without jobs who would scab and work the factories and break the strike.
"I guess you saw in the papers about the national officer of the A.F. of L. cigarmakers' union coming to Tampa and suspending the guiding committee elected by our local unions. The committee was trying to get the men to make the CIO union. They had a long fuss in the courts with the national officer. The unions elected another guiding committee--it was funny, the new committee wanted the CIO just as much as the suspended men did. At last the national officer agreed to let the suspended men come back in the union if they would promise not to be officers for a year.
"One time the Ku Klux Klan paraded through Ybor City to break up a strike. Everybody just got their shot guns and came out and sat on the porch with their guns and watched the parade. That sure was a quiet parade, and it didn't last very long. Man, it was a good thing the Klan didn't start no trouble or there sure would have been revolution or something over here! The Klan don't want no talk of communism going on.
"I read in the papers about the Klen parading over in Lakeland, trying to stop the citrus workers' strike. But it didn't do no good. The citrus union wrote a letter to the longshoremen's union, and the longshoremen stopped handling the fruit--Trhioh was being packed by scab laborers--and they also got the seamen's union to stop shipping it. And in New York, somebody was picketing the fruit stands in the market. That was real cooperation.
"Of course they was very lucky to not have no dishonest judge in Lakeland; the judge would not give the companies an injunction to stop the picketing of the packing plants. Citrus is a perishable food, and unless it is handled quickly it rots and the owners lose money. With cigars it is very different. All the factories have thousands of cigars stored up, and in case there is a strike they have plenty cigars that will last a long time. The companies have money to hold out for years, while the workers do not even have to eat for their families.
"The wage-hour lair is funny. Roosevelt made that law so things would be more better for workers; so they would get more money and not have to work so long. But it is not working like that. More than two thousand men have lost their jobs from the cigar factories here because of that law: The factory owners say they can't make profit if they pay the workers so much money, so they fire the workers and put that work on machines. Of course the factory owners can afford to pay more wages. But they say they can't and that's all there is to it. They want to keep all the profit for themselves.
"The national officer of the cigarmakers' union--the one who suspended our officers for trying to start the CIO--is trying to get the cigar industry exempt from the wage-hour law. He says that is the only way those mens what have been fired can get their jobs back. But the way I think it, the Government ought to make the company take back those mens and keep up with the law, or else why did they pass a law like that in the first place?
"All these new kind of insurance Roosevelt has made the companies start for the workers is all right. There was a man in our factory got hurt with a saw not long ago, and he was in bed one week and that insurance pay him just the same as if he was at work. Man, that's all right; we never had nothing like that before.
"In the Gasparilla parade in 1950 the factory float had a beautiful Cuban girl on it--she was beautiful--and they had her, almost naked, painted all over with gold paint. Right after the parade she got sick and she was sick for two days and died. The doctor said the paint poisoned her. Her family didn't get paid nothing.
"In the National Maritime Union sit-down strike on the S.S, CUBA while it was in Tampa all the men went on strike but one--he was a Key West man. They sat right down on the ship. We heard they was on strike, so we went down to the dock to see what was happening and how they getting along. They had picket lines all around the dock. Some of the men asked as to go get them a copy of the paper and some cigarettes, and we did. When we got back it was raining like hell and the picket lines wore standing out in the rain. Then the police drove up with, two big open trucks, and went on the ship with their blackjacks and guns and arrested everybody and put them in the trucks.
"They put all them men in them trucks and they was packed in just like cattle. They drove to the jail standing up in the trucks in the rain and sieging all the way. They sing all kinda songs and say they ain't gonna be in jail long.
"All our cigar unions took up a collection and also went to a loan company and borrowed money to pay the fines for the strikers so they could get out of jail, We sent cigars and cigarettes to the jail for them and the restaurants in Ybor City sent good food free. The police searched all the food and cigarettes before they would give it to the men in jail. For a long time after the men got out of jail all of us cigar union men paid ten cents a week to pay the loan company for the fine money. But now the national office of the National Maritime Union is paying us back.
"This morning everybody is supposed to register for the social security. I am going down to register at the Labor Temple if you want to come with me."
Little Perico suddenly becomes attentive. "Let me go with you," he says to me, "and then when you leave daddy you won't have to ride back all by yourself."
"Smart kid, huh?" says Enrique, and chases Perico out of the house. So Enrique and I drive to the Labor Temple.
"I am not sure about how this social security works yet," he says, "but I think it is this ways: if you do not go to work--I mean if the factory is not open--then the factory and the Government have the social insurance together which they pay you for three or four months. They only pay you a certain percent of your average salary; I don't know how much, but it sure sounds good, all right. You can't get anything, though, unless you register. Everybody is registering."
The Labor Temple is surrounded by a noisy crowd of men, women, children, and dogs; the activity reminds me of typical scenes at voting polls. Enrique takes his place in the line of people waiting to register. Although all conversation is in Spanish, I hear frequent interjections in English, such as "OK," and "That's nice."
I decide to enter the building, and as I walk through the entrance I am immediately approached by a Cuban man who asks:
"You Americano? You sign the petition to lift the embargo on Spain?" He has a card table erected near the doorway, and approaches everyone who enters.
I tell him I am a member of the Jacksonville branch of the Medical Bureau and North American Committee to aid Spanish Democracy, and he responds enthusiastically.
He calls to a stocky Cuban man at the drink stand.
"This is Mr. Ginesta," he says. "He is Tampa chairman of the Spanish Aid committee."
"I am pleased to meet you," says Ginesta. "I hope you will be here for the meeting When we sponsor two young ladies who are touring the country in a 'wounded ambulance.' One of the young ladies drove the ambulance for Loyalist Spain, and the other was a nurse. The Tampa Ministerial Alliance is going to co-sponsor the meeting with us; it will be the first time in this country that a ministerial alliance has done that. And for the first time we will get the Americans in Tampa to our meetings."
"Ginesta just returned from Washington," explains the other man. "In a few days he is going back to attend as a delegate to the Congress for Peace and Democracy."
"I learn plenty in Washington," Ginesta says." I went with a delegation to ask Congressmen to lift the embargo on Spain. Man, we got a good friend in Claude Pepper; Pepper, he is a good guy. There was another Congressman who told to us: 'You are from Florida and not my constituents, but in your request you represent the majority of the American people, and so do I.' That sure make us feel good.
"Another Congressman said: 'Yes, I will vote to lift the embargo on Spain this time.--But listen, I want you to understand that it is not I who have changed my views since I voted against lifting the embargo last year. It is the situation that has changed.' You see, he didn't want us to say that we were right and he was wrong, or that he had swung around to our point of view. Munich, the Lima Conference, and President Roosevelt's speeches sure are waking a lot of people up.
"You should have seen us when we went into Senator George's office, from Georgia; we almost got thrown out. I don't guess there's been a Spaniard in Georgia since De Soto marched through.
"I learned a lot in Washington, all right. I watched those guys work and I know there are very few real liberals. Most of them are uneducated and crooked politicians controlled by the big interests."
A young man who has been standing behind Ginesta, listening to the conversation steps up and whispers cautiously to him: "You must be more quieter and not talk too much because the woman selling drinks at the cold drink stand is a Ku Klux Klan, so you better be careful."
"I was just talking about the Spanish Aid committee," replies Ginesta, "but the Klan don't like it so I guess I might as well be careful.--Do you know George Pershing, who is field representative for the Spanish committee? He is a relative of General Pershing. Well, he spoke here in the Labor Temple not long ago. He is very good, all right. At the meeting he read a note he had received at the hotel that said: 'Tampa is an unhealthy place for liberals.' After he read the note he said: 'Whoever wrote that note should be sent one saying not to come over here because Ybor City is an unhealthy place for Fascists.' Everybody laugh; they sure like Pershing."
Enrique approaches, having duly registered, and nods to Ginesta and the others. "Give my regards to our friends in Jacksonville," says Ginesta as I tell hist good-bye. When we leave, I see over the front entrance a large poster labelled:
SOLIDARITY WITH THE VICTIMS OP WORLD FASCISM.!
"Those were very intelligent mens you were talking to," Enrique says. "They are leaders in the unions, the newspapers, the Spanish Aid Committee, and all like that. The cigar unions make I don't know how many thousand cigars and cigarettes to send to Spain--we stayed in the factories and work overtime to make those things for Spain.
"The Spanish Aid Committee has two mens to stand by the factory door every time we get pay; one of the men takes a collection to help Spain, and the other man writes the receipts for whatever you give. Giving receipts that way nobody can never say any of the money is missing. And they print in the paper the record of how much every man give."
Although it is only two o'clock in the afternoon when we return to the house, Amanda is already considering what she should cook for the evening meal, which is eaten at four o'clock. She explains that it is a Cuban custom to eat at four, because that allows time to clean up the kitchen before night; and also, when they retire early, the food is thoroughly digested before they go to sleep.
"What would you all like to eat for supper?" she asks." We want to fix something you like, I don't know much about cooking American dinners."
"We don't want American food," says Edith. "That's one reason why I come to Tampa: so I could eat some good Cuban food."
"I know a man who sells crabs," says Enrique. "If I can just find him while he is drunk--he stays drunk most of the time--I can get throe dozen crabs for fifty cents. Crabs makes very good enchilado."
"My husband likes enchilado, frijoles negra (black beans), garbanzos (Spanish beans), arroz con pollo (rice with chicken); he likes all Cuban things, plenty hot," Edith says.
"I know," Enrique says, "I make the empanada. You know, the shrimp all crushed up and cook with hot sauce and then fry inside little long rolls of dough. The dough cooks crisp and you bite into the good hot shrimp. I think maybe you like that all right."
He hurries off to the store to buy the necessary ingredients. When he returns, he goes to the kitchen and begins preparing the meal, while Amanda sits in the front room and listens to the radio. "I sure got me a good cook for a husband," she says. "Enrique cooks lots more better than I do, and he likes to, so I'm glad to let him do it. You know, most all Caban men is good cooks."
I sit in the kitchen window and watch Enrique. The entire house is soon permeated with the odor of the sauce which he prepares by frying finely chopped onion, garlic, green and red poppers in tomato paste and olive oil. When the shrimp are boiled, he pulls them into shreds with his fingers. The sauce is strained to remove the onion, garlic, and peppers, then mixed with the shrimp. Dough is made of flour, baking powder, and water, and portions of shrimp are encased in it. The empanadas are then fried in very hot lard, and come out crisp and golden brown.
He has made a large pot of rice, which he strains and then steams with the addition of a tablespoon of lard. He prepares a salad of sliced tomatoes, cucumbers, and lettuce, and pours over it a dressing of salt, pepper, olive oil, and vinegar. He pours four large glasses of home-made raisin wine, and smaller glasses for the children.
Someone shouts "Hello" from the front porch, enters, and walks on down the hall. "This is Miss Caridad Martinez," says Amanda. "She is a very good friend to us who wanted to meet you."
Caridad is about nineteen years old; her complexion is very light, her eyes large and dark, and her hair naturally waved. She remains a few minutes, laughing and joking in Spanish. When she leaves, she says in English, "I'm very glad to have met you."
After Caridad has gone Amanda says, "Poor Caridad--she's got TB. Three of her sisters died with it in the last three years. Now Caridad is going to die with it, the last one, and her mother just looks at her all the time and cries. It hurts her mother to know that Caridad is going to die, too, like all the others. Her mother fusses at her all the time but it is only because she is so worried about her dying. They are a very nice family and the girls were beautiful."
When the cooking is over and the meal placed on the table, there is a sudden burst of very rapid and exalted Spanish which I am unable to understand, Perico dashes out of the front door. I ask what has happened, but receive no answer. In a few minutes Perico returns, and there is more rapid talking in Spanish. The dinner is getting cold.
At last Amanda says, "Well, I guess you might as well know; we been trying to borrow some knives from the neighbors but none of them, has got any either. I guess we will have to use the big knife and pass it around the table. I'm so ashamed not to have no knives, but we don't never use any."
We all gather about the small table. "Just help yourself to everything," invites Amanda, perico tears the end off of a hot loaf of Cuban bread. His hands are extremely dirty.
"Perico!" shouts Amanda. "Get up from here and wash your hands! You know better than to sit down to eat with your hands like that."
I am suddenly startled by a loud "Mooo..." from directly under the kitchen window. Everyone laughs loudly.
"What's a cow doing so close?" I ask.
"That was no cow," says Enrique. "That was a caballo--a horse--poop-pooping!"
They all laugh louder than ever. "Sure it was a cow," says Estrella, "Enrique ought to be ashamed telling jokes like that at the dinner table. The neighbors keep their cow in a shed right under the window."
"That remind me of a good joke," says Enrique. "One time there was an old man who had a horse named 'Bertha,' and his daughter was named 'Bertha' too. There was a young man who wanted to borrow the horse one day, so he asked the old man if he could borrow Bertha for a little while. The old man grab his gun and say, 'Hell no, what you think this is--you think I let you try out my daughter?"
The response to this joke almost upsets the table.
"I notice you don't laugh so much like Latin people," Amanda says to me. "I guess you feel good and just don't laugh so much. I think that is all right. But I just can't help laughing. You should hear me in the picture show; sometime when I see something real funny I laugh so much I have to go outside to stop from laughing so much."
"Would you like to go for a ride?" asks Edith.
"Yes, sure, anything you all want to do," replies Amanda. "You go put on your suit, Enrique; we are going for a ride and I like to see you dressed up in your suit."
After a few minutes Enrique appears in a neatly pressed brown suit.
"He won that suit at a lottery for one dollar," says Amanda. "The man told him if he wanted to buy an extra pair of pants to match, it would cost him six dollars. I told him to go ahead and get the extra pants because that way the suit would be good for twice as long as if he only had one pair of pants. I bought him that crepe shirt he's wearing, for Christmas. It cost two dollars."
Amanda is rolling her hair on a clothes-pin. "I fix hair pretty good, huh?" she asks. "You know I don't get to go to the beauty parlor but about once a year. They don't do it so good as I do sometimes; I taught some of the girls in the beauty parlor how to fix hair."
In due time we are ready to leave. "Let's drive over to Tampa tonight," suggests Edith.
In Tampa, we drive slowly so Edith and Amanda can look in the shop windows. Each window evokes some such comment, in Spanish, as: "Que lindo!" (How pretty) "Divino!" (Divine) "No me gusta!" (I don't like it).
"That's the jail Joseph Shoemaker was taken out of," suddenly says Enrique. "Right in the middle of town. I have heard people argue about whether the Klan, the polioe, or both did it. All I know is that they took him right out of jail the night before the election, November 1935. They took him out and sat him down in a bucket of hot tar, castrated him, beat him, and made him die.
"I guess you heard about it. It was in papers all over the country. He organized the Modern Democratic Club to elect city officials who would be fair to labor and who would clean out the crooked political machine. He especially wanted to clean up the police force, which was the most crookedest. He would have done it, too, if they hadn't killed him. All the Latin and working people in town was supporting that man. Shoemaker was the only one who ever got the working people here to vote together. We won that election, but it was so crooked we didn't win.
"I been in that jail, too. One night when I was walking home along the bridge I saw a lady climb over the rail and get ready to jump in and commit suicide, so I grabbed her around the waist and held on and she yelled and raised all kinds of hell. The police came, and I guess they thought we was fighting; anyway, they took us both to jail and told us we could tell it to the judge. I stayed in jail seven days before Amanda could borrow ten dollars to pay ay fine to get me out."
We drive over a bridge into a residential section of large homes and well-kept lawns.
"This is Davis Island," says Amanda. "This is where all the millionaires and rich people live. It's very pretty in the daytime but you can't see much now. That's the... no, that's not it."
"Amanda, you don't know nothing about this part of town," says Enrique.
"I've only rode over here on Davis Island once or twice," Amanda admits. "I tell you what you ought to go see: the museum in the Tampa Bay Hotel. They have lots of things in there very old, thousands of years old. I like it in there. I only been there one time but that time I stayed three hours looking at all those things. It sure is interesting. I hope you go there before you leave; you would like it."
On the way home we stop at a barbecue stand. When we reach the house, Rosa is sitting on the railing of the front porch, looking up into the sky.
"Well, I guess you don't have to worry no more about having an Italian son-in-law," she tells Amanda dejectedly. "Nicky and I had a fight and he went away mad, I guess it's a good thing. We didn't get along so good anyway."
"I'm glad you find out now before you married him," comments Amanda.
We are given the front sleeping room.
The next morning we are awakened by Rosa who calls, "Your coffee is ready."
"Huh," says Edith," That's not Cuban custom--Cuban custom everybody eats when they feel like."
After a breakfast of coffee and hot bread, we prepare to depart for Jacksonville, Enrique and Amanda present us with a package of sandwiches to take with us for lunch, several cans of the surplus commodity grapefruit juice, and a pound of black beans.
"We wish we could give you something more better to take with you," Amanda says, "but Enrique hasn't worked any In the last few weeks and we are short on cash."
As we start out the front door, the children in the bedroom shout: "Good-bye-Good-bye-come-again!"
"Good-bye," we call, "And Rosa," I say, "don't get married before I get back to Tampa, and I'll bring you a nice American for a husband."
"All right," she says, "I'll wait."
"I want to come visit you in Jacksonville sometime," Amanda says, "but I don't know when I'll ever be able to leave these kids. I ain't got nobody to look after them while I'm gone. I never been no who re except Key West, Miami, and Tampa, and I always wanted to see Jacksonville before I die... Well, hurry up and beat it. And don't say 'good-bye.' Say, 'hasta la vista--until we meet again.'"
One week after our return to Jacksonville, we receive a penciled postcard from Amanda. It concludes: "Rosa married Nicky and they are living with his family in West Tampa."
