Susie R. O"Brien,
March 15, 1939.
Mrs. Ira Reynolds,
Uniontown, Alabama.
It was a bright warm day in March when all the world longed to be out of doors enjoying the sunshine. Ira was taking advantage of the unusual weather and as I came around the side of the house I found her weeding her small vegetable garden. A brood of young chickens picked busily among the tender new plants. Ira tossed a bit of rook in the midst of the brood scattering them in every direction and sending them cheeping loudly back to the mother hen tied by the leg in the next yard. Attracted by the noise a woman appeared in the door of the next house and said "I've got the hen tied up it looks like you would'nt kill the little chickens". "But I will" replied Ira, "if you dont keep 'em at home, if you think I buy seed and break my back workin' a garden for your chickens to scratch up you are mistaken'! The woman did not reply and Ira straightened up slowly and placing her hands on her back said as she dusted the soil from her fingers and leaned the hoe against the side of the house, "I'm gettin' too old to bend over like this, I declare you just cant have nothin' for the neighbors pesky chickens. I do so love to have my own garden, these store bought vegetables dont taste like nothin', now I had a nice mess of volunteer mustard out of my garden today for dinner and they just melted in my mouth they was so good. I love flowers too but as I was sayin' you cant have nothin' much for the pesky chickens, they dont bother the bulbs much, thank goodness, so I have lots of them. These is the sweetest little things you ever smelled" she said stooping to pick a blossom "here pin it on your bosom it'll make you smell sweet". The yard was swept as clean as a broom could make it here and there were clusters of yellow daffodils, narcissus and jonquils in full bloom. As we came around toward the front of the house Ira said, "come on in and rest yourself I'm just plum tuckered out. I hope you will excuse the way I look but I been workin' in the garden all mornin' and I declare I do look a sight" she said brushing off her sweater and smoothing back the loose strands of hair. Ira is a woman of <text not clear> medium height, she has a very heavy suit of hairsprinkled with gray which she wears parted in the middle and done in a heavy knot low on the back of her neck. She has a pleasant face with twinkling gray eyes and a broad smile which displays the one remaining lower tooth left in her otherwise toothless gams. She wore a clean faded print dress and an old brown sweater worn through at the elbows. "Come on in the house" she said, inviting me into the small entrance hall and opening a door leading into a bedroom. I followed her and found myself in a very cozy room, Ira drew up a rocking chair close to the dying embers in the grate and busied herself plumping up the seat cushions and straightening the old fashioned tidy on the back of the chair takling all the while. " I declare I hope you will excuse this room, I've been so busy trying to get my garden worked out I haven't even took time to wash up my dinner dishes, see they are all piled up on the table" she said nodding her head toward the open door of an adjoining room where a few dishes stood in neat stacks on a table and a blue enameled oil stove shone like new in the bright sunlight streaming through the open window. The room where we sat was neat and orderly containing two metal beds with thick comfortatbe looking mattresses so high they reached almost to the top of the foot of the bed. making me wonder how Ira managed to climb in at night. In one corner stood an old fashioned bureau and in another the washstand to match with flowered bowl and pitcher. There were several comfortable rockers, each with a patchwork cushion and on the floor were three or four woven grass rugs, "Now dont think you are stopping me from my work" Ira said as she drew her chair up close beside me, plumped up the cushions and made herself comfortable for a long chat,"because if theres anything I do like its company, my, I do get so lonesome when I'm here by myself. I'm just like Papa was, thats his picture "she said, pointing to an enlarged picture of a bearded old. gentleman which hung over the mantel, I guess you dont remember him but he was just like me, had to have somebody to talk to. We been. livin'in this town all our days and. Papa knew everybody, there wasnt nobody he didnt know well enough to stop and talk to. Papa moved here in a covered wagon when he was 'bout ten years old, they settled at Mud Creek. He wanted to study to be a doctor but the war broke out and he had to give it up. I reckon he must of been 'bout twenty years old when he joined the Canebrake Rifles here and left for the war. The second year he was shot in the shoulder and not havin' much attention it got bad and gangrene set in, he came mighty near losin' that arm. Seein' he wasnt able to do no fightin' they finally give him a furlough, I think thats what you call it when they let you come home for a while. He had to walk most all the way, and him sick too, when he got to the Alabama River there wasnt no way for him to cross so he just waded right in and swam across with that bad arm too. I tell you Papa had grit, all the men did in them days, but now, shucks, they aint nothin' but softies. And such a disposition as Papa did have, never gettin' upset about nothin', not a one of his five children had one like him. My brother said to me once I declare if I had to choose between Papa's disposition and a million dollars I believe I'd take Papas disposition. Shucks, I said you wouldnt do nothin' of the kind you'd take the million dollars and go right on havin' a bad disposition and take a chance on your money gettin' you by. Papa went through the war and surrendered with his company at Appomattox Courthouse, we had his discharge paper all framed so it wouldnt get tore up, he was always so proud of it. Would you like to see it, and Ira hurried into the next room and came back bringing a neatly framed paper showing that Edward Franklin Gouldman had been honorably discharged from the army at Appomattox Courthouse Virginia. Papa used to talk so much about the time he was in the war " she went on " but I didnt listen much, I wish now I had, but you know how it is when people just keep on talkin' and talkin' about the same thing you get kinda tired of hearin' it. Papa lived to be eighty four years old, he was one of the last of the veterans livin' in town to go, the government give me a headstone for his grave. I used to like to go to church on Memorial Day but I dont go no more, now it makes me too sad.
Papa and Mama were married after the war and settled here, they built a house about a mile from town, the house is still there and ever since then people have called it Gouldman"S hill We dont own the house now though, Papa lost it some way or other. Theres been a lot of changes since them days," Ira said with a sigh, there was eleven of us children but Papa, and Mama raised only five, three girls and two boys, and just two of us livin' now, me and one brother. I was married young, my husband was doin' very well he had a meat market, but he died when he was forty and I've been a widow a long time. Buddie has a store and he is awful good to me. Ofcourse I have four girls but they are all married and have got just about as much as they can take care of, they all have families of their own. They all want me to live with them but I told "em Lor'no, I aint got no idea of livin' with none of you. I'll stay right here in my own house where I can run things like I please without so much bossin' from young folks. 'Course the old house aint what it used to be, it leaks like a sifter but Buddie says he aint got no idea of puttin' out no money on it. I declare I'm just between the devil and the deep blue sea, I need some teeth, as I reckon you've already noticed, and the house leaks so bad and I dont know whether to get the teeth or to have the roof fixed. I've about made up my mind though to go on and get the teeth and let the house leak a while longer. But I'll get the roof fixed some way you just wait and see, Ira said nodding her head wisely, I'll put aside a nickel here and a dime there and before I know it I'll have enough to patch the roof, it happens like that every time I need anything real bad. But it sure makes a sight of work for me when it rains, I was moppin' up water all day yesterday, come on in the other room and I'll show you." I followed her across the small hall into another bedroom, this one was not as cozy as the one in which we had been sitting it was furnished with a white metal bed and a dressing table and washstand which had been painted white, several enlarged photographs with heavy gilt frames hung on the wall. "Now did you ever see such a mess" said Ira, pointing to the spots on the clean bare floor made by the leaky roof, and one of the rooms I cant use at all it leaks so bad. Well folks cant have every thing they want in this old world" she said cheerfully as she led the way back to the room where we had been sitting. Just as we were seated comfortably again there was a knock at the door and Ira said "mercy sakes, more company, when it rains it pours." She smoothed her hair and dress and went to the door to admit the visitors. " Come in" " she said " I"ve already got company but theres always room for more." Two young women followed Ira in, one of them carrying a sample case, she sat down and began to open the case. "Sakes alive " said Ira throwing up her hands " I cant buy nothin' today. Dont get so excited Miss Ira said the woman, I dont want to sell you anything I want to give you something, now the company I work for wants all their customers to have a sample of their products, and its mighty good stuff too. Which would you like to have, some vanilla to make a cake or something to beautify yourself? " Oh my, I'd rather have something to beautify me" said Ira as she searched in a drawer and brought out a small bottle. " Here give me a sample of perfume, I do love to smell good. You might laugh at me" she said shaking her finger at us and nodding her head, "but I was a pretty girl once. I"ll show you and she hurried into another room and returned with an old-Fashioned photograph, carefully posed showing bare neck and shoulders above a lacey scarf, light hair piled high and done in many curls. She held it up proudly for us to see," yes thats me but you wouldnt know it to look at me now, would you,?" The sales woman finished filling the bottle and gave it to Ira who removed the stopper and inhaled deeply saying"my that smells good, I do love things to pretty me up. I'll save it to use when I'm dressed up" she said as she put it carefully away in a drawer. The sales women rose to leave and Ira followed them to the door, hurrying back she resumed the conversation, " I was right young when this picture was taken and if I do say it myself I was pretty " she said replacing the photograph in the small mahogany chest from which she had taken it. I put all my little keepsakes in this box, but land sakes whats the use, nobody will care a thing about them when I'm gone. Now here's a picture of Papa when he was young " she said rummaging in the box, " and heres Mama's obituary, somebody has tore it half in two " she said unfolding an old newspaper clipping, you see the girls don't care about these things like I do. I visited with one of them last summer, of course they was nice to me. Bob, my son-in-law always puts his arm around me and kisses me just like I was his own mother, but it just ain't like bein' in your own house. While I was there we all took down with the flu, well we had a time, there wasn't nobody to look after me so they bundled me up and sent me to the hospital in the ambulance, you know I can hear the whistle on that thing now. There I was goin' to the hospital with not a single loved one to hold my hand. My daughter said afterwards though that I wasn't all by myself 'cause the undertaker was sittin' right at my head lookin' down in my face, so after that I thought I'd be better off at home. But I did have a nice visit last summer, my two grand-daughters took me to Texas to see my husband's folks, and what a time we did have. The car was old and broke down two or three times but we made it allright. The night before we left I was so excited I couldn't sleep, early nex' moruin' they come for me and I got in the car and was sittin" all comfortable with my suit case at my feet when one of the girls said, Grandma, we got a gun in one of them pockets well I started gettin' out right now and I said well if we are goin' to such a wild country that we have to tote a gun I just ain't a'goin. So one of 'em took the gun on the back seat with her and while I wasn't exactly satisfied I felt better and I'm glad we didn't have to use it. Both of the girls work and they gave me the trip but the young folks today ain't what they were in my day, they are so prissy and I don't like it. Now one of them wrote me not long ago and said she thought a friend of hers was goofy and I sat right down and wrote her back and told her I thought she was goofy herself. Well I'm sixty six years old and times have changed a lot since I was young. Land sakes, do you have to go? I had just started to talk good, my, how time does fly " she said as she followed me to the door. Please come again, I do so love company. I might have my new teeth by the next time you come" she called as I reached the gate.

