Rose E. Shepherd
February 13, 1936
Interview # 20.
II - HISTORICAL
PERSONAL INTERVIEW
Mrs. Isabel Bacon (O'Neill) Barnwell,
Life-long Resident of Florida,
2116 Pearl Place,
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mrs. Barnwell's great-grandfather, Henry O'Neill, obtained a Spanish grant to 1007 acres of land situated on a peninsula two and one-half miles long, with salt-water on both sides, about 14 miles from the present City of Fernandina, Nassau County, Florida, in 1775, coming from South Carolina and settling there with his family, consisting of his wife Margaret and nine children. The plantation was given the name of "Nueva Esperanza" (New Hope), which name it still bears. The deeds were made out April 16, 1792, and the land has been, in possession of the family and its heirs since, with never a mortgage or other incumbrance. New Hope was a well known and active little town and settlement, before the City of Fernandina was thought of.
Mrs. Barnwell says: "Henry O'Neill's son, Eva, heired his share of the property and married Mary Andrews. They had three children - James Thomas O'Neill, Jane O'Neill and Mary O'Neill. My father was the son of Eva O'Neill. He lived to be 87, and is buried on the plantation. The land has been continually occupied by our family, except for the period of the War between the States. Mrs. Barnwell and I own a large part of it today.
"In our same neighborhood, there was another early settler, Ephraim Harrison, who also owned a Spanish Grant of I do not know how many acres. The Starratt family had another large grant located nearby on Nassau River, now known as "Seymour Point."
"All these people came to that section of Florida from South Carolina during the Revolutionary War period, because they wished to preserve their loyalty to King George III of England, and be free to fight for their Sovereign's interests in case of attack by the Colonists.
"There was also General Cooper, living with his family on Bell's River, who obtained his title in the early days of Spanish contention for Florida.
"Mr. Hallowes, an Englishman, settled with his family about 15 miles from us. He raised a large and rather interesting family, whose great-grand-children are living in Jacksonville today.
"The Coachman's lived at "Glenwood" about three miles across Bell's River. Their family consisted of two boys (one named Oliver) and two girls, and their estate is one of the most beautiful in Florida. It afforded excellent fishing.
"In the Hallowes' neighborhood lived a Mr. Gunby, also an Englishman, who married my grand-mother, Maria Susan Hillingsworth. Her sister married a Mr. Byrnes, from New-berry S. C.
"All of these families were refugees from South Carolina, all loyal to the English King, not wishing to antagonize the Colonists in the section from which they had emigrated, preferring the wilderness in which they desired to establish themselves. They lived within a radius of fifteen miles, and all knew each other.
"About this time the State of Georgia gave to Nathaniel Greene, a famous General of the Revolutionary War, a large section of land on Cumberland Island, as a token of appreciation for services rendered in the South during this conflict. He built an elegant home, in fact, a mansion for these times, of "tabby," - a preparation composed of shells and plaster.
"General Greene had one daughter, who married a Rev Mr. Shaw, an Episcopalian rector from England. After her father's death, she fell heir to the property. She had one nephew, James Nightingale, who did not like to study, and she went to Mrs. O'Neill - my father's mother -and asked that she be allowed to have James O'Neill, my father, come over and study with James Nightingale, as she thought if he had a companion he might take more interest in learning. So the two boys were, educated by an English tutor. My father used to tell with great disgust how this tutor made him and James Nightingale go down to the shore each morning and down a glass of sea-water.
"When my father, James O'Neill grew up, Mrs. Shaw made him agent for her vast property, which she called "Dungeness."
"Mrs. Shaw was interested in farming and horticulture. She had a splendid grove of olives, also groves of oranges on her plantation. My father said that one time he shipped three schooners of oranges packed in barrels to New York, but the weather was bad, the sea rough, and it took so long for the cargo to reach the destined port that the oranges all rotted.
"The olives were packed in kegs filled, with salt water, and arrived in good condition.
"Mrs. Shaw retained the property until after the War between the States, when it was sold to two nephews of Jefferson Davis. I myself saw one of the nephews, and he was a handsome, fine looking man. They did not hold the land very long, and it was sold to Mr. Thomas Carnegie, a brother of the famous steel magnate, Andrew Carnegie. The heirs still own the property, and several of them live there now.
"On the Same island was a Mr. Stafford, an old bachelor, who owned a large plantation.
"In St. Mary's, twelve miles from Fernandina, lived a family of Baileys, also a Mr. Burns, old settlers. The latter was an architect and builder. I have in my-old home a piece of furniture which we would now call a wardrobe, made in three sections, which he designed and built. He also built both of my father's houses.
"These plantation owners lived in great luxury. They had slaves, entertained lavishly - giving large bells from time to time- and always wanted company, because this was their one touch with the outside world.
"General Greene died of a malarial fever. He was so famous that his body was placed in a mausoleum, for fear it would be stolen, and for fifty years it was lost. However, it was located in a vault in Savannah, and is buried in a small country cemetery about ten miles out from that City, and the town erected a beautiful statue in his honor.
"There was also a Colonel Vaughn, a famous military man, buried in Fernandina, and when I first came to Jacksonville, some of the women's memorial organizations here used to journey over at certain times with wreaths for his grave. I only know of one daughter, who with her two sons, is still living.
"The Acostas were also an old family in Nassau County.
"Fernandina was settled by Don Domingo Fernandez, who was an astronomer. All of his life was devoted to that work, and its study. He owned many slaves, but his wife was the business head of the family and managed the plantation. He had one son and two daughters. His son was called "Domingo" also, and he married Miss Eliza Gunby, my mother's sister. They had four children: Isabel (named for Queen Isabella, the Spanish Queen), Edwin, Domingo and Evelyn.
"One of Mr. Fernandez' daughters married a Mr. Pons. The other daughter, named Jane, married a Mr. Villalonga, from Savannah. They had two children. The son married a Virginia lady; the daughter - Nilla, never married.
"Mr. Fernandez owned the whole City of Fernandina. The land was planted in indigo and cotton. The seed of the indigo is very much like rice, which for commercial purposes they would crush, then dissolve in water which would become a beautiful blue color. This water was boiled down, producing the powder or cakes, which were shipped in large quantities. This material now is obtained from coal tar. They also raised casava, arrow-root, water-melons, and all sorts of fruits and vegetables.
"In 1812 the English came to Fernandina - 36 English War Vessels anchored in the harbor. (By the way, the Indian name for the Island of Fernandina is "Guaile." I have read it was named Amelia Island, for one of the Queens of Spain.) A battle was fought, and everybody that could fight was in that battle. Mrs. Fernandez was the "Major" of her crowd.
They had guns and the English had blunderbusses. Every slave had to get in the battle line, and my father said Mrs. Fernandez would rally her cohorts with - "Shoot, you villains! and don't be abashed at the blunderbusses."
"It was at this period that General Jackson was sent to Florida.
"When my ancestors came to Florida in 1775, it was a Spanish Province, then was ceded to the English, who later on gave Florida back to Spain in exchange for what is now Louisiana. Thru these various changes of dominion, I have the deeds given to cover our property.
"John Domingo Fernandez married a Miss Louise S. Douglas, a grand-daughter of Judge Thomas Douglas, and for many years lived in Jacksonville.
Don Domingo's daughter, Isabel, married Dr. Richard P. Daniel. She died leaving one son - R. Bowen Daniel. Dr. Daniel later on married the second daughter, Evelyn.
"In a newspaper recently, I saw the names of two girls, Alice and Isabel Fernandez, attending the Florida State College for Women at Tallahassee. I wrote them and they visited me at the old home place in Fernandina, staying for two weeks, and I had the pleasure of taking them to the old historical sections and telling them the part played in the early days by their ancestors, of whom they had lost all trace, and then to the old Villalonga Cemetery where they took from the tomb-stones the names of their family buried there. They are both very musical. Alice plays the violin beautifully. About three weeks ago, I read another notice in the paper where she was married to a Dr. Baker, in Foley, Florida.
"Don Domingo's son was named Stephen Fernandez, who went to Texas, leaving his four children in the care of my father. I found a letter among my father's old papers, mentioning a check he was enclosing for the care of these children, and I was glad to turn over to Alice this missive which had been written by her great-grandfather.
"I remember a young man who had come to Fernandina to marry Miss Belle LeFils, a most beautiful girl, who was ill at the time and died within ten days of the date, they had set to be married. When he left to return to his home, I thought he had one of the saddest faces I have ever seen.
THE PERIOD OF THE WAR BETWEEN THE STATES
"The Government built Fort Clinch, commanding the harbor of Fernandina, about two miles out from the City. (A beautiful highway has now been built right up to the Fort, and I had the pleasure of traveling over it not so long ago.)
"At the beginning of the War, about 6,000 Confederate soldiers were located there and in camps around our plantation of "New Hope," and of course, all of Fernandina was filled with soldiers. The officer in charge of Fort Clinch was Colonel Fitzhugh Lee. Other officers were Col. McIlvaine, who had with him his wife and child, and Major Dow.
"My father entertained often for the officers and inviting the whole countryside to these elaborate balls. The floor of the "cotton-house" was waxed, and there they danced away until the wee sma' hours.
("During the Spanish-American War, Colonel Lee was made a General, and transferred to Cuba, where he was in charge of the U. S. troops.)
"One day in the Summer of 1861 one of my brothers went to spend the afternoon at the Harrisons, returning in a hurry about 4 o'clock with the exciting information that four Federal Gun-boats were in the harbor. Although we had ten visitors in our home at the time, we began to pack necessaries, and by 10 o'clock that night there was a complete exodus - the house was empty of everything but the furniture. And by the way, we never saw a stick of that furniture, again - the Yankees made away with all of it.
"As refugees my father took his family to the interior to White Sulphur Springs, where he purchased 1,000 acres of land, and there we remained for the four year period of the war. He had about 100 slaves and with the exception of six who ran away, supposedly to join with the Federals, they, too, were transferred to the new plantation. We were on the last train leaving Fernandina before the Federals took possession, and as it passed over the cause-way about three miles out, the gun-boats shot into the train, and in the last car, among other Confederates who were leaving, was David "Yulee, at that time U. S. Senator from Florida, and his family or four. The cannon-ball passed thru the window right behind them. He was a loyal southerner. He had married a Kentucky girl, a Miss Wickliffe, and their four children were Maggie, Nannie, Florida, and a little boy called Wickliffe. These daughters and son of Senator and Mrs. David Yulee in later years gave the old Yulee home to the City of Fernandina as a Community House, restoring it and refurnishing it complete. David Yulee was born in the West Indies, changing his name of "Levy" to "Yulee," and also changing his religion when he married the charming Miss Wyckliffe.
"When the War ended, David Yulee was consigned by the Yankees as a prisoner in the old Fort for criminals on the Dry Tortuguas, in the key West section. However, he escaped by some means and returned at once to Fernandina.
"He was the first sic man to build a Railroad in Florida.
This first road, called the? Florida Railroad Company, was opened in 1852, sic and ran from Fernandina to Cedar Keys. This is now a part of the Seaboard Air Line R. R. of Florida.
"When We returned from White Sulphur Springs to Fernandina in 1865, my father sold this central Florida plantation to Mr. Ivy of Jasper, Florida. He also purchased the hogs, sheep and poultry. We took about 100 cows back with us to Fernandina.
"One of Mr. Ivy's daughters, is Mrs. Markham, whose husband operates the draw-bridge across the Amelia River, about three miles from Fernandina.
"I often visited in Jacksonville, which was then a most important City, staying with the Flemings and Daniels, and others of the old families. Dr. R. P. Daniel had married two of my first cousins, and I spent many happy days there as a young girl. I remember on one visit when I was only fifteen, I had made an engagement with Willie Bours to attend a very formal ball and my cousin (Mrs. Isabel Daniel, for whom I was named) put her foot down very decidedly against it, and I was for the time being broken-hearted. I married when I was nineteen. I was the youngest of my parent's eleven children.
"One of my brothers, John B. G. O'Neill, went into the Confederate Army, joining the 2d Florida Regiment, which was transferred for service to Virginia. He had been educated in a Military Academy in Schenectady, N. Y. He was later made Colonel of his regiment. During the last two years of the War he was desperately wounded and could not take charge, but when the War closed he was still in command.
"Another brother, Dunbar, was also with the Florida troops in Virginia for four years. My brother Isador, was an artilery-man and fought in Florida in the Battle of Olustee.
"When we moved to White Sulphur Springs, my father soon found he had obtained wonderfully rich land. He understood farming in Florida and with the large number of slaves still in his possession, there was no plant, fruit, or vegetable that was not raised there.
"We had an abundance of plums, peaches, grapes, strawberries and small fruits, water-melons, mush-melons, with lots of chickens, ducks and guineas. Rice, corn, peas, potatoes, and cotton in the greatest abundance.
"During the War, cotton was worth $2.00 a pound, and the Yankees confiscated at one time $20,000 worth of cotton owned by my father and stored in bales in Mr. Villalonga's warehouse in Savannah. No claim was made and no criticism of Mr. Villa-long as to his responsibility - this was one of the fortunes of War - a thing the southern people had to stand with no re-course.
"While we were at White Sulphur Springs, my father purchased 150 head of what is known or was at that time known as "Coast Cattle," driving them to our plantation in the interior. They were accustomed to salt, and as we had no salt in quantities to feed cattle, they died in large numbers - about 65 all together. The carcasses were skinned, and the skins placed in three large vats, with vegetable colorings and barks suitable to the process of tanning as in vogue at that time, and when ready, my father hired a white shoe maker to spend some time on the plantation and make shoes for his family and also the slaves. This was quite a large order.
I can still see the old man, patiently sewing the uppers and driving wooden pegs into the soles.
"We also had looms for weaving, and some of the more intelligent slave women were taught to weave. We had two spinning wheels. Thread was spun and fashioned into cloth for cloths for both the whites and blacks, also sheets, bed covering and blankets. For the latter, wool strings were spun as large around as a finger, and sewed together, forming heavy warm blankets. Also coarse cotton string was fashioned into lines for driving the horses.
"We planted sugar cane, boiling the syrup down to form coarse brown sugar. We had no way of refining or bleaching it. We also planted the sorghum cane and made syrup. We had a species of sweet potato called "nigger-killers" - with red skin and white meat, and so palatable, we used to scrape them and eat them raw. We had an abundance of arrow-root for puddings and sauces, and also cassava.
"The wheat raised was sent to Valdosta, Georgia, where it was pounded into coarse flour.
"When we needed salt, my brother, James Nightingale, went with two negro men to the east coast of Florida, and brought back about a bushel of salt which they would scrape up, and this would be put into the sugar pans with water and boiled down and allowed to stand until the moisture evaporated, when the powder would be scraped up and kept for table use.
"We had one back field called the "Ocean Field", a series of ponds where the rice was planted. The matured rice grains were pounded in a large mortar made from an oak tree probably two feet in diameter and burned out to a depth of 1-1/2 feet, two slaves swinging the heavy pestles alternately.
"We never suffered for the lack of food, clothing, or anything else during the whole period of the war, which we spent at White Sulphur Springs Plantation. We had a large comfortable house, with plenty of room for our family and visitors, who were always welcome. The slaves were housed in comfortable cabins, and there was plenty of food and proper clothing for all, in the greatest of abundance.
THE FREEING OF THE SLAVES
"I will never forget the night my father sent word to the slaves to come to the "big house" as he wanted to talk to them all together. The War was over, and we were making plans to return to the old home at Fernandina. Large bon-fires were built in the yard adjoining the house, which gave plenty of light. My father, silhouetted in the fire-light on the porch against the white walls of the long five-room wing attached to the main house, told the slaves they were free to go where they would. It was April; the crops were all in, and he made an appeal for some to stay until after harvest-time, although explaining it was a matter of free will, and they did not have to stay unless they wished. Fifteen volunteered to stay, and after the crops were taken care of, my father kept his promise to take them, with their furniture and belongings, across the Suwannee River into Columbia County, (we lived in Hamilton County), where they could establish themselves in their new homes.
"On the memorable night when the slaves were told they were free, a laughable incident occurred. Sally, a strapping, black slave girl, with a round face and large white teeth, jumped into the air two or three times, almost hysterical, shouting: "Thank God! I am as free as a jay-bird." She took to her heels and we never saw her again.
"When I visited my relatives in Jacksonville later, an old slave woman, Phoebe, came to see me and begged that I make her a dress. I told her to get the goods, which she did a piece of blue worsted - and I made her a dress, which made her very happy, indeed.
"I would also like to say that my father, with his many slaves, not only provided for their work, their clothing and their care, but he also provided for their pleasures. Our place was on the water, and they were permitted to go out in boats to fish, and during the season went crabbing. At Christmas he always gave them a large ball, to which the negroes would come from far and wide, and they all had a good time.
"My father was the first clerk of the Court in Fernandina, and after he married mother, he was made a Judge, which position he held for twenty-three years. After the War, when he came back to Fernandina, he was again asked to become a Judge, but refused - saying he had lost everything and had no country to work for. My father never took the oath of allegiance. As I said before, he lived to be 87, and is buried on the old plantation. I helped to build the four foot coping around the little plot where the members of my family lie buried.
"Before the War, Dr. R. P. Daniel was a Surgeon in the U. S. Navy, and during his service he spent three years in China, coming home to marry my cousin Isabel, to whom he was engaged.
"When Florida seceded, he left the Navy to join up with the Confederates. As soon as he came back from china, he came to our home at "New Hope" where Isabel Fernandez lived with us, she being one of the four Fernandez children whose father had left them in our home when he went to Texas, and while I do not remember much about the wedding - they were married in the Church at Fernandina - I do remember my first sight of the train stopping at O'Neill Station, on our plantation, to take the bridal couple to Jacksonville, and I was so frightened at the black monster of an engine puffing away that I took to my heels, running screaming into the woods, and was forcibly brought back by my father, and placed with the other members of our family on the train.
"Going back to the beginning of the War when our family left "New Hope" - our belongings were placed on two flats, which with two carriages, a wagon and a buggy carried all we could take with us. I was such a small girl at the time, that my mother handling me a small box covered with untanned white leather, tacked on with brass-headed tacks - told me I might place in it what I could of my doll "rags," which I hurriedly did, and today it is still one of my prize possessions. I also have some of the scraps of goods I collected and placed in the box.
"During part of the time we were away a Mrs. Lyons lived <text not clear>, supporting herself and children by fishing and selling the fish to the Yankees. In the Summer she used shrimp for bait, but after the season was over she used a novel method of catching minnows and small fish for bait. She would take two pieces of bacon tied by string to her toes, wade out into the water, and wiggling her toes attracted the minnows which she grabbed with her hands and soon had all the bait she needed.
"When we returned to New Hope after the War had closed, Mrs. Lyons moved to Fernandina, and during a sort of Summer Festival she entered a Boat Race in the harbor, using a large tub which she paddled with oars, and believe it or not, she won the race over all the other small craft entered. Her four years experience had made her most proficient in and on the water."
<text not clear>
