"Cucumber John" Tyler
Federal Writers' Project
504 Lyric Building
Richmond, Virginia
Date of first writing January 3, 1939
Subject "Cucumber John" Tyler (Negro)
Address Covington, Virginia
Occupational status Odd jobs man
Name of writer Mary S. Venable
Name of reviser Carlton Collins
Slightly edited by: Eudora Ramsay Richardson, State Director
Rush Bowen approached the fire the carpenters had built on a frosty morning. He bent over the smoky pile of scrap material, and held his gnarled hands to the feeble blaze that half-heartedly burned amid the rubbish.
"I seen ol' 'Cucumber John' up on Hal Forset's roof this mornin', patchin'it, and I'll be damned if it want my saw I lost last year he was sawin' with, "Rush told the other carpenters, when he had partly warmed his hands. "I'd know it as fur as I could see that saw,' cause its got er broke place in the handle what allusketched my hand when I sawed. I stopped to let him know I was 'quaintedwith my saw an' he put it down right quick, and damned if he didn't pick up my hammer what had the end broke offen it and begin hammerin' and all to once he dropped it."
"He'd never take my saw and not give it up," said a fellow carpenter.
"Why didn't you climb up there and take your tools?"
"You don't know them folks or you would let bad enough alone. What'd I go and get in a 'spute with 'Cucumber John' fer and give him a excuse to come a-prowlin' around my house at night time. My coal pile wo'd be in the samefix the old woman's wus what lived next door to them and lettum get water outen her hydrant. The coal pile was close by, and allus brought one or two o' his boys with him. He carried his flash light and he throwed the spot on the window and thur was the old lady lookin' out as the boy was fillin' his bag with coal while the other one run the water loud enuf to drown the noise of the coal lumpsa-goin' in the bag.
" 'Cucumber John' figgered he'd been caught and that the old lady would have the law on him, so the next night thur want no moon, she waked up from the smell of kary scene fumes an' she looked through the winder. She can't see nothin' cause black cats would er showed white dark as 'twas. But she knowed somebody wus 'round, and 'bout that time the neighbor's dog run at somethin' with a bark and growl like he wus shakin' something he hader holt uf.
"All of a sudden the growl stopped short like the dog's throat had been ketched, cut off in the middle of a growl like. She had a pistol and hit wasn't no pearl handle affair like most women play with but a shonuff Colt 38, one of them blue-barreled fellers whut fetches the news. She cut loose at the growland waited to see what she hit. After half-a-minute of still that dog let outer howl like the devil done got 'im, an' he run home with his tail twixt his legs. She figgered 'Cucumber John' had been a-stranglin' of that dog and let him go when she shot and went home his self without doin' no burnin.' And then he stayed away from there ontil he moved. But my women folks wouldn't use nogun when I'm gone, so my dog might get choked and worse happen some night than the loss of a hammer an' saw.
"Ever hear how he got his name?
"They uster live up the river and crop for old man Hastings. 'Twant much farm but what land there was, Old John wouldn't scratch. He'd find out what the neighbors wus a-puttin' in in their bottom land next to his patch and plant the same for garden or what could be carried off.
"Old man Kerr, right next to John's patch, had a whole passel of cucumber splanted, and all of us planted heavy on the cucumbers that year 'cause the year before had been a drought and none of us had any pickles. Well, Old John saw how the land lay and he planted his self about six cucumber vines. Them vines couldn't begin to grow the cucumbers what he took to town and sold that year.
"One night Old Man Kerr says to me that he hears cucumbers are bringing a good price in town and he allows he'll gather his tomorrow. Old John heared him too. When the old man Kerr went to his patch the next mawnin' there want nary a cucumber and even the vines was all tore up like somebody had pulled the cucumbers off in a hurry.
"Goin' into town that day, Kerr met Old John on the road. He had acroaker sack over his shoulder 'Hop in,' sez Kerr to John, 'an' I'll give you a lift.' John lit out through the bushes, croaker sack an' all, and frum that day to this he's called 'Cucumber John'.
"Hit were a good season for the Tylers but tough on us neighbors. We didn't have enuf cucumbers to make us up all the pickles we wanted, much lessen havin' any to sell. But the Tylers moved away that Fall and that was some thin'. They never did stay long in one place, an' it got so they couldn't get no placeto stay. All the farmers knowed them, so they moved to town. They had erboutsix chillun then.
"The old woman got to be mighty fond of walkin' down to the railroad grade where they wus a passel of men workin', and hit would be plum dark afore she come home.
"One evenin' late the postmaster's wife picked her up a-goin' back to town. She was allus givin' some body er lift. When they got to town the postmaster's wife sez, 'I'll let you out here.' 'No,' sez Mrs. Tyler, 'I wus goin' to the post office.'
"The postmaster was a-lookin' out the window when they druv up, and he sez to his wife, laughing as he sed it, 'Who's your friend? 'I dunno,' sez his wife,'I picked 'er up about two miles back, and she looked tired,' 'I guess she were tired,' sez the postmaster, 'today wus payday for the hands workin' on that grade down there. Hain't you never goin' to learn who people is?' He teased her a lot about the tired woman afore she heard the last of it.
"Twant long ontil the Tylers built them three rooms out on the way to the mill when things wasgettin' better. They had a bath tub, an' the old woman found out that effen you kep' home brew in hot water, it'd age in thutty-six hours, an' she could get five cents a bottle more'n what the folks around wus gettin'. From the looks of the chillun, an' thur wus two more by then, the bath tub wus doin' such a heavy home brew business 'twant no placeer time for chillun to git washed. Home brew built a upstairs to the house and the nabors wus sufferin' worse'n them up the river, 'cause they can't run the Tylers off and they done bin thur two y'ars afeedin' offen 'em.
"I went to see ol' man Henry, what lived next door, 'bout doin' some repair work fur me, and we wus a-sittin' on the side porch what faced down the river, away from the Tyler yard on to ther side er the house.
"Inside the house, we heard Mrs. Henry say 'Come in,' to somebody, just as Jimmie Henry come around the house from school. Henry, he listen right close and when he ketched the voice on the inside he sez to Jimmie, 'Run 'round the house, Jimmie, and watch, and when Tyler calls my chickens over you go over thur and shoo 'em back home.
"How'd you know, last him, when Jimmie come back and said shonuf old Cucumber John was shellin' corn and tollin' the big old red rooster of Henry's.
"'That's easy,' sez Henry, 'Mrs. Tyler done comes over to my house to call Mrs. Henry to the tother window away from their side of the yard. She's had every damn thing on earth the matter with her a woman can have to git another woman to see after from a splinter in her toe to a Bealed and runnin' throat. She knows my wife can't say 'No,' to a sufferin' woman, but even she's gettin' fed up. If that red rooster had went jist now, I'd say Mrs. Tyler'd have to cum here with her haid in her hand fer to git hit sewed back on afore my wife'd believe her next time.
"When the white chickens got tolled over thur, we seed the feather sunder the hill and them Tylersh ain't got no white chickens. That time, their youngest child had a broke leg in a cast. It was powerful hot weather, and all the neighbors felt sorry for the young un and uster go thur to see her. Well, one day Mrs. Tyler runned over and tell my wife that the chile was a-sufferin' errible and my wife goes over thur. The chile was in a room on tother side of house away from our'n, and my wife went to hit but hit didn't seem to be no wurser. Well, anyhow, that day our white chickens disappeared, and wedidn't see hide nor hair of 'emuntil their feathers showed up under the hill.'
"How'd they lose their home down thur on the road"."Wal, bootleggin' rully built that house, but it takes a thief to ketch a thief, and that's what they run up a'gin. They lost hit borrowin' from a lumber man. He tol' them they oughter have a bigger house for a fambly of eight, and Mrs. Tyler is purty smart and he got plumb around her. He showed her where she could payoff themortgage on the lumber and stuff he sold her, and she signed up.
"He may have been losin' chickens too, but he done the same thing fer so many folks that I figger it wus jest plain perfessional jealousy of plain an' ordinary thievin'.
"By that time she had done got on the county relief ration list" and she would get a bag of flour and sech ever so often. Her brother wus stayin' at the still and bringin' in the juice and plantin' hit on the hill back er the house. They'd been searched so frequent they didn't keep notin' at the house 'ceptin' home brew. Her brother allus got on time to get the county handout. He done served time twice in the pen so he couldn't get me relief rations for his self, even if he lie as much as she did to git hit. I've seen him week after week gittin' his grub when honest folks wus a-goin hungry.
"Anyhow, she got the lumber and built the rooms on credit, feedin' her family and her still-runnin' brother offen the county and the nabors. Their food want costin' them much. But she got a big trade to her house, and the winders'd fly out some nights, and they'd fight allover the grass. Wedone got used to the cussin' by them. She wus gittin' along fine when the blow come. They repealed prohibition, an' folks quit buy in' her rot-gut. She couldn't make no money, and the lumber feller come down on her. He sez he's gotter have his money right now. After all the help the law'd give her to hold on, she wus sold out and whilst all the nabors wus right glad, they wus sorry for the chillun.
"A man what works for the auction company tole me that when the house wus sold it didn't bring enough for the debt on the two rooms of lumber, and when Seebee, the man what furnished hit, bought it in, he still held ergin them most of the debt.
Thur want nobody at the sale. He had hit put up two days afore pay day at the mill, knowin' twarn't nobody'd have cash to put down on the bid. Then hit rained, bad, the day of the auction, so old man Seebee got the house fer less than the two rooms cost. Mrs. Tyler'd met her match, only he done hit by law.
"Bethcher all I got that when he makes up his outstanding debts he puts the whole loan in fer exemption on his income tax, tho he's got the same lumber what he sold her on credit and four rooms more bid in for one-third the loan.
Boy, wouldn't you like to see his debts listed over the county?
"I tell my boy Jimmie to be one or tother, bank man or lawyer.
"The Tylers oldest boy, Howe, went off to a C.C.C. camp and hit done him a world of good. He come back here to, take keer of the two little girls,' cause Mrs. Tyler by then is gone to drinkin' steady, and Howe, he sees atter the girls, sends them to school, an' makes them keep clean an' gits' em to school on time, never missin' a day. Sometimes when the mother is onery at leas' one of the chillun'll git fed up on it and jest naturally pull they selves up out of hit.
"The Tylers' youngest boy, Ed, were half-witted and couldn't talk plain, an' hit shore were a help to them when hit come to handin' out licker. When the cops were in their car at the top o' the hill a-watchin' the Tyler house, they'd keep their eyes skunt for 'Satan,' which wus the boy next older to Ed, 'cause' Satan,' as the nabors called him, had been in jail so much they all knowed him, and they'd noticed him effen he'd gone down the road a- stoppin' cars with his coat all bulged out from a fruit jar under hit. But Ed'd go right down the roadwith the fruit jars under his coat and carryin' a bunch of bitter sweet, which his mammy had give him, and when the cars what he knew were them of the re'glar customers' stop, he'd hold up the bitter sweet liken he wus a-sellin' hit and slip the liquor in the otter mobile with the cops a-lookin' right smack at him.
"Ed'd take liquor to the customer's house and effen his wife come to the do' Ed'd say, I am a-lookin' fer Mr. So and So 'cause he promised me a dime," and then Mr. So-and-So'd come to the do' and Ed'd hand him the liquor and take the money and they never could fool Ed on the money. He mighter been half-witted, but he could count money ez good as you er me.
"The last time I seed Ed he was a-sidlin' up to a man what wus unloadin' a car of coal and wus a-talking goofy as all git out. I betcher when the man went to his dinner Ed sho got in his licks on that coal.
"Ed's the one what took the nabor's calf into their coal house and his mother sed he tuck hit in thur to play with. When the woman come atter the calf, Mrs. Tyler told her it jest wandered into the coal shed, When the woman seed the latch dropped in place, the woman as teffen the calf put the latch on, too, and then Mrs. Tyler sed Ed done hit.
"Satan' went to a C CC camp, but he come back same ez when he wenterway, and then he went away ag'in and stayed about er year. When he come back the nabors all said, 'Can't leave the wet clothes on the line all night no more, Satan's back.'
"I wus by the Tylers' place not long ergo, and Cucumber John was a-trying to git the old lady back in the itchen. She were high. But the house wus cleaner than l'd ever seed hit. Maybe Howe and them two young girls will pullup er bit. They is smart chillun, an' the oldest is in the Seventh grade at school, furtherest any Tyler has ever been. She had on as good clothes as your chillun or mine and they wus a radio singin' a hymn in the house.
"Po' chillun!"
