Emile Ward
4610 Chestnut St.
Interviewed 7/12/39
Submitted 7/17/39
Life History
THE LIFE HISTORY OF A SUGAR CANE WORKER
It is very plain that a working man must have some fun. And it is probable thata black working man will have a "high yallar" gal, the kind who packs tender thighs. Cane cutters are no different, they are working men too. Because "any man who meets the mornin' and then the evenin' in the same place is a workin' man."
Emile Ward was one of the best cane cutters in Lecompte Parish. His only trouble was that he played too much. Emile would work all day and forget to stop playing at night, which caused him to become too tired to work the next day. "My boss was an old man and couldn't see things like I did, so he always dockin' me," states Emile, who is against any boss who threathens to tame him, or keep him from having fun. Emile is a six footer, weighs about two hundred and ten pounds. He is a smooth black with crystal-like teeth which makes a very pretty picture 'when he opens his thick lips and big mouth. Emile laughs heartily, his belly rolling like jelly. He is a plain dresser, wearing overalls most of the time.
For some Strange reason Emile will not get married. However, he is the father of four boys by four different women. "Yeah, I got liberty with my love," he smiles, disregarding all the decent principles of life. The general spirit which permeates Emile's desire to be the father of children by different women grew out of admiration of his father whom he didn't know until he was sixteen. He is forty-seven now. "I used to see my pa man-handle women all the time. I used to wonder who he was, and one day my ma said he was my pa. I went up and told him what my ma says and he says, 'thats right son.' Then me and my pa commence gettin' t' gether," Emile proudly states.
"I was born on the plantation in Lecompte forty-seven years ago," Emile says, pressing his mind to recall his early child-hood days. I aint had no pappy. Ma was workin' on the farm. Every now and then I used to see some mens come around to see ma but I aint never thought nothin' of it. We was po' people. The folks in the big house used to like ma, she'd do their washin' and ironin' sometimes. I was a small boy buy I remembers how ma used to work. After she'd leave the farm she'd come home and wash nearly all nite. Thats one thing about her, she sho b'leive in bein' clean. Ma used to say all the time, 'you can be po' but you sho don't have to be dirty.'
"Aint never been to school, ceptin' the time some lady come around two times in two years and teached me my A.B. C. lessons. She used to say it was a shame I couldn't go to school cause I was smart. I was that, allright. Man, I could figure and everything. Learned it at the store, just watchin'. I used to keep my eyes open. No, there was no schoolin' fo' me. Cause ma used to say all the time that as soon as I gets big enough I had to take that load off'n her. I was small but I'd ten to the small farm we had. Ma was teachin' me how to cut cane. They was payin' one and a half fo' that.
"We was doin'z all right. The only trouble was that ma used to say all the time that the grocery bill and the rent took up all her money. We could never buy no clothes and do things fo' ourselves cause we aint had the money. Ma got terribly sick one time. Thats the time we caught hell, particular hell. Them people on the farm raised enough for the doctor's furst call, and we had to owe him the rest. We still owe him. The doctor said, "you po' niggers ought to go down to N'Awleens. Thats when I got in my mind to go to N'Awleens. I always did say that I was goin' to work and save me some money andthen go to N'Awleens.
"Ma took up wid a man who wasn't much good. Everybody told her that he wasn't much good. His name was Tom. What was ma's name? Emma, Emma Ward. Ward was her maiden name. I was named after her. Emile. No, I aint never been christained. Ma just had me. As far as I know. This might sound like a lie, but ma told me she just had me like on today and she put me up and let me cry all day and she went out and cut cane. You see, ma had to have me. She got hitched. She aint cared fo' me much in the beginnin', didn't care if I lived or died. But I lived and ma starts to love me. She used to sit up and cry over me plenty. When I got big I asked her one day why did she cry over me and ma said that she almost threw me away cause I was in her way.
"You see, I'll tell you how ma made up wid my pa. She was raised byx some white folks in St. John Parish. They raised her from a child. Her ma and pa used to work fo' them white folks fo' years but they die. So, they took my ma in and begin to raise her. Well, them white folks was so mean they forces my ma to run away. She runs to Lecompte. She could always cut cane, so she gets a job. Well, you know there is always some smart nigger around. Well, Tom was that smart nigger. He aint done nothin' but hang around and take money from the womens. The high sherriff ran him out of town twice but he knowed some good white folks and they let him back. But, the bastard was no good.
"My ma was a pretty black gal. Tom was a brownskin. Well, he commence wooin' my ma. He used to come over to the house all the time, bring cane and sit down and talk fo' the longest my ma says. She was young, he was a way older than her. She aint knowed nothin' bout keepin' men off her. Thats whar I knows I was a forced baby, cause ma aint knowed nothin'. It shows you she aint knowed nothin', cause when she got like that she aint told nobody. And when she gets puffed way out there the people start sayin', "Child, Emma's gettin' a baby.' The Reverend come runnin' over to my ma's house like somebody crazy. I had done been born I'd sho knocked him on his ass. Stead of him tryin' to hep my ma he come sayin' let me make the next one. My ma spitted right in his face. She did him right, didn't she? Black bastard! You see, everybody thought my ma was a bad woman. I don't know why they thought that. Tom was makin' babies fo' everybody in the church and everywhar else.
"Ma said she had a hard time. No, she didn't b'long to church. Cause she always did say if she ever went to that church she was goin' to tell the congregation what the preacher told her, and the preacher used to send her word not to come. You see, my ma was pig meat. And all preachers like pig meat!
"The only friend I knows of that my ma had was an old lady we used to call Antie. When she wasn't sick she used to come over and hep ma, but she was always sick, po' thing. When Antie died we all went to the funeral. That was my furst time in a church in LeCompte. I sho did feel funny. Yeah, ma went to the funeral too. No, she aint said nothin' bout the preacher. But, I'm tellin' you that bastard sho did feel funny. Every time he'd look at ma he'd mess up his text. I don't know why he felt like that, cause that was a long time afterwards. Shucks, ma thought she was foolin' me. She didn't a want me to know that was the preacher who had tried her. I was nothin! but a lil boy but ma knowed I'd knock that preacher on his ass right there in the church. Funeral or no funeral. I start to knock my pa on his ass, but ma stopped me. Say, man I'd do anything in the world fo' my ma. Thats why I didn't leave Lecompte b'fore I did.
"I'll tell you why I didn't like the church. Them people was hollorin' and carryin' on like fools. I don't like all that noise. And I couldn't see why they was makin' so much fuss, cause when you is dead you is dead. When I die I don't want 'em to do nothin' but put my body in a box and put me under the groud. I don't want no preacher standin' over me wid no Bible in his hand and a lot of damn crazy talk. Let me rest in peace. I aint goin' to never go to another funeral like Antie's funeral in my life. I don't mind goin' to a funeral but I sho don't like none of this you say sumpin' then I say sumpin', and then he says sumpin'. Bury the people. Some sister come sayin' to my ma, 'aint you got nothin' to say over Antie?' My ma says, 'no mam.' Then somebody come sayin, 'Umph. What can she say?' And boy, that whar I almost broke up the church. I says, if she'd talk all you damn hipocrites would run out er this church like fire was on yo' asses. Did I say that? You should er been there. Sho, I said it! I didn't give a damn!
"I was gettin' big then. What about school? Man, school is fo' rich kids I was too po' to even think about it. The furst thing I thought about was gettin' in that cane field and savin' enough money to get me and my ma down to N'Awleens. Thats what I wanted to do. I had done figured that I'd come down hyar and get me a good job and put my ma up in a house. But as soon as I got to workin' and doin' all right the high sherriff comes to my house and tells me and my ma that I had to marry Susie Brown or give give him twenty-five dollars. She had my baby all right, but I didn't marry her. I don't know what the high sherriff told her, but I reckon he told her that I didn't have to marry her. Anyway, he took all my money, aint had none. Had to start savin' all over again. And as soon as I got a little bit more ma took sick wid the consumption. She got wet in the cane field and caught a bad cold. She got to couffin' and carryin' on. The doctor came back but he said I'd have to pay him infront. I paid him a little and owed him the rest. Yeah, I still owe him. Then he says, 'the best thing fo' you to do is take yo' mother to N'Awleens.' But, before I could take my ma to N'Awleens she died. I was goin' to bury her in the back yard but somebody told the high sherriff. He came home and stopped me. He was a fine fellow. Told me if I wanted to bring my ma to church to go head and do so. Ma aint never said nothin' bout bringin' her to no church, and you know how I felt bout it. But, the high sherriff wanted me to go head and bring her to church. I told him I aint had no money to take her to church and I aint had no money to bury. The doctor took it all. He aint said nothin' to me but went right on. He says, 'don't you worry.' Lawd today, that man was some white man. Thats what I calls a white man. Do you know what he did? He went straight to the foreman and got money to fix ma up, then he went to the preacher. I don't know what he told the preacher but I know what he told me. The high sherriff says to me jest like this: 'I got enough on all these bastards to run 'em all in jail.' Man, the preacher and half of the church came to my house and took it away from me. They sho was nice. Everything was well taken care of. They gave my ma a nice funeral. And did that preache preach! He went to town. Them sisters got up and told some of the damnest lies I ever did hear tell. All of them was sayin' what my ma told 'em, what they knowed about my ma, and all that. Aint a one of' em knowed my ma.
"After the funeral a gal named Althea came to my house and ask me could she take care of things fo' me. I let her come in and we got t'gether. She had a baby fo' me, and I left town. But I came back. Why I left? Man, I aint had no twenty-five dollars to give that high sherriff!
"Thats when I met my pa. He commence showin' me around. I quite the cane field and starts to havin' my fun. I got hitched wid my furst yallar woman. I was doin' allright till she tells me I had to work, 'didn't I know that all black mens had to work fo' yallar womens,' I says, Oh yeah, Then I beats her ass. Thats when I had to leave town fo' true, cause she was the high sherriff's woman!
"I comes on down to N'Awleens. Somebody tells me that the high sherriff put the policemens on me because I killed a man. I was down hyar two years, and do you know that the policemens caught me and beat me up. They say I killed a white man in Lecompte. They sends me back to Lecompte. The only thing saves me was that the high sherriff had done died. Them other sheriffs tried their damnest to find out who was the man I killed but they couldnt. Man, I stayed in jail three months. Aint had nothin' but dry bread and water once a day. They talked about lynchin' me and everything. One of them sherriff used to come in the jail everyday and slapped me in the face. He say he was goin to make me say I killed a white man. I'd said it but I didn't know no name of any white man who was dead. No, there wasn't no trial. I aint never seen a judge. Somebody said the judge was on a vacation. I don't know whar he' was. I know I aint never seen him. "Man, stayin' in jail was allright but sleepin' wid them rats, roaches and bed bugs almost drove me crazy. I aint never in all my life seen so many bed bugs. Everywhar I'd move one of them rascals was bitin' me. I was so bit up by bed bugs I made up a little song:
Mister bed bug, is you goin' let me sleep tonight
Mister bed bug, is you goin' let me sleep tonight
The only thing I got to offer you is that shinin' moonlight.
I aint had no sleep since I been in this mess Says, I aint had no sleep since this lodown mess.
I aint done nothin', and I'm charge wid false arrest.
Mister bed bug, plase don't bite me no mo'
Mister bed bug, please don't bite me no mo'
Cause I'm goin' get off'n this bed and sleep on the flo'.
This is my furst time in jail and I don't what to do
My furst time in jail. I don't know what to do
I'm goin' get me some t'bacco and sprinkle you.
Mister bed bug, please leave me alone
Mister bed bug, will you please leave me alone
I'm goin' stop my cryin' and stop singin' this song.
"One of them sherriffs heard me singin' one day and says, 'how you can be happy and we is thinkin' bout cuttin' off yo' damn neck is sumpin' I a can't understand.' Then he went away. Man, I had done give up my life. That old preacher came down to the jail and wanted to pray wid me. I says, 'you damn fool. Get out hyar and find Geraldine. Tell her I'm sorry, and if I ever git out of jail I'm goin' take her to N'Awleens and let her be my wife the rest of my days.' That old preacher got out of that jail. He knowed I wasn't to be fooled wid. He knowed I'd start sumpin' right there in the jail, and there it would be fo' him and me!
"Man, I don't know what happened, but some white man came to the jail and told them sherriffs this like this, I aint tellin' you no word of lie. I swear! He says, 'doesn't you' all know you got to feed this nigger even If you feed him water and bread? And if you kill him its goin' to cost us money This niggeraint never killed no white man. And if we kill this nigger foul we islosin' money foul.' Man, them sherriffs aint done nothin' but turned me aloose. When I got out of jail I went to that gal and thanked her. She thought I was comin' back but I fooled her. I came on back to N'Awleens and got settled again.
"Let me tell you I wasscared of yallar womens fo' a long time. But I got allright again. Yallar womens done had three kids fo' me. Only the Lawd knows where they is, I sho don't. I guess one day one of 'em will come and say, Pa this is yo' son.
"My trouble is that I jest can't stay wid no one woman no time, jest can't. I trys but I jest can't. I aint done no cane cuttin' since I been in Lecompte. I started to go back one summer but I knew I was goin' to get introuble wid them yallar womens. Why the trouble? Well, you see, them yallar womens got white mens, and no white mens want you to mess around their womens, no matter what color they is.
"There aint but one thing fo' the cullud people to do and that is to work and save their money and go into business. If I had knowed what I know now I'd be right smack into business. What kind of business? I don't know, but some kind of business. Our trouble is my trouble, or anyway you look at it. We like to have too much fun. What I call fun? I calls fun havin' plenty womens. Look at me. I have so many I can't walk along the street. About nine of 'em done swore that they is goin' to kill me. I'll tell you why. I aint had no work so I took their money when they went out at night. Could you blame me? I had to eat. I had to have clothes. I had to live. Didn't I. I still got to live!
"I'm on the W.P.A. They say they is goin' to take me off. If they take me off I guess I'll go back to the country, but not to Lecompte. No indeed! Them sherriffs is too bad, specially when you likes yallar womens. And man. I aint goin' to lie. I like 'em.
"You see how I live. I live right hyar in this one room and I aint got nothin' in it but a wash stand and a bed. Thats all I needs. I'm goin' to eat, cause I pay an old lady around the corner two fifty per week. Thats fo' food. I sleep hyar or at somebody else's house. I brings my womens hyar when I wants to, and I have my fun hyar when I wants to. this is my life cause I have my fun. I aint got no what some people calls future. It will bring on it self. No matter what you do yo' future is goin' to be what its suppose to be, anyway.
"Man, I aint never been sick in my life. Aint had nothin', not even a fever. I don't even 'spect to be sick. I drink too mcu liquor to get sick. Man, whiskey will ease anything. Yo' trouble and everything,
"How I feels about children? I feels that people should have as many kids as they can take care of and no mo'. Thats one of the things wrong wid cullud people. They have too many children. Man, if I ever get married I aint goin' to never have a gang of chillun. My wife better try to find sumpin' to do to keep from havin' a gang of chullun. Most womens let kids slip up on 'em, but it aint goin' to happen to me, no indeed!
"Didn't I have chillun? Sho, but they aint really fo' me. Man, how in the world can a woman tell who is the pa if their kid? How can they?"