1935
Enrique Pendas (Spaniard)
Ybor City
Tampa, Florida
(Owner of cigar factory; chairman of manufacturers' association)
F. Valdes, writer, for the FERA Sociological Survey of Ybor City
ENRIQUE PENDAS INTRODUCTION
In order to obtain this interview with Mr. Pendas, I decided that it would be beat to apply to Mr. Souto, Secretary of the Spanish Club, and obtain from him an introduction to Mr. Pandas, as Mr. Souto is a life-long friend of his. When I informed Mr. Souto of what I desired, he refused, giving me the following reasons:
"No, I cannot do that. I will gladly do any favor that you may ask of me, but not that. If I were to give you a letter of introduction, he would throw you out. Not that he has the highest regards for me, but he is a man of strange moods. What is the name of that animal that rolls itself up with a million thistles sticking out!" A porcupine, I answered. "Well, that is what he is. You cannot touch him."
"I am going to tell you exactly how he is going to receive you: The first thing he will ask is, 'who are you!' "I am Mr. So and So."
"Where are you from!'
"I am from the Sociological Study of Ybor City."
'Um---who runs this!'
"The Federal Government."
"Well, why did you come here! Why didn't they send the President of the United States or his Secretary!' 'I have no time to lose---that will be all for today', "and my dear young man you would come out feeling like two cents." He is not a man who will sit down, and open his heart like me, who am a simple man, and always willing to give you any information. He is too proud. He is a man who carries his head thrown far back, as you may say. He only considers those who have a high position in life.
He is a man of strange moods, as I told you before. One moment he will receive you as if you were his only friend in life, and at the next, he will ignore you completely. I have known him for many many years, and I know how he is.
"If you are set on seeing him, however, it is best that you should go to his home after he has had his supper. It may be that he will be in the right mood then---and for all that you hold sacred, please do not mention my name for anything. Remember that---not the slightest reference to me. This is the best advice I can give you".
I, therefore, decided to apply to Mr. Manteiga, Editor of "La Gaceta", Spanish newspaper, who is a close friend of Mr. Pandas. Mr. Manteiga told me to go over to the factory, and if Mr. Pendas was doubtful about anything, to have him call him (Mr. Manteiga) up on the telephone. To go right up to Mr. Pendas and tell him that Mr. Manteiga had sent me. However, he was very sorry, but he was too busy, and could not give me an introduction.
Seeing that it was impossible to obtain a letter of introduction from his close friends, I "armed" myself with a letter from the office and called on Mr. Pendas at his factory. He was not in the office at that moment, but one of the bookkeepers said he was out in the hall. So I went out in the hall, found him, introduced myself, and handed him the letter from the office. He must have been in one of his good moods, as he received me civilly enough, took me to his private office, and sat down to read the letter. Than I went on to explain what I wanted. He then replied: "I am very sorry as I am expecting the Comite Nivelador any moment." I told him that I would then go to his home, and see him there that night. He evaded me once more by saying: "that cannot be as I go to bed early, and have plenty on my hands with that 190 pounds boy, who is good for nothing (idiot)."
However, I was not willing to take no for an answer, and told him that I would call him up on the phone every day, and that when he had a few moments to spare me, I would immediately come to interview him. He smiled at this and said: "Well, do you work on Sundays?" I told him no, but if Sunday was all right for him, it would be all right for me. "Well, come Sunday here to the factory after 9:30 A.M. and I will be waiting for you."
Sunday I went to interview him, and although he told me at the start, that he could not give me this history as he has never given his picture to a newspaper or to any of the Clubs that he has founded, for he has never wanted publicity, yet he talked so much, and I urged him along without seeming to be getting his life history, that I believe I obtained as much as possible under the circumstances. When I first engaged him in the conversation, I took out paper and pencil, but he promptly took hold of the paper and rolled it up.
I, therefore, had to trust to my memory in preparing this life history, and have kept to his wording as much as possible. When I was leaving he gave me two 50? cigars, and told me that if I should get Mr. Ramirez (another cigar manufacturer), Mr. Manteiga, and himself together on some festive day (the only time when he is not busy), that he would be very glad to accommodate me, as he never wishes to take credit alone in anything. As soon as I was in the street car, I wrote out everything he had said.
PERSONAL DESCRIPTION OF MR. PENDAS
Mr. Pandas is very thin, and small in status, about 5 feet 4 inches. He carries himself erect. His face is very much lined, and his under eyelids are somewhat fallen. He is distinctly a nervous type. He talks quits loudly. He gestures with his hands, and many times would get up from his seat, and walk about. He would get so enthused at times, and raise his voice so high that I believe it could be heard distinctly throughout the whole building.