Jim Eubanks
Durham, North Carolina
February 3, 1939
L. R. [Leonard Rapport]
JIM EUBANKS; HORSE AND COW TRADER
"If this automobile business hadn't come along I'd be worth a hundred thousand dollars today. I was best prepared, had spent all my life getting set, and was in fine shape when they come along. It just ruint me.
"I got in the horse business when saddle horses were in style, in 1900. I saw an ad in the Raleigh Morning Post where the Sanford Cotton Mill Company wanted a man to train a pair of wild horses they had. I went over to Sanford right away and got the job. Went out to the stable and opened the door and one of those horses jumped clean over my head. They hadn't been driven in months. I got em bitted close together and hitched to the wagon and started out. They ran away with me. I kept holding back on the reins and waited till one of them was in the air running and I turned loose all of a sudden and it throwed that horse, and the wagon come along on top of him. Just skinned him up a little but he never run away no more.
"I'd been carrying a mail route horseback from Pittsboro to Siler City; I'd started it in 1894 when I was seventeen years old--I'm sixty-one. When I quit I got my daddy to finish out my contract on the route.
"My daddy had a farm a mile and a half outside Pittsboro that his daddy had give him. My grandfather came over from Scotland before the Civil War and owned a pile of land around Pittsboro. He owned a bunch of slaves and was a big farmer and he gave all his boys a farm apiece. He had five boys and two or three girls. Clyde Eubanks, the druggist in Chapel Hill, is my cousin, and the Eubanks who's postmaster there is a cousin, too.
"Howcome my daddy to get to breaking horses was his training in the cavalry during the Civil War. They really trained him. He was a young man and they sent him to Kentucky and he stayed there two years learning before he got into the fighting. He was in the whole four years; he never got hurt but one brother got an arm shot off at Atlanta.
"My daddy raised horses and cows--some of the finest milk cows you ever seen. He raised wheat, corn, and oats and we made a lot of cotton. No tobacco, though his father did. I learned to ride and break horses there on the farm. And I never got thrown but once in my life. I was on a Kentucky mare and she bucked four times then. I was just careless; I didn't think she'd throw me and got careless and stood in the stirrups and she threw me winding.
"A lazy person can't ride a horse. If you'll get your stirrups the right length and stand in them instead of sitting the horse won't know you're there. Standing in the stirrups and holding myself up I've rode many a day from six in the morning to six at night and never got tired.
"Well, I drove that pair of horses for the Sanford Mills a few months and then went to work for the Standard Oil Company. I hauled oil for them out of Sanford in a big tank truck with two big horses, delivering kerosene to the little stores around. I'd sell maybe four or five hundred gallons to some company store but most of the little places took less.
"During this time I was training and riding saddle horses. In 1904 and '5 I ran a machine in a veneering plant. That job - around thirty-five years ago - was the last time I worked for wages.
"I started out trading in a covered wagon and off and on I camped out fifteen years. I'd stop where night caught me, feed my stock, cook, and sleep in the wagon. In cold weather I'd hang a lantern inside the wagon and stay warm all night. I'd drive or lead whatever I had along the road; I drove cows on the road until 1922 or '3. Then the automobiles got so thick I had to stop. I drove fourteen head of cattle from Siler City to Durham in 1921.
"I had a collie dog I wouldn't-a took a thousand dollars for; I was offered six hundred dollars for him. He could drive cows by himself. I got him as a puppy and trained him myself. He'd drive five or six cows behind my buggy; I'd point where to stop and he'd stop the cows right there. I couldn't do without him. I got his picture at the house now.
"In those days I didn't hit the tobacco markets; I didn't start them until 1922-23 when I came to Durham. I'd go mostly to courthouse towns -- Asheboro, Hillsboro, Pittsboro, Carthage -on big court days and be gone two and three weeks at the time, trading, selling, and buying as I went. Before the war three or four hundred dollars a month trading wasn't nothing; I counted on that. It's different now.
"I got up mighty good in Sanford. I married; my wife was in school there when I met her. She was raised in Lee County - used to part of old Moore County. In twenty-two years there we raised up our family, four girls and two boys. I had a meat market - worked three cutters. I had all I could do for fifteen years straight. I'd buy beef cattle on the road and send them back to the market. I cleared five thousand dollars in 1915. Part of the time I ran a stable, too. I bought a lot and built a home for three thousand dollars in 1912 and when I sold in 1921 I doubled my money.
"I sold out my market in 1920 and I sold my property in '21. Then I came to Durham. I thought I was trained enough and Durham was a big enough place so I could maybe do a bigger business. But from then on things went down instead of up. I whole saled meatx here six or seven years. I done my own butchering and dressing. I built three or four batcher houses here. I was furnishing the Jew-market here where the Rabbi killed, with six hundred dollars worth a week. But I was doing a lot of credit business and about 1930 markets just couldn't pay and I lost two or three hundred dollars in Raleigh and about twelve hundred here. I drawed a deadline there and then and swore never again to sell anything on credit. And I've stuck to it like a sick kitten to a hot rock. "I did some dealing in real estate. I owned a house on Spring Street before I came here I paid fifty-five hundred dollars for, and I paid seven thousand for one on South Street. I made twenty-five hundred dollars on one deal here and lost four thousand on another. But property isn't any good I got beat out of rent and I got shut of all I had. The house on Morris Street where I've been living about two years has twelve rooms and we need them. There's my wife and me, my oldest son, my daughter, my daughter who lives in Sanford's son who's going to school here, and a married daughter and her five children. All my girls are married but one and my youngest boy is married. He's been with the Morning Herald for four or five years but just last week he got to handle the Raleigh News and Observer in Durham. He gets nine hundred copies a day here; he hasn't had it long enough that I know whether that includes the newstand copies or not. One of my grand-boys at the house carries the Morning Herald and another the Sun, so we get both papers. I got eleven grandchildren.
"My oldest son's been going around with me since he was a year old - since he could ride in a buggy. He drove a team at Pinehurst where I had a grading job when he was six years old. He was riding horseback too. Then I put him in school and never allowed him to ride much and when he finished - he finished here in Durham like all my children but the two oldest girls who finished in Sanford - he got to driving trucks. He's thrity-three now and ain't married. He says he'll study about marrying when he gets so he can support somebody beside himself. He's in with me, trading. He would have made a fine horseman.
"I built a dairy on the Raleigh road in 1926 and hired a man to run it. I milked thirty-five head; paid around a hundred dollars a piece for most of them, all Jerseys. Milk was hard to sell right then and I tried delivering it but I got just the leavings of the trade of the other dairies. The people not only beat me out of money but they lost five hundred bottles for me. I had a lot of hard luck. There were a hundred and twenty-five hogs on the place and cholera hit me and I lost them all. I came out there one day and twenty-two of them were dead. Hogs were twenty-one to twenty-five cents a pound then.
"I was once offered nine thousand dollars for the place but man backed out. I had fifty-four acres and a four or five thousand dollar dairy barn on it; I ran it two years and sold out for seventy-five hundred.
"Along in 1900 I could buy good saddle horses for sixty or seventy dollars. Those same horses today would cost two hundred. In 1918 I sold a riding horse for three hundred and thirty-five dollars. Best trained horse I ever had. How come me to get hold of him, a little show had a wreck over near Red Springs and this horse didn't get hurt. He was a show horse, I traded a mule to the man who'd bought him; I kept him a couple years and sold him to a Sanford lumber man.
"I kept a fine pair of saddle horses to show. They were fine gaited horses; they could do everything in the catalog. I'd ride them up and down the street when I'd come into a town to advertise my stock. Well - everything I had was for sale at a price and I finally sold one of them to the sheriff at Pittsboro for two hundred and fifty dollars.
"During the war I had a contract and helped build Camp Bragg at Fayetteville. I had fifteen horses over there and I was riding fo reman. I got nine dollars a day for that and twelve dollars a day a team. Once I remember we worked on a Sunday and got double time and I made two hundred dollars for the day. The government furnished free lumber to me to build a stable. Feed was awful high, though. With corn three dollars a bushel, oats five dollars, and hay seventy-five dollars a bale it cost a dollar a head a day to feed the stock.
"I never did keep check of how many horses I sold in a year; I've often thought I ought to do that. I guess I used to sell an average of eight or ten a week. I sold everything; mules - I sold four of them just before Christmas, oxen - sold a many a one. I sold a fine ox here last spring for ninety-two dollars. This'n was broke. I saw him yesterday. He was a little thin and I tried to buy him back. The man wanted seventy-five dollars but he wasn't worth that much to me. There are a right smart of them still used. A man at Warsaw has sixteen or twenty head he uses to haul logs. Some at Rocky Mount are used to carts and there're some at Oak City. There is twelve or fourteen years of good use in a well trained ox. I've handled everything; oxen, horses, mules, cows, bulls, sheep, hogs. Driving you usually had to stick to one, though, because you can't gait different kinds of animals.
"I first started handing milk cows and cattle in 1910, selling around in Fayetteville, Raleigh, Greensboro, Rocky Mount, Greenville, and Wilson. Since 1925 or '6 I've been selling more cows than horses. It's a little safer with cows; you can sell out every day in the week. In 1915 you could buy a nice grown cow and calf for fifteen dollars; in '16 and '17 on account of the war they went up to a hundred and fifty dollars. Hides were fifty cents a pound; I've sold hides that brought me fifty dollars apiece. In 1921 there came a slump after the war and hides dropped from fifty to four cents in a day. One day, a friend of mine in Greensboro had several carloads and lost over seventy-five thousand dollars.
"Milk cows are generally better to handle than beef cattle. I sell to the slaughterhouse what don't do to milk. I was to an auction sale at Goldsboro this week; there were a thousand people there selling horses, cows, and mules at the rate of one a minute. I bought four beef cattle and carried them to the slaughterhouse and made seven or eight dollars on each of them. You have to watch on these auctions, everybody knows so close what stock is worth. It's like tobacco buying; sometimes somebody who isn't expert will bid too much and you can't make anything bidding against him. Those auctions are like toabcco sales, too, in that if you don't like what you get you can holler no sale and you take back your stock.
I've got a barn just outside the city limits. There're four cows there now; next week there'll maybe be six or seven. In the summer I'll graze fifteen or twenty milk COWS. Sometimes I'll milk them and take the milk home to my family. We kept a cow in Sanford eight years; the family was raised on her. I gave thirty-five dollars for her and sold her for a hundred and twenty-five. I'll tell you what I ain't done. I ain't never lost on a cow I bought unless I had hard luck. Something had to happen like getting sick or killed or breaking a leg. Going bad like that is the only way I ever lost on a cow or horse. Sometimes, of course, I'll get off and not make expenses; sometimes I'll come back with a bigger load than I set out with; I'm always willing to buy, sell, or trade. I'll take anything a man's got and willing to turn loose. Sometimes I'll take a hog or two as boot. This week I was trading with a man and I wanted ten dollars boot. He wouldn't give it but I saw he had some sweet potatoes. I got ten bushels of them in place of the money. We'll eat them this winter.
"You might not think so but you can make a better trade with another trader than with somebody who doesn't know anything about trading. A man who doesn't know is scared to trade. Another trader maybe can handle what I got better than I can and we both benefit.
"Stock's improving. I remember the first Jersey cow brought to this section. A yarn mill man - only man at the time who had money enough - at Snow Hill ordered some shipped over from Jersey Island. Jerseys are still the best cow for this part of the country. These here Guernseys you hear so much about - they're a short-lived cow. You can milk a Guernsey and the milk is yellow all the way from the bottom to the top. In a Jersey all the cream stands at the top. That's why everybody's stuck on Guernseys. But the milks so rich it gets messed up in the bags. Soon they're milking from three tits and then two. And as I say they're short-lived. A Jersey'll milk nicely until she's twelve or fifteen years old. I know a Jersey that had twenty-one calves.
"Before we got the Jersey we had the old field cow - the piney woods cow. Twenty-five years ago there were no Guernseys at all but we got em now. Like there were no Plymouth Rocks and Rhode Island Reds and no Durocs and Poland China hogs but we've got them now, too. We had the old piney woods hog and the dungy-hill chicken. A piney woods hog'd weigh eighty pounds; now we got them that weight three-four hundred. We got Shropshire sheep weighing a hundred pounds; the old fashioned, no-count ones weighed twenty pounds. We used to get six and seven hundred pound mules; now they run up thirteen and fourteen hundred. We've got Percherons we didn't used to have - a fine, gentle horse. The stock's improving; I don't know what we'll get next.
"The way I follow the tobacco markets is to go down to Lumberton in August for two or three weeks, then catch the markets at Wilson, Rocky Mount, and on up. I've got a ton and a half truck that carries five or six head at a load. I'll generally get me a lot for my cows, keep a few on the truck to show, and when I get a customer I take him out to the lot. I park at the warehouses and get acquainted with some good farmers and I can work three or four towns in a section. Down through that way there are a lot of Scotch - about the gamest folks you find. They'll make you an offer on anything you got. Lots of them are Presbyterians; my grandfather was from Scotland but I forgot what he was. Most of our folks are Missionary Baptists.
"I've traded as far west as Winston-Salem and up at Roanoke and Bedford City in Virginia; I've bought carloads of mules in Atlanta and Richmond but I never worked outside the state much. My oldest boy's been ground though, just visiting. He was as far as Canada and he's been to Jesse James' old home. He went out to the barn and saw where Jesse used to keep his horses.
"I don't keep up with politics much. It's so dirty I haven't voted in the last several years though I did vote last year. I'm a Democrat, but I believe that unless you know something about the men running you're liable to do harm with your vote instead of good.
"I don't do no running around. I go to a moving picture every once in a while. I went to this horseracing picture, Kentucky, last week; I liked it right well. I like Western moving pictures.
"Lots of times I can tell about a man when he's ten feet away, whether he's going to trade. You can always tell when a colored man wants to trade. If I got something he wants he's easy to trade with. Most of the time though colored people are scared.
"If I can get a man to talking I can generally tell about him. I can't get my son to learn that. He's young, he hasn't had my experience. I can tell as much about a cow in a minute as he can in ten minutes.
"The winter is my slackest season. Then When I get out on the highway with my truck, I'll stop along at filling stations and ask who around there is in the market for stock, or some farmer will give me a tip, or if a man wants something I got he'll stop me on the highway to bargain. I usually price up a little. You can't get more than you ask, you know. I came down sometimes four or five dollars; I have come down as much as ten.
"I guess the best profit I've made was in Wilson when the government closed down the market for two weeks in 1933. When it opened again the buyers paid up big; The companies were scared not to; they thought the government was going to take the warehouses over. I sold twenty-eight head of cows and made three hundred and sixty-five dollars in five days.
That same year I sold a load of cows that cost me two hundred dollars to a lady at Henderson for five hundred and forty. I had just what she wanted and I was there and back in three hours. And when the PWA or WPA was buying cows in Raleigh I used to make as much as a hundred dollars a load; I had good cows but the men who passed on them didn't know much about them.
"Lately I been getting along like the terrapin crawling. I keep in it not because I'm making anything but every now and then I happen upon a bargain and it brings in a little money. It's been my life work."