"A CUSTOMER IS ALWAYS RIGHT"
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
Mrs. Leila Harris
Area 7 - Augusta
Federal Writers’ Project
August 3, 1939
July 20, 1939
Samuel Augustus Sheets (Negro)
1290 West Broad Street
Athens, Georgia
Grocery Store & Barber Shop
Proprietor
G.M.
"A CUSTOMER IS ALWAYS RIGHT"
At a street intersection in the Negro business district, where each corner is occupied by a commercial establishment of some sort, I was attracted by a notice depended from the sign over Jim Smith’s Grocery Store. This was the wording:
"TYPHOID CLINIC FREE
TYPHOID SHOTS FREE
COME ONE, COME ALL
AND YOU WON’T REGRET"
During this period of sweltering weather there had been rumors of a few scattered cases of typhoid fever, and I felt confident that a grocer, sufficiently public spirited to thus provide precautionary measures for his race, would make good life history material.
As I entered the store, which occupies the lower portion of a two-story frame structure, the proprietor, a slender young mulatto, came toward me. His immaculate white shirt and trousers contrasted sharply with his dark skin and shining black shoes. A broad grin displayed gleaming teeth as he listened to my request for his life story and some data demonstrating the problems and difficulties experienced in the operation of his business.
"Lady," he began, "You’re right. There are many real problems, to say nothing of the minor difficulties experienced by anyone in the business world. However, I don’t know much of anything except this retail grocery business that I inherited from my father.
”I was born in Athens, on October 12, 1912. There was nothing especially interesting in my early life. Like the other colored boys, I went to school and did the things schoolboys us for sally do. Father retired from the grocery business for a little while, but when I was about thirteen or fourteen years old, and just finishing grammar school, he started his come-back in business at the age of sixty. I’m only hoping I can make as good progress as a young man, as he did when he was starting out again well past middle age.
"I kept on in school until I finished high school, but that’s as far as I got. I worked in the store when I wasn’t in school, sometimes selling goods, but mostly delivering those groceries father had sold. When father first started back in business he opened a place in that building right across the street from here. We had a small stock of goods, all bought on credit. In just a few years he was able to pay cash for this building and the one next to it. One reason for his getting ahead that way, was that he sold for cash only, and he really did do pretty good.”
His discourse was interrupted by a small girl with shiny black skin, and numerous, short and very tightly braided pigtails. "Jim," she said, "is you got some nice fresh roas’ in’ ears? An’ iffen you’se got ‘em, what does dey cost?”
"Yes, I have nice fresh corn at 25 cents a dozen," Jim replied. "How many ears do you want?"
"I don’t want none. Leas’wise, not right now. Maw jes’ wanted to know how much they cost," she replied as she sprinted out the door.
Another child came in and handed a note to Jim. He read it, scribbled on the back of it, and said, "Tell her I’LL send the things over pretty soon."
Jim resumed his story. "I liked delivering groceries for father very well,” he said. "Of course I was in dutch plenty of times. Nobody can please everybody. They would really tell me about it when I got to the customers’ houses with the groceries too late for the meal for which they had been ordered, and that happened plenty often when I had to wait till school was out to begin my deliveries. Just as long as I could stay out of the reach of angry folks I was all right. One of the first things I learned in the grocery business was to take tongue lashings.
"Father didn’t pay me regular wages. He boarded and fed me, bought my clothes and sent me to school, but did not supply me with pocket money. He was willing to furnish necessities, but old folks don’t like to do much spending on luxuries. And so I found out I had to make my own spending money. I learned to cut hair by practicing on my schoolmates, and that was the way I earned my first cash. Soon I was cutting hair for men too end it brought me in plenty of pocket change, for those days. Folks didn’t spend money then like they do now. There wasn’t so many places to go, and automobiles hadn’t got so plentiful to take folks everywhere then. I never have given up my haircutting side line, and in that room at the back of the store I have a barber chair and with my nephew in charge of it we do quite a bit of business back there, particularly on week ends and special occasions. Haircutting, as a side line, seems to sort of run in the family for my young 16-year old nephew has been making his pocket money that way since he was 10 years old, and now he does most of the work in my little shop here, but when we get in a rush, I can still do a good job on a head.
"Father was in the grocery business, taking it all in all, around thirty years. Perhaps it was longer. There were as many difficulties then as now, but most of them were different from our worries. As a rule all the stores in town had the same prices on staples. Well, practically the same. There were no chain stores to cut prices on ‘em.
"Chain store prices are our great problem today. And we do have too much competition of one kind and another. The chain stores’ll cut a few pennies on one article and raise several others in price to make up for it. Or at least, that’s the way it’s said to run. The other stores do likewise. Just look out there on this street, a store on each corner and each one trying to get all the business we can.
Maybe one will cut the price on one article and the others on other things, and so it goes, as it does everywhere. Competition is something fierce.
"Our customers don’t understand. Some of them are right peculiar about it. Why, I’ve had them refuse to buy things that weren’t priced as high as elsewhere. They seem to think something is wrong with the cheaper-priced article. For instance, not long ago I marked down some canned goods from 15 cents to 12 cents. Some of my customers refused to buy these goods until I put the price back to 15 cents, which was the price asked at the other stores. They cheerfully paid the 15 cent price end went away happy because they’d showed me I couldn’t get by with running low prices over ‘em," With another grin he added, "‘The customer is always right,’ even when he’s wrong.
"Sometimes my customers get mighty mad about their bills. It’s usually like this. They’ll let the accounts run over a week or two after they’re due. If I refuse to charge any more food until they pay up, or pay something on account, then they really do raise cain. They’ll stay mad and pout for a week or two, but I just let ‘em go on that way until they get over the mad spell. Usually it comes out all right, for they generally pay up and start back trading again."
A very small Negro girl, scantily clad in a play suit, came in and asked for "a dime’s wuth o’ fatback." Jim cut the meat and wrapped it and as he handed it to the child she said, "Mama said iffen hit wasn’t all right, she’d sho send it right straight back to you." Jim asked if she wanted anything else. "Naw," was the curt response as she ran out.
"I do very little credit business Jim said, "for it really doesn’t pay. Soon as I get my debts all paid up and my affairs straightened out and in better shape, I mean to get a larger and better location, and I’ll open up a really modern store that will be run on a strictly cash basis. I’ll refuse to extend credit with as much firmness as they do at super markets and other chain store places. A cash basis is really the only safe way to do business.
"By way of illustration, say, you have 10 people trading regularly to the extent of, perhaps 3 dollars a week. If just one of those ten fails to pay you, it takes all the profit on what you have sold the other nine, to make up the loss. Credit just won’t work. Ho business can stand it and exist through the panics and depressions that are bound to come over a long period of time. I’ve got my plans for a better business and if my father could come back at 60 and make a success, I should make a go of it, as young as I am."
Jim answered the telephone. "Yes, mem. Yes, I have irish potatoes. They’re 3 cents a pound. Yes, mam, I have canned peaches. -- Ho, they are not dessert peaches, just pie peaches. -- Yes, thank you, I’ll get them out to you."
Two women of his race came in. Jim met them with a friendly smile. "All I wants is to pick me out a nickel’s wuth o’ sweet ‘taters, an’ I wants ‘em the long sort," one woman announced, and while she was carefully inspecting his supply of sweet potatoes, the other customer asked, "How much is beans?"
"Twenty cents a gallon," Jim answered.
"Well, I ain’t spendin’ but 20 cents, so gimme 15 cents wuth o’ beans an’ a nickel’s wuth of i’sh ‘taters. An’ it ain’t cash I’se spendin’. Put dat 20 cents on my bill." When he handed her the parcels containing her purchases, she inquired, "Is you got any of them 5-cent boxes of starch?" Receiving an affirmative reply she ordered, "Well, gimme one box, an’ don’t you go put it on my hill for I’se gwine to pay that nickel. I ain’t spendin’ but 20 cents on credick." The customers hurried out.
A salesman claimed the storekeeper’s attention for a demonstration of a new brand of soap powder, just about the same time a small Negro boy entered the store. "Where have you been?" Jim demanded, and without waiting for the boy’s response ordered him to get the broom and sweep the store. The salesman was showing how practical his cleanser was for use even in ice water, and the boy lingered close by to see and hear; at the same time making a great display of wielding the broom. The youngster warily watched his employer and contrived to sweep the accumulation of trash through cracks in the flooring. If Jim was looking in his direction the broom moved swiftly and there was a great show of industry, but when he looked toward the salesman there was much less energy expended. By the time the youth had swept as far as the entrance, most of the trash had gone through the cracks and there was very little to be swept through the open door.
While Jim was busy, I took advantage of the opportunity to look about the place of business. Canned and packaged goods filled the shelves, and a small glass showcase - cracked and marred by many scratches - held candies and chewing gum. There was a small supply of bread, cakes, and pies on a long table, and the vegetable bins contained corn, beans, tomatoes, and onions. Dried cowpeas, and beans of various kinds seemed to be selling well, although fresh vegetables were in mid season. The two large baskets containing sweet and irish potatoes, were patronized by the majority of customers that visited the store. He carried a comparatively large supply of smoking and chewing tobacco, and a few cigarettes, but nowhere was a box of snuff to be seen, and not once during my stay was there a call for it. Chimneys for kerosene lamps, clothespins, laundry soaps and washing powders were prominently displayed. He also carried a supply of fruit jars, tops and rubbers, and jelly glasses. Another dilapidated showcase held school supplies consisting chiefly of tablets, pencils and composition books.
Probably the most modern equipment in the store was behind his meat counter. The ancient-looking meat block had probably seen service many years before the present owner was born, but the meat was kept in a modern electric ice box, and another large ice box was filled with soft drinks. One pair of scales was suspended from the ceiling and a more modern weighing and calculating device was conveniently at hand on the counter. Flour was piled up on the floor at one end of the counter, and paper bags of meal occupied considerable floor space at the other end. A part of the center space was filled with watermelons and cantaloupes.
As the salesman left, an enormous old Negro woman shuffled in. She wore a blue uniform of the kind usually affected by house servants, and the large sack pinned apron-fashion across her front, proclaimed its origin as a sugar container in bright red letters. After leisurely inspecting his stock of goods and handling many of the fresh vegetables, she finally reached in a pocket under her improvised apron and drew forth a coin. "Gimme a nickel’s wuth o’ fatback. That’s all I want," she announced.
"I don’t mind if this goes into history," Jim said as he resumed his narrative, "It’s hard for a young colored person to go in business among the people of his own race. That may not sound reasonable, but it’s true. We just can’t do anything much with our own people in a business-like way. They’ll pull us down in spite of all we can do. If I don’t get the money before the merchandise leaves the store, it would be better for me that the goods were left on the shelf. At least I’d have the merchandise to show, instead of a lot of unpaid bills.”
He was interrupted by a woman who asked for a plug of chewing tobacco. "I wants Brown Mule,” she said, and then ordered ”a quarter’s wuth o’ fatback.” Jim ruefully explained that he had not received the delivery of meat expected that day and did not have enough fatback left to fill her order. The woman grunted and snorted scornfully as she went out mumbling about his never having anything she wanted when she wanted it.
Jim grinned. ”You see how my folks do me,” he said. ”They make it as hard for each other as they can. Another thing is their lack of confidence in their own race. Since the chain stores and super markets are competing with the small stores operated by their own people, they will take what little money they have to spend to these places. If they’d just stop to think, they’d know they could get their goods from their own people cheaper, and have them delivered to their homes without having to carry them all over town. They don’t seem to realize that if they haven’t the money to pay cash they’re just out of luck at chain stores. The neighborhood grocer will readily extend some credit to a regular customer when sickness or trouble strikes, but it’s not to be expected at the chain stores. But you just can’t make colored folks see it that way. They’ll spend their cash at the chain store and then come to the Negro storekeeper for credit."
Two men came in end ordered one 10-cent bottle of cold ginger ale. Jim told them he had no ginger ale on ice. "But I’ll be glad to ice a bottle for you," he offered.
"How do you mean ice it?" one of them discontentedly asked.
"Why, I’ll put chipped ice in a glass for each of you, and you can pour the ginger ale over the ice.
"Well, if that’s the best you can do, just sell me the ale, and I’ll do that for myself at home," one of the customers grumbled. They took the bottle and went out of the store in a hurry. "‘Customers are always right,’" Jim said, with a grin.
Evidently he had firm convictions on the subject of credit for he began again, "The greatest handicap faced by a colored person in business among his own race, is the temptation to extend credit. This is especially true in the grocery business. Never start giving credit. Enter your saleswork whole-heartedly, but on a strictly cash basis if you want to stay in business. It’ll be slow in getting ahead and will be mighty hard work, but it’s the only way to keep your business safe. For credit will surely pull you down - way down.
Another serious handicap faced by the Negro merchant is the lack of confidence colored people have in each other. I know that because I have always worked among them. The instance I’m going to tell you about now will prove to you I’m right about that.
"During the winter months I handle sacks of coal. It’s just for the convenience of my customers, as there’s very little profit in this for the merchant. I don’t have a thing to do with weighing and sacking this coal. This is done by the coal company and it’s delivered to me in the sack ready for delivery to the customer. A white man in a nearby store sells sacked coal from the same company. Often the truck brings his supply out at the same time it hauls mine. Yet a little colored boy in this neighborhood told me last winter that his mother always bought her coal at the white man’s store because she got more coal in a sack there than she did from me. Yes, it takes the experience and knowledge of the peculiarities of our race to be able to do business with our people. I hope some day I’ll be able to overcome a part of this trouble."
A little girl came running in the store. "Hurry, Jim, an’ wait on me," she gasped, almost out of breath. ‘It’s gwine to rain, and maw, she wants, fifteen cents wuth o’ roas’in’ ears." Jim swiftly waited on her and as he handed her the paper sack, he said, "I’ve given you an extra ear for good measure."
"I gits dat," she told him, adding, "an’ here’s a dime on it. Maw, she said as how you could just put de yuther 5-cents on her bill." The child darted out the door and speeded off down the street.
Jim was laughing when he returned. "I wonder if you’ve noticed one peculiarity about the way my people trade," he began. I urged him to explain.
"You’ve probably noticed since you’ve been in here that they order just one thing at a time and wait for that to be wrapped before they will so much as mention the other items on the list of goods they mean to buy. Now, as a general rule a white person will give the entire order at once, and that makes it possible for the clerk to get it up much easier and quicker.
"When I was a small boy it was customary to buy a week’s supply of heavy staple groceries at one time, usually on Saturday. Now they purchase everything by the nickle or dime’s worth at a time. In fact, I think we have almost come to where my people buy just enough for one meal at a time."
By this time rain was coming down in torrents and several Negro men came running in out of the downpour. They did not stop in the salesroom, but went directly to a small room at the rear of the store. In a short time it was evident from the laughter and remarks about how to play, when to move, and so-and-so had crowned a king, that a checker game was in progress. "If their noise worries you, I’ll close the door," Jim remarked. "They love to meet here in my barber shop room at the back and play checkers when they have a bit of spare time." I did not care for the door to be closed. The merchant called his young helper and told him to sweep out the water that had come in the entrance at the first herd downpour. Again the child managed to sweep it through the cracks in the floor without letting Jim know that it was not all directed toward the doorway.
"Probably my best sellers are fatback, side meat, lard, flour, meal, sugar and coffee. Fresh meats would sell well here but I’m not fixed to keep ‘em on hand all the time. However, I do manage to have a pretty good supply of fish end fresh meet on hand for the week ends. Soon as I can finance it I mean to prepare for keeping fresh meat on hand all the time. Another thing that moves fast with the colored trade is charcoal. So many of our ladies do laundry work in their homes. And they use charcoal for the charcoal buckets that most of ‘em heat their irons on.
"If I just had about a thousand dollars, I’d know exactly what to do to use it to the best advantage. I can figure and see the best ways and means of making money, but it takes time for a poor man to get up the cash to work out things like I want them in my business. In fact, it takes cash to make money, to a large extent. You have to make investments in stock and equipment before you can call yourself ready to serve enough of the sort of trade that’s got money to spend, to make much money yourself."
He stopped talking long enough to make a 5-cent sale of tomatoes to a small girl. She took her package and darted out in the rain. He called to her end urged that she wait until the rain was over.
"What fer? Ain’t I wet already?" she answered as she went on her way.
A roar of applause and laughter sounded in the back room. "Somebody’s won the first checker same this afternoon," Jim explained. "Our little barber shop room back there is not a very large or a very good place right now, but it’ll do for just cutting hair, and we even have a shoe-shine chair back there too. I’m planning now to work our little side line up to something better and to put in some modern equipment that will enable us to do anything to a customer’s head, hair, and shoes, that any barber shop can do. I’m not hurrying on that right now. If I can just get straightened out and out of debt before I’m thirty years old, I’ll be satisfied. By then I hope to be able to fix up and prepare so I can really make money by the time I’m thirty-five. If my plans work out right, and nothing happens to prevent me, I ought to be well off by the time I’m forty."
A woman came in pulling off her raincoat. Without a word she began looking over the supply of canned goods. She shook a can at Jim, and asked, "Why don’t you mark the price on the cans?”
"Because it’s too hard to change when the price changes or when we’re having a sale," he replied, adding, "Anyway that’s canned spinach you’re looking at. How about trying some of these nice fresh snap beans?"
"It’s done too late now to bile ‘em for supper,” she snapped, "Anyways, what’s you gittin’ for i’sh ‘taters?"
"Irish potatoes are 3 cents a pound," he told her.
"Well gimme a dime’s wuth," she reluctantly ordered. While he weighed the potatoes and put them in a paper sack, she put on her big raincoat grumbling to herself about the high price of everything, and the way he kept his store. Finally she departed, and Jim smiled significantly as he again remarked, ‘The customer is always right.’
"As to education for our people, it’s hard to say. I’m better off than I’d be without what little schooling I have. I’ve come across many places where I needed it, and if it hadn’t been for my education it would have been just too bad for me. On the whole I guess a reasonable amount of learning is a good thing for some of the colored folks. Yes - and we must not overlook or forget this - some of the greatest crimes committed by my people have been on account of it. Rather it might be fairer and plainer to say, they behaved themselves until they were educated, and then the ones that were most highly educated went and committed the worst of all the crimes. Well, it might have happened anyway. We never can tell. Education leads the colored people to know about and want things that never would have tempted them if they hadn’t been to school enough to learn about such things.
"One way that my ability to estimate and figure has helped me is in my dealing with peddlers. I often buy meal and fresh vegetables from them, and it’s a mighty good way to get nice fresh produce. It’s always up to me to weigh up and figure out the cost of what I buy from them, for most of them just have no idea of how to figure fractions. I figure things out accurately and pay them exactly what I should - no more and no less - for I do try to be honest and fair in all my dealings with the public.
"I’ve been married about three years now, but we have no children as yet. Hard as times are now I’m rather glad that we don’t have any children, but that doesn’t mean I don’t ever want any children of our own. We both want ‘em. No home is complete without children. My wife works in a doctor’s office in one of the local hotels. She’s learning to give body massages, and she’s really learning fast. Of course, she isn’t making much while she learns, but when she is fully trained the work will pay her well. On Saturdays, when she is off from work, she helps me here in the store. She taught school before going to work for the doctor, but she likes her present work much better than school teaching.
"Saturdays are busy days in grocery stores and it seems especially so in this one. But we manage some way to wait on all the customers. When my nephew is not busy cutting hair he helps wait on trade, and my little delivery boy helps out on the inside too but,” he laughed, "that boy would rather ride off on that bicycle I furnish for him to use in making deliveries, than to do anything else, and. he’s always scrambling to get off with an order.
"As for recreation, golf is my hobby. I play baseball a little too, but golf is my favorite game. My next choice in recreation could hardly be called a hobby exactly. It’s singing, and I really do enjoy it. I’ve been singing ever since I was in high school. My professor’s wife wanted me to go to Boston and study voice and offered to help me, but I was never able to get there for it was a little more than I could finance.
"I organized a glee club, and we sang at several of the white churches. We have had programs out at the local radio station, and some of ‘em were long programs too. So many of our members had to drop out, for various reasons, that our club broke up. I have been on the radio in solos many a time. I also sing in our church choir. Right now we’re planning to get our glee club started again, and we ought to be going good by this fall.
"My wife and I are Baptists, and we have a very nice church. However, we are by no means through working on it. I’m president of the Young Men’s Bible Glass, and that’s one reason why I’m working so hard to get my old glee club reorganized. Our Bible class wants to use the glee club in shows we plan to put on to raise money for our church. Our glee club was used lots that way before we disbanded. We had our best cash receipts in the smaller towns and schoolhouses where we showed out of town. We’d get half of the admission receipts. That’s what we have in mind to do now. We want to use that money to improve the churchyard as well as the building. We are proud of our church and are determined to have it just as nice as anybody’s church,"
When the checker game in the back room broke up and the players came filing out, I looked outside and noticed the rain had become a fine drizzle. "Ain’t it ‘bout time for you to close up and go home, Jim?" one of the checker players asked.
"Yeah, I’ll be with you in a little while,” was Jim’s reply, and I knew from that remark that my interview was ended.
"Will those books be on sale for the public to buy?” Jim asked as I was leaving, and he added, "For if they are, I sure would like to get one and read my own story. I hope you can, and will, use it my own name in it, for wouldn’t to be grand for my children, and maybe my grandchildren to read it when they get old enough?"
