THE BARGAIN HOUSE
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
and
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
March 2, 1939
February 16, 1939
J. Buford Dudley (white)
124 Thomas Street
Athens, Georgia
Merchant
G.M.
THE BARGAIN HOUSE
The Bargain House has a large sign swinging on a rod over the sidewalk before its door, boldly announcing to the world that, "Every day is bargain day here."The small window contains a compactly arranged display of almost everything that is usually carried in a clothing and dry goods store, and in one corner of the window a small sign reads:
"Old and used clothing sold here
As well as the latest styles out."
The place interested me, so I opened the door and walked in. A tall, well-groomed man was displaying children’s overalls to a prospective purchaser. Seeing no one else in the small store, I looked around as I waited for an opportunity to talk with the person in charge.
I marvelled at the large amount of merchandise displayed in so small a space. Well laden tables, racks, showcases, and counters are arranged with geometric precision to leave just barelythe space necessary for aisles. A long rack at the right of the door displays men's and boys’ suits. Just beyond that is the stock of shoes on shelves. Next to the shoe department is a small wrapping table and cash register. Women's and children's hats, dresses, and dry goods take up the left side of the store, and across the back of the long, narrow room was a rack of second-hand clothing. A glass showcase displaying hosiery, women's underwear, and baby clothes is near the center front, and back of this are the long tables with their stacks of overalls, men's trousers, and piece goods.
The customer departed with his package and the salesman approached me. "I’m waiting to see the proprietor,” I told him.
"I'm the proprietor,” he replied.
"Your sign attracted my attention,” I said.
"That old sign is a pretty good drawing card," he agreed. "It brings in new customers almost every day. I noticed you were taking a good look around while you waited for me, so tell me what you think of my little store."
He did not wait for my reply, but accepted my smile as sufficient approbation and continued: "I've only been open here since last August, but I've done pretty good. I bought out a man who was buying and selling second-hand clothing here, and to get the store space I had to purchase his stock too. As he was making a fair profit on his second-hand merchandise, I decided to continue this line in addition to my stock of new goods. You may not realize it, but there is definitely a good demand here for used clothing."
Two boys came in and, asking me to have a chair in a small enclosure at the back of the store, he went to see what they wanted. As I enjoyed the comfortable warmth from the glowing heater, I noticed that this enclosed space was furnished with two chairs, a bench, and a small table - a sort of office, apparently. From where I sat there was a good view of the store's interior. The boys were trying to sell a suit of clothes. One of them declared, "It's a good suit, but it's just too small for me now." The merchant paid them $3 for the suit. Before they left he had sold each of them shoes and a shirt. After they were gone, he smiled, "See," he said, "If I had not bought that old suit, they would have gone somewhere else to buy their shoes and shirts."
"How long have you been in this kind of business?" I wanted to know.
"Oh, about twenty nine years," he answered. "I've been working with dry goods and clothing about that long, and in that time I ought to have learned how to sell. Salesmanship is the important thing in retail business.
"To give you my story from the beginning, I guess I'd better tell you I was born February 24, 1887 on a farm about four miles from Comer, Georgia. Our farm was near the old Hard-shell Baptist Church. Many's the time I've been to that old church, and I never missed a foot-washing service if I could help it. Now that's something interesting if you've never seen one. It's altogether different from what you might picture it if you have never been to one. There's nothing funny about it as you might be inclined to imagine, but it's really very solemn and a little sad. At least that's the way those old foot-washing services always impressed me."
He stopped to wait on another customer. The man wanted to know if he had any high-topped shoes for small boys. He explained his boy had a weak ankle and just had to wear strong, high-topped shoes. The merchant said, "Did you bring the child with you?" Receiving a negative reply, he suggested, "Why not bring your boy in and fit him right? I've sold shoes for years and years and that's about the only way that you can fit anyone correctly, especially if it has to be a certain fit or make of shoe. Perhaps I could also have braces fitted that would help your son."
"Why I had never thought of that" the customer said, "and I sure will bring him in when I come back to town. Maybe we'll come in the morning, for he really needs something to support his ankle. Sometimes it'll give way with him when he's walking and he just falls down." After buying some cloth for his wife, he thanked the merchant again and went out.
"You have made a friend and a good customer out of that man," I remarked to the merchant. His reply was, "I think so, and it's so easy to be nice to people. Of course, we come in contact with all classes of people - some that just won't let you be courteous, regardless of how hard you try.
"But where was I at in telling my story?" I reminded him that he had just finished telling me about the old Hard-shell Baptist Church, and he continued: "Well, when I was about three my mother got sick, and do you know I was eleven years old before I remember her being able to get out of bed again. She was sick so long that my father spent everything he had trying to get her well.
"When I was eight years old, I went to the fields and I plowed like a man. I plowed day in and day out until I was twenty. Hard as it was, we came back, got out of debt, bought our home, and had plenty of everything that could be raised on a farm. My father believed in working, and he believed in having a plenty of everything needed. We, of course, had all kinds of things that grow in gardens on farms, and we didn't have to buy feed for our stock either, for there was plenty of that raised.
"We had chickens, turkeys, geese, and guineas, and raised all our hogs. We had meat from one hog-killing to the next, and cows, and plenty of good fresh milk, butter, and eggs, as well as fruits of many kinds. I'll tell you now, we didn't have to wait for company to come to get something good fixed to eat, for we had what we wanted at any time. Father said that we had worked for it and should have it, and he liked to have good things to eat.
"We lived three miles from school, and I didn't get to go to school until I was eleven years old. We went to school after the workin the fields was finished. That was called 'laying-by time. We stayed all day at school, carried our dinner with us, and in all the time I went to school, I just finished the fifth grade. Our teacher was a man and he was mean as the devil. I know I shouldn't say that, but it's the truth. The larger boys did everything they could to aggravate him because he was so mean. I guess I was mean too, anyway I would get from one to three whippings a day."
"What did he whip with?" I asked.
"Why, he used big switches, sticks, or anything that he could get his hands on, except his walking stick. He was very particular with that, and he wouldn't allow any of us to so much as touch it. He was always about half drunk, and every day at noon and in recess periods he would take his walking stick and go out in the woods. We followed him one day at dinnertime and we found out why he carried that cane with him. It had a big cork in one end. Would you believe it? He took that cork out and drank corn liquor from the hollow cane. When he drained it he was just about drunk. We hurried back to tell the others what we had seen.
"We hunted up about forty or fifty pins and put them in the big cushion in his chair. He came in and rang the bell like he would tear it up. That was one time we hurried in when the bell rang, for we were anxious to see what he would do. He looked at us like he could go through us as we marched by his chair. As we all arrived at our desks, he just flopped down in his chair, but he came up in a hurry and the cushion came with him. His eyes looked like they would pop out of his head as he tried to pull that cushion loose from him.
"We all yelled out and laughed. It was just too funny to watch him, but that is where we gave ourselves away for he knew then that some of us were responsible for those pins. He kept every one of the boys in after school and tried to find out who did it. No one would tell - just didn't know a thing about it. He got a bundle of sticks and said if we didn't tell he would whip the whole crowd, for he knew then he would get the guilty one. Still no one knew anything about the pins. Why we didn’t even know that there was a pin in the schoolhouse. Then the whipping started. I’ll say we really got thrashed, and he didn't miss a one of us either - almost beat us to death. Oh yes, he got the guilty ones, for we were all, everyone of us, in it.
"He didn’t last very long after that for we told why he gave us such a whipping and about his walking stick flask. Some of our fathers got hold of that cane and found whiskey in it. As soon as they could get somebody else they let him go, for he was never able to teach us anything. I guess one reason was because we disliked him so much.
"Our next teacher was a man also, but such a different one! He was a fine person and teacher and we all liked him. All I ever learned in school was from him. He didn’t believe in whipping, but he was strict with us and made us study. Yes, he never had any trouble with a one of us. He was a good man.
"When I was about 17, I was sick for a long time. The doctors were treating me for indigestion, but I didn’t get any better. Finally my doctor sent me to Augusta for an operation for appendicitis, and on the 17th of October 1907 they operated on me. The operating doctor kept me in that Augusta hospital 2 weeks and charged me $500 for the operation and hospital bill. When I was ready to come home I asked the doctor for my appendix. He said it was in such a bad condition that they had to throw it away, but they said they had one that had been taken from another man and I could have that if I wanted it. I told them I didn't care for anyone else's appendix. I came home much worse off than I was before the operation.
"I stayed at home until January 1908, then I went to St. Joseph's Hospital in Atlanta. One of the doctors there, after the X-ray examination and consultation, said, 'Well, son, you will have to have an operation for appendictis, 'I couldn't understand and told them that I had an operation for that just a few months back. He said, ’You still have it, so what are you going to do about it?'
"I was in such a condition that something had to be done. I told them to go ahead and see what they could find. They laughed and promised, 'We will find your appendix. Want to bet on it?' I was sure they wouldn't, but was just about too sick to care. After the operation and after I had come to myself, that was the first thing they showed me, my appendix. It was in a very bad condition. All that suffering and hospital bill in Augusta had done me no good.
"It seemed as if I just couldn't get any better, and on the 11th of March I had to have another operation. For three days and nights I didn't know anything. They had sent for all my folks and just knew I was going to check out, but I wasn't ready to die and after the fourth day I began to mend. I stayed there in the hospital for twenty-seven weeks.
"After I got better I had a good time, for the nuns - we called them ‘sisters’- were so nice. They did everything that they could for us. There was a man there who had been burned. He was in a terrible condition, but so jolly with it all. A young doctor was there for treatment. We were soon put in a room together, for the sisters said they could keep up with us better that way.
"We did enjoy teasing and playing jokes on those good sisters. They were good sports and could take it. Very often we got it back from them as good as we had sent. I was there on my 21st birthday. I was a little blue that day, for I had been used to having my birthday dinner at home and then you know a man's 21st birthday is rather important to him. We were discussing it and the other two patients in our room were threatening to give me a whipping - twenty one lashes.
"One of the sisters came in the room and said, 'I have tried everything else to make a man out of you and now I am going to try the last thing. I only hope that it will do more than we have been able to do.' Then another sister came in rolling a table, and such a table it was! – a real dinner for the three of us and in the center of the table was a cake with twenty one candles.
"I just couldn't say anything and I guess I would have been a big baby and cried if it hadn’t been for the doctor. He told the sisters to put the baby to bed and that they would take care of the dinner without me. We really did enjoy that feast, and as we were eating they brought me in a cake from mother and I had a nice birthday if it was spent in a hospital.
"When I did get home I was not able to do anything. The doctors had told me before I left the hospital that if I would take things easy for a year, I would be well and a good man again. After I had been at home for a few months and got a little of my strength back, my father decided that a good camping and hunting trip would put me on my feet again.
"After considering several places, he decided that down in Greene County would be the best place for me to go. That suited me fine, for there is nothing that I enjoy more than hunting and fishing. I went to Park's Mill and Ferry, and I just fished and hunted birds, rabbits, and squirrels for the rest of the year. I was camping out, and even had a cow with me so I had all the fresh milk that I needed.
"The only thing I didn’t like was the water. I just couldn't get used to that, but I had to drink it. I met some of the finest people that I ever knew there and they were all so good to me; always bringing me things to eat, and inviting me out to their homes. I stayed there until I had my health back and was ready for work again.
"I came to Athens in November 1910. As I was walking down the street I met a man I knew and he offered me a job. I accepted and went to work in his store for $25 a month. I worked for him until April of 1911 and then I changed jobs. On the 15th day of April 1911 I went to work for another store at $35 a month. In June of 1913 I got married. Then my boss raised me to $45 a month, and he continued to give me raises until I was making $175 a month. I worked for him until the end of 1919. He was just a good old scout all the way around.
"But you know I was from the country and I wanted to go back to the farm. I don't think you just ever get the 'country’ out of you. I know I haven't. So in 1920 I went back to the farm. The first year I made good with the farm, and I also put me up a country store." He laughed and continued, "I've noticed you looking around in here, but you should have seen that country store of mine. It was small also but, Lord, the stuff I did have packed in that little place. It was a sight. I had to move things sometimes to get what the customers called for. I had farm supplies such as plows, hoes, rakes, seeds, and, in fact, just a little of everything needed to farm with.
"Then the foodstuff - everything in that line. Of course I didn't forget cloth, thread, pins, powder, hairpins, combs, and just all the things women have to have. Children needed paper, pencils, and books for school. I tried to think of them all, and I really made money.
"But business conditions in town and country are much alike. The next year I lost as much as I had made before. Crops were bad and cotton prices went to the bottom. I lost heavily, for the other farmers couldn't pay for what they had bought in my store. That was just a bad year for all of the farmers, and it took me four' years to get over its losses.
"I never did like to give up when I was down, so I stayed right on that farm until I was on my feet again. Then, as my wife didn’t like the country, I came back to Athens. This time I went to work in a men’s clothing store.
"I worked there for three years at $124 a month. My boss had a good business and he carried a line of clothes that his customers could depend on. He is still in business here and he still carries the best in men’s clothing. I really did like to work for him but, while he was good to me, he was really hard on the other clerks. Finally a dull season hit him, as well as all the other stores in town, and my salary was cut to $100 a month. His other employees were cut in proportion.
"When I left there I went to work in a department store owned by a fine old Jewish man. He was good to everybody and especially to the people that worked for him. His family was small, just himself, his wife, and one child, a daughter. She was married, and her husband was manager of the store. I went to work there for $120 a month.
"The owner tried to keep his business going straight and to pay his bills promptly, but that manager of his was rotten, and did so many things his fine old father-in-law didn’t know about that in a few years the old man was in bankruptcy, and the shock of it really caused his death.
"The old gentleman passed away one evening about six o’clock. He had a stroke of paralysis a day or so before and never knew anything after that. They called his son-in-law at the store earlier that afternoon, but you know that sorry rascal wouldn’t go home until the store was closed. The old man had died before we left and the manager told us that he would have to close the store until the funeral was over, but that hewanted me and the two girls that worked there to come to the house the next morning to help them get fixed for the funeral.
”I never saw anything like it in all my life. I don’t think I was ever so mad about anything that really didn't concern me in any way. We worked hard all day. They had to have everything, and could think of more things to do. The girls had to fix the mourning clothes for the family. I went with the son-in-law to see about things for the old man, for they were going to leave him at the undertaking parlor, because it would be cheaper than carrying him home, I reckon.
"When I saw what he was going to put on that old man, I really went up in the air, for it was a sorry old palm beach suit that he had had cleaned and pressed, and he was going to put an old worn-out shirt and tie on him, but that was just more than I could stand. I went out and bought a shirt and tie myself and asked the undertaker to put them on my old boss because I loved him and could not bear to see him laid away like that.
"His son-in-law sneered, ’what’s the use? It’s just wasting money and he will never know the difference.’ I remembered how neat and particular the old man had always been in his clothes and I felt sure that he would want his grave clothes to be nice. I begged for a new suit out of the store to put on him but I sure didn't get it.
"The funeral was the next morning at 11 o'clock. Of course we all went. Do you know that son-in-law gave me the key while they were letting the body down in the grave and told me to hurry back and get the store open. It was open and ready for business before the funeral wreath had been taken off the door. On the following Saturday when we were paid for the week's work, he had taken out for the day and a half that we worked at his house.
"The business was reorganized in his mother-in-law's name, but he was still manager. It took just about all of the old man's insurance to get it straightened out and that is where the old woman made the greatest mistake of her life, for she has no more to say in regard to it than you have, and she can’t even get a dollar unless he says so.
"I could see how things were but there was nothing that I could do about it. The business was just going down every day, and he cut our salaries too, but he and his wife were having the time of their lives. They only have one child, a girl, and they have made one long trip after another, and that takes money.
"I had opened up a small grocery store of my own for my oldest boy to run. I started that store with a capital of $70 dollars cash, and a debt of almost $700. My son was married, and we had five other children at home. All of us, his family and mine, lived out of that store, and I used my salary and what we made out of the store to pay on the notes. It was a hard pull but I knew that if we tried hard enough we could make it, and I knew that I was going to have to do something for myself, for the way things were going at the store, I didn’t think it could last long. When the manager found out that I had opened up a store for myself, he wanted to know how I did it. I told him there were enough of my family to look after the store without my help.
"In about a year I started another grocery store. One of my daughters and her husband took care of the new store. My boss then said, ’How in the world do you manage with your large family and on the salary that you are getting here?’ I told him my small salary was the reason that I was having to work so hard to try to get something else started, so that I could take care of my family.
"His business kept going down and he just bought until he was loaded down with stuff that he couldn’t sell. That fall was a disappointment, for that is when he used to have the most business, but that was the season he went broke. For a while it looked as if he would lose everything, but he finally got a settlement with his creditors for 33 1/3 percent, and just as soon as that was settled he put off part of the help, cut our salaries again, then took his family on a trip to Florida.
"That left just three of us to run the store and get it straight after the inventory that had to be taken before the settlement could be made. We worked hard and had the store all cleaned and everything in place when he came back. He told us about the grand trip and how they had enjoyed it. He had left his family in Florida for they didn't want to come home.
"He told me that he paid $5 for a berth on the trip home, and I realized when he paid me off that night that I had paid for that berth, for he had given me another $5 cut and the others got another cut also. We' were paying for the family's visit in Florida. I didn't think it was right and told him so.
"He said, ‘Well, that's the best I can do.' I asked him if he thought we could live on what he paid us. That made him mad and he said that was up to us, he didn't have anything to do with it. I told him that I was sure I couldn’t live on it and that my family was just as important to me as his was to him.
"He said, 'Well, what are you going to do about it?' Only this, I replied and put the store key down on his desk. He wanted to know what that meant. I asked him what did he think it meant. It meant that I was leaving, for I wouldn't work for him any longer. Then he wanted me to reconsider. I asked if he would reconsider and he said no, that he was doing the best he could.
"So I told him I didn't see where I could do any better either by staying on there and that it was time for me to try something else. He laughed and asked me if I would be back in the morning. I didn't even answer, just got my hat and walked out, and I haven't been back since.
"That is when I opened up my store here, and from what I hear I really did more business last fall than he did. My customers that I had waited on for years followed me here to my store and I hope before the fall business starts this year that I’ll be able to get into a larger place. I really need more room. My wife and daughters help me and we manage just fine."
"Do you do any credit business?" I asked.
"No," he replied, "but I do use the lay-away plan, A small deposit will hold anything the customer wants for a reasonable time, and I find that is a much better plan than taking it out and paying later. It really is a help to the customer as well as to the store.
"My greatest mistake was in not pulling out for myself sooner. I would have been so much better off and would have had something to fall back on. I hope to accomplish that yet. I've built up a good trade here and both of my little grocery stores are going good. I don’t have much trouble with collections in them, for if they don't pay up, I cut off their credit until they come across with the cash.
"I've managed to give my older children high school educations, and the younger ones are still in school. I have three grandchildren. I've had my share of trouble and sickness in my family. I guess those things come to everyone, and with hard work I've managed to come through them and get all the bills paid.
"You know it's been years since I've had the time to think of a vacation. But just as soon as I can now, I’m going to take a good long vacation, one just like I want."
"What kind of vacation is that?" I asked.
"A camping trip with good fishing and hunting,” he quickly replied. ”I can get more pleasure out of that than any other kind of sport.
“Of course, I enjoy ball games. Who doesn’t? Baseball is my favorite, and I like the movies too. I go to shows often with my kids. I want them to enjoy life while they can, for as they grow older they may have too many problems to face and work out to leave much time for fun, and I may not be here to help them then.
"I always try to see that they go places and have a good time, but understand now, I want them to go with the right class of people and to the best places. We try to keep a pleasant home for them so they will want to bring their friends there as well as go out with them, and there is usually a crowd of young people at our house. Some folks tell me I am too easy on my children, but I don’t think so, for they are smart and they all work at home and in the stores when they are not in school, so why not try to see that they have some pleasure instead of all work. What do you think?”
”That you are right," I replied.
As I was leaving he walked to the door with me and said, "Come over to our home sometime and see just how we do live. We will be glad to have you."
