Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
MARY RAWLS
(white)
91 YEARS OLD
Miss Mary Rawls is an inmate of the Confederate Home, Columbia, South Carolina. She is about five feet two inches tall and weighs ninety-six pounds. She has a high forehead, a straight nose, and a firm chin, expressive of will and determination. Her wisp of snow-white hair is parted in the middle and combed down evenly about her small ears. Her eyes are blue and have a touching appeal for human sympathy and understanding.
" I was ninety-one years old the 26th day of August, 1938. I was born on the corner of Sumter and Taylor Streets. The lot was real large at that time. Our dwelling house was a commodious, two-story frame building, with a veranda running around three sides and a balcony that jutted out and faced Taylor Street. There were outhouses for house servants, stables for horses, and a carriage house. We had a large vegetable garden in the rear and a nice flower yard in front of the home. Walks from the street and about the flower beds were bordered with the old-fashioned, evergreen, box-wood hedges. I delighted to share my home with my young friends and relatives.
" My father was John Ivey Rawls; my mother, Elizabeth Geiger Rawls. My brothers were John Geiger Rawls and James Pope Rawls. My sister was named Victoria, for the Queen of England. I always thought it a very beautiful name and a very appropriate one, for no one could queen it over a miniature empire of slaves better than she.
" I attended a private school, taught by a 'Miss Tradewell. The hours were from 9 a. m. till 3 p. m. We were given much individual help from the teacher, and we never left school, regardless of the hours, until we had really learned the lessons in the books. She opened the exercises of the school every day by reading from one of the Psalms of the Bible and having the whole school recite, in unison, the prayer Christ gave to His disciples.
" It was not a graded school such as we have today. The text books used in the classes were not the same for each pupil. My course was Webster's Blue Back Speller, McGuffy's Readers, somebody's arithmetic, Moss' Geography, Ramsey's History, and a book on Familiar Science; I forget the author.
" We had a piano in our home, and father was enthusiastic over Victoria and myself taking music lessons.
" We entertained a great deal. Our dance hall was upstairs, and we had a hard time getting the piano up there the nights we gave dances. We danced the waltz, the polka, and the quadrille. The dances were very beautiful. Gentlemen wore spike-tail coats and were shod with pumps. Ladies and girls wore hoop skirts with long trails, and their hair was in coifs on top of their head. It was a beautiful sight to see them moving in rhythm to the lovely music.
" Christmas was a day of joy to the whole household, even mother hung up her stocking. As to the house servants, they were wild with delight in catching each one of the white folks with the call 'Christmas gift, Marster! 'Christmas gift, Missis! ' 'Christmas gift, Little Miss! ' There was sure to be a big dinner on that day, and everybody had a good time.
" Two of the problems of the city of Columbia in my childhood days were sanitation and water supply. I remember an old pump stood at the courthouse corner to fill the fireman's buckets in time of fire. Many families got their water supply for domestic uses from this pump. We didn't have city clocks in those days, a policeman would come to the corner of Taylor and Sumter Streets in the nighttime and cry the hour.
"India rubber, as it was called then, was used only to erase lead pencil marks and to make bouncing balls for children to play with. Ink writing was done with quill pens. The postage on a letter was 25 cents. No prepayment was required; the person receiving the letter paid the postage at the point to which the letter was addressed.
"We had a carriage with 'let down steps.' We didn't have a buggy, and I don't remember any other family having one. We had a two-wheeled vehicle called a gig; the seat was way up on two wheels. My sister and I rode horseback nearly every day. I remember the roads and streets were in ruts and ridges. In wet weather, I have seen wagons loaded with bales of cotton stalled right on Main Street.
" When I was a young girl, a riot took place at the South Carolina college. I don't remember who the president of the college was then. The mayor of the city was E. J. Arthur, and the sheriff was Mr. Jesse Dent. Two of the college boys were arrested one night for disorderly conduct on the streets. They resisted arrest but were cracked over the head with wooden billies, overcome, and put into the guardhouse. When they got out and went back to the college, the students were indignant at the severity of the treatment of the boys had received at the hands of the policemen. The collegians then went in a body to the guardhouse to get 'satisfaction.' Mayor Arthur had the alarm bell rung. When the citizens turned up in answer to the call, Sheriff Dent told them that they must protect the policeman and help to keep the peace. The students had guns and pistols in their hands. Some of the citizens cooked their guns and were ready to meet fire with fire. Sheriff Dent told the citizens not to fire until fired upon. Then both sides stood growling. They were undecided for quite a while. Colonel Goodwyn, who was afterwards mayor, and Mr. Allen J. Green stepped out between the citizens and the collegians and begged for peace. Then Dr. Thornwell appeared and asked the boys to follow him back to the campus and talk the matter over with him. They obeyed and followed him quietly.
"The city was in a furor for a long time. Some of the students were indicted, but their canes were never tried in court. A compromise was arranged with the mayor.
"There was hard feeling for a long time. Citizens were thinking and saying that Mr. Arthur should have been firmer in dealing with the students in such open defiance and contempt for the city ordinances; that they should have been dealt with as any other violators of the city laws.
"Well, the Secession Convention came, got scared of the smallpox and adjourned, to meet in Charleston.
"After the capture of Fort Sumter and the first battle of Bull Run, everybody thought the South would win.
"Columbia was burned on the night of February 17. Wheeler's men had come in on Thursday, and the Yankees were not far away, firing on the city with cannon balls. I think that Wheeler left early Friday, and the city surrendered upon the assurance that private property would be respected. Our house was among the first visited by the Yankees. All liquor shops were closed, but that didn't stop them. They got axes and broke open the stores, got the liquor, and got drunk. Many in this drunken condition ransacked our homes, going through downstairs and upstairs rooms. Guards furnished by superior officers for protection were powerless or indifferent to our calamity. Mr. Arthur's house was among the first burned by the Yankees in broad daylight. Night came on, and soon the city was ablaze with burning houses. All the buildings one mile north of the state House, on both sides of Main Street, were burned. General Sherman made his headquarters at Mr. Duncan's house on Gervais Street. Those who went to him for assistance came away impressed with his peacock manners and his boasts of causing hell to break loose in Georgia. He said that brimstone had been reserved for South Carolina.
" Both of my brothers, John Geiger and James Pope, fought through the war under Hampton. I don't think they joined the Ku Klux Klan, but they were enthusiastic over Hampton in 1876, and I made each of them a red shirt out of red flannel cloth. They wore them in the parades and at club meetings.
"My sister had married D. K. Feaster of Feasterville, Fairfield County. He was a large planter and the owner of many slaves. He was a Confederate soldier, a member of the Buckhead Guards, of which Boykin Lyles was captain. My sister's children were Anne Isabell, John Rawls, Edith Caroline, Mary Victoria, and Jacob Henry. After the war and the burning of Columbia, I spent many happy days in Sister's home in Fairfield. I rejoiced in her children and assisted in their rearing and primary education.
"Mr. Feaster was organizer of the Old Fairfield Grange, a society devoted to the study of agriculture and experimental farming in Fairfield County about 1880.
"In 1876, my brother, John, came home on election night and said he had voted 13 times for Wade Hampton.
"My father was a great reader of newspapers, books, and magazines. Of the newspapers, the New York Ledger was enjoyed most. Shakespeare and Longfellow were his favorite poets, and Charles Dickens was among the authors and novelists he liked best. These, and the Bible, are still ay favorites.
"My eyes are weak now, but I have friends in the 'Home' who read for me. As Helen Keller says, ' My mind to me a kingdom is. ' I remember parts of 71 poems, and the favorite quotation of my father is true of me now:
'He who steals my purse steals trash. But he who filches from me my good name takes that which enriches him not but makes me poor indeed!'
"I remember in 1890, Mr. Cramer was the manager of the City Opera House, in which he and his wife lived. He formed a library and called it Lend A Hand Library, which was in his parlor. From there, the library was moved to the fifth story over Robertson's Bank. I am the only surviving member of that library, and I wonder sometimes if the present library in the Woodrow building is not a continuation of the old ' Lend A Hand Library.'
" I worked eleven years in the Columbia Post Office under Dr. J. F. Ensor, postmaster, and saved up some money. But I have been in so many hospitals and bank failures that my money is all gone. I have been through many vicissitudes and have seen many mutations in my ninety-one years, but I am deeply thankful to the Lord for his taking tender care of me as the years have passed swiftly along. And I am conscious that I am near the end of my pilgrimage here below. I will soon take up my citizenship in that other land where there will be " no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, for the former things will have passed away."
