Sam Benson was reared on his father's fifty-acre farm in Johnson County. His father, John Senson, who could not write his own name married, the young school teacher who came to teach la his community. Through her influence and John's hard work they accumulated enough to buy and equip a fifty-acre farm. Here the elder Benson reared his three boys and three girls, working them in the fields and giving them hardly any time off to go to school. His wife taught the children at home and sent them to school only to take examinations. After this fashion Sam Benson finished the sixth grade.
Sam was fifteen years old when his mother died. It was the year before the price of cotton and tobacco began to soar. The Bensons, like their neighbors, entered into a hitherto unknown and unexpected prosperity. They spent money recklessly because they believed easy money had come to stay. "Why, it wasn't at all unusual for me to stop my ploughing at eleven o'clock just to drive into Benson, seven miles from out house, to get me a coca-cola, "Sam relates."Money come too quick to most of us and we never knowed how to manage it."
Their greatest financial misfortune came to the Bensons when the elder Benton entered into land speculation. Without the advice of his wife who had been his mainstay, he made unwise deals which led to the loss of his homestead.
Dissatisfied with farming as a renter, John moved his family to the cotton mill. There he hoped to save money to buy land. After five or six years he saw that this hope would never toe realised and he moved back to his home community and rented land where once he had been the owner. Sam with his young wife stayed on at the mill, cherishing the hope that had brought his father there. He was young and more years lay ahead. If he tried hard enough, maybe he could save enough to buy a Small farm. Today most of his hope has vanished. He and his wife make f joint weekly wage of nineteen dollars and on that they and their three children live.
"They's no reason that I can see why I shouldn't be paid that much or more and me work full time" Sam argues. "My wife's place is at home anyhow, and we could come nesrer savin' a little if she was here to look after things. As it is, what we make together won't cover our expenses for bare livin'. We have to pay a girl to stay here and look after things when both of us are work in. Unless conditions changes a eight, my farm'll just be something I hope to have. If ever I do get anything ahead I want to get a piece of that same land we owned."
