SUSIE RAY
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
and
John N. Booth
Field Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
August a, Georgia
July 13, 1939
June 23, 1939
Jennie Favors (Negro)
215 South Jackson Street
Athens, Georgia
Restaurant Proprietor
G.M.
SUSIE RAY
Susie Ray's cafe is identified by a large sign that swings over the sidewalk. When I entered, a pair of love birds were chirping away in their cage and a nickel-in-the slot phonograph was going full blast. The young Negress who greeted me wore a clean print frock, and her bobbed hair was combed back from her face.
"Are you the proprietor?" I asked.
"No," she replied, "that's Susie Ray. She's my mother. She'll be back in just a few minutes. Won't you have a seat and wait for her? Come over here by the window where it's nice and cool." She pulled a leather-covered rocking chair toward the window, and when I was comfortably ensconced in it, she turned a large electric fan around so that I might get the benefit of that too. "Is there anything else I can do for you?" she asked. I assured her that I was perfectly comfortable and she excused herself. "I'll go and help finish up the dinner, for all our customers are working folks and they don't have time to wait. We try to have everything ready for 'em so they'll have plenty of time to eat without having to hurry." She disappeared in the direction of the kitchen.
The large dining-room was clean and neat, though the well-brushed walls were cracked and stained and the plastering had fallen from several places. Calendars and advertising placards of various kinds decorated the walls and helped to cover the scarred places. Hand-lettered signs listed the various kinds of sandwiches and bottled soft drinks served here. A row of shelves behind a counter held tobacco, cigars, cigarettes, candy, and chewing gum, and a patented container was filled with soft drinks of many varieties, all embedded in cracked ice. The exterior of the large electric ice box was spotless. The two long, wooden tables were mahogany colored, and the two smaller metal tables were lettuce green. Their centerpieces were small vases of mixed garden flowers, and a great basket of gladioli stood near the front window. On the whole it was a cheerful and very comfortable place.
Susie's daughter entered to wipe off the restaurant tables, and the aroma of food that came in through the open kitchen door was keen enough to tempt a more dormant appetite than mine.
"Mother, this lady's been waiting to see you," the girl announced as a yellow Negress of middle age and medium size came in. Her straight black hair was cut short and curled upward at the ends.
Her dark-colored print frock, carefully fitted, was well suited to her like business appearance.
Every one of Susie's white teeth as displayed in her wide smile of welcome revealed lavish use of gold in crowns and fillings. "Please excuse me until I can see how the girls are getting along with dinner, then I'll see what I can do about giving you my story," she said, after I had explained my presence. She promptly returned and announced, "They haven't left a thing for me to do, and dinner's about ready. I did hate to leave all the work for the girls to do today, but I just had to go see the doctor about that old summer cold that's settled in my head. Did you just want to hear about my cafe here, or about my whole life?"
"I want the whole story, if you have time to give it to me. Your whole life story, cafe and all," I urged.
"All of my life could be summed up when I say I've always worked and worked hard for what little I have. I was born in 1892, near Rayle, in Wilkes County, Georgia, less than a dozen miles from the better-known town of Washington. Our good old Baptist pastor, Silas Johnson, baptized everyone of mother's seven children. We worked on the farm and went to grammar school at Rayle, and when I had finished the seventh grade, I attended high school in Washington for two years. Thinking I was grown then, I married Robert Ray. I was just nineteen and we didn't have no big wedding; just a quiet little ceremony in the presence of our families and friends at home and then we went right on out to church that night to a revival service.
"For several years after we married we lived on the farm. All four of our children were born there. They are all girls and, let me tell you right now, I'm mighty proud of each one of my girls. Each one has finished high school in her sixteenth year and not one of my girls has ever missed a grade in school. Don't you agree with me that they are smart?
"The first two years after I married I taught school," she continued, "and then I stayed at home until my two oldest girls were old enough to attend school. The way I managed was to take one to school with me one day and leave the other at home to look after the two babies. In that way, each one went every other day and kept up with her grade. That was right strenuous for all of us but I had done made up my mind that my four children was going to have an education if it was in my power to give it to 'em. My husband didn't take much interest in their education, so it was up to me to pay most of those expenses. I had to get to work and make the money to meet their bills, but I don't have one regret about that hard work. The results in my girls' welfare and opportunities has been worth it all.
"The two oldest of our daughters are teachers, our third daughter is in training to be a nurse at a big hospital in Chicago, and the one you met here today is my baby child. She just came home the other day from her first year away at college. Pshaw, I'm getting ahead of my story. That's the way I do. I just forget everything and everybody else when I get to talking about my children.
"When my children were little, I not only taught school five days a week but I taught in Sunday School on Sunday and sang in the choir in our old Baptist church at Rayle. You may not know it, but it was awfully hard to make money farming, especially when you were renting or working on halves, for 'most all you raised and sold had to go to the landlord for the rent. In 1921, when we came on here to try our fortunes in the city, cotton had dropped from forty cents a pound to almost nothing, and nearly all the country folks were deep in debt. Although I've never wanted to go back to the country to work, yet I've never lost my love for country life. It's a grand place to live if you could just be sure of making a living and clearing enough to educate a family.
"When we first moved here, laundry work for the white people was all I did. They said I was good at that work. One funny thing I'll never forget is that for five years or more I washed for one of the wealthiest women in this town and never did see her one time. Someone had told her about what good work I was doing, so she sent her would clothes to me, and when I'd finished she would send the money by the person that came after the clothes. She was a mighty good woman too, for she was always sending me something nice to eat or wear, and she paid extra good for her washing.
"I've always done a good deal of sewing, and the white folks I've sewed for say I'm a really good seamstress. I made good money at my sewing, and do you know why? I think it was because I love to sew. I enjoyed it so much when I was making pretty things for folks to wear. It isn't so easy to make money dressmaking now, for you can buy readymade dresses cheaper than you can buy the material, and you really do have to stay with it to make a living sewing. My youngest child was not old enough to go to school when we moved here, so I was obliged to find some way to earn money and stay at home to look after her while the other children were in school. Washing and sewing were just naturally the two most suitable things for me to do then.
"When the Florida real estate boom was on my husband went down there and in 1925 I followed him."
Four neatly-clad young Negro girls now came in and ordered plate lunches. Susie excused herself to help with these orders, but before she arrived at the kitchen door her daughter and another Negro girl came with trays on which the four lunches were placed, ready to set before the diners. Susie came back to me and remarked with a great show of pride:
"Those girls work downtown end they buy lunch here every day. The people of our race all want their vegetables and cornbread fresh cooked and warm at noon. Cold sandwiches and lunches wrapped before they go to work in the morning just don’t suit ’em a bit. Now look at what we are serving today. On each of those plates you'll see snap beans, fresh corn, okra, irish potatoes, cornbread, roast meat, and pie that we cooked today. Of course I sell sandwiches, and it's mostly the snackers, or folks that are just eating between meals, that buys ’em. It’s surprising how many folks do get hungry between meals and come in for a fresh sandwich and a soda pop. With our plate lunches we serve tea, coffee, or milk, and the complete plate with a drink comes to only twenty-five cents. Just look at what they’re eating! Don’t you think it's a mighty good dinner for that price?" Men and women kept coming in until almost every seat was taken, and Susie asked me if the crowd worried me. "No, indeed!” I replied, "It interests me. Are you this busy all the time?"
"Oh, yes!" she laughed, "I have just about as many as I can feed every day, but if you want to see how we work on a really busy day come in some Saturday about this time. I find 'most everybody likes plain home cooking, and I’ve let it be known that I cook the food to sell here just as carefully as I would if I was fixing it for my own family at home. Coming back to that question of Saturday trade, I have so many folks to feed that day that I keep six girls to help me and they’re all busy as a rule. The rest of the week I just have one helper except when my baby child is with me."
A feeble old Negro man came shuffling in the doorway. Susie hastened to take him by the arm and lead him to a table. After she saw that he was comfortably seated she inquired carefully as to what he wanted to eat, and then went to the kitchen and prepared his plate herself. No one in the restaurant had a more appetizing looking meal than she had piled on his plate. Then she helped the two girls with the noonday trade until the old man had finished his repast, and she assisted him to the sidewalk. Coming back to me, she said, "My mother, down at the old home-place in Rayle, is almost 90 years old, and she’s feeble too. That gives me a tender feeling for old folks. I always feel that they should have special attention.
"Where was I in our story? Wasn’t I telling you about our Florida experiences? I can laugh over them now, but going down there was no laughing matter at the start, for I was dead broke. Why, I didn’t even have any money to pay the man who let me ride down there on his truck. He finally agreed to let me ride on credit, and I promised faithfully to pay him later. I kept that promise. So into Tampa I rode without a penny, and no job in view.
"I was lucky. I soon had a job cooking for three different families - one meal a day for each family. That made me hustle for they were in widely scattered places, but I managed to get to each place on time - I had to - and I earned $27 a week. That was the most I had ever made in any one week before. Everything in Florida was high during the real estate boom and salaries just had to be good. My husband was making good money too, and we saved every penny we possibly could. We sure didn't throw our money away for anything, and I didn't have to buy my food, of course, for I ate where I cooked. I stayed down there just one year. I came home in my own car, a brand new car that I had paid for with my own earnings. I can tell you my homecoming trip was quite different from the way I left. I still keep a good car and now I don't see how I ever did get along without one. A person in business really needs a car.
"After I'd been home awhile I made up my mind to open up a store for myself. I studied about it for sometime and then went ahead and invested all my savings in a store. You can get an idea of how big a business it was at the start when I tell you my investment was just $75, and I put it all in groceries. I tried to build up my stock as I went along and it wasn't long before I had a pretty good stock and was doing pretty well. Then times got hard end business began to fall off. When I realized I was actually beginning to lose money, I sold out and retired from that business in order to save what little I had."
By this time the majority of her customers had finished eating and left. "I'd like to fix you a dinner," Susie hospitably announced, "but I know you wouldn't care for it. I wonder if you'd mind if I fix my own plate and eat here at this table as we talk." I urged her to go ahead and eat her dinner, and explained that I'd already eaten my lunch before I arrived at her shop. She soon returned to the table with her platter, but she did not sit down until she had opened a bottle of coca cola and handed it to me saying, "I just know you must be tired and thirsty and I want to give you this cool drink." I accepted the drink and thanked her.
Susie quite evidently enjoyed the good food, and as she ate she told me of her ventures in home-ownership. "While I was running my store I bought me a house,” she said. "It was just a little frame cottage, not much of a house, no fine place, but just the same it was home to us and we loved it. My down payment was only $50 and the monthly payments of $10 were just like paying rent. I've always been glad that while I was making good in the store I got ahead on my payments by paying as high as $25 a month, and got it all paid up so much sooner than if I'd just paid the $10 specified in the contract for every month. When business did get down to nothing and I sold out my store, I didn't have to worry about losing my home.
"No matter what conditions happened to be, I kept our children in school and managed to see that they had just as much to wear and that they had as much money to spend for pleasure as any other colored children in this town. I encouraged 'em to join all the clubs that are sponsored by the schools and religious organizations, for there is always some improvement to be gained through these clubs - 'societies' we used to call 'em - and especially did I do all I could to keep them interested in all kinds of athletics that girls could take part in. I think those things are grand for growing girls. I was always ready to go with 'em to other places for games and contests, school athletic meets, and such like. Many's the time I've carried just as many of 'em as could crowd into my car. Sharing things like that with my girls has helped me to stay young and see things their way. I don't have to keep on repeating things like that for you to understand how proud I am of my girls.
"It was 4 years ago in March that I opened this cafe. There’d been a restaurant business in this location before, but I’ve heard it went broke, and I had to build up my business to get the class and volume of trade I wanted. Have you noticed what an old building this is? I wouldn’t be surprised if it isn’t one of the very oldest houses in this town. Folks tell me that the old post office used to be in this very room where we are sitting and that the first city council held its first meetings in the room above us. The old man that runs the barber shop next door tells me he has had his shop right there for over 40 years, and he knows lots of history connected with this building and this neighborhood.
"I’ve made a good living here. Of course, right now business is not as good as it has been in the best times. However, I keep on doing the best I can and I’m hoping that things will pick up.
"I’ve got lots to be thankful for, and right now I’m glad because my youngest daughter has gotten home from school. She's really lots of help to me, for she's not one bit afraid of work. This was her first year in that college in Atlanta, and I’m hoping nothing will happen to prevent her from having another year in the same school.
"You seemed interested in hearing about the house I bought several years ago while I was in the grocery business. Well, I've bought me another house, and this time I was able to pay cash for it. Since I moved in I've been constantly remodeling and improving it, just a little at a time. This summer the improvements have been on my walls and woodwork. We calcimined the walls in cream and white and painted the woodwork a dark mahogany shade. The outside has been recently painted too, as well as the garage, and for these I selected dark brown and then trimmed them in light tan. I think it helps to have a house fresh painted and clean, inside and out, even it if's just a little 5-room house like mine. I don't need a bigger place to keep clean while I'm working in my cafe so steady.
"Our little house is on a large lot, and that enables us to keep hogs and a cow, to say nothing of our dogs. We love dogs and we are going to have 'em wherever we are. I did have lots of chickens, but I have given 'em to my married daughter who lives on the other side of town. I just couldn't take care of so many things and work too. I hadn't told you about our garden. You won't find a better one anywhere, considering the weather we've been having. 'Most everybody's gardens are burning up now in this drouth. My flowers have been 'specially lovely this year, and I have some of almost every variety that's grown around here. See those gladioli? They came outa my yard. I have same of the loveliest roses. You just oughta see 'em. And my pot flowers are doing mighty well now.
"Water has been my greatest problem at my present home. We are a little too far out to get city water, so we had to have a well dug. I'll say it cost me plenty too - a hundred and fifty dollars - but that was because they had to blast through a big rock after they'd dug 40 feet. However, that good well of water is worth all I had to pay to get it. The water's so cool - more refreshing than ice water - and about the first thing I do when I get home every day is to draw me up a fresh drink from our well.
"My husband gets good wages working for an oil refining company here, and with what we both make, we manage to get on fine and to keep our children in school as long as they need and want more training. Now the one in Chicago isn't making any salary, and so I keep her supplied with spending money. We do get so lonesome here by ourselves when all our girls are away. Right now, they're all here except the one that studies in Chicago, and she's coming when she gets her vacation about the last of July.
"Our oldest daughter teaches school not far from Jefferson, Georgia, but she's here going to summer school now. She goes every summer, for she has made educational work her life business and she wants to keep up with all the newest and best methods of teaching. That's good business practice, for in that way she ought to get ahead faster and make a bigger salary than those who don’t take the extra training. She really enjoys all this teaching and studying.
"My second daughter is the only one of my four girls that's married. Her husband runs the same grocery store here that his father and mother kept when they first married. They've been dead for years and years, and they were old when they died, so you can figure it out that my son-in-law has a mighty old business. This daughter taught school until about the first of this year, when she went to work for some sort of a doctor that has offices in a big hotel here. He gives turkish baths, wax treatments, and has lots of electric things that he uses on patients. My girl says she likes this work lots better’n teaching, and she's trying hard to learn all she can. She started out just giving the rub-down after the patient came out of the bath, but now the doctor says she's lots of help to him in most of his different treatments. She enjoys the work and the patients are mighty nice to her.
"It's my third daughter that's taking training in that big hospital in Chicago. This is her first year up there. I did everything I could to keep her out of nursing work, for she had been educated to be a teacher, but when it became so hard to get teaching or anything else to do I decided to let her take this training if that was really what she wanted to do. If she was going to be a nurse I wanted her to have the very best training that could be gotten. That's why she went so far away from home.
"I had to pay for the whole 3-year course before she could even enter the hospital on probation. The probation period lasted 6 months and if she hadn't made good on that trial I'd have lost everything I'd paid out on the course, and in addition would have to send money for her to come back home on. They sent all her reports to me, and do you know that child didn't come under 95 grade on any of her tests. At the end of the 6 months she was put on the ground floor and now she has worked her way up to the seventh floor, where she assists the doctors in the operating rooms. She's made that much progress before the end of her first year there. Don't you think that's fine?"
"The reason she asked for her vacation to begin the last week in July is so she can be here at our big meeting that starts that week and goes on through the first week in August. When our meeting closes, there's always a big baptizing, and if there’s anything that girl of mine does enjoy it's the affairs of our church. All of our family are Baptists, and we have our membership in the Friendship Church near our home. In her last letter she said that as she was writing she could almost hear our choir singing Precious Lord. That’s her favorite song. Poor child! I know she’s homesick for she hasn’t been home since she went away last September.
"My baby girl that I told you has just come home from her first year away at college is taking a business course. She expects all that shorthand and typing to help her in getting a job as secretary. Of course, there’s not much of that sort of work here for girls of our race. There are just a few insurance companies that have sufficient office work and correspondence to need a secretary. She’s planning to join her sister in Chicago when she finishes her course, for there's plenty of office work open to women of our race in Chicago. You can just know that if those two youngest girls of ours do settle permanently in Chicago, it won’t be long before I’m there too.
"We have been wonderfully blessed in more ways than one and the unusually good health of our family is one of those blessings. I’ve never been seriously sick but once in all my life, and in spite of all the hard work I’ve done practically all my grown-up life, I've kept well most of the time. Of course I catch cold occasionally, and this time my old summer cold seems to be hanging on rather long, but that’s about the worst that can be said about my general health.
"As for recreation, I don't have much time for that now since all my girls are away so much. I’m kept too closely confined in my cafe. There’s always the chance to enjoy a good show, and I do love picture shows. They’re so restful after a hard day's work. Often in warm weather, we pack a basket of sandwiches and other picnic food, with plenty of cold bottled drinks, and go out to some woodsy place to eat ’em. The fresh air is so good after breathing kitchen fumes so long, and everything we eat tastes better’n it would if we ate at the cafe or at home when we're so wore out and tired.
"My greatest hobby is fishing. I never get tired of it. Honestly, I believe I could fish day and night, and I just can't describe the thrill I get out of pulling a fish out of the water. I may sometimes say I’m too tired when asked to do a good many other things, but you'll never hear of me being too tired to pass up a good chance to go fishing. I'm ready to start right now when I hear somebody say, 'Let's go fishing.' All my girls like to fish too. That's one thing they get from me, I guess - love of fishing.
"We went fishing out at Brooklyn branch last night. Did you ever do any fishing out there? It's a pretty place and there's a grand spring of nice cold water handy. Best of all, you can catch plenty of fish there. Our party filled two automobiles last night and we took plenty of picnic food for our supper. We enjoyed every minute of it.
"Before we got there we met a man coming toward town with a fine string of blue cats. They looked so fine we stopped right there in the road to ask him about those fish. Why, I believe that string of 'em would've weighed every bit of 20 pounds, and he had caught 'em all in Brooklyn branch. Of course that got us all pepped up and excited so we couldn't get there quick enough to suit us. We even started to fishing before we unpacked our supper. Would you believe it? 'Most everybody caught some fish but me! Last night was just my unlucky night. I got some mighty fine bites, but I never landed a fish the whole time we were there. My youngest girl had better luck. She landed a good sized blue cat that was really good when we cooked it for breakfast this morning. I want to try my luck out there again."
Susie was breathless when she ended her fishing story. After a silent moment, she remarked, "You haven’t said a word about how you like our cafe."
"You have a nice place," I told her, "and it's very convenient for your customers, particularly so for those who work."
"That’s what I was thinking of when I rented this place," she replied. "Even if it is old and looks bad on the outside, I can keep it clean and nice on the inside. Of course, now and then we have a dull day like this one, but then if it hadn’t been sort of dull today, I wouldn’t have had time for this talk with you. Sometimes we have a dull Saturday, but they are rare. No, our dull days are seldom rainy days. It seems like when it's raining folks want a place to come in and sit and eat. They think more about food when it’s wet and disagreeable than they do in pretty weather.
"I can’t pay my help very high wages, but the fact that I feed ’em as long as they work for me ought to be counted, for they eat the best food in the shop. If you count the cash I pay ’em and add to that the cost of the food they eat, they are really mighty well paid. Having to have six extra waitresses on Saturdays goes right hard on me when a dull Saturday does happen up on us. That doesn’t happen often, for most of our people want to come into town on Saturday and this part of town is their favorite Saturday meeting place, where they get together and talk and shop in that department store on the next corner.
"You've noticed that little alley between here and Broad Street, haven't you? Before I came here it used to be a busy place for bootleggers. That was before the prohibition law was changed. I've heard that so many were caught there that it sort of discouraged 'em, and lots of 'em gave it up as a bad place for their business. Folks have said that one bootlegger kept a bottle and glass hid behind a big old rock right by the side of this building and that he made lots of money selling liquor by the drink. White and colored folks all drank out of the same little green glass. It’s said they even stored liquor in the old jail house." She giggled. "Don’t you think that was a bad place to take such a chance on? I think I'd hunt a better place than a Jail house if I was in that business, for liquor'll get you inside the jail soon enough anyway if you drink it or handle it.
"The medicine shows that usually come to town in the fall of the year - they think folks have a little money from their crops then - generally park on this street, and they sure do draw crowds. Folks just go wild when the man gets to shouting about all the different ailments his one brand of cure-all will heal, and the fool things those medicine shows do pull off! Why, just last fall one of those men made a great crowd believe he could stick a knife through a Negro boy's arm, then pour some of his tonic on it, and it wouldn't even bleed. Of course it didn’t bleed, but it sure wasn't on account of the tonic; it was because the knife never went through the skin on his arm. On circus day, or when there are big ball games in town, it's sure crowded in front of my cafe, for out-of-town folks leave their cars and wagons parked in this block all day.
"The old covered wagons - more often they’re covered trucks - that come down from the mountains with cider and apples and other produce in season, park out here to sell their goods. Taking it all in all, we seldom have a really lonesome day. There’s always plenty to see and hear that will amuse and interest you whenever you happen to look out the door.
"I'll have to stop now, for I've told you about all there is to know about myself and my cafe. I really do hope you’ll come back and talk to my third daughter when she gets home from Chicago. She's so smart that you’ll hear a more interesting story from her than from me. Come by again when you are in our neighborhood. I'll be happy to see you."
