RIGHT LIVIN'
Written By:
Mrs. Leola T. Bradley
Research Field Worker
Georgia Writers' Project
Athens -
Edited By:
Mrs. Maggie B. Freeman
Editor
Georgia Writers' Project
Athens -
WPA Area # 6
November 22, 1939
1630
November 22, 1939
 
November 1, 1939
Evie Louvenia Robinson (Negro)
260 Cleveland Avenue
Athena, Georgia
Practical Nurse (WPA Housekeepers Aid Project)
Bradley -
RIGHT LIVIN'
As I entered the classroom of the Housekeepers' Aid Project I found, seated at one of the desks, a Negro nurse, Etta Robbins. Apparently she had been writing, for pencil, some paper, and an open book were still lying before her.
"Good morning, Etta," I said, "I see you are still at work. Am I too early for our interview?"
"No, ma'am," said she, "I'se jest gettin' through with a 'zamination in First Aid an' I sho hope I pass. I had so much to do today I jest couldn't git my mind on it. Fust thing, I had to git up early an' tend to mah baby. You know I has a new baby. He jest come last Saturday. I'se a midwife as well as a practical nurse and I always cares for my baby cases before I does anything else. As dis is de only baby case I has scheduled for some time, dey let me work on WPA. When I gits a job of my own den I soon gits laid off of WPA. Den I gits through wid dat case an', if I don't git another, dey puts me on agin, so you see I'se jest just on, den off, den on agin.
"I ain't on nursing duty de rest of der day, so I can talk ter you jest as long as you wants to. You say youse goin' to write my life history? Well, I'se done plenty; I can't tell you half, but I'll try.
"I wuz born over here in Oglethorpe County. I'se fifty- one years old. Now, I don't know 'zactly what year I was born. I ain't looked on de book to see, but I'se still fifty-one years old. We moved to Athens when I wuz three months old an' that's where I wuz raised.
"We lived pretty good I guess. Ma worked out. She had to, an' she always worked fer good white folks, too. Course she didn't make as much cookin' in dem days as people do now. Why, she cooked three meals a day for $1.50 a week. Still it didn't take as much to live then as it do now. My pa used to work 'round too. He worked by de day farming and in folks' yards. Dat is fo what he wuz meant. He wuz, also, a minister of de gospel. He had three churches over in Oglethorpe County and one in Athens. He wuz Baptist. Why, Miss, my pa started Arnold Grove church over in Oglethorpe County; den after he died, a Methodist man picked it up, so it ain't Baptist no mo'. My pa he wuz born way back in slavery time, ten years befo' de freedom. He didn't git no schoolin' or nothin' when he wuz growin' up, so to keep up with the other preachers he had to go to Jarrel Baptist College on Baxter Street. Dey call it Union Baptist now. De reason dey changed de name is 'cause it sorter went broke. You know de money give out, so a whole lot of churches throwed in some money to keep it goin'. Dat's why it's called Union.
"Going back to my childhood, my ma sho had lots o' trouble with her children. She had four girls and four boys an' out of dem there's only two of us livin'. Three brothers died when dey wuz babies. Yes ma'am, de doctor said dey died of milk poisoning. Dey wuz all weaned while dey wuz in long clothes. One slater lived 'till she wuz thirteen years old; she over growed her age - dat's what the doctor said. I got one sister livin' - least I hope she is. She wuz livin' in Atlanta de last time I heard from her.
"De fust time I knowed myself I wuz livin' on Prince Avenue. Den we moved over on Dearing Street. We never did own a home, dat is while pa wuz livin'. Now my step-pappy, he bought us one. My ma married twide.
"I started to school in January, 1902, and went 'till June de same year. My pa, he taught me some at home. Well, he died the same year, so I didn't git to go no more. When I wuz still a little girl I went out to work. I couldn't do much but wash dishes and play wid de white folks' chillun, but I done dat. When I wuz fourteen I got a regular job and worked on till I got married.
'Yea, ma'am, I married real young an' I paid for it too. I hadn't known dis man long an' it didn't take me no longer dan dat to find out he wuz no 'count. I had to work den sho 'nuff. He got to drinkin' an' runnin' 'round wid a woman. I lef' him once an' went to Atlanta. Den he tuck her and went to Rome, Georgia. I came back to Athens. Why, Miss, he committed one of de wustest murders ever heard of in dis part of de country. It wuz in Rome - an' dis same woman. He went home one day an' found her in bed wid another man. He tuck out his razor and cut her all to pieces; she died. De law sent him up for five years. I didn't git no divorce, 'cause when he killed dat woman and served de jail sentence, dat give me a divorce. De law brought it out to me right here in Athens.
"How did I feel? Why I felt good over it, I didn't feel no ways bad. I heap rather it would have been her than me. Dat same year I married again; in fact I married in two months after I got my divorce. Dis time I married a good man. He wuz lots older than I and wuz a deacon in our church. Me and his daughter uster play as chillun together. I used to go to him wid all my troubles when I an' my first husband wuz livin' together.
"Well, I decided I wanted some mo' schoolin', so after I married de second time I went to night school. I learned readin', spellin', and how to write. I can write pretty good now but I can't spell much. Den I went to West Broad Industrial School. I learned cookin' and sewin' there. At the close of school in June, we gave a demonstration to the white folks, at the Y.M.C.A. It was real nice too.
"Durin' de World War I went to a nursin' class. We went to St. Mary's Hospital for practice. We nursed in de colored folks' ward. All we got was our dinner - no pay. After that I took a six months trainin' course from the Chicago Nurse Training School. It was a correspondence course. My husband paid for that, five dollars a month. The lowest mark I made was eighty-five. We had a oral 'zamination for that. I like dem kind. When yer gits me to writin' I forgit everything I know, but I can answer questions.
"I has two certificates from the High Industrial School Wish I had them to show you, but they are hangin' on the wall at home. Then I've studied something else, too. I went to Atlanta and studied hair-dressing. Madam Burris was my teacher. I have a diploma in that and I want you to see it, too. I've been to sewin' school; and I'm a self-made woman, I is. I never has worked in a hair-dressing parlor or worked out as a seamstress but I does make most of my own clothes and sometimes I dresses de gals hair 'round our 'cinity. I doesn't make any chargee, de gals jest hand me a dime or fifteen cents when dey has it. I helps myself an' I never sit around, never lay around, never been in trouble o' no kind either. I believes in right livin'. You know a woman dat is a woman, who don't do nothing on the side, has a hard time. I've got de trade if I could jest git de work. I jest didn't make enough nursing so I had to join de WPA. I registered in 1934 at de re-ply (re-employment) office on Lumpkin Street. When I started on WPA I wuz in debt. I ruther not be on WPA if I could help it. Oh, it's pretty fair - it beats begging and it is honest.
"Lawsy me!" she exclaimed, "I wuz to pay a bill today, an' I jest clean forgot it. It wuz on my graphonola. I and my first husband bought it. Den he died an' lef it to me to pay for. We give fifty dollars for it an' I owe five more dollars. I'd sell it if I could, but I couldn't git nothin' fer It.
"I owns all my furniture, but I doesn't own a home. I wish I did. I rents a house - just three rooms an' I pays seven dollars fer that. Rents is up, groceries le up, everything is up, 'cept pay. It's down. It's jest like a see-saw, 'cept the wrong end's up. I'm trying to git out of debt. I owed about three months rent when I went on WPA, but I'se about paid it up, I has. I has insurande too ter keep up an' dat takes money. I needs a new stove, but I'm scared to go in debt. I lives by myself, now as my second husband died some time ago, but I don't git lone-some as I has my church clubs to go to. I'm Superintendent of the Sunday School too an' sings in two gospel choruses. Ef more folks would go to church and work in de church, dere wouldn't be so much meanness going on.
"Yes, ma'am, I has studied singin'. I has a soprano voice. I goes to two practices a week. Wuz you here when I sang fer the Red Cross ladles here in de courthouse? You wusn't. Well, let's see what did I sing. Oh yes, here's de words to de chorus:
'Do you know anything about Jesus?
Do you know anything about Calvary?
Do you know anything about Salvation?
Do you know that your soul has been set free?
'Yes, ma'am, I sung dat fer the Red Cross. Wish you could been dere.
"I has to be careful about overdoing myself. You see I'se kinder stout, and I has de high blood pressure. I watches my diet case I've studied dat. Heap of things I caint eat. I eats lots of vegetables, no pork. I likes rabbit - dey's cheap an' plentiful right now.
"I been in four wrecks in my life. Once, I wuz going to a Red Cross meetin' in Atlanta wid some white folks, and de car turned over. I got a dislocated knee. Oh, I can work all right, but I caint git on my knees.
"I'se always been a big hand to pray, an' my daddy taught me to pray on my knees. When I found I couldn't do dat so easy I jest said, 'Lawd, yer know Etta's allus got on her knees to talk ter You. She can't do dat no mo'. Will you's 'cuse me Lawd, ef I prays in de bed?' I guess it wuz all right wid Him - anyhow I been doin' it ever since.
"Next to my Lawd I believes in Mr. Roosevelt. Aint he grand?
'Lady, I've brung all my recommendations for you to see an'I'se 'bout to fergit to show 'em to you.'
I read a number of them. They were all good. "There's one I especially want you to see," she continued. 'It's from a French woman, Madam Lustrat. Course now, she didn't write It, but her daughter did. I'se nursed her two different times and wuz wid her when she died. Stayed over a year dat time. I'se very proud of dat one.
'Well, I'se told you a lot an' could tell a lot mo', but I specks you're tired. I wants to go by and take a look at my baby 'fo I goes home.
I thanked Etta and left, after promising her that I would drop by her house sometime and see all her diplomas.