
Mary A. Hicks
GEORGE N. ELLISON
Proprietor of Raleigh Diner
Raleigh, N. C.
George N. Ellison, proprietor of the Raleigh Diner, was born in Turkey where his father, a gentleman of culture and refinement, tutored Turkish children. The Turks had captured him almost as soon as his education was completed to teach their children. He had married a beautiful Greek girl who was also a captive, and George was born in a Turkish Nobleman's house.
He was taught by his father to read and write at an early age, and he also attended the public schools of Turkey. At the age of sixteen he enlisted in the Turkish army where he remained until 1905. In 1906 he decided to come to America. It was hard to make a living there and he, with the other Greeks, had few privileges. He had heard a great deal about America, so in 1906 he boarded a ship for New York.
A cousin and an uncle met him when his boat docked and took him to their home in the Bronx. He began work in their little cafe the next week.
From 1906 until 1918 George worked in the Cafe and was happy. He received his citizenship papers in 1918 and was immediately drafted for service. When the War closed he returned to the lunchroom in the Bronx. He remained in New York se seventeen years longer, serving as chef and waiter.
He was satisfied with his work in New York -until letters from his cousin in Raleigh made him long for a warmer climate. He didn't know until the letters began coming how he dreaded the severe winters and the intense summer heat. He had married a New York woman who was very fond of the city, but as they discussed the fine climate and people of North Carolina she decided that she would like to come, too. They wrote, asking the cousin if he could give George employment in his lunchroom, and when the answer came they were ready to leave.
It was in the spring of 1935 when they came to Raleigh, and George began working in the lunchroom. They moved into the apartment house with the cousin and his wife, two children, and three other families. It appeared that things were going to turn out beautifully for the Ellisons.
George worked for his cousin for three and a half years and he kept adding a little to his savings, although he made only $15 a week. Seven months ago he opened a cafe of his own, hired a chef, an assistant chef, a waiter, and two waitresses, and announced that he served home cooking.
His diner rapidly became one of the town's favorite cafes, and he found it necessary to hire another waitress. His boast is, "Once they eat with me they come again."
His greatest ambition is to give his daughter an American education. He wants her to attend the University of North Carolina to study for a school teacher, and he wants her to forgot her nationality completely and to be an American only. He hopes that she will marry an American boy, but he wouldn't object if she married an American Greek.
He and his wife belong to the Greek Orthodox Church, but he wants his daughter to belong to an American church when she is old enough to know which church she prefers.
He doesn't believe in women voting and doesn't vote himself, but he hopes that if his daughter ever votes it will be the Democratic ticket. He says, "Democracy is the world's greatest government. They say that it was known in Greece many centuries ago, but my people in Turkey couldn't have known much about it. Americans don't appreciate their Government enough. They couldn't unless they had lived for awhile in Turkey or in Greece, expecting the Turkd to capture or kill them daily."
wg

