There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project, A third version of the interview, "Guess We Had Morning Fever," with the same title, can be found on pages 3175A-3185.
 
In an otherwise identical version lines 11 and 12 on page 1507 were deleted.
 
A.G.Barie
M. D. Rice
Powder springs, Ga.
Route #1
December 12,1938
Life History
In order to reach the house where Dave Melvin and his wife Betsy live their quiet, life, I had to park my car "up the hill" at the farm home of the Widow McDonough, for whom Dave does all the "mans work". After receiving directions from the widow on how to reach the place, I followed a winding path down the hill, jumped a small branch, toiled up another hill through scrubby oaks and pines, and finally came to the house itself, perched several feet above an old red clay road which ended at a broken down bridge a few feet beyond the front yard.
A cheery, "come in" greeted me before I had reached the porch, and upon entering I found Dave sitting by a window overlooking the yard, and Betsy sitting in a rocker near the open fire. Betsy seemed to be just sitting there thinking, while Dave was busy scraping on a new hammer handle of fine-grain hickory. He had several of them on the floor beside his chair and would pick up first one and then another and give them a little trimming, as if to be sure they were all exactly alike. When I asked him if he sold them he replied, "Never sold 'ary one; couldn't git enough to pay to bother, but I sure likes to have one 'round, when a feller needs one he needs it 'right now'." 
When I informed him of the reason for my visit he grinned broadly and said, "Now you just look 'round and see all you want to, and 'gin I finish these handles and you've seen ever'thin' maybe I'll rek'lek what you want to know."
The house is a four-room frame building, shingle roofed, with two porches, both of which are little something of collapse, and the whole rests partly on wooden blocks and partly on irregular sized rocks. The roof leaks badly but this will soon be remedied; the Widow McDonough has donated a tree which Dave will rive up into boards and the man who owns the house and his two sons will help Dave put on a new roof. The house has never been painted inside or out and is only partly sealed, but the windows and doors are fairly tight and with plenty of wood nearby they will be able to keep warm during the coming winter. Only one small shed is on the same side of the road as the housed the barn, corn crib, hog lot and a nondescript sort of shed being across the road and almost entirely surrounded by tall weeds. To the west of the house and toward the branch an old orchard is still bearing a few scrubby apples and peaches. The fields within view of the house are eroded and gullied and are a visible evidence of the reason for the owner having practically abandoned the place and rented a large farm near the main highway. The only cropping done on the place this year was a couple of acres of cotton for Widow McDonough, and a small garden for Dave and Betsy.
Their furniture consists of three old but substantial beds, several good cane-bottom chairs, a plain heavy rocker, a heavy plain dining table, a small kitchen table, an old style sewing machine, two screened "safes" and a heavy well-made stove of the "box" type, on which Betsy does the cooking. All the articles of furniture show their age but have been well taken care of and are in fairly good condition despite the many times they have been moved. The kitchen utensils are plentiful and show care in handling, among then being a common enamel drinking dipper and an enamel dish pan which have been in use over twenty years. In addition there is an old-fashioned trunk which holds, besides their spare clothing, many mementoes of their younger days: letters, picture cards, and old photographs and tin-types, some of which would bring a smile to those seeing for the first time the actual styles- of the earlier days.
Another article deserving special mention is a large tool- chest, almost equal in construction to the "factory-made" kind, which Dave built during rainy spells this past summer; and it is almost filled with carpenter tools of the batter grade, although Dave says he has never actually worked at the trade. "I hate allus to be borryin' tools from the neighbors", is his reason for the chest of tools. The walls are bare of adornment except for a few modest picture calendars and the windows are void of curtains but have soma old shades with what was at one time a rich tasseled edging. On the mantel shelf is a small clock with a sweet, mellow tone.
Everything in the house was spotlessly clean, their clothing of the better grade, and the bed clothes were of subdued patterns, made of good materials, and showed many hours of painstaking labor. 
Waiting for Dave to finish his hammer-handles and do a little more "rek'lektin' gave me plenty of time to observe the couple, and learn something of their manner of living.
Dave is short in stature, solidly built, very erect in carriage, and belying his sixty-three years by his sure and purposeful movements while at work. His upper lip is adorned by a pair of gray mustaches of the "walrus" type, which he has been cultivating for several years, as is evidenced by a tintype taken during his early married life.
Betsy, who is four years his senior, is his third wife. She is small, thin and stooped, but active and clear of eye, although past the days of hard labor, She is still able to keep the house and yard spotlessly clean, tend to a small garden and look after a few chickens.
Fearing that the silence was becoming too prolonged I asked Betsy if she was a native of that section. "Yes, sir, I was born jist a few miles from here, near Sulphur Springs. My aw was a saw mill man when I was a little tyke and so I didn't git to go to school much. We was allus moving with the mill; wasn't no big sight of timber 'ary one place so we had to go where the timber was."
When I remarked that both she and Dave used pretty good language for folks that hadn't been to school much, Betsy pointed to a pile of magazines on the floor near the fire place and said, "We both read lots, don't know what we'd do without the magazines and papers the neighbors fetch us."
Here Dave interposed with, "I only got three months' school when I was about nine years old, 'n 'bout all I got out o' that was how to scratch my name on a paper. Dun'no where I learnt to read - jest seemed to grow into it. Sometimes we git tired o' readin' 'n jest set 'n think. Were so fur off the 'big road' we can't see 'ary cars go by 'n sometimes it gits sorta lonesome. Weak ends sometimes Betsy's kin come for a visit 'n than we all talk a heap."
Here we were interrupted by a step on the porch, the door opened and in walked a fine-looking young woman, a small baby in her arms and a sweet little girl of about five years trailing along behind. The woman was dressed in a good-looking black dress which had a great deal of lace work in its makeup and was somewhat out of season, Over this she wore a cheap but warm looking coat with an imitation fur collar. A small black hat, chic in style, completed an ensemble, which, though unmistakably inexpensive, seemed Donshow out of place in these our surroundings.
Dave introduced the lady to me as his daughter Hildred, and while the newcomers were in a bedroom removing their wraps he explained that she had been staying with a sister in Rome and trying to get work- in one of the textile mills. The two sisters had married brothers, both mill men, but none of them had had steady work for a long time.
When Hildred and the children returned to the room Dave told her that I was a Gov'ment man and she immediately began to relate her experience with "WPA" as follows; "Guess you never met Joe, but he and I were mill workers. Joe never did like the work and was always trying to get a job selling something, so when the mills slacked down he was usually one of the first to get laid off. The last time the mill shut down and laid him off we went to the east part of the state and he tried to sell stuff from house to house. We managed to eat, but not as much as we all needed until Joe got a job in the hospital. We had plenty to eat than but mighty little cash and Joe wasn't ever satisfied. He had been reading a lot about what they were doing for poor folks out in Oregon and he kept on dinging at' me to go out there. Well, we finally scraped and borrowed enough to get out there. Joe got a little work picking fruit after we got there but that didn't last long and Joe wasn't used to the rough work and wasn't a bit more satisfied than when we was back here. There was so many men selling stuff out there who were regular salesmen that Joe couldn't get a 'look-in' at selling anything and he finally want and applied for a WPA job. Joe wasn't used to real heavy work and the jobs began getting scarcer and scarcer until finally there just didn't seem to be any more to do. We applied to the relief and got some help right soon but it wasn't enough to live on. Joe and I were interviewed several times and told them all about ourselves and where we were raised and it wasn't long after that when they sent for us to come in and they told us we would have to go back to Georgia. Joe told the Relief folks we didn't have any money or any way to get back to Georgia, so they told us to wait and we would hear from them. In about a week they sent for us and when we got to the office they had two Pullman tickets good to take us to Savannah and a check for enough expense money to feed us and the kids till we got there. We happened to strike up with some folks coming this way after we got back to Georgia and so we got back among our own folks. That was last fall a year ago. After we got here Joe didn't seem to have any luck getting work and he was always talking about going back west. He finally met up with a couple of fellows going up to Michigan and said he was going with them. I hated to see him go but he couldn't seem to do anything to help around here so I decided, maybe it was best. We didn't hear from him for a long time and finally he wrote that he had been sick and in a hospital but was better and was going back west with the two fellows he want north with. Wasn't long before we got a letter telling that he was in a hospital in Oklahoma with one of his feet nearly taken off by a train. Seems like he and these two fallows were bumming a ride and one night he was trying to get off a box car when the train wasn't stopped yet and his foot got caught in something. The Railroad Company had a hospital there and put him in it and took care of him till he was able to get out with a crutch."
"No, I don't know the name of the company or how come they took care of him when he was stealing a ride. All I know about it is that he got able to get help some way and it wasn't long before he was 'way back out west but several hundred miles away from where we was before. He hoard while he was on the way out that the police out there were ordered to arrest anybody who had been there before looking for work or even working, unless they had money enough to pay their way for quite a while. He don't seem to be having any better luck this time than he had before and the last we heard from him he was in one of them WPA relief concentration camps, but they don't have anything to do much and Joe said it might be 'way next spring before they are put to work. I sure do wish the mills would run steady so we all could go back to work; it wouldn't take us long to get back on our own feet and maybe we could help our own folks some too." With a deep sigh Hildred relaxed in her chair as if to discard her worries and began to nurse the baby who had been getting restless.
To relieve the feeling of depression which seemed to pervade the room after listening to Hildred's troubles I asked David if he had any more children, to which he promptly replied, with a noticeable look of pride on his face, "I had three children by my first wife, two girls and a boy, and three by my second wife, two girls and a boy agin. They're all livin'. Think it makes 'ary difference how many y' get? Don't think thataway myself. We'all seemed to git along somehow, allus had 'bout'nough to eat and wear. Guess maybe I was doin' a little better then cause I did see to 'em getting common schoolin'. We not been so'as to lay by anything last few years but Betsy 'n I don't eat much 'cept garden "sass", so it don't take much t'keep us goin'
By this time Hildred's baby had finished his lunch and been tucked away for a nap and as the mother resumed her seat she again joined the conversation with: "My oldest child Jerry I left with my sister Nell in Rome cause I just didn't want to take him out of school when they were so good to take him in and me not being a resident of the town. Sure don't know how we all are going to come out but no matter what happens to Joe, I'm going to do my best to keep my kiddies in school. Yes, I had some schooling myself and have lived around with folks who had better learning than I did, but I can see where kids now'a days have to know more to get along"--with which wise saying she excused herself, and she and Betsy went out into the back yard to see what the little girl was doing.
This left David and me alone in the room and he seemed to have been waiting for the opportunity as he suddenly broke forth "Wall, I 'n my Daddy 'n 'bout all our kin I knowed about was allus renters, share croppers 'r worked on somebody elses place for wages. Reckon us never found 'ary place we wanted. Seems- like come next year we'd find the right place to suit us, but we never did."
"Was my folks Georgy folks? No, sir, leastwise 'fore I was born they come over from North Ca'lina and rented a place in Pickens County. Course 'twas a long time attar I was born 'fore I come to remember movin' so much, but I reckon I got things all stra't'ned out in my mind from time I left Daddy, so I kin tell you how many times we've moved . .'N if you want t' ask me ary questions I'll try t'anser 'em."
"No, I wasn't the only kid in the family. Oldest o' seven all livin'. Don't know much about 'em - scattered here and yon. Seems like folks now-a-days don't hang t'gether like when we was boys'n girls. I 'member I was allus strong fer a kid and laid off corn ground fer Daddy when I wasn't but twelve years old. Wasn't long attar that I was doin' a man's work 'long with Daddy, 'n 'gin I got married 'n went fer myself, Daddy 'n I stayed purty close 'round them parts where I was born."
"Yes, my first wife was born 'n raised close 'bout there too. Her folks was tenant farmers too."
After pausing a moment to part his voluminous mustaches and spit in the fire, he straightened back in his chair and resumed, "That was in '96. Reckon we was like most young folks, wantin' to get away from things, so we went a piece further south 'n I got a job runnin' drill in a Gold mine. Atter I'd been thar 'bout two years pay uirt played out 'n t.ie mine shut down so we moved a few miles to south o'there and worked in an ochre mine. Wa'nt a driller there; did most a.ry kind of work. Reckon we stayed thar two years more. Yeh, that's right, cause 'twas 1900 that we went back near whar I come from 'n got a job as handy-man on Mr. Shield's fifteen-hoss farm. S'pose you heard tell o' Joe Brown, used to be Guvner? Well, he lived not fur away, 'n folks sure liked Joe Brown. That's Joe M., I mean. Don't 'member much o' Joe E., but I do 'member seein' the big WELCOME sign painted on th'front o' his big barn. Folks us'ta tell 'bout him feeding all th' folks 'round those parts, cause he had s'much corn he didn't need it'n just handed it out t' anybody who'd ask. I never seen nobody turned 'way from Joe Brown's place neither. Whilst I was with Mr. Shields he loan'd some o' his hands to Joe Brown t'help survey the place n'build a fence 'round it. Man, that was some farm; seem'd like a thousand acres. 'N that was a fence too let me tell you. The postes was all concrete and just miles'n miles o'wire. Reckon Joe Brown kinda took a likin' t' me cause sev'ral times he borryed me from Hr. Shields and had me haul big loads o'corn down t'Hariette whar his home was. Our first boy was corned thar -(the fust one was a girl.) so we calls him Joe Brown, .We had 'nother girl sides them. Guess we rnust'a had moving fever all th'time, cause we went back t'the ochre mine section, but cu'dn't get ary job. That was nineteen-two 'n my first wife died. Worked on a small farm at day wages not fur from th'mines far nigh two years. Spring o' nineteen--four we went over into Spaldin' 'n got a job 'n a saw mill. Met a gal fr'm over in Milton County and took a likin' t'her - guass the kids did too, anyways we got married. Her kinfolks was farmers too so she was us't t' it, 'n we stayed thar nigh four years 'n had three more kids borned thar. Them young- 'uns is all growed up 'n gone by th'selves long ago. Don't see 'em often si nee times got bad cause we can't afford a car. Any way we move 'round so much sometimes maybe they don't know whar t' look fur us."
Here Dave paused long enough for each of us to take a good big chew of "natural twist" with which I am usually supplied, and Dave remarked that it was "mighty good chawin' 'backer". Having again manipulated the mustaches to his satisfaction he quietly resumed.
"I got tired 'saw-millin' 'n spring o' nineteen-eight we went on a farm a short piece west o' th'saw mill 'n worked on halvas fer three seasons. Didn't do so bad thar, but you know how 'tis; when comes time t' move 'bout all you got is a little furniture 'n maybe a little corn 'n fodder 'n mighty little cash. Anyways, we moved back over nigh Sulphur Springs 'n spring o' nineteen-leven, 'n cropped on halvas two seasons. Didn't do so good thar, so we went back t' Spaldin' 'n spring o' 'thirteen 'n took a leatle bigger place on halves fer two seasons. Didn't do so bad them two seasons, but late in 'fifteen my wife died, 'n we jest didn't feel like stayin' on thare, so come spring o' nineteen-sixteen we went back over by Sulphur Springs 'n I bought a small team o' mules 'n a few tools 'n paia standin' rent on 25 acres o' good land. That's whar Betsy 'n I got married. Didn't seem like we wanted to stay too close to her folks right then so I sold my stock 'n we went t' a big farm 'bout seven miles further north nigh the mountain 'n worked a one-hoss crop on halvas. That's in 'seventeen. Made purty good that season 'n felt like I c'ud do better by m'self so I bought stock 'n worked a one-hoss crop over by the 'Springs' two seasons - that was 'n 'eighteen 'n 'nineteen. Didn't do so good that last season so 'n spring of 'twenty we moved over to a small place not fur 'way. Still had m' stock 'n worked a two- hoss crop. We staid on just the one season that place. Done purty good tho' 'n the spring o' 'twenty-one we moved to th' Lawrence farm, not fur fr'm th' "Springs'. That's-a fifteen- hoss farm 'n I worked forty-five acres with m'own stock.
Didn't do so bad th' first season but we stayed on in 'twenty- two 'n didn't do good so next spring, that's 'twenty-three, we took a smaller place, two-hoss crop, 'n settled down thar 'till late 'twenty-six. We'd come out clear that season 'n maybe a leetle better'n that. 'Bout 'cided to try a real crop 'n bought more stock 'n tools 'n moved back onto th'big place I cropped onct before near th' mountain. I had a five-hoss crop thar three seasons, 'twenty-seven, 'twenty-eight, 'n 'twenty-nine." Here Dave paused and studied for a moment, which gave me an opportunity to refresh our supply of "twist", and after throwing a fresh chunk on the fire he sat down and resumed.
"Don't know as y'know 'bout things in the farmin' line, but seems-like things started goin' down hill fast 'bout that time. Th'first season I didn't do so poorly, but guano 'n feed-stuff was gettin' high 'n it just seems-like there wa'n't anythin' left. Second season I jist 'bout broke even. 'N'twenty-nine th' boll-weevil jist 'bout eat us up 'n cotton didn't bring more'n'nuff to pay fer guano. I was sure 'nuff cleaned out. Stayed on till crops was gathered 'n Betsy 'nI moved in with daughter Kell over to Oaktown. We staid on 't that place till the spring o' 'thirty-one. Had a few leetle piddlin' jobs around town but jist couldn't find ary steady job ary-place. That spring we hear'n tell 'bout good farmin' down in Dalton County, so Betsy 'n I went over there 'n found a likely lookin' place 'n rented a twenty-five acre crop on thirds 'n fourths. Stayed thar through 'thirty-two 'n 'gin we got ready t'move off, all we had t'move was our furniture. Seem'd like that wa'n't ary place fit t' crop on whar 't wouldn't take more'n cotton'd bring t' pay fur guano. Betsy 'n I moved t' a leetle house over'n "Socktown", a short piece from whar her folks use'ta live, 'n I got odd jobs 'round town. We jist 'bout manag'd feat that year. I went t' the relief folks one time 'n they gimme twelve pounds o' flour 'n a leetle sack o' dried milk but I didn't take it. Guessed we might 's well starve t' death all 't onct 's t' teeter 'long on th' job. We haint been on relief yet. Wal, 'n 'thirty-four I got a farm-hand job not fur off 'n we staid 'n Socktown till spring o' 'thirty-five. Got back farmin' - three-hoss crop I rented - 'n didn't pay out. Gome spring o' 'thirty-six we moved t'nother saw mill town 'n I worked two, three months. 'Bout time we got settled that I put a ad in Farmers Market Bull'tin askin' fer work on er big farm. 'Grannies', I got a stack o' letters a foot high! Betsy read 'em all 'n she writ fer a job bossin' farm hands on' a big orchard farm up 'n north Georgy. 'Twasn't long 'fore we war sent fer t'go up thar, 'n I got th'job. Nice place 'n I liked it fine. Got fifteen dollars a month an'keep fer both of us. Feller what own'd it lived 'n Savannah. He cum'up frequent 'n he acted like he was pleased the way I done things. We was get- tin' 'long fine 'til come spring o' 'thirty-seven he come up 'n we traded fer Another year 'n he said he was pleased th'things I had done 'n planned, but atter he went home I got a'letter from him cussin' me out fer the way I done things. Made me so mad I quit. That was 'n July, 'thirty seven, 'n we moved back t'where I usta work in a saw mill. That mill'd been moved a long time, but a small mill was there 'n I got work 'n it.
Thar was a small farm house off a small piece from whar th' mill stood 'n the man what owned it let us live in't fer clearin' a piece o'land. We staid thar 'til March 'nineteen-thirty- eight, when Mrs. McDonaugh, th'lady you met up on th'hill come atter me. We been here ev'r' since." - - -And with these words David relaxed in his chair with the air of one who had finished a job, and considered it well done.
Long before he had finished Betsy had returned and quietly seated herself in a chair near a side window, apparently so she could watch the little girl playing out in the lot.
Thinking perhaps she might be feeling slighted I asked her if they attended the church not far away, but up on the big road. She said, "No, we aint been t'church yet. Y'know we kind'a got out'a the habit long time ago. Like'nuff it's cause we was allus on th'move. Didn't live long'nuff in ary one place t'get 'quaint- ad with folks. We like it here though, folks jist seem like home- folks. 'Gin spring gets here mebbe we'll git t'go t'church."
I asked David if he had a car and he said, "No, I only had'a couple cars in my time. Ary one wa'n't no good. Th'last one jist disint'grated under me 'n I wa'n't no mechanic. Disgust'd me so I didn't try t'fix 'em up.
I asked him what he thought the prospects were for farmers in the future. After studying for a moment he began: "Wal, I reckon it's 'bout all som'v'us kin do. Haint ary chance t'git 'n a mill now-a-days. Seems-like we've allus got some kind-a livin' off th'land 'n I reckon hit'll allus feed us' 'gin we tries hard'nuff. Some folks blames owners 'n some blames tenants fer th'way farms's gone down now-a-days. I reckon they's both t'blame. Leastwise, some folks seems-t' be able t'a build up th'soil on places what's got tenants 'n some places what's got no tenants 's let go down th'branches 's if hit didn't make ary diffrunce. I've allus tried t'git folks t' plant cover crops. Some on 'em tries 't one season 'n jist cause 't don't do wonders they say it's no good. Worst part o' tenantin' 's atter layin'- by time. Landlord lookin' fer a new hand 'n tenant lookin' far new land. Ought-a be so's a landlord could 'ford t'keep tenants full year 'n then like'nuff they'd git more fall plowin' done 'n maybe more covercrop 'n winter pasture tended to. 'F I ever git me 'nother place o'my own I jist don't b'lieve I'd plant ary stalk o'cotton. Like-'nuff I'd starve, but look't that feller nigh th' top o' mountain; he's made a living this year on two'n a half acres o' 'matoes 'n th'land's so steep a mule kin hardly stand up. Us Georgy farmers never larn'd t' rotate crops like 'n other parts. We've jist cotton'd 'n corn'd th'land t' death. No wond'r th'gov'ment has t' pay us fer cotton. Now, thar I go, talkin' pol'tiks. Reckon I'd better go up th'hill 'n feed th'widow's mules 'gin hit gits dark. You goin' back that-a-way I'll go'long with ye."
After saying "good-bye" to Betsy, Hildred and the children we went out the door to the porch and were about to step down to the yard when Dave said, "wait a Minute", and went back into the house. He returned almost immediately and handed me one of the hammer-handles, saying: "Like 'nuff y'need one o' these fer yer hammer. If ye don't right now mebbe y'will later 'n ye kin lay thissen by t'season 'n it sure'1 be a good one."
We toiled up the hill to the widow's place and I went with him to the barn so he could show me a new bed and box which he built one rainy day for the "converted Ford" wagon. The workman- ship was so fine that I had to compliment the maker. Visibly pleased, he replied: "Aw shucks, 'taint so good a job. That's one trouble with lots'a farmers. Don't take car'a their tools 'n things. I've want onto places 'n th' spring 'n had'ta hunt 'round in th'fields t'find a plow t'start with."
The Widow McDonough was approaching with her milk pail and evidently caught the drift of our conversation for she immediately said, "I've ordered a gallon of good paint for him to paint that wagon box and the plow stocks and a few more things around here. Dave is the first man I've had around here in a long time that took an interest in anything but the regular work. He's sure done things to this place in a few months." This seemed to be more of a compliment than Dave could stand for he blurted out, "Aw shucks, here it's plumb dark 'n I gotta git down th' hill. Pleas'd t'uv metcha, 'n ary time ye'round these parts glad you'd come 'n see us 'gin."
"Dava sure is a good man", said Lrs. McDonough. "He has patched up a lot of the old buildings here when the weather wasn't fit to do other things, and when the ground was too wet to plow good he moved a lot of rock piles that had been out in the middle of the fields for years. Put them in the washes and gullies where they'd do some good. I can't afford to pay him more'n fifteen dollars a month, but I got a good old cow I'm going to let them have for her feed, and sometimes we have a little something extra in the way of eats. They don't care much for meat so they didn't have a pig this year. I've some kin folks in New York that send me some real good children's clothes they get from folks in the big flat where they live, fine clothes that sometimes are just a little soiled, so I'm going to be able to fix up his daughters children with some real good things for Christmas. Sounds as if that cow was 'bout to tear the barn down so I'd better get busy and milk her. Glad to have met you; drop in when you're in the settlement."
As I drove out the long winding farm road to the main highway a pleasant thought came to me. Here is one deserving couple who are secure for another year, at least, without having to call on the relief.