LIFE HISTORY
First written in summer of 1934; cut for Project, December, 1938. Person interviewed: Mr. E. J. Tull.
Address: Ellijay, Georgia.
Occupation: Retired. Formerly teacher, farmer, river boatman.
Interviewed by: Jacques H. Upshaw.
Revisional work, same.
 
The Man Who Lives in the House by the Side of the Road.
"No", replied Mr. Davis, "I am too old to teach anyone anything. I don't believe I'll be able to tell much that will be interesting. I don't do much nowdays except read, and raise a few vegetables. I'm reading the Arabian Nights now. I have a new unexpurgated edition that just came from New York. Would you like to take it? Well, you're welcome to borrow it, but you must bring it back. Are you much interested in literature? So am I, but I don't read now as much as I used to. Go get this copy and we will have a look at it. It's lying in my room on the desk."
I went into the house and saw to the left of the door a small desk sitting before a window, on which were a few books, a table model radio, paper, pens, and so forth. On the corner of the table was lying the book. On the walls of the room were pictures, and many newspaper clippings filed on nails. Over the mantel was a large cross-stich work of two or three stanzas from the poem by Sam Walter Foss: The House by the Side of the Road. I carried the volume back to Mr. Davis, who was sitting under a tree in the yard. He took the book and began reading without glasses, though he is ninety years old.
"This is an unexpurgated edition", he said. "Different from the literature we read and write today. Perhaps too sensual, but nevertheless a true picture of Oriental life. If one is going to read that kind of literature he may as well read the uncut edition. There is no sense in reading a thing of that kind which has been expurgated and ruined. I haven't got many books here with me in the mountains, but in Atlanta I have a library of 1,700 volumes. Do you know Omar Khayyam? I used to be very fond of his poetry.
Yes, old Omar is a good poet .... Oh, no, he can't compare with Shake speare, certainly.
"Yes, people around here call me a hermit, I suppose. I've been living in the Blue Ridge Mountains here for twenty-two years all alone, mostly growing corn and other vegetables, and reading, and making friends. Friendship is the greatest thing in life. With friends any misfortune can be borne. I've got a lot of friends. Everybody from Dan to Beersheba knows about my dog and comes to see him do tricks, and brings a string of little devils with them. Oh, yes, I like children. I used to entertain them here at the house a good deal when I was younger. Now it's too much trouble on me, though. I'm nearly a hundred years old. My baby boy is sixty-five.
"Well, it's been a long time ago that I was young, but I'll try to remember a few things to tell you. It's been so long ago when I was a boy that buckskin was still commonly worn in Wisconsin where I lived. There were very few railroads, and all the travel, almost, was by horseback or river-boat. I used to fire a river-boat myself. I fired a boat which ran the Mississippi between LaCrosse and St. Paul. Sometimes, I remember, the heat from the fireboxes would be so intense that it burned the leather on my boots. When I was going to school I worked in the harvest fields to help meet the expenses for the coming winter. Then I did chorea at the boarding house for meals, rang the bell at school, and did other chores for tuition. Working this way I managed to graduate from the University of Wisconsin in three years. It was pretty hard, yea, but I enjoyed it. After that I taught school, kept a post office and store, ran a butcher shop, went to Idaho and bought an eighty-five thousand-dollar mill for grinding silver and gold ore, and did other things.
"I began teaching school when I was only seventeen years old. I had heard there was a vacancy near my home in Wisconsin, and I applied for the job. It was only a small school, just a one-room building, but there were five or six grades. There were one hundred and two pupils in all, twenty-two of them older than I was. All of the boys were sons of lumber jacks there in Wisconsin, and two or three of them were strong enough and big enough to throw me if they bad tried, though I was a pretty good wrestler myself. When I asked the superintendent for the job he looked right hard at me -- I was only seventeen years old, you know -- and he said to me, 'Why, you couldn't hold down that school. The last teacher didn't stay there but a week, and then they threw him out the window."
"I thought I could, though, and asked him to give me a chance. 'All right', the superintendent said, 'I'll let you try. If you stay two weeks the job's yours. If before that time you leave -- or are thrown out the window -- you don't get anything.'
"Well, the first day I walked to the school through five inches of snow, carrying a few books and a Bible. The place was crowded with all ages of boys, most of them big, husky fellows. The first thing I did was to read a chapter from the Bible and say a prayer. (We always opened school like that in those days.) Then I made them a little speech, telling them that I was there for their own good, end if we all worked together we would learn something before the year was out. Well, do you know, I hadn't more than got through talking when the scholars started talking among themselves -- not whispering, but talking out loud. Some of them walked around the room, went outside after stove wood, or threw things at each other clear across the room. I had to let out school early that day,they were so noisy. I felt pretty sorry I had taken the job, but I had taken it, and I determined to stick to it. That afternoon I went to town and bought me an ebony ruler and a blacksnake whip.
"The next morning when I got to school I read the Bible and said a prayer like I had the day before. But after I got through the prayer I told them that we wouldn't have time for lessons today, as they had been so unruly the day before we had to straighten out a few things between us. I hadn't more than got through talking before some boy in the back of the room threw his cap plumb across the house and fetched another boy a lick on the back of the neck. I grabbed my whip and stalked down the aisle to the boy doublequick time. I took him by surprise, so he didn't have time to resist if he had wanted to. I pretty near killed him, I frailed him so hard, and I didn't know but what some of the others would jump on me. They didn't, though, and it wasn't but a few minutes until I had to flog another one. And then another. And, do you know, I flogged twenty-five boys that first morning. Yes, sir, twenty-five in one day!"
"And now, just let me tell you something. You just wait. Before the year was out, every one of those scholars thought so much of me that if anybody had laid a hand on me he would have had to fight the whole school."
•••••••
"It's about lunch time now, and if you don't mind, you go look on the back porch and get two of those big cantaloupes there. 'We will have some of these peaches here and the cantaloupes, and the chocolate you brought with you, if you like. We'll have us a little picnic here in the front yard. And that reminds me, I used to give a Sunday School picnic sometimes."
We sat down under the shade of the trees to lunch, and he told of organ izing a Sunday school at a little church near his home.
"At Oak Hill Church near here -- you passed it on the road down there -- I started a Sunday school. They didn't have one, and I thought the children and young people needed something like that to keep them interested in the church. You can't expect young boys and girls to be very enthusiastic about long, dry sermons in regular church. We sent around a petition to get up the Sunday school, and over a hundred names were signed. It seemed that everyone was in favor of the idea. The first Sunday there were eighty pupils present, but in two months not a one attended, and the project failed. They expected it to run itself, and it won't do it. You have to have social affairs, egg-hunting and all such things, to keep the children interested. Not half the people of the mountains go to Sunday School, and there are only about twenty in the town of Ellijay who attend regularly.
"I'm a Presbyterian by birth, but not a narrow-minded one. Yes, I read the Bible, but I can't believe that everything happened just as it said.
For instance, do you believe that Christ disappeared into the heavens, just vanished out of sight, as the Bible says? And the virgin birth. It doesn't seem any more wonderful or miraculous to me that he should have been born of a virgin than in the normal way. It was that first spark of life which was mysteriously put into the first creature that was really wonderful -- as wonderful as a man suddenly being made of mud."
With a wide gesture toward the sky and his own fields, where his corn stood a foot higher than that of another farmer's across the road, he said, "There has to be a God for this to be. But I can't believe that it was all created in six days. It is too large. Evolution seems to offer the best explanation, and it is just as wonderful that everything should come from one tiny cell of life."
His pet pigeon had been flying about us during lunch, and now it lit upon his shoulder. "Well, Pidgie, what do you say about it? Do you want to join our conversation? Here, take some of this com for your lunch." Turning to me again, "You haven't met my housekeeper, have you? You must meet her." He called, "Oh, Tick-tock, oh, Tick, oh, Took. Come here!" At the call a large yellow oat which was lying under a bush in the shade lazily raised her head and looked toward us. It took quite a bit more coaxing to induce her to leave her cool retreat. "Where's Jack, Tick-tock?" At the sound of his name the collie named Jack came and joined us. "This is my family -- Jack, Tick-tock my housekeeper, and Pidgie, and Bim, but Bim doesn't seem to be around just now. Do you want to see them do their tricks? But wait, though. I thought of something else to tell you, and I might forget it. They won't forget their tricks.
"This is one of the most exciting things that I can remember happening to me, that I am going to tell you. I was visiting a friend in the Northwest who had invited me to go hunting with him. A few days before I left to see him, though, I got a letter saying that it might be impossible for him to leave his ranch on account of a marauding grizzly bear that had killed some of his sheep. I wrote hack to him and told him it would be just as much fun to hunt a marauding grizzly bear as anything else, and he said come ahead. When I got there he agreed to let me help kill the bear, but told me not to bring a gun. He was afraid I might frighten the bear away before he could kill it, and he had to kill it, because it was killing his sheep every night. My not carrying a gun certainly caused plenty of excitement before the night was over.
"That night, after dark, we went to the corral where the sheep were kept, and made ourselves as comfortable as we could on a rail above the open gate. We got high enough to be out of reach of the bears, we thought, hoping that they would walk directly under us. We sat this way for two hours or more, not talking much, just waiting. Then we heard in the distance grunts and growls, and we could tell there was not one bear, but serial.
They came up to the corral, and after sniffing about, two of than walked Inside. In the dark it was hard to tell how many there were, and it was possible that these two were all. My friend raised his gun and fired, and one of the bears rolled over, mortally wounded. The other, Instead of running away, as we expected, turned in the direction of the shot, walking upright like a man, and holding its forelegs wide apart. It walked right toward us.
"No, I didn't have a gun. Yea, air, I can tell you, it was a mighty exciting time. It was the biggest bear that I had ever seen, and by stand ing up it could reach us easy. By this time we knew there were two or three more bears outside the corral and we didn't want to scare them away. But there wasn't anything to do but shoot. It was either us or the bear. So when the bear was within reach of us my friend shot, and the big grizzly fell over dead. It was a she-bear, and the other one was her cub that was almost grown ...... Well, that's been a long time ago.
"Here, Jack, hare Tick-tock, come and sing for us." The dog and oat came and at his command jumped upon a largo flat-topped stump and stood on their hind legs together. The collie began to howl softly. "Here, Jack, you must sing better than that. Sing tenor." The dog howled more loudly, and raised the pitch of his voice.
"I can't tell you, exactly, how I train them. They just understand me. A man has to be born with the knack of making friends with animals. And a way with animals and a way with children go together.
"Jack is naturally a very smart dog. Come in the house with me and I will show you how he says his prayers." We walked into the kitchen, with Jack at our heels. Mr. Davis took a plate from the cupboard, put a piece of bread in it, and sat down to the table. "Now you watch", he said. "I won't have to say anything. When Jack hears me cutting up my pancake in the morning he knows that it is breakfast time, and that he must ask the blessing before he eats." Mr. Davis arose from the table and stood very straight, with his arms folded, and kept silence. The dog looked at him, then rose on his haunches, held his forepaws up, and tilted his nose upward. He kept this position as long as his master remained standing, then dropped to all fours. "Now go and get your pan." The dog fetched it, and Mr. Dairs, put some bread into it.
"Jack always says his prayers before he goes to bed at night, too. Come into the other room and see." In the other room was a chair standing beside a couch, and when he was told to say his prayers the dog placed his front feet upon the chair and laid his head between them. Then Mr. Tull repeated the Lord's Prayer, and the dog remained perfectly still until "amen" had been said.
"Yes, Jack is a lot of company. All my pets and I are good friends. They keep me from being lonely a lot of times." We walked back into the yard, and the pigeon flew down upon Mr. Davis shoulder. A rooster, too, came up, which had a long top-knot. "This is Bim. Bim doesn't know any tricks, but he's a good fellow. Here, Bim, have some of Pidgie's corn."
••••••••
"Well, I'm very glad you came. You must come back sometime -- if I'm still living. I'm getting pretty old, you know. You must come back next summer if you are up this way. If I live till March, I know that I'll live the rest of the year. I hope to live to be a hundred years old."