Socio-Ethnic
Greeks in American
November 29, 1939.
Mabel B. Francis
Statewide Writers' Project
Miami, Florida
MRS. JOHN COLEZOFF,
1443 South Miami Avenue,
Miami, Florida.
The large white stu<text not clear> home of Mrs. John Colezoff is located on the south Miami Avenue in a fashionable residential section. A fence of bright pink and white concrete blocks, arranged checkerboard fashion surrounds the place which is very neatly kept. The house is really a duplex with screened porch upstairs and down.
The Colezoff family live on the second floor and wide heavily carpeted stairs lead to their apartment.
The long living room extends across the entire front of the house and is well ventilated by several French windows on three sides. Each window is equipped with white venetian blinds and hung with unusual but lovely curtains of fine cream colored imported scrim. Each curtain is centered with a wide panel of exquisite hand made lace and when I commented on the beauty, Mrs. Colezoff said "the lace was made by mother-in-law Greece and I would not subtract from its beauty by using over drapes."
The living room was charming. A thick blue rug covered much of the polished oak floor, and the three piece over stuffed furniture had slip covers of cream linen hand blocked with blue chrysanthemums and trimmed with heavy cream colored fringe. A long mahogany coffee table was in front of the sofa; a now cabinet radio was against one wall and a heavy mahogany spinet desk was at one end of the long room. Several upholstered chairs in harmonizing colors were placed about the room but there were no pictures on the walls and no ash trays. The mantel was of cream colored stone blocks and the hearth was of many colored broken tile. Back of the mantel hung a large mirror in a heavy gold frame and on the mantel were three or four large framed family photographs, all tinted. The home is immaculately kept.
Mrs. Colezoff is a beautiful woman: she wears her naturally curly black hair in a long bob and her big black eyes sparkle when she smiles. She weighs approximately 130 pounds and was exquisitely groomed. Her tailored sports dress of natural colored silk shantung had the lines of Fifth Avenue or Lincoln Road shop as did her hose and pumps. She was very gracious and charming and spoke English with little accent.
"Most of my time, <text not clear> I can remember, was spent traveling. We came to this country first in 1912 when I was six. I was born on the Island of Motylone and my father was employed by the Greek government. In Greece, the olive oil factories might be privately owned but they were inspected by the government and that was my father's job.
"As soon as my brothers began to reach manhood they wanted to come to America. We heard so much about America in the old country. First my oldest brother came to New York, then after awhile the other brother came to join him. My father decided that they would stay here so he told my mother it would be best to come for them and make them return to Greece. So my father and mother and I came to New York to get my two brothers but my father began to like this country also. There was war with the Turks and much trouble in Greece so we stayed on in New York. My father went many times back to the old country. In 1918 my mother and I went with him for a short while and the next year we went again, this time for a longer visit.
"In 1921 we came to Miami to visit with my brother who had decided to come here. Then we went back to New York after the winter season was over and in 1925 everybody said "go to Miami to get rich" so we came back.
"For six years we stayed here most of the time then we went back to Greece for a visit. I met Mr. Colezoff there at that visit and we were married very soon after in Greece. We did not come back here through New York but came to Havana for ten days in a hotel. Then we went to Nassau and came over to Miami from there. We did not need passports and many of the high class Greeks came that way. Ellis Island is not pleasant. When we came my husband spoke perfect English because he was educated to. He attended the Greek commercial college and English is taught. It is a compulsory subject and French is also for six years. Mr. Colezoff can speak Turkish, French, Greek and English equally well but I went into American grammar school and I can speak only English and Greek. I can read Greek and can write it a little.
"We speak English in our home except when we speak with my mother-in-law. She came last Christmas to live with us and she does not speak English. My little boy six years old will not speak any Greek so I sent him every day to Greek school. He would not learn so my mother-in-law said she would teach him the Greek and could tell her the English. When she speaks to him in Greek he can understand her all right but he always answers her in English He says he is an American. My other little boy is two and a half and he speaks very good Greek.
"I always speak English except to older Greeks and my husband when I have a fight with him. Then I speak Greek. Your language is too slow for me when I get angry. I must say the angry words in Greek, but that is not so often. Mr. Colezoff is very good. He is very quiet and listens to me chatter away. He likes to come home in the evenings and put on his house slippers and read or listen to the radio. I like swing music but he likes most the dramatics and the high class music. My husband reads the funnies first, then the war news. Both of us like best Miami Herald and the Miami Daily News. I always read the stock market first, then the war news but never the society page. We got the New York Greek Herald every day and I read it some just to keep in practice with my Greek but I like the American newspapers best. We got the Ahopian Magazine and my favorite of all is the True Story Magazine. That's all I read except the daily papers.
"I do not have much time to read, my little boy goes to school this year and I am working in the P.T.A Then I am a charter member of the Philleptohos Society. It is under the rule of the Greek Church and we have much to do."
"Do you play bridge?" I asked.
Mrs. Colezoff smiled, disclosing perfect tooth.
"Oh no," she replied, "that is such a waste of time, don't you think? We usually play poker and sometimes bingo or rummy - never for very high stakes. Then it would become too serious and we want only to have fun. The Greeks are very social people and we have much company.
"Even though my husband is quiet he goes with me and when he goes. I go. We Greek women do not have to worry about our husbands as you American women do. Married men are considered their wives property and other women do not chase them Divorce is not an exit for marriage among my people. If we quarrel and we do like everybody also - we just have to patch it up. If we wait too long to make it up or it gets too serious, our parents or older relatives <text not clear> to it that we get over such foolishness. My parents are dead now and one brother too, but my brother here in Miami would soon straighten me out if I wanted to be angry enough to divorce my husband. Of course, there may sometime be a good reason but very seldom. The Greek men are far from perfect but most of them are home loving and kind and neither drink nor run around nights. Parts of that is duo, I think to our training. In <text not clear> a girl may not say to a men who is a casual acquaintance "come around and see me". He must wait to come into her home until he is engaged to her."
"But how can he become engaged if he does not come to see her?" I asked.
"Oh there are many ways" she answered smiling, "we see each other at social gatherings and church. Nice girls - and I speak only of that class as I know no other are always chaperoned by their brother of father. If they have neither, always an elder man relative. Boys are taught that the home is a sacred responsibility. You have much freedom in this country and many fine ideas but I think the old Greek custom of strict chaperonage is better. Too many wild young Americans in cars and parents asleep in their beds. I intend never have a sister.
"I do not want any more children. Most of the Greeks now only cars to have two or three, and I think that is about the average family. Its enough. If I did not have a good negro I would find it tiresome, and now my mother-in-law helps."
I could see into the dining room, elaborately furnished in heavy walnut furniture and out glass, and through to the modern white kitchen where an old crook woman, plainly dressed, was cooking. Evidently that was the front yard with the younger boy. Both children were typically Greek, dark curly hair, brown eyes and strong, sturdy bodies.
"They are never sick," said Mrs. Colezoff "but they should be well. My husband and I are healthy. I had typhoid fever years ago but that's really all. My mother always felt illness came on because she broke the olive oil bottle.
"The Greeks have a lot of superstitions in the old country and I think that's one of the most believed, but even there I noticed on my last visit, people are becoming more sensible. They still believe in the evil eye. Every blue eyed person does not have the evil eyes, but the evil eye is always blue, not a dark blue like years but a kind of greenish blue. Evil eyed persons are always jealous when others have good fortune so maybe that's the reason for the expression "green eyed with jealousy."
"I had a pretty little sister and she died from the evil eye in the old country. That. I do not remember, but my mother said so. If the olive oil spoils or is spilled or our wine which we call "ouza or mastika" is spilled, it always means trouble. We read coffee grounds too, and the Cypsy troupes tell fortunes with certain cards. However, most of the superstitions exist only among the peasants." (She pronounced it pee-sents.)
"There is not much social distinction here but in Greece every one goes in for class. Only the poor wear native clothing except for celebrations; among the better class, only the latest Parisian styles are used. We do keep a native costume that we use on special occasions. Let me show you one I have had sent from Greece for my little boy."
Mrs. Colezoff brought in a lovely costume. The short white satin skirt, probably five or six yards wide, was gathered to a wide waist band. The vest-like jacket was royal blue velvet elaborately embroidered with non-tarnishable silver thread and beads; the sleeves, lined with white satin were open from armhole to wristhand where they were fastened together. Red moccasins with big pompoms and a red fez trimmed with long black tassel completed the costume. The entire outfit cost $30 American money.
"This costume of native dress is called a <text not clear> and the cost depends on the elaborateness; a man's costume like this would be about $45 and a woman's may run up to $200. They are usually embroidered and sometimes colored stones are set in. I want my children to be proud of their Greek heritage and when they have entertainments at the public school, where he goes I dress my little boy in his costume. He likes it even if he will not talk the Greek language.
"We have the same celebrations that you Americans have except our Independence Day is celebrated in this country on March 25th. Since Metaxas is King, it has been changed in Greece till August 4th. We do not like Kings. The Greeks believe in democratic government like you have in this country.
"Our Easter falls on your Easter every fourth year, and we still color our Easter eggs red like they do in the old country. We celebrate Christmas as you do and only at that time we eat our Christmas cookies. In Greece it is only a religious holiday and our social time and exchange of gifts comes at New Years. But on my last visit to Greece two years ago I noticed more American ways and customs. Nice women go to night clubs now and though they do not smoke or go unchaperened in public places, nice American women don't do that either. We drink mastika at meals and never serve cocktails. Straight whiskey is better."
Mrs. Colezoff brought in a bottle of mastika. It looks like gin and smells like lemon extract.
"We serve this at our social gatherings and evenings at home. Enough of it is very potent, but we seldom drink too much. The older Greeks frown on bobbed hair and short dresses, but style is style, and the young people follow it. My mother-in-law says I am not old fashioned and I cannot cook. I would not dare give you one of my recipes. I can make a stew of lamb and string beans and tomatoes, but we like our vegetables in salad mostly. Roast meat is better than fried or broiled, but we have anything we want.
"It makes me feel afraid sometimes and I do not boast about my good fortune but I have all I want of everything. Mr. Colezoff is very successful - he is in the fuel and oil business you know. When we were first married and came to Miami he went into wholesale hear business. That was during prohibition and he did not make enough money, so he sold that out for the oil business. He works very much and gives me what I want. Three years ago I built this house in this part of town because its nice and near the public school. There are no Greek families near, either, though my brother has bought the lot back of us on Brickell Avenue and two years from now will build his home. Of course, I do not yet have a yacht but that will come. We have a small boat, I have a new Buick a good husband, a lovely home, two nice children. What more do I want? It makes me very humble that I am so lucky. Our Greek friends are nice. There are really few tough or poor Greeks in Miami like these people in Tarpon Springs, and while we do go in for class we do not care so much here because there are mostly high type Greeks. We can associate with them and know most of them. We have very few cheap restaurant coopers and shoe shining places, that class. There are two doctors, one a chiropractor and one an eye and ear specialist but most of the Greeks deal with food or food production."
