See also "Talking Is My Life"(pp. 12251-12256), another interview with the same individual. The graveyard trouble discussed on pages 12401-12407 is also mentioned on page 12256.
Clark
Aswell
OUR TIMES AND SEASONS
A good part of the time Aunt Tobe Easterly sits in the door of her cabin looking toward the road across the quarter acre of yellow dust and scrubby weeds that former tenants used for a garden. Most days there will be people passing who wave to her and stop long enough to tell her what is hap--pening along the road, or over at Zama or Sand Hill or Oak Springs. Three times a week the peddler comes by in his mule-drawn democrat wagon. Then Aunt Tobe has a full spell of gossip while she swaps her hoarded eggs for thread or canned goods, or maybe some Rruton's Snuff for her and a plug of Pat Burnley chewing for Patey.
Aunt Tobe Easterly is tall and lank. Her face is sallow and patterned with thousands of light lines. Her dark hair, streaked with gray, is parted in the middle and rolled in a huge club at the nape of her neck. When she laughs, and she laughs often, she cants her head to the left ahd throws up her hands in a pushing-away gesture. She dips snuff so constantly that her lips are brown-crusted and her teeth stained. Otherwise she is spotlessly neat in a freshly washed dress and sugar sack apron.
Once a month the mail carrier in his spattered coupe delivers Patey's old age assistance check. If the carrier is not too pushed, he'll come in and have a drink of water and tell county seat news from Poplin.
"I'd just as leave talk to the mail carrier as get the check, too!"Aunt Tobe says, her face wrinkling until the eyes nearly disappear. She laughs in a loud voice, edged but not unpleasant. "patey ain't a whole lot of company, now he's so down and week with his bad stomach trouble. So I'm proud for anybody, just anybody at all, to talk to."
Back in the dimness of the single room Patey whispers from his chair, "Nunh, ain't much company now theae days. Ain't much good these days."
Patey seldom speaks. Hunched in his rocking chair at the foot of the iron bedstead, he is a small bundle of loose flesh and bones. His large protruding eyes are so fixed and blank that they appear almost sightless. His toothless gums mumble weakly over his tobacco. Now and then he whispers, "Wan' spit,"and Aunt Tobe, with movements that have long been automatic, steps over, puts her arms around his shoulder and helps him lean forward. Patey's thin white hair is awry, ambeer stains his stubby chin, but his shirt and overalls are clean.
The room, with its few sticks of furniture and calender and bright magazine pictures tacked on the wall, is clean and the walls are sealed with heavy blue paper, ridged and blistered over the rough log walls. From the lean-to kitchen there is scarcely any odor, but there are no screens and the walls and floors crawl with flies.
Aunt Tobe twirls her willow snuff stick in her can of Bruton's and rubs her gums vigorously, then leaves the stick in the corner of her mouth. "We ain't paying no rent here. Joe Fulghum--he's my brother-in-law--he owns this cabin and wasn't nobody living here. So he says, "Aunt Tobe"he says. 'if you'll fix up the house you and Patey can live in it as long as you want to.'"
She throws up her hands, chuckles, and goes on talking in her breathless way. "Law, Law--why, I didn't have much to fix with. Patey draws twelve dollars a month from the Old Age, but that don't go nowhere when a body has to buy everything in God Almighty's world a body has to eat. But I says to Patey, 'I'm going to fix up that house.' So I bought some roofing to cover the lean-to and I bought this here blue paper to cover these nasty walls. I put some chinking in between the logs and fixed up a sort of hen house. Neldon Kelcy, he married my daughter Etta, he come up here and put on the roofing and helped me put on the paper. And, bless God, if the very first wind didn't blow off one sheet of that roof! So it rains in that there kitchen when it's just barely leaking out of doors.
"Just the other day, I says, 'Patey, soon as I can find another house, I'm getting about read to move.'"
"This is an awful unhandy place. I have to hire somebody to take me to Poplin to get the junk they give Patey at the Welfare Office. They give a lot of mess. A heap of it ain't fitten for a pig to eat---old rice and prunes and the flour makes black biscuit but my name's Jimmie-take all you gimme.
"Last time I got my rations up to the office, they give me a great sack full of what you call them? Grape something-grape fruit, that's it. What makes them say that? They ain't a drop like a grape. Anyway, they give me fifteen of the greatest, biggest, juicy ones you ever saw.
"I says to Patey, I saya, 'Now, Pap, you ought to eat some of these things. They give them to us because they is so healthy.' But Pap wouldn't touch nary drop of them.
"Otis Raymore he'd took me to town and helped wag them things around and he said, "Miss Tobe, I want one of them things. I just want to see how they tastes.'
"I says, 'Why Otis, take one for you and one for Veda.
'"He says, 'Naw, one's enough. We'll see if we like them. If we do, we might buy some sometime.'
"I says, 'Now, Just cut it open round this way. Put plenty of sugar and then dig between them walls with a spoon. It sure is larapin!'
"Law ha' mercy!" Aunt Tobe lifts her hands, laughs shrilly, bending forward and slapping her palms on her knees. "Eating grapefruits on the fat of the land and no work at all to do! Ain't it a sight? And after all the hard times and seasons we've had!"
Patey turns his head and nods stiffly. "Ups and downs, We've had ups and sowns."
"That's the Gospel!" says Aunt Tobe. "I reckon they ain't nobody that's had more ups and downs than I have. Lord, I've been through a heap.
"My mammy died when I was two years old. I was Tobitha Barbee before I married. MY pap he owned a little place near where clyde Loggins lives now. He was left with five girls to raise. Not any boy at all. Oma she was Just big enough to keep the rest of us out of the fire. Well, Pap be went on doing the best he could and taking what care he could of us. The neighbor women helped all they could. You might say Miss Della Terry and Miss Lottie McCurry--she was Hester Thetford's mammy--raised me up. I stayed at their houses pretty nigh as much as I stayed at Pap's.
"The baby was Just three months old when mammy died and then the baby died when she was nine months old. Then Myrtle died when she was nine years old. So that left me and Oma and Nadine. Oma and Nadine was older than me but I was a spoilt brat and I thought I was big as any of them. They married young. Oma was fifteen and Nadine was fourteen. That left me and Pappy there by ourselves. Pap just always let me do like I pleased. When I went to school--and I didn't go much-if I wanted to go home with anybody, I Just went. Didn't never ask him nothing. If one of my kids had a done that way I'd beat him half to death.
"Well, I washed the dishes and piddled around in the house and Pap he done the cooking and we went on that way a while. Pap had a bugle. He loved to play it. He'd get out in the early morning and blow it loud. Folks for a mile around would get up by his bugle. Then he'd play it nights soft and sweet when he'd set by the fire in winter and under the trees in the dark of summer.
"When I was eleven they was a young boy of twenty-one living over on Mr. Bunch's place. His brother Jack rented from Mr. Bunch. So this Young boy was good to me. He bought me a doll and some candy. He played hiding with me and games like that.
"Well, that spring Pap got me three new dresses and Miss Lottie McCurry was making them for me. I knowed one of them was done. So one evening I says to Pap, I says, 'Pap, you go up to Nadine's and stay tonight. Miss Lottie wants me to come and spend the night with her and Tempie.' Tempie was just me age and we was playmates.
"Pap he says, 'Aw, I don't want to, I'm tired.' I begun to think I wasn't going to get him off. I believe he sort of smelt a mouse. I whined and I pouted. I says, 'Now, Pap, Miss Lottie and Tempie will be mad at me if I don't come, because I promised I would.' So Pap he covered the fire and went with me to Miss Lottie's. I went in and waited until he was plumb out of Sight. Then I says to Miss Lottie, I says, 'I want to put it on and I want you to tie that big sash bow in the back for me.'
"She looked at me funny like and said, 'Why, Tobitha, that's your Sunday dress.' What you want to put it on here on Friday for?'
"I says, I says, "I'm going to Mr. Bunch's for to spend the night and I want to wear it and I want you to fix it.' Hester, she was setting there and she says,'Tobe, you are up to something or you wouldn't be putting on that dress just to go up there.'
" I says, 'Well, I ain't going no place else,' which was the truth.
" I got dressed and went running, hopping, skipping happy as a lark up the road to Mr. Bunch's place.
"The young man he was there all dressed up and ready. Irby Brazeale was a young magistrate then. He was up there to see Hester and he said the ceremony for us and that's how me and Patey got married. We was the first couple Squire Brazeale ever married, and he was scared plumb to death. He had a little speech memorized and he like to forgot it.
"I wasn't scared. I didn't have sense enough to be scared. Why, I was just a kid eleven. I didn't have no more idea what it meant to get married than a bat. I knowed that Oma and Nadine was married and that I could marry if they could. Why, I didn't know what it meant to love a man. I didn't even know how babies come. Patey must loved me or he'd never have put up with my childish doings.
"Well, we stayed there at Mr. Bunch's that night.
"Patey, he didn't have no home and Pap was mad a heap about us marrying but they wasn't a thing he could do but make the best of it. He sent us word we needn't never come to his house no more. He didn't like Patey and said he never would.
"The day after we was married, Patey and me walked slop to Zama to see one of his sisters that lived down there. I remember it just as well as if it was yesterday, and it was fifty years ago, the sixteenth day of this March."
Patey looks up. "Hot day. It was a hot day."
"That was an uncommon early spring," I Aunt Tobe nods. "We had to go through the woods. I skipped and hopped along with Patey. He was awful lively in them days and whistled a heap. I gathered wild flowers and run ahead and hid behind trees and jumped out at Patey. I Just had a plumb good time.
"We stayed down there three days and I played with the children. But when we started home, I wanted to see Pap. We was going back to Jack Easterly's at Mr. Bunch's place. We was going to live with him and his wife. When we got to the place to turn off to go to Pap's, I saya, 'Patey, I'm going to see Pap.'
"Patey, he Says, 'Naw, you come on with me.'
"I says I says, 'I ain't a going to Jack Easterly's tonight. Pap's up yonder by his self and lonesome. I'm a going to stay at his house tonight.'
"patey, he says,'Well, if you go, you can Just stay.' I tossed my head sassy and independent and I says, 'I don't care, I want to stay.'
"So I went on to Pap's cabin and brushed up and built on a nice fire and het water and washed all the dishes and warmed supper. I was awful smart. After a while I seen him coming to the house. I run and met him and like I always done. Then I told him I'd left Patey.
"He says, 'Wasn't Patey good to you?"
"I says, 'Yes, but I wanted to come and see you and he said if I did I could just stay and I come on anyway.'
"Pap didn't say much. After we eat and washed up the dishes and put up a churning, Pap he says. 'Tobe, let's walk up to Nadine's a while,' and I says, 'And come back here after a while?'
"He says, 'Yes.'
"I says, 'All right, but I want to sleep in my own bed.'
"So we went on. When we got there, Pap he stopped in by the fire with Nadine and her man Buck. Buck he was Patey's brother and Nadine married him. Well, I loped on through to the kitchen where the girls was washing dishes. They said, 'Where's Patey?'
"I thought it was smart, so I says, 'I left him.'
"They went running in to tell Nadine and Buck that I'd left Patey.
"Nadine says, 'Have you shore nough, Tobe?' I says, 'Yes, siree I left him. I wanted to see Pap and he wouldn't let me.'
"Nadine says, 'you ought to be ashamed, Tobe. Patey loves you. You ought to mind him and be good to him.' She persuaded me to go back to Patey.
"So that next morning I wadded up my duds and went to Nadine's. Patey, he come over there and made arrangements for us to stay there a while. That throwed Patey to have to go back and to, to his work. Walk a mile every night, and morning. The nearest way was through Pap's yard. He went through every time but Pap never played like he seen him. He'd be late some nights and see Pap in the shadow but never spoke. One night Patey went through, a whistling.
"Pap heard and says, he says, "Uh--Patey, come here.'
"patey went up and talked a little and Pap he says, 'Patey, you bring Tobe and come on over and stay a while with me. You'll be close to your work and everything.'
"Law, I was happy as a lark. I was up before day next morning, bundling up my things to go to Pap's as Patey went to work.
"Well, we stayed on the rest of the year. The next year me and Patey talked it over and decided we'd get another place where he'd have a better show. He made a trade with a man nigh Kilburn but it wasn't a month until I'd left him and come back to Pap's. He come back and Pap says, 'Patey', you just stay here and tend my land.' So we stayed on for several years.
"We was cotton farmers on Pap's place. The way we always done whenever we went to plant was we would break the ground and break it up good. Always used black sandy land for cotton. We didn't get any chance to ride none when we planted cotton. Just walking with one mule, one row at a time is the way we planted. After you break the ground, you bed it up, then rake it good-- rake off reel good, and try to get done planting by the first of May.
"So we made the ground and cropped it good and nigh about the 4th of July we topped the cotton. That's the best way to make cotton. You just go out on days when it's the dark of the moon and top it. It spreads better and don't grow no taller and gets grown sooner, too, if you top it in the July dark of the moon.
"I remember one woman said she wasn't going to top hers that way. She waited till way out in August before she took her scissors and got out and topped it. Pappy told her better but she just wouldn't listen at all. Pap told her, 'Now you see if it don't 'grow higher than mine.' He told her it would, and it did, too. Growed up and spread way out and wasn't no good at all.
"Cotton just gets rank if you don't top it on dark nights and won't open till after frost comes and the leaves fall off it. Sometimes they's boll stains the frost makes. The cotton turns yellow then and ain't worth picking.
"In plowing we let the cotton stalks from last year stand in the middles. Then when we'd plow down the middle. That throwed them stalks down in the ground to make it rotten rich and helped the cotton grow. These days they pile the stalks up and burn them to..."
"Keep boll weevils out," Patey says. "Burn 'em up! Kill 'em Ain't no good. Nohow!"
With an absent nod to Patey, Aunt Tobe continues, "We went on that way for several years. Raising cotton and selling it in the seed at Zama, at the gin there. Well, these young girls back through here in Big lvy, why I hear them whine about how hard it is for them to get out in their lily white hands and chop cotton. Law ha' mercy, I loved it. Loved being out there in the boiling sun hoeing the crab grass out and working up a sweat and singing. Law yea, I didn't have none of these here high flung notions about being a fine lady. Where'd I be now if I'd had fool ideas like that rattling in my head?
"My children didn't start coming until I was eighteen. And it was a God's blessing. Poor little ignorant me. I wouldn't have konwed how to take care of them. They come fast enough though, after they got atarted. I had seven.
"When my fourth baby was little, Patey he got down with this here bad stomach trouble that has bothered him ever since. That summer in August he got down to weighing ninety pounds. He was just skin and bones."
Patey leans forward and misses the bucket.
Aunt Tobe goes to the water pail. "You'll have to be more careful. Pate." She pours and smears water over a square foot of the bare pine floor.
Patey says,"Wan' chew now."
After getting a hand of homespun tobacco from the mantle, twisting off a chewing, and giving it to Patey, Aunt Tobe settkes back in her chair. "Well, Dr. Hooper Redrum he said Patey just had to change climates or die. He'd been drinking cistern water. Doc said he needed mineral water and said for him to go to Texas. So Patey he got his fare together and went to Texas. Thirty-two years ago it was he went out there to look around for a place for all of us to stay."
Patey shakes his head. "Thirty-one years! East Texas."
"Anyhow, he went. Well, there I was. Pap he was just about down with rheumatism and heart dropsy. We had a crop of cotton and corn that had to be gathered. There wasn't nothing for me to do but take my boy Isham to the field and leave the children at the house with Pap. Bad weather set in early and me and Isham worked out there picking cotton and ice spewed out of the ground three inches.
"I come to the house one day and Holly McCurry was there with Pap and the children.. I hadn't noticed Pap being off no way and Holly he called me off in the kitchen and says, 'Tobe, what ever you do don't leave these children here with your Pap no more. He's off and off bad.'
"I says, 'But, Holly, I've got to get the crop in. What can I do but leave them? I'm in a peck of trouble, 'I says. 'Here I am. The others won't help me with Pap a bit. Nadine she can't take him. She's got eleven children and expecting another one and Oma won't do a form thing. Patey's a writing that he's down sick and a needing me and a needing some money. What am I to do? Patey wants me to sell out the mules and chickens and hogs and all the crop and come out there but I can't leave Pap.'
"Holly he went up to Oma's and talked her in to keeping Pap Then he helped me gather the corn and get everything we had accumulated sold off. I moved this chest and a bed and a lot of quilts and sheets up to Oma's for Pap to use. I washed and mended and ironed all his clothes and folded them nice and put them in a pillow slip and moved him up there the day before we was to start. I was going to take my feather beds and quilts and sheets and pillow slips and everything of the sort.
"Joe Fulghum he helped me get all the things crated up, And I fixed a great big Market basket full of grub for us to Eat on the way. Pappy cried till I thought I'd die, he hated To see me go so bad. But I had to go to Patey.
" I hadn't been on a train before. Seems like I didn't mind that though. We got to the train. They told me that I 'Wouldn't have to buy tickets for the children nnder nine. Pate Junior was a great big fat gob.. He wasn't but eight. But I just I knowed the conductor tor wouldn't believe it because he was as big as a cow.
"Joe Fulghum says, 'Well, I'll tote him in and set him down.' So here I was getting on with out grips, the dinner, and the three other kids and Joe wagging in that great big young one. They ain't never been nothing as funny as that.
"We got along pretty good on that trip. When we got there, it was a might good woman there and she helped us get fixed and started to sort of keeping house. Patey got better and got work at a sawmill out the edge of Smithville. I was enjoying the change. We was seeing everything and doing fine.
"Well, sir, if one morning Pap and Joe Fulghum did't come walking up, I ain't a setting here! Pap had hired Joe Fulghum to bring him out there to me. As sure as there's a God in Heaven I'm telling the truth. Before I left Big Ivy I'd cleaned Pap up and washed and ironed his clothes and there he was with them same clothes on and his clean ones in the pillow slip just like I fixed them.
"Why Oma hadn't done a form thing for him and Pap was just plumb fagged out from the trip. I put him to bed and cleaned him up soon as he'd rested. He come pretty nigh dying out there. He was down a month and then he, got better. I found out then he'd sold his place and got money to come out there on.
"When Pap got better, he begun to cry and beg us to go back to Tennessee. He, just couldn't stand to stay in Texas. He got worse and looked like grieving was about to kill him, so we finally sold out again and started back. Pap•had stayed in Texas three months."
Patey thumps the arm of his chair. "Six months."
"No it ain't. I'm a aiming to tell you how I know."
"Umh."
"I went before Christmas. Pappy he come next September. We come back to Tennessee in December."
"Nunh. Ain't so."
Aunt Tobe laughs. "Don't matter now. Anyhow we got started. This time I had Patey to look after, and Pap the four children and our dog--I was about to forget the dog. We had the prettiest dog in the world.
"We'd raised him from a pup. A shepherd, big and black with a white ring around his neck. We took him with us and was bringing him back. Well, we changed cars and made it all right until we got to kilburn, just pretty nigh home. Well, dad take, if Patey didn't get off the train there and the train left him. He thought Isham had strayed off and he was looking for him. I seen that patey was left so when the conductor come through, I says, 'What in the world am I to do? You've left Patey in Kilburn.'
"No, lady, he's in the caboose with the dog,' he says.
"I knowed he wasn't, but I didn't say nothing. Directly the man come and said, 'I'm sorry, lady, but your man and the dog is both gone.'
"I knowed he was left,' I said, 'And what in the name of God am I to do? Pap here can't walk and I've got these young ones and all this junk.'
"He says, 'Don't worry, we'll take care of you.'
"We got to Zama station. They took and put Pap in a rolling chair and rolled him out of the train and across town to a shade tree and borrowed a chair from the drug store and put him in it. Then they got me and the kids and all our junk out under that tree. Law, we was a sight! It just can't be fancied! I had wrote Joe fulghum to meet us in the wagon but he didn't come. There I was, the sun not two hours high, Pap not able to walk a step, the children tired and fretful, and Patey in Kilburn. Law ha' mercy!
"Tom McBride come up. He offered to take Pap in the buggy to Joe Fulghum's. So I got rid of that worry, but when and how Patey would ever get to Zama I didn't know. Wasn't a car in a thousand miles them days and I felt like if he caught a wagon or buggy it would be pitch dark before he got there. Well, I know folks in Zama, so I sort of calmed down and went in the stores visiting around.
"Somebody come in in less time than it would take to skin a gnat and said, 'Yonder comes patey. 'I just couldn't believe it. He'd followed that train. He was running. He was hot and sweating and puffing and blowing and mad. I ain't never seen Patey Easterly madder. And to cap it all, he didn't have the dog. 'They had took our dog right on. He went to the station agent and told about the dog and got right in behind them. We'd paid express and they was responsible for him. It was a week before we seen hair nor hide of him, but they got him back to Zama. We always thought some of them conductors tried to steal him. He was the happiest do you ever seen. It was a happy meeting when him and the boys got together again. Law, how they rolled and tumbled!
"Well, we got a wagon and carried our stuff and some thing's to eat out to a empty house just the other side of Joe Fulghum's. We didn't have nothing, of course, and precious little money. I asked Oma to keep Pap until I got sort of fixed and rested, but she wouldn't. So I took his bed and the chest to that house. I fixed his bed in one corner and a pallet for me and Patey and the young ones on the floor. He stayed there a while and Pap bought another little place and started building a house but his money give out and he got worse. I was expecting another baby and I got down not able to do nothing. Winter was coming on and we was living in one little room. Holly McCurry and Aaron Robbins come and says, 'Tobe, we seen about taking your pap to the poor house the other day when we was in town. Winter is coming on and you are down and ain't able to do much. He'll just be so much better cared for and I believe if I was you, I'd let him go till you get well.'
"I'd ruther have seen a hearse coming than that wagon to take him off, but what could I do? I just aimed that he'd stay till the baby come and I could get strong again. The day he was to leave every one of my little children went to the back of the field. They couldn't stand to see Pap go off.
"Well, we heard from Pap a few times and I wrote the folks if he at bad off to let me know. I wanted him buried up here with my folks at Shady Grove church.
"Well, my baby come the first day of January and I got along tolerable well. On the third day Patey went to the mail box and got a letter. Patey, he can't read, never went to school but two days in his life, so he carried it up to Theny Barbee's and got her to read it. It said that Pap had died on Christmas Eve and was buried up there in the grayeyard. Patey, he told Theny not to tell me a word about it till I got strong. So she didn't. Then, one day after I could set up, she said, 'Tobe, I'm going to tell you something, but promise me you won't cry.'
"I says, 'How do I know I won't cry? What is it?"
"'You won't cry?" she says.
"I says, I says, 'I won't if I can help it.'
"She says, 'Your pappy is done dead and buried.'
"How can I help crying?' I says, but she talked so sweet about how much better off he was and I knowed it was so. But I did want to see him one more time.
"It wasn't but a few days then until my little baby girl took sick and went into pneumonia and died when she was fourteen days old. It was spring before I got stout and well and over all that strain. We didn't have no more bad luck much then for a few years.
"Finally, after my last baby was born, we moved to a trucking country in Kentucky. We was growing a crop of tomatoes and just before they was ready to ship, some boys stole and shipped Patey's great big old brood sow. He was hot in behind them with the Law, he'd swore out a warrant, So they give him a hundred dollars to skip the country and not come into court against them. He left in the dead of the night. He come back to Big Ivy and hired out the rest of the year. There I was that time with six young ones and a crop to gather and sell. I sold out as soon as I could and come back here. Patey had a new house ready for us to move in that time. That fall my boy Buford had the pneumonia. He just liked to died. Dr. Hooper Redrum said he wouldn't never be no more account, and he ain't never been strong since, just cry now, sometimes when I think of him. He's just as poor as a snake and works day and night. He's got seven children and. He's on WP and A. He has to get up at four O'clock and walk three miles to catch a way to work and his wife's sickly and a bad manager too. And she don't make the kids do. when I told my kids what to do, they done it, if it took a barrel stave. I've beat and slapped my girl Etta about cutting up when I combed her hair until I ashamed, but now days children run the parents. Buford's do as they please.
"When my baby girl Nancy was seven, we moved over on Irby Brazeale's place, up there where Cora Bagley lives now. Nancy was a pretty kid and just started to school. She taken the diptheria and died. Then the next year my oldest girl, Neva died. She had married at fourteen and died when her first baby come. It was born dead.
"Etta done better. She waited till she was sixteen to get married. She could of waited ten years and she wouldn't beat Neldon Kelcy. I just know they don't make better men than him. He does too much for Irby Brazeale sometimes, looks like, but then Irby helps them out a lot one way and another. Squire is a might good man to rent from.
"We've lived at Irby's a lot one time and another, about ten years. Three years ago we was living where Neldon and Etta is on Irby's place. Irby was batching. He offered to board me and Patey if I'd move over there and do his house work. 'We had us a room separate and I didn't mind the work, Irby didn't fuss about but one thing and that was wood. He just kept next to no fires. I reckon he's hot blooded somehow. Anyway, Patey, thin as he is, needed more fire. Old Miss Lock come in one day and there wasn't much fire. She says, 'Irby, I hope when we die and go to hell they'll make you the fireman. 'That tickled Irby. He's a good man for all his queer ideas about religion and such. He's a Jehovah witness, a Judge Rutherford man. His religion ain't mine. I never did encourage his talk about it.
"Him and Miss Irma, his old maid Sister, is just like two children since she's come to live with him. They argue about everything under Heaven. Miss Irma is a dog lover and they've got nine. Irby slipped out six puppies and had Lovey Cole kill them last week. Why, it's a wonder Irby keeps soul and body together the way he lets them croppers do. He knows they steal and sell everything, but he Just lets them go on. He did tell Dallas Pomeroy to leave because he caught him stealing hay out of the field and it made him mad.
"Well, we stayed on at Irby's and would a been there yet, I guess, but Patey he couldn't get no Old Age and us staying on there. We are out to our selves and happier if we do have to pinch pennies to get by.
"patey Junior is the only one of my children that's able to help us much. He does a right smart and the others help too. Etta brought a gallon of milk today. And they bring vegetables when they can. I can't have no garden, no place here. Just my chickens is all I've got. I got a cow Irby give me, but my boy Purvis keeps her and divides the milk, only she's dry now.
"I get my pleasure out of going to church these days. Right up here at Shady Grove church by Joe Fulghum's store. That's where we belong. Brother Flavis Borum is our pastor and as good a little man I think as I ever seen. But I'm just afraid to brag on them, seems like every time I do that, the best preachers we have begins to break on us. And then the next thing they just ain't a bit account. If they just stay here they'd be all right. But when they go off to a big school it sure ruins them. when they go off to a big school and get proper and come back, they are ruined. They learn such proper names and talk I just don't like them at all. Now we had the best little boy around us, with Runnels, and he ruined his self and set so proper you couldn't hardly understand what he was a saying. Some of them gets to preaching weak doctrine, too. I like my sermons strong. A good strong sermon gives me peace and rest from my troubles."
Patey cranes his head and breaks in. "Graveyard trouble! Can't have no rest now."
Aunt Tobe rocks vigorously. "It sure is the truth for me. My graveyard trouble has pestered me mortally, And everybody else back through here. It's not the church's fault, though. It's the fault of that Ab DeFord and his wife Jennie Bell. Law, I've been preaching funerals all over Big Ivy about my graveyard trouble.
"It's like I told Clerence Allen the other day. Thirty years ago, when my first little baby died, they wasn't so many folks buried at Shady Grove. I was sick in bed and Patey went and picked out a place to bury the little fellow and started us a row. Then when Nancy died we put her next. Then Neva next to her. That left enough space for three grown folks' graves on the upper end of the row. I says out loud where everybody heard it that day after the flowers was put over Neva, I says, 'Me and Patey will be put in this space and Etta's family can be at the lower end.
"Well, last year this Ab DeFord he married Stella McCurry's niece, Jennie Bell. They moved to Poplin and he got him some sort of a little trifling job there. They's poor as snakes but put on such high and mighty airs a body gets sick to see them.
"They was raised out here at shady Grove and when their baby died they come back here to bury it. They started the grave in a row right at the foot of Lola Bledsoe's man's grave but for some reason they moved the grave up there on the end of my row.
"Well! I says then when I heard about it, If Ab DeFord and his wife wants to be put by their baby, they'll sure Lordy have to move their baby!' I says. 'The baby ain't in my way and I don't want to disturb the poor little innocent thing but they sure don't aim to take my place by my children away from me. Not if I have to stand there on it the rest of my days.'
"Jennie Belle DeFord she heard about what I said. Sometime the next summer she was at Shady Grove." Aunt Tobe raises her voice to a whine to mimic Jennie Belle. "I wish I'd never brought my baby out here. I'd rather have him in my back yard.' she says.
"Now, I never caught on, but she was hinting then for me to say something. I'd already said my say. I was in my rights so I didn't even think what she was a driving at.
"I never thought no more until one day in March me and Etta went to set some flowers by her baby's grave. Her baby was laid right next to mine. I seen the Derords had drove stobs right up to my Neva's grave. That meant they was a claiming me and Patey's space to be buried in beside their baby. I says to Neldon Kelcy, I says, 'Pull them things up. I'll tell Ab DeFord something if he fools with me.'
"So we pulled up them stobs and throwed them away.
"Well then, two 'weeks after that I went to see if our things was living and lo and behold if that there Ab De Ford hadn't been out there and dug a trench and planted flowers all around his baby's grave and on our place right up to Neva's grave. One of Buford's little boys was with me so I says, 'You get them stobs up and I'll pull the last one of these flowers up!' I was mad and preaching.
"Well, we throwed them stobs away. I says, 'I just ain't a going to set by. 'I says, 'I'm a going to pull them up and throw them out ever time.'
"The next day I went up to Lera Dene Hales' and Stella McCurry was up there. They asked how I was. I says, 'I ain't so 'well. I strained my back digging at them things yesterday.'
"Stella says, 'Tobe, you ought to be ashamed to cut such a rusty about a thing like that. What difference does it make? Why I don't care a whit where they put me when I die.'
"I looked her in the eye and pointed my finger and said, 'Stella, they ain't no use in you a setting there lying like that. Holly McCurry's been dead going on six years. You know well and good that if somebody was to come and take your plane beside him you'd be preaching too!'
"I had her there.
"But Aunt Tobe, 'Lera Dene says, 'It did look bad to pull up the flowers. They'd be pretty.'
"I says, 'You all can tell the DeFords that if they want flowers growing around their graves before they die, to pick out the place and I'll come and set them out, but I don't want them around my place. I've told pretty nigh every member of the church about it and they say I done right.'
"So Stella told Ab DeFord and he threatened to bring the Law.
"I says, I hope to Jesus he does bring the Law and save me the expense.'
"I ain't seen no Law. They did send Lawyer Glen Turner down here to see what I had to say.
"I says, Glen Turner, lain't got no more to say. I've said all there is to say. The DeFords is talking about moving their baby. I don't know whether they will or not. I don't care. And Glen Turner said, 'Aunt Tobe, I believe you're in your rights.'
"Ab DeFord and Jennie Belle was at Shady Grove every Sunday but they never come around and I never went around. I guess it was as much my place as theirs. Yes, they come every Sunday and drive them stobs and I go pull them up.
"The last time them stobs was iron pipes and as long as broom handles. 'I says, 'I'm going to get a posthole digger and get them up.' Patey Junior said, 'Well, I've had just about all this I can stand. I'll get them up.' And he told me just to keep my mouth shut. And he pulled them up.
"Well, the deacons of the church come up here about it and I says to them, I says, I'm a pulling up stobs and a throwing them out and a having a bushel of fun over it myself. 'They said, 'Tobe, you are in your rights.' One of them got in the meeting house and told out loud how the DeFords was a doing me.
"Then bless God, if them DeFords didn't drive up and do it again! Drove down some more stobs! well, I heard about it and went to shady Grove to see if it could be true. Well, it was true, all right. I looked at them stobs and turned around and started to go to Fulghum's store. I was plumb outdone. But I didn't aim to pull them stabs this time.
"Well, about' that time who should come a running out of hiding in the woods but three good brothers, from the church, three deacons. They was Lally Reed, Ned Collins, and Bill Allen.
"Lally Reed says, 'Miss Tobe, are you in a hurry?'
"I says, 'No. Just kind of wanted to get home before the rain starts,'
"He says, 'Well, we see Ab DeFord's been here driving stobs again. We've wrote a letter and tacked it on a plank and signed our names to it. We're a going to stick it up here and put a little tin roof over it. When Ab DeFord comes out here and sees it, that ought to stop all this stob driving and pulling up.
"Well, I read the letter. It says,'We have been authorized by the church to decide on the disputed lot. We have decided said lot belongs to Mr. and Mrs. Patey Easterly as they put in their claim on 'said lot twenty-one years ago. Please don't remove or drive any more stakes.'
"So it looks like me and Patey is a going to sleep by our babies spite of all Ab DeFord and Jennie Belle can do. But this graveyard trouble, while it's lasted, has sure had this community tore up like nothing ever done before. Everybody has lost sleep on account of it. I've sure preached Ab DeFord's funeral plenty of times, too.
"I went over to Pilgrim Glory church couple of Sundays gone. I preached Ab DeFord's fureral there risht in front of the church. A man come up and says, 'Who's dead, Aunt Tobe?'
"'Ain't nobody,'I says, 'I'm a preaching the living.'
"He laid on the ground and died laughing.
"So I'm just a waiting to see if Ab DeFord and Jennie Bell tries any more of their meanness. I declare to my soul, I'm just a ruining to preach their furerals some more if they do."