Allen Turpin (colored.)
Montgomery, Alabama
Adelaide Rogers
Montgomery, Alabama
NEVER NO MORE
An ex-farmer who loves the Bible... an ex-preacher, who loves the farm, is Allen Turpin, the Negro janitor at the Agudath Israel Synagogue in Montgomery.
Seventy-one years old, Allen has been married five times. He maintains however that he has never had but one wife-and that one was Matilda, the mother of his eight children.
Allen’s first and “only real wife” died forty years ago, the nineteenth of last December. But he can see Matilda as plainly now, he says wistfully, as though they parted only yesterday. He and Matilda had been married thirteen years when she died of child-birth pneumonia, in Russell County near Wurtsboro, Alabama. Something went out of him when she died, Allen remarked simply, and he has never felt the same since about anything. “But you can’t give up,” the old man opined, “as long as others weaker than yourself is looking to you for help. Hearts break ...but they keep on beating. And we can’t quit until they does. Of course I had my children. After Matilda died I lived for them and my farm. I had never done anything else then but farm. I love a farm.
“The happiest and best life a man is ever to know in this world waits on a farm. From the time the birds begin twittering at the break of dawn, until the first shadows of night fall in the evening, there is something to do-on a farm. That’s why lazy people never likes to farm. It’s not the place for them that wants to set and think. Or even just to set. No ma’am. You got to be up and doing from morning to night; hour to hour; season to season, if you make a success of your farm.
“When I lived on a farm I was always up by three in the morning. After breakfast-and I always had a good breakfast on the farm-I’d go out to my barn sometimes it wouldn’t be good daylight and I’d carry a lantern. I’d hitch up my plowin’ pardners if I didn’t have no mules I’d plow steers-an’ we’d be in the field by dawn.
“If I didn’t take the plow to the field, I’d take myself irregardless. I’ve always thought that old sayin’ ‘Don’t let the grass grow under your feet’ was meant for the farmers. Grass in your field amongst the furrows will choke out a crop worse’n diptheria will choke a baby. So when I wasn’t plowin’ I was hoein’; an’ when I wasn’t reapin’ I was sowin’.
“St. Valentine’s Day on the fourteenth of February, is the best time to sow tender plants. If you put them out any earlier they are sho’ to be killed by a cold spell. And in the spring, it’s always best to plant just before the full of the moon.
“The moon plays an important part in farming, just like everything else. All sun-plants, like cotton, and com, grow faster under light rays-whether of the sun or moon. The dark o’ the moon must also be took into account if you are trying to turn all of nature’s tricks to your advantage. For some reason, frost is not as killing on a dark night as it is when the moon is bright. And even on the coldest night, if freshly killed meat is put out under a bright moon, the meat will spoil. Yes, ma’am the moon has some strange powers and it just don’t like freshly killed meat.
“The weather of course, next to energy, can be a farmer’s best friend. And it pays every farmer to watch the weather signs.
“When the wind shifts to the West, or North-West, and stays for forty-eight hours, look out for cold weather. Then if it is too cold to plow, the thrifty farmer will not spend his time by the fire-side talking about how cold it is. That neither makes it any warmer nor chops out the Johnson grass. Solomon says ‘By reason of cold, the sluggard will not plow, but will beg bread in the harvest.’ Now I am not a sluggards. So when the cold had made the ground too hard to be broken by the plow, I knew I should use that time to cut down the grass and undergrowth which if left to itself, will strangle a young crop. But speaking of weather signs; if the wind in this latitude, goes South and stays twenty-four hours-then you can expect continuous showers. Yes ma’am, there’s a lot of sense sometimes in those little rhymes. They are easy to remember and mighty, mighty useful. I know another one that says, ‘Rainbow in the morning, sailors take warning; Rainbow at night, sailor’s delight.’
“‘Lightning in the North in summer or spring, a hard soaking rain the evening will bring.’
“I don’t believe I ever prayed for rain, even when my crops were burning up with drouth. I always felt I was too insignificant for the good Lord to drench his earth just to accommodate me. The good Lord sends the rains and the seasons according to his own pleasure, and we can’t return any of them to be done over like a shirt, or a dress that hasn’t been washed and ironed proper. I know when the seasons or the weather is due for a change. But I can’t neither make, nor hinder their operations through no kind of prayers or supplications.
“Everybody that has ever lived in the country-with his eyes open- knows that fig trees never put out their tiny green buds until summer is really on the way. Of all the plants, the fig tree is the wisest, and most truthful. It has never forgotten that our Lord cursed it once for deceiving Him. For its falseness, that particular tree was withered overnight. So from that time until the present, fig trees have been truthful as well as wise.
“I have noticed too, that when terminate, or ‘flying ants’ come out from their bed in rotten wood, winter has really gone. And it will not be long before we have our annual feast of fresh fruits and vegetables. All these signs, a farmer must read and apply-along with hard work-ar he will not succeed in his endeavors. Folks will tell you nowadays, that a man cannot make a living on a farm. Well-if a man can’t make a living on a farm, he can’t make a living anywhere. I loved and understood my farm like a mother loves and understands her children... because I watched it, and thought about it all the time. But then-I came into this world on a farm-and if I had my way...I’d go out of it on a farm.”
Allen was born on the Borum plantation at creek-stand, Alabama, three miles from Hurtsboro, an old township in Russell County.
He spent his childhood roaming the woods ... fishing and hunting ... playing hide and seek .. blind man ... and all the games in which boys regardless of creed or color have throughout the ages found their diversion.
Then one day, young Mr. George Williams, a relative of the Borums, came to visit his cousins, and the whole course of Allen’s life was altered. For between him and Mr. George, there developed one of those rare friendships that sometimes bind a white man and a black man with indissoluble ties of affection.
“We were just like brothers,” Allen’s voice dwelt proudly on the word ‘brothers’. “Whatever he had, I had. And what I had belonged to him, if I thought he had even half-way took a shine to it.
“We roamed the woods all day, and at night we sat on the door steps lookin’ at the stars, and dreamin’ and talkin’ about the big things we’d do in the world when we grow’d up to be men. Sometimes we’d scare each other with tales about ha’nts or ghosts we had heard of. Then again we’d plan to go off to a war together, like white gentlemens and colored boys had done before. But mostly we just played ... and talked ... and had fun.
“When the summer was over, and he went back home to Hurtsboro, I went with him. We stayed in the same room then, and wore the same-or nearly the same-kind of clothes. We ate the same things-at a different table, and we often carried our meals upstairs so we could eat together.
“I toted his books to school for him, and waited around outside until he was ready to come home. As soon as he’d get out Mr. George would say something like this: ‘Come on now Allen. Let’s get busy. I’m going to learn you what they learned me today. So laying down on our stummicks in the grass, he would learn me, out of the same book they had learned him.
“Because Mr. George wanted me to have some of everything he had, my learning had to come before we played any games. And that night after supper when we had gone to our room, we had learning again. We’d put the lamp on the floor and lay down beside it to read out of our book. One night his pa came in unexpectedly, and caught us. ‘Why Allen, ‘he says, all surprised, ‘I didn’t know you could read.’
“‘He can read just as good as me.’ Mr. George spoke up real proud. ‘Just as good as me.’
“Nothing would do then but I had to read for his pa. Afterwards he read for his pa. And when they all decided I read a little the best, the happiest and proudest one was Mr. George.
“He was the best man what ever lived in the world. There never was no other man like Mr. George. Just like there never was no other woman like Matilda.
“I married her young. And we went to live on a farm not far from Hurtsboro. I didn’t want to be too great a distance from Mr. George. So I went to live on his farm, while he run a store in Hurtsboro and I looked after the place in the country. He came out twice a week to the farm. And I went in town every Saturday to buy my supplies. Of course I traded with Mr. George. I wouldn’t of thought to buy nothing from nobody else while he was operating a store. We still went hunting together too, in the Fall. And we always spent some time fishin’ in the Spring.
“Then he married Hiss Leila. And we didn’t see each other so often as time went on. But years a passing don’t make no difference to folks like me and Mr. George. He had his store, and his wife and children to keep him hustling. I had Matilda-and six children, and my farm, that was really Hr. George’s. Though I couldn’t have had more interest in the place if I’d owned every stick and stone of it.
“Daylight found me in the field a-plowin’. At first I plowed with oxen. Then after Mr. George saw what a good farmer I was, he bought me a pair of mules. And about that time, I hired a nigger boy to help me in the field. We made fine crops too. I raised cotton on shares with Mr. George, and while he got most of the money that come from our cotton, I got a part of it. And I had all the sweet potatoes, black-eyed peas, com, onions, cabbage, turnip greens, chickens, eggs, squash and tomatoes that I could raise. In those days white gentlemen wouldn’t stoop to raisin’ pigs. Cotton, old King Cotton, was the white folks’ crop in Alabama. So I had all the pigs on the farm. I kept three cows too. And all the milk and butter I didn’t want I sold in town. I sold all my surplus vegetables, eggs, and fruit too. Yet people say you can’t make a living on a farm.
“Why, Miss, if I had been working in town, and had had to pay rent, and buy everything my family and I ate, and buy it with the wages a workman gets in this latitude, we would all have starved to death. As it was, my children had plenty of milk to drink; plenty of good food to eat; and I had thick, sweet cream on some kind of pie every night with my supper.
“That was the meal we all ate together. When I went to the fields in the morning, the little folks were asleep. I carried my lunch along with me, so I didn’t come home to dinner. But at night we ate together ... cracklin’ bread, simmered peas, turnips, sweet potatoes, pork shoulder, ribs, sausage, or just plain ham, and pie. We had eggs whenever we wanted them-fried, scrambled, boiled- or in sweet custards. Sundays we had fried chicken, rice and cream gravy, flour biscuits and honey, and old-fashioned sweet potato pudding.
“Twice a week I went fishin’. And I never came back without a nice string of fish for supper. I had noticed that if white children ate pork too steady, they broke out in boils. Now, if pork meals ain’t good for white children every day, they ain’t good for colored children either. So twice a week I went fishin’. I got to the place where I didn’t specially care about fishin’ as a pastime. In fact I didn’t like to lose a whole afternoon out of the fields. But I didn’t want my children to get sick. White children what ate pork all the time were never well. I wanted Ola, Rosalie, Minnie, George, John William, and Exton, to be healthy, fine set-up children. There would have been eight of them, but the last two were still-born.
“I was crazy about my children. After I lost Matilda, I don’t believe I would have married again except for them. You can’t leave little children in the country without somebody to look out for them. Ida-my second wife-was a good woman and a good cook. I reckon you might say I married her as a convenience. Ida didn’t live so long. But I disrecollects of just which particular sickness she died. She use to grumble, I remember, because I made her help in the field. I wouldn’t let Matilda work in the field. But Matilda was my wife. And Ida was just a woman I married.
“After Ida’s death, I married Emma. She was a good cook too. But like Ida, she was jealous of Matilda being my wife, and they just the wimmins I would happen to marry. Wimmins are always going to be jealous though, about one thing or another. And a man is lucky if he can give them something real to be jealous about, instead of them making his life a burden on account of something they have thought up for themselves.
“Soon after I married Emma, Mr. George left Hurtsboro and come to Montgomery to be a book-keeper in a store. I didn’t want to stay in Russell County and Mr. George in Montgomery. So I come to Montgomery too. Mr. George got me a job as a porter, in the furniture store where he kept books. And once more we was together again-almost like when we was boys.
“Then Mr. George died. And I couldn’t stand Montgomery no longer.
“I went to Birmingham and got a job as a car greaser for the T.C. & I. Railroad. I didn’t like Birmingham at all. Hot in no ways. But I couldn’t come back for a while, to Montgomery without Mr. George. And I couldn’t live happy in Hurtsboro without Matilda. So I stayed on in Birmingham. Since I was going to be miserable anyhow, I figured I might as well suffer in some place where I could draw good wages. My children had all grow’d up, and struck out for themselves. That left just me and Emma to get along on what I made out of the railroad.
“I had taken up preaching in the meantime. And I got considerable comfort out of religion. My father was a preacher too. He was a presiding elder in the Opelika district of the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church. That’s the one I belong to. I reckon there are other good churches, but I can’t think of none that I would put along side of the Methodist. If a man is a good Methodist, he is a good Christian. And that is as much as anybody can ever hope for to be.
“During my stay in Birmingham, Emma died of being too frail, I suppose; and a short while later I met Mary. Mary was a Widow well along near fifty. I should have knowed better than to give a serious thought in her direction. But she was sc persistent in her pleasant widow-ways that I began going to her house for Sunday night supper. Now whenever a man starts eating Sunday dinner or supper in a widow’s house, he has already hung out the white flag of surrender. And all that is needed is his final ‘I does.’ I didn’t realize this at that time, but Mary did. So she kept asking me to eat in her house, and I kept going, until Mary married me, without my consent-so to speak. But I will say this for Mary. She could make the best chicken stew out of rabbit that ever set on a preacher’s dinner plate. Yes ma’am, she could cook a rabbit with a little onion, and green pepper and raisin sauce, till that cotton-tail- served on the table with dumplings, and apple salad, ice tea and banana pudding, wouldn’t know itself from a chicken. Mary was smart in them ways. And that chicken-into-rabbit dish was her own fifty-year-old game of widowish deceit. After me and Mary was married, our life was one long disagreement. Nothing I could do seemed to please Mary. And everything she did afflicted me the wrong way. She didn’t even cook good no longer. So I divorced Mary right here in Montgomery.
“I had moved back here, thinking the change might help her disposition. But it make her worse. So I got shet of Mary for all time. After I got rid of her I went to Chicago on a visit to my daughter, Minnie. And I felt better when I came back than I had in years. But no matter how good a man feels on his own account, he has got to eat. So I married Maria some twelve or fifteen years ago, I believe; and I have been eating well ever since.
“Maria is a good woman as well as a first class cook. She is twenty- one years younger than I am and has a job cooking for well-to-do white folks. Maria makes five dollars a week, and they let her tote. That means she can bring home her meals instead of eating them in the white folks kitchen. If she eats in the white folks’ house, I wouldn’t get none. So I told her she would have to either tote or quit. Rather than be without a good cook, the white folks will let ‘em tote their meals home. In that way, all the fine cooks usually has husbands. For if you’ll notice, the good providers of either sect is never without a mate.
“I reckon I should be thankful to have Maria. I am too old now to preach. And I have just recently laid down my job as janitor at the Synagogue. I do wish-since I am old and penniless-except for the meals and room that Maria donates toward my upkeep-I do wish I say, with all my heart that I could get a pension.
“The Lord never intended a woman to be the head of a man’s house. But if she makes the living, and is able to pinch down on the purse strings, then the Lord’s will, as well as her husband, is made to look foolish. It takes very little to give a woman the idea that she is a man’s equal. In fact they already think so anyhow. Then when they were allowed to vote, and plainly told they were our equals, it unsettled the woman’s head. That’s what is ruining our country today. Wimmins said they wanted equal rights with men. But they didn’t. What they really wanted was equal wrongs; freedom-to live their own lives ... getting drunk ... neglecting children ... running around all hours of the night ... and fussing with their husbands if the poor old fellow wants a dime for to buy himself a sack of smoking tobacco.
“This is a rich country. They give big jobs in Washington to white men who serve their party in some notorious fashion. Well, I have served the Democratic party in my small way just as well as Mr. Jim Farley, or Mr. Senator Harrison. I began voting in 1887. Since then, I’ve always been a Democrat. I have always cautioned the colored people not to vote Republican, but to vote Democratic along with the white gentlemen of the South. So it seems to me that a rich country like ours, could give one little pension to a poor old darkey like me. If I could get a little pension money to spend now and then, Maria couldn’t domineer over me on account of her being the financial head of the house, with I looking to her for all my necessities. As it is now, I am in her power. At those times when she can’t get a job cooking for white folks, she works at the sewing room of the WPA. I believe they pay her ten dollars a week. But she won’t allow me even ten cents a week. Anybody ought to know that is not right. The Lord did not give the man to the woman. He gave the woman to the man. Now the white folks have reversed the Lord’s judgment, and given the man-along with all the money-to the woman. I have heard that ‘every dog has his dry; and every woman her hour.’ If that is true, it explains why we are passing through one of the darkest hours of civilization.
“I am living now with only one hope. And that is the belief that in the life beyond the grave, I shall see Matilda again. Her ... and my boy, Exton, who went away to the war in France, and didn’t come back. I never knew if he died of some sickness or was killed in fighting, or just didn’t return. If I wrote off to find out, and they told me he was dead ... I’d know then ...and I’d have no more hope. But this way, the door is always open. I can think maybe Exton will come home tonight. Maybe he will come tomorrow. Tomorrow ... or the next day. But especially tomorrow loves that word. There is something so wonderful about tomorrow.
“In that tomorrow toward which I am looking forward, Matilda and I shall be together again with our children. Reunited, we may forget the loneliness of the years we spent apart, and remember only that we are together again-to be separated no more.
“Never no more, Lord .... Never no more!”
<text not clear>
