Annie L. Bowman
Escambia County
December 14. 1939 Mr. and Mrs w. D. Owens Atmore Ala.
The sun shone down warmly with its glancing shades of purple, bright yellow, and green on the wide Avenue of oak tree trees, as Mrs W.D. Owens came to meet me, her arms holding a load of oak wood for the kitchen stove. She says, we could go into the parlor, but I am so busy, we will just viset here in the kitchen. You know to-morrow is Thanks-giving and the children will be home, however I am saving my turkey until Sunday. Mr. Owens will be home then, you are doubly welcome for the one of the greatest joys I get from life is the meeting of people and making friends. I like to know people, for I always find something in every person to admire, something to cherish, something to commend. Certainly all the people I meet are not perfect; but if all folks are of the same pattern as those I meet from day to day, it must be a pretty fine old world. I love life, cheifly because I love people. The more people I know, the happier I am.
Mrs. Owens was born in Chipley Florida, a ministers daughter. After finishing high school in Chipley Florida, she graduated at the normal school in Tallagassee Florida and taught school until she married in 1900. They have six children, three girls and three boys. The three girls have finished college. Willie Dosia, the oldest girl is married. She lives and her little four years old live at home with hermother. Patsy the platinum blonde so much like her mother, was a stenographer before she married her rich employer. Kathline is a teacher in the Graceful Florida high school. Of her boys: Dowling, who died at the age of sixteen. Chester is in his first year at Auburn and Jesse is still in Atmore High school.
Mrs. Owens says I am very disappointed this Thanksgiving. It is the first time Mr. Owens business has ever kept him away from home so much,(especially on this day) since we were married. He has planned to be with us on Sunday, because he never misses church here if he can possibly help himself. I dont believe you can ever come again in the same community after once loosing out. I believe you will have to hunt a new location, even after you have built up your home and hate to give it up.
As we continue the conversation you find she is a very religeous woman who is a member of the methodist church, not only a member but a great worker and has brought up her childrn to never shirk their religeous responsibilities.
She speaks of their former years of prosperity. I never did such menial work as getting in wood before the depression, but we are blessed with plenty of oak wood from this avenue of oak trees you came through to get here. They are so big and old, limbs are continually falling and this makes all the wood we can use. This wood box was here when we bought the place (pointing to a huge covered and painted box that would hold at least a half cord of wood) and laughingly said, as one of the school boys visiting in the home said to Jesse: if mamma had such a wood box at home and asked me to fill it, why I would actually faint. I never let it get entirely empty.
Willie Dosia a tall, dark, slinder, haughty looking girl leading her little daughter by the hand came in from the post office. Mamma I bet daddy will come home to-morrow or we would have heard from him. I didn't get a thing at the office but this old magazine and she nodded to me as she passed through the door. Presently she returned and said, I'm making my home here now until my husband gets to work again, when that will be I don't know. I know mamma. needs me as daddy is away so much, but I had rather be in my own home, the more there is in the family the more work is to be done and I feel like she would be better off alone. I think I'll leave baby with you and go over and fix aunt Hattie for the night.
She swished out through the door and her mother says, dont pay any attention to the way she acts for she is sorely troubled and feels she is a burden to us. We do try to make her feel welcome, but she is bitter. Her husband isn't much force. Its an ill wind that blows nobody good and I think helping her aunt, who has been sick two months makes her feel a little more worthy.
A car drove rapidly up to the door and there was a joyful meeting of this short stocky man of sixty five years and his little blonde wife, who looks not much older than her daughters. She busied herself with basting the turkey saying, I'll cook it now you are at home. Here is a lady a lady to see you, take care of her while I fix up the turkey. Why sure I am never to tired to talk to the ladies. Says he.
Mr. Owens came to Atmore in 1915 and bought the old W. M. Carney home with its forty acres surroundings. This big two story building is situated one half mile west from the business section of Atmore. Across the railroad on highway 31. A big avenue of trees on the front give it a shady sombre look. This walk extends from the L. and N. railroad to the door a quarter of a mile. Mr. Owens was reared in Chipley Florida, he and his wife attended the same high school. His father, being a turpentine before him, naturally he grew up with this work in view He has been a turpintine operater all his life. He is a member of the methodist church and has contributed heavily in this and was one of the promoters of the beautiful methodist church here. As one man expressed it, even if he is a little wild at times you can always find he and his family in the amen corner on every Sunday morning. He is a member of the Carney Masonic Lodge and is a free giver to all charitable organixations. He recently gave five hundred dollars($500) to the welfare for the purpose of keeping the sewing room open.
When he located in Atmore he erected two naval stores mills ome in Escambia Ala. the other in Escambia Florida each within a nadius of twenty five miles of Atmore. With the money he already had made before coming and these two stills made him a rich man and an important leader in the community in all the civic actions and participation in public affairs. His income is undetermined, although it run up into the thousands annually.
He says, to be home on Thanks-giving has caused me no end of inconveniences and has knocked into some of my financial plans as well, but I couldn't let down the wife. After I lost out here during the depression. It was hard to adjust my self to anything. After prices in turpintine dropped so low, and my first pay roll money was short I saw it was useless to carry on and I sold my business at a great loss of some Fifty thousand dollars. It was better this way than to get deeper in debt.
I then drifted about looking for something to cling to there was nothing in view. There was a big land deal on a corporation buying up the Southern States Farms. Well I bit and these fellows cleaned me out of ten thousand dollars (10.000) deal. I sat down for awhile worrying, when an idea came to me of putting in a meat market here in Atmore. I worked this for a year and got farther in debt every day. I finally played Santa Claus, distributing what I had in stock to the poor, paid the rent, burnt the credit book, locked the doors and went home a failure. I didn't know how to do a thing but turpintine. I thought of the great hopes my father and mother had for me, but high school was enough for me I wouldn't budge an inch toward college talk. My mother had mapped out a ministers life for me. Still I couldn't see how I had missed any thing by being A ministers, business was my aim in life and I just would not be whipped. So I set my brain to working again. It sounds easy doesn't it. Just try it for your self.
He tells you, that out of a clear sky comes the Kraft paper mill to Mobile and he immediately investigated this and secured a contract with the firm to get out timber for the mill. Re bouhht or leased all the timber in Baldwin and Escambia county he could get and has made as much if not more than he ever did in naval stores. But th_s keeps him away from home most of the time.
Mrs. Owens says, we kept out of the red pretty well during the depression. willie Docia got a place as book keeper with the Red Cross, Patsy had a good position as stenographer. The smaller children and I went to work sold milk and butter and I also made sandwiches for a local drug store. But there was nothing so bad as when I found my oldest boy dead in bed one night while I was alone. If a thing happens to you like that and you arn't already a Christian you will be before the funeral is over.
He tells you that with his paper mill contract, he also recently has bought a big interest in some oil wells in Louisianna and has built and fixed his offices to begin operation by the first of January, and will probably move his for my family there.
He says, he believes the depression was caused by greed forgetting their fellow men end God in the pursuit of this worlds goods. And the defense of the depression therfore, is not a problem for the government or the army, it will mot be solved on foreign soil. It is up to us, as individuals citizens On what we do depends the future of the depression. I am asked How shall we build the world after the depression and I might be justified in saying that we shant rebuild it but shall just middle along. However the fact is that rebuilding the world is a job for which we are not hardly qualified. When we knock down our houses we can rebuild them; that is about as much as we can claim.
I like to do my own planning and drive my own bargains even if I do get left or fail so many times. Men are gamblers by nature. Why not direct it into orderly, supervised channels. Well you must admit if you recieved a telegram stating you had won a fortune you would be some what surprised. Thats exactly what happened to me and if you don't believe me, come to Louisanna to my oil wells and see the gushers.
Mr. Owens says, he has had many ups and downs in business, but the worst he ever did during the hard times was trying to farm a little on his forty acre farm with a mule and negro man. Well that beat him how any body could wrestle a living out of a farm is more than he could see. He didn't know which to pity the most, he, the mule or old Sam. But he knows he will never try that again.
He believes in the good old days when a man managed his family, did his own thinking, educated his own children, clinging to his own church, giving charity to all that is in need. And sometimes I believe in the negros eleventh commandment. Do others or they will do you.
He still holds the highest respects of all he comes in contact with. If he should move to his new place of business. He will be missed socially as well as financially.