NC-418
John L. Walters
1015 Green Street
Durham, North Carolina
February 25, 1939
LR (Leonard Rapport)
JOHN L. WALTERS, TATTOO ARTIST
Dr. Fassett, the eyedoctor, decided he'd try a little experiment so he called me in. This girl - her name was Leathie Bradshaw - was an orphan in the county home at Roxboro and they were trying to get her placed in a private home, but she was disfigured by this solid white eyeball. It was right scary looking and they'd sent her to Dr. Fassett to see if he could do anything. He put her to sleep and I tattooed a little sight right in the center of the eye verify by Dr. Fassett-L. R. That was about seventeen years ago and I never have seen her since but Dr. Fassett said it healed in three days and helped her looks a lot. I believe they got her in a family after that. I sent a story about it to a magazine but they never did print it. I reckon no other tattooer in the world ever worked on an eyeball.
I've tattooed moles on women's faces; that used to be right popular. Butterflys on women's legs used to be a good number too; they're might pretty through dropstitch stockings. I remember one mole I tattooed on a fellow's face. I was working over at Hillsboro, pricking a design on a man, and this fellow come running up and wanted to know if I could prick a mole on his face before the train come; seemed like he was supposed to catch that train. Well, he had freckles on his face as big as the end of my finger; I never saw such freckles. Everybody was laughing and I asked the man I was working on if he'd wait a few minutes, and I put a mole on this fellow. He paid me and run on out; but that always puzzled me, what he wanted with a mole with all them freckles.
I learned tattooing in the navy; I'm the only tattooer in this section. There're some in Norfolk and there may be some in Richmond; there may even be some jackleg tattooers with half-way outfits through here; there're jacklegs in every trade. The further inland you get the less tattooing there is; to do anything at it I really ought to be in a seaport town. In a seaport you get to do ten, twelve, fifteen dollar designs; sailors have money and don't mind spending. Around here the average fellow gets about a fifty or seventy-five cent design, that's all the money he's got. There was a fellow in Norfolk I knew when I was there who was a real artist; I guess he's about to die now because he was tattooing when I was there in the navy and I'm sixty-four.
I enlisted on July eighteenth, 1900, right after the Spanish-American War; I saw the hulls of the Spanish ships at Santiago. I stayed for one cruise we called it, four years. We made three trips to the West Indies and one to New England. The navy then was mostly criminals and foreigners; Chinese, Dagoes, Japanese; we had a band with forty men and every one was an Italian. The navy was about the meanest place you could be. There's no comparison with it today. Today they enlist from inland; in those days they used to round up men from the waterfronts.
We were trained off Paris Island in South Carolina. They've got a naval base there now but we were down there before it was built. I was on the old Topeka; she was what you call brig-rigged - half steam and half sail, two masted. I remember we turned up, a bunch of us, at night and they got the quartermaster up to issue us equipment. We got two of everything, uniforms, blankets, and all. He was grumpy anyhow at having to get up in the night like that and I got a pair of pants about a foot too big in the waist and about half a leg too long. When we came on the old Topeka some of the sailors were standing around to look us over. We had to climb down a ladder and about time I got halfway down I caught my foot in them turned- up pants-legs and sprawled out on the deck with all my stuff, one of them old sailors looked at me and said, 'Gee, that's a bird. Wonder where he come from?' I couldn't help laughing myself. I've thought since I really must have looked like a bird, sprawled out there like that.
I got to be a first-class seaman. I was on the Lancaster, which was a three master, all sail, and on the Indiana, a first-class battleship. The old Indiana could ride those waves like a duck. I didn't like the pitching, though. One time I was going down the steps - they call them ladders in the navy and that's about what they really are - carrying a five gallon kettle of beans and five gallons of coffee to the boys for their breakfast, and the old ship pitched and I throwed those beans and that coffee all over the place.
When the cadets would go for a cruise, dog, we'd have fun. We were the officers then. It was the only time we got a whack at them because later on they'd be officers, but when they were cadets was one time the sailor had fun.
I was born and raised in Danville, Virginia. My father came from around Chapel Hill but he moved to Danville as a young man. My mother was from Roanoke.
I had one brother and three sisters; they're all dead but my brother and me and he like to passed out two or three months ago, but now he's back at work. He's master mechanic where I work.
My father hadn't any kind of trade. He was a foreman in a tobacco factory but he fell and got hurt and he never was himself after that. He clerked and such as that.
When my father died my mother first run a boarding house and I helped carry dinner. She had forty boarders and kept three cooks. Then I went to work tagging chewing tobacco. I remember the name - Reynold's Sun Cured. I'd take paper tags and lick and stick them on; my mouth used to get sore from licking so many. I made forty cents a day then and worked from seven to six and to four on Saturday. I don't remember just how old I was; not over twelve, but it's been so long ago.
We moved to Durham when I was fourteen; my father's brother lived here. Durham then was about the size Hillsboro is now. I worked in the cigarette factory and in smoking tobacco and did some carpenter work and painting. I worked in leaf tobacco, packing it, and then went in the bag mill, counting sacks they gave out to taggers in town. I got a dollar a day which in those days was good pay.
I got in the navy like other young boys; the advertisements and uniforms caught my eye and I signed on. The day I joined I made the rounds of all the saloons in Durham and had something in every one.
When I got out of the navy I travelled for two years doing nothing but tattooing. I was through North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia and had good business. I wore a white sailor suit all covered with designs - even wore white slippers with designs on them - and I did some slack-rope walking to get a crowd. I've always been a good rope walker. Mostly I was by myself but sometimes I'd take along one or two fellows for company. I started out with a hand needle but tattooing machines were invented about that time and later I used a machine run off of dry-cell batteries. Those were sorry machines; I remember the first one I bought; I got it from a fellow named Brown and it was a sorry thing.
Twenty-two twenty was the best I ever done in one day; that was in Haw River. I worked in cotton mill towns and around mills. Down at Erwin - it used to be called Duke - I tattooed I don't know how many women. Since I got married I haven't travelled anywhere except to Hillsboro. I went to Hillsboro once every weekend for twelve months straight; I'd be there ten hours and make eight, ten, twelve dollars.
I figured one time I'd go to Chapel Hill and make a barrel of money tattooing the students, but I found out it was a mistake. I've only tattooed one college student I know of; a boy come out one night who had a pin - a lodge emblem or pin of some sort of order he belonged to at college - and got me to tattoo it on him.
I quit travelling after a couple years and got back my old job at Golden Belt, the same job I had when I quit to join the navy. I'd been making good money on the road but I was drinking right hard then and would go on a big spree and blow fifty or a hundred dollars and have to start all over again. I got tired of it.
After I'd been back in the basement counting sacks awhile they happened to need another mechanic to fix those little machines that mike the sacks. The foreman asked me how I'd like to have a job fixing them and I told him fine, so I went to work upstairs and I've been there ever since. I'm really not a mechanic; a mechanic is a man who can make any kind of machine most; I'm a machine fixer. The machines there, of course, have been changing all along, just like evolution. Times are getting so fast you have to make improvements to live. Golden Belt runs about as regular as anything in Durham. The plant is CIO; there wasn't any union before the CIO, but now everbody in the plant except maybe a dozen belong.
I never had much chance as a kid to get any education but I got two years of night school here at the old Durham High School before I was married. They had classes for people with not much education; once I won a five dollar gold piece there for learning by heart the most stuff.
Any time you see a tattooer he'll have five dots in a L shape on the back of his left hand between the thumb and first finger like this. Course, some jacklegs may not have heard about it but every real tattooer I ever knew had that mark. Isn't that a funny mark? Looks like tattoo artists would have some pretty design, doesn't it?
I haven't much on me worth looking at. I've got a small design on my breast, not much good, a butterfly on one shoulder, and some designs on my arms and on the top of my feet. Lot of the stuff was pricked by jacklegs who I'd swap work with and some of it's from my early days. I've pricked a lot on myself. That's why there's so much work on me; I put it on when I was practicing and learning. Though you could always get plenty of people in the old days to practice on free.
My legs are a sight. See all these lines and marks? I'd buy or make a new machine and stick it in just to see how it was going to work. Or I get to mixing colors for a job and have to see about the shade, so I try a little on my leg. I'm right ashamed to go in swimming with them; I look like a sea spider.
I'm the only one in my family tattooed except when we were first married I argued with my wife and begged her so hard she let me put a little picture on her shoulder. Dog if it wasn't the sorriest one I ever done. My boy wouldn't have anything on him for nothing in the world. He works in a grocery store and lives here with us; he isn't married. I've got two girls, both married, and I'm a grandfather.
Tattooing started with the Indians. They'd use the juice of the bark of trees and tattoo war designs - half-moons and circles and such - on their faces. The American people took it up and brought it down to a fine art. Tattooing's not going out; in the big cities and around seaport towns there're plenty of tattoo artists, some high-up people are tattooed; I've done tattooing on some might nice people though its mostly the ordinary run of people my business comes from. A lot of the high officers in the navy are tattooed. King George of England who died a couple years ago was tattooed and one of the big men in Germany - I can't think, of his name - was tattooed. King George's markings were the English coat of arms on his left shoulder, three wild ducks on his back between his shoulder blades, and a belt all around his waist, with a lion standing with four paws on a buckle on one side and a lion standing on his hind paws holding up the buckle on the other side. A high class tattooer in London did them. He wouldn't fool with nobody except royalty he wouldn't fool with no common man. And he'd get fifty or a hundred dollars for a design.
The old hand-sets I started with were just needles lined up on a stick and wrapped around with thread.
You could use a stick; some used bone or a toothbrush handle - that was pretty good -, wrapping needles real tight to it. Then you'd dip the needles in ink and prick under the skin. It was a might slow process. A butterfly that would take me an hour and a half by hand I can do in twenty minutes by machine.
In those days I'd draw my design freehand from pictures I carried along in a little canvas book. Now I use stencils that I make myself. I trace the design on a piece of celluloid with something sharp so there's a ridge everywhere I want a line. I cover it with tattooer's sauce; that's a high grade of lampblack I buy from a tattoo supply house. Most tattooers with carnivals use just plain old lampblack but I stay here in one place and I can't afford to use anything but the best materials.
Then I shave the hair off wherever I'm going to prick and wash the place with alcohol to kill all the germs. If I didn't do that I might give somebody blood poisoning. I guess a fellow could catch syphilis from unsanitary tattooing. I always clean my machine in a bath of alcohol. I won't tattoo anybody I know has anything; one fellow told me one time after I'd already finished with him and I threw away the tube and needle I used; I didn't even bother to sterilize them. A fellow runs a big risk at these old carnivals with rusty needles and unsterilized machines.
When. I get the arm or whatever part it is I'M going to work on clean I spread on vaseline and then set the stencil down on that. The only lampblack that will stick and show is on the lines where the design is ridged.
I used to carry five hundred stencilx designs but I don't reckon I've got more than two hundred now. I picked out the best and threw the rest away. I got my designs everywhere; off of arms, out of magazines, Created some myself - all ways. This big Rose of No Man's Land is a shoulder design. I got it from a blue print. Generally they run about a dozen designs to a sheet and the tattooing supply houses sell them for about a dollar a sheet. Rose of No Man's Land is a Red Cross nurse inside of a rose. I put that on for five dollars. During the war it sold like hot-cakes; tattooers mopped up. Here's a smaller one of it for the arm for three dollars; I designed it myself. The S? I make every S backwards like that. I learned to make them that way and I don't see no difference between an S that way and any other way; S is S.
Here are my tattooers; I got nine in all. The general run of tattoo artists have about four; four's plenty. I make my own machines; I make everything I use but the ink, lampblack, and vaseline. I've even made and sold outfits to fellows.
These machines work on the plan of a doorbell. Here's the two magnets and the contact spring to bring back the needle when the circuit's broken. I got a transformer here to take the current down from a hundred-ten to from eighteen to twenty-five volts. And with this rheostat I can take it down as low as six volts. When the current's on the making and breaking of the circuit sets the electro-magnets to attracting and repelling and causes the needle to do the jabbing.
Some people think tattooing needles are hollow but they're not. I just hold the machine in the ink and it sucks it in the tube; it's Just like writing with a pen. I make my own hole for the needles to work through; the ones that come on the machines are always too big and throw ink all over.
I used to use number thirteen sewing machine needles but they don't make them any more so I use number twelves. Thirteens were dangerous, anyhow; they were so fine they'd pop right off in the flesh. For outlining I use three number twelve needles soldered together,? that's what I sketch in my design with. For light shading I use four needles and for heavy shading anywhere from eight to twelve. A funny thing but the less needles you use the more it hurts; twelve needles don't hurt near as much as three. I've had lots of fellows tell me that I pricked with less pain than any tattooer who ever worked on them.
Now, here's something you'll never see another tattooer use. I invented this button myself; all the others use a foot pedal to handle their current. I never have patented it but it seems to me it makes it just like writing, with the button on the barrel.
I fixed up that device on the alarm clock, too. I overslept two mornings straight for the mill and I said, 'That'll never do,' so I rigged that up. When the clock gets around to waking time it sets off this electric bell and it'll wake the dead.
I've got something else here you'll never see another tattoo artist with; it's what you might call a pocket outfit. I use these three flashlight cells and slip them in one hind pocket and the machine in another and you'd never know I had a tattoo outfit on me. It's right handy. Most tattooers don't know you can run a machine off of flashlight batteries. I wrote up a piece about it and sent it to one of the mechanic magazines. The man wrote and sent me a letter saying it wouldn't interest but just a certain class of people. I don't think he was right, do you? It's as interesting to as many people as lots of things I see in that magazine.
I've got four colors here in this set, brown, red - English Vermilion is a pretty red -, green, and black, and I've got some yellow. That's about all I ever use. Black ink comes out blue; blue ink won't stay, it fades. There're two shades of green, two of yellow, two of all the colors. You can get brown and purple - all together, I believe, there are about nine dolors you can get. A good tattooer mixes his own colors for shade and some bring it to a fine point. I get my colors from a fellow in Pennsylvania, fellow name of Russell. He puts it up for tattooers; I don't know where he gets it. Every now and then I read Billboard to get addresses of new supply houses.
Tattoo ink comes in powder form. I mix it with Listerine, distilled water, and glycerine - the glycerine keeps it moist. We used to mix in carbolic acid but it blurs too much and if you used more than you were supposed to it would turn white. One fellow I used too much on spotted; he told me later he started to come hunting me with a shotgun.
India ink is good tattooing ink. Higgins puts out a white ink that's an India ink, though, that won't stay. I've used it on some real black niggers and it looked all right at first but it Just won't stay in there. You can't do much with a black nigger; tattooing shows up all right on yellow niggers but not on black ones. One time I put a picture on a yellow nigger's arm and there was a black nigger with him who wanted one so bad he could't stand it. I told him it wasn't no use but he kept on begging me so much and promised to pay me anyhow, so I pricked one on him. When I was through all you could see was the pricking where the marking had been. He drew a long breath but he paid me.
I used to do right smart of the Mutt and Jeffs and Maggie and Jiggs; they made a good, clear picture. Eagles, roses, hearts are good. These little cupids used to be a great fad and this one of a bird with a little ribbon in its bill saying 'Feace' used to be popular. Friendships, Rose of No Man's Land, and whole women used to be fads, If a fellow wanted me to I'd put 'everything on her but I didn't like to do it. I'd always tell a man that he shouldn't have anything on him he'd be ashamed to have his own mother see, but lots of them want the whole works.
I drew a design of a woman's leg once and went to West Durham and pricked it on a fellow's arm, and I pricked five more before I left there that day. That's the way it is; you'll sit down on a cracker box to do a design and you'll do five or six dollars worth before you ever get up.
My prices are about the same as they've always been; tattooing prices haven't changed much. Most designs run about seventy-five cents, a dollar, or a dollar and a quarter. A design I'll get a dollar and a quarter for some carnival tattooer will charge two dollars to do. I guess my most popular number is about a fifty cent heart with a dagger through it - something concerning love; it used to be hands clasped in friendship. I can do a heart and dagger in eight or ten minutes. It takes about as long to get ready as it does to prick it.
The biggest job I ever did was a battleship on a fellow's chest. It was for twelve dollars and took about four hours; I had to give him chances to rest. Tattooing hurts on the breast; it takes a good man to stand it there. It was his old ship I put on. I used to have a lot of large breast designs but it got so I never had any calls so I quit fooling with them.
Now, there's something you'd think nobody would want, a death skull, but I bet I've pricked a thousand of them. I've tattooed a lot of mermaids on sailors. That's a sailors' superstition; if you've got a mermaid tattooed on you you'll never be drowned. Another thing sailors have is a little pg on the the top of the foot. I bet I've seen a thousand and I never have found out why they have them there. I tattooed a photograph of a fellows wife on him once. I lay a piece of celluloid on the picture and made my etching from that. He liked it so well he gave me fifty cents extra - a dollar and a half instead of a dollar like I charged him.
I've put on a lot of crosses and Christs. I had a funny experience once. Jews hate Christ, you know. I was in a. Jew store and had my pictures setting there and a picture of Christ fell out - just happened to fall out. There was a little Jew boy there and the first thing I knowed he was over there stomping it. His mother went over and smacked him. I thought then, no wonder they hate Christ so much if it's taught to them that little.
I thought when this social security came in I'd sure get to put a lot of those number on. Here's a good design I got up for the numbers and it's just fifty cents. The numbers, 240-01-7294, are my numbers. I wanted to make up some samples to put around town as advertisements so I used my own numbers. I've got cards of designs with my name and address in several places about town. I read where one tattooer in Norfolk put on over fifty numbers but I hadn't done but two or three. In fact I haven't done much tattooing at all since the depression. It was really best back in the barroom days. I'm in the wrong part of the country for tattooing; I'm too far inland.
I want to show you something here; it's my hobby. I'm a handcuff king. I've got ten pairs of handcuffs In this box and seven or eight pair of legirons. Here's a pinkerton handcuff; it's the sorriest ever made. You can take a phin piece of steel or even celluloid and get out of it. I don't know why they made such a sorry handcuff. Here is a Peerless cuff; I got two of these I gave twenty dollars for. They're about the best ones; the Durham police use them. We had a show here a while back and I let a policeman put his Peerless cuffs on me and seal the keyhole and I got out. I've been in some shows here and I put on little private entertainments among my friends. I had the intention of travelling as an escape artist but I never did.
I've read every book I could get on the subject and I've invented some escapes myself. Here's a book about Houdini I ordered from London. He must have been the greatest escape artist of all if what the book says is true. He had the whole police force of the world baffled. He fought the spiritualists but the spirits predicted his death.
These are Bean leg irons, invented by old Captain Bean of the Boston Police Force, and these are the hand- cuffs he invented. Here are a pair of slave irons used during the Civil War. They screw on with what you might call an old socket wrench. Handcuff kings don't have nothing like that to escape from; they just keep them for souvenirs.
This English cuff is the clumsiest ever made. It uses a screw instead of a key. I ordered it from London. These are Irish and they screw on, too. I got them from London. I had the original key but I lost it. I made this one out of an automobile valve. I can put these on, dive in the water, and come up loose.
I'm prepared to get out of any kind of handcuff or leg iron made. The only pair I'm afraid of is the French letter cuff, where they use a five-letter word combination instead of a key. The French have the best locks.
I'm going to put this pair of cuffs on and back out of the door; I haven't got the key. I'll be back in just a minute......(Clank...Clank...Clank).....Lord me, I put em on upside down. Put that key in there and pull - that's it. Now I'll put em back on this way and show you...See, I'm free.
I belonged to the Durham National Guard, Company M, and we used to go to summer camp at Morehead City. I had more money than anybody in the camp; the lieutenant was always borrowing two or three dollars off of me and never paying it back. I'd never drill. I'd get my little outfit every morning and light out. One night a bunch of the fellows sent word for me to come to the guard house and work on them. I pricked until three o'clock. I got something kind of like writer's cramp; one fellow begged, just begged me to work some more on him but I couldn't prick a line.
Tattooing is fascinating to people. I've been tattooing in a barber-shop window and look up to see twenty-five or thirty people watching me. It's always interesting to watch good tattooers. I go to every carnival that comes here if I find out they got one, and most all of them have. I get new wrinkles and ideas from them. The last carnival had a woman tattooer; there are lots of them but I never seen one much good. They don't know anything about machines.
Tattooers are mighty sociable serts of fellows; almsot every one I ever met was. About the only one who wasn't was this woman with the last carnival. I picked up one of her machines and she said, 'Lay that down.' I explained who I was but she still wasn't very sociable.
I get some good advertising at swimming beaches. Somebody will see a design on somebody else and ask where he got it and then they'll come around. I've had people come here just see tattooing done. One fellow who come here was so anxious he paid two dollars to have some tattooing done on another fellow so he could watch it.
I've tattooed dogs.- put fellows' initials on their dogs' body or ears. A fellow whose dog I tattooed got him back that way once. One man brought in a big police dog for me to tattoo. The man held him while I did it but that dog looked at me in a way I didn't like.
Tattooing stays till the flesh rots; I'll bet there's many a man laying in his tomb I pricked; there's some of them I know of. There are several remedies for getting out marks but none of them are satisfactory. I can get marks out but it'll leave a scar. I did prick a friendship out of my palm without leaving a scar. I took the machine and went over it dry and let it bleed good and then put on a sweet-gum poultice. If you go over it like that three or four times it won't leave no scar.
I had a fellow come to me once and say, 'Can you get this jane's initials off my arm?' 'No,' I told him, 'But I can hide it.' I worked it over and hid 'em, and he throwed a dollar on the box, and I gave him back seventy-five cents. He said, 'Aw hell, keep the change. It was worth ten dollars to get that thing off my arm.'
I've done a lot of work like that. I've had some fellows, too, who didn't want their marks to go against them. They didn't tell me they were in any trouble but I figured it.
I had a fellow come to my house on a motorcycle from Greensboro at three o'clock in the morning; I pricked seven dollars worth on him. He'd got kind of high and just decided to get some more work done; I'd worked on him before. I had a fellow from a hosiery mill in Burlington who came every week until he got arms covered. Sometimes he'd miss one week but he'd show up the next.
Another fellow come astaggering in once and wanted five dollars worth of tattooing done. He was a bricklayer - made good money - and he was about covered. He lay down across the bed and went on off to sleep. I kept pricking till I got five dollars worth on him. Some fellows wouldn't have put all he paid for on but I kept working until I gave him his money's worth and then he staggered on off.
I had a dummy come in one time - he was a loom- fixer in a cotton mill - and he pointed out what he wanted and I pricked it. He kept pointing out more and more designs and after awhile I got to wondering if he knew the prices of the designs. So I took a piece of paper and wrote and asked if he knew the prices, and that dummy pulled out a roll of bills - I never saw such a roll;-he must have had two or three hundred dollars - and he threw it on the floor and stomped on it. Then he took that paper and started writing, I never saw such writing. I pricked eleven dollars worth on him.
I've asked preachers about tattooing; I've asked three preachers, a Universalist, a Methodist, and a Presbyterian, and each one said the same thing. They surprised me; I was sure they'd lecutre me on it being a sin to mark the flesh and that stuff, but they all said they didn't see no harm in it. They said, 'I don't want it on me, but I got no objection to anybody else who wants it having it on them.'
I've got up many a time from the supper table or from bed to tattoo. Nothing pleases me more than to do a good tattooing job - but that's like it is with anybody who loves his work. When I was a little boy ten or twelve years old I loved to draw pictures. I've had a love for tattooing - and anybody who has a love for a thing is naturally likely to make a success at it.
