A VISIT TO A LAUNDRY
and
DRY CLEANING PLANT
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
March 24, 1939
March 9, 10, 1939
Mr. and Mrs. L. S. Whitehead
(white)
199 Prince Avenue
Athens, Georgia
Proprietors of dry cleaning and laundry business
S.B.H.
A VISIT TO A LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING PLANT
When I opened the door of the two-story white brick structure that houses the establishment of the Nova Dry Cleaners and their laundry, I was met with all the fuss and fumes that are part of this kind of business. A vivacious young woman was standing within the enclosure that serves as an office and a man who proved to be Mr. Bryant, the manager, was telephoning.
"Did you want to see me?" asked Mr. Bryant.
"Yes," I replied, and stated my mission.
"Well, I don't have time this morning, but here is my wife. She will tell you what you want to know." He soon left the building.
Mrs. Bryant seemed excited when she came in from the funeral home across the way, and began telling me:
"One of our men is out today. Their first child came too soon. It never breathed. We, here in the plant, are going over to pay our respects," Turning to a group of women who had gathered around her, she began giving them instructions; "They are going to bury the baby at eleven o'clock. Now, if you all want to go over there, go on now so everybody will have a chance to see it before the funeral.
"Come in the office where we can talk," she invited me, "You take this stool, and I'll sit on the table. Miss Jones, give me those tickets," she addressed the receiving clerk, "and I will check them. I can do that and talk too." The girl did as she was instructed. "No, go on," she told the girl, "if you want to see the baby, because others will want to go later and you can take their places."
Mrs. Bryant was wearing a red crepe dress, a blue checked sport coat blocked in red, and tan hose with black suede slippers. She is of medium weight and height and has black hair and brown eyes.
"Now, what is it you want me to tell you? Oh, I don't mind that, I have always thought I would write my own life history and send it to the True Story Magazine. I was born right here in Clarke County, on a farm, and have worked all my life. I have done field work, such as carrying water, many a day, as well as doing other necessary things. I have even picked cotton.
"I went to school first at Princeton, and after I finished grammar school there I came to Athens High School one year. Then I quit school and went to work. My folks didn't like it one bit, but one of my brothers was in college and another in high school, so I felt like it was too much of an effort for my parents to send me any longer.
"My father gave up farm work about that time and moved to town. My first job was at a dime store. I worked in that store as a clerk about two years, then they made me floor lady. After being on this job 6 months, I quit to take a vacation. They paid me $1 a day as clerk and $10 a week when they promoted me to the floor lady's job. My first money was spent on clothes and I sent some money each week to my brother at college. I would buy clothes if I didn't have anything else. My husband says that's all I do anyway, spend everything I make on them, but I didn't have to pay hoard then and I could do as I pleased with my money.
"My second job was as saleslady at a local department store. I started in for $8 a week and was making $12 when I quit to get married. I thought I couldn't keep house and work too. I even worked until 5 o'clock Christmas Eve and was married at 9 o'clock that same night.
"The way I met my husband was like this. I had a date one night with a boy I didn't like, and we were double dating with another couple. When they kept telling me about Stephens Bryant, I expressed a desire to meet him, so they dared me to write to him. Stephens and the boy I was with worked at the same place. Mother heard us and told me later I had better not do such a thing, but it was too late because I had already written the note. I told him in my note how much I knew about him, and said I would like to meet him. I signed it, 'Betty.' That was on Monday after the dare was made on Sunday night, but I didn't really meet him until the last Sunday in June of that year. There were four girls in the car and all of us were introduced to him as 'Betty.' After sizing us up he knew I was the one who wrote that note.
"He wanted a date and I gave him one for the following Saturday night, but he made me so mad that night I could have murdered him. Since we were going to the show, I was sure he was going to put his coat on, but he didn't, and I thought there was no excuse for his not wearing it. We dated regularly from then on until we married, in fact, every night he could get off. He worked on the night shift at the bakery and never knew when he could get away, but he made real good money working at the mixing machine. At the time we married he had a nice little bank account and a good car.
"We lived on here in Athena for four months, then his boss sent him to Milledgeville to take charge of a bakery, and it was during the 18 months we lived there that our first child was born. We got just what we wanted, a black-haired girl. That summer I canned 250 cans of fruit, did all my own housework, and carried lunch to my husband every day. One day I put the baby in her carriage, put the lunch in the foot of it, and started out. I had on a new pair of shoes and when I started down the six steps at our house my feet slipped. I let the carriage go and it went flying down the steps and bumped into a tree. I was scared out of my wits for fear the baby would be killed, but instead only the food was knocked out on the ground; baby's safety strap had held her. We soon grew tired of that place, for we had very little social life and none of our relatives lived there, so my husband gave up his job and we came back here."
Mrs. Bryant stopped talking to answer one of the phones, in fact, it seemed to me that one or the other of them rang constantly. There were two in the office and at times both were ringing. The machinery never stopped running even at lunch time.
She began again:"After we came back here, my husband went into the restaurant business and made good. While he was operating this cafe I helped him with it. One day a woman came in and tried to get Stephens to have a date with one of her grown daughters. It made me mad enough to fight, but I didn't let her know it and took it like a good sport because she was a good customer.
"He sold the restaurant at a profit and we decided to farm. We rented a house and four acres of land 'way out on Prince Avenue, a large house so mother and dad could move in with us. Each of us had our own garden, about an acre in all, and we farmed on the other three acres. We made real good and our rent cost us very little. During the time we lived there my husband worked at the post office.
"When our farm lease expired in December, Stephens went to Atlanta to find work. Lee Baking Company had just opened their plant and my husband was the first man that they hired to work in their plant. I followed about a month later. We rented a small three-room apartment, but we had so much company to drop in on us we had to get a larger place. While we were living in one section of the city I was scared almost to death. I knew somebody was snooping around the house at night but I was never able to find out who it was, whether white or black. I got my brother-in-law and his wife to come and stay with me, and one night he went to the kitchen and saw the man looking in at the window’ My brother-in-law didn't let on he saw him, but he went out of the kitchen and crept around the house to catch him. Just as he grabbed his coat the man pulled away and ran. We came to the conclusion it was only a 'peeping-tom.' We moved away from that section and that was the only scare I ever experienced in Atlanta. We lived in Atlanta two and a half years. I came back before my husband did, in order to be with my mother when our little boy was born. When the baby was 2 weeks old Stephens gave up that $65-a-week job and came back here to live. While we were living in Atlanta my husband’s mother died. There were four sisters and a brother left at home. Her death was a great blow to us, for she was a fine woman and I loved her almost as much as I did my own mother. It took Stephens a long time to get over his great grief.
"One thing that made him quit his Atlanta job was that the plant changed managers, and a man from out west was sent to Atlanta to take charge. He had a friend he wanted to work in and Stephens didn't like him so decided to quit before there was any trouble. He packed up bag and baggage and moved, back here with my mother, who was then living about six miles from town.
"Stephens’ first experience with a laundry was in 1930. While we were living with my mother in the country he got a job with a laundry here in town. That called for buying a truck. However, we kept our own oar and we have never been without one more than 3 months of our married life. He worked strictly on a commission basis and canvassed all the small towns out of the city. While he called on people soliciting business and picking up laundry and dry cleaning he had a boy to do the driving for him. He averaged making $75 a week on that job. In June of 1931 we moved back to town so we could be near his work. He continued his work at this laundry about a year, then decided if he could make that much for the other fellow he could do even better for himself.
"He went in partnership with another man and rented a building a couple of blocks up the street from where We are now. As soon as the machinery was installed we opened up for business. The first week we took in exactly $218, and before the month was out our collections amounted to between four and five hundred dollars a week. My task was checking the dry cleaning in and out. I saw to it that every one of the garments was clean and inspected before I entered it on the books. I have worked many a night until one and two o'clock before I went home, and I was back on the job next morning at 8 o'clock. That was the first time I had ever been inside a dry cleaning plant. Our partner, his wife, my husband, one Negro, and I were all that worked in that plant in the beginning.
"A short time after we opened up for business we found ourselves in a terrible condition. We had spent all our cash and were $11,000 in debt. In order to cut expenses we moved in the house with Stephens' folks. We paid them the small amount of $10a month for rent, and we had our own cow, chickens, and garden.
"Our business grew and grew until we had to get a larger place, then we bought this building with our own personal money. When we started in the dry cleaning business we didn't have but one truck. At the time we moved into this plant we had six trucks, three in town and three in the country, and we had 15 employees inside the plant.
"Just about the time we moved our plant and got started, my husband was taken sick with a terrible kidney trouble. I was not working when he was taken ill. We were not able to hire a nurse and I couldn't come to the plant in his place for I couldn't leave him more than 15 minutes at a time. The children even upset him, and their noise made him so nervous I had to send them to his sister's to stay. He was sick a month before he was able to come back to work.
"We were getting lots of dry cleaning from a North Georgia town, so we decided to open a plant in that place. There were two other plants in that town besides ours. They got together and paid us to get out of business there. It was a paying proposition so we accepted it. Now, we have our business all under one roof with 20 people working for us."
Mrs. Bryant answered the telephone. After the conversation was over, she asked a man who was standing near, "Do you remember yesterday when Mr. Palmer called and asked about a billfold that had been left in his pocket? I told the girl who inspects the clothes to check and see if it was in his clothes. She told me it was not. Well, it has been dry cleaned and delivered without being removed from his pocket."
The man made no reply to that, but said, "Make a note of this: I found $8.50 in a man's pocket this morning."
Turning to me she began again. "Our plant is run by steam and electricity. The ironing in the laundry is done by eleven Negroes."
Just at this time a large Negro woman in a blue uniform brought a shirt to the office with the bottom part torn from the yoke. "Why, Lucindy, what did you do that for?" Without a word the woman spread the shirt on the corner of the desk, covered her face with her hands, and walked away.
"All the ironing is done by steam pressure and they are touched up by hand. That is what the Negro women do. We have one women who does nothing else but fold, inspect, and sew buttons on shirts. Oh, we have to buy buttons by the wholesale. People will even send whole suits of clothes, as well as other garments, to us without a button on them. We replace the buttons free of charge.
"When clothes are brought in for dry cleaning, they are searched and all articles found are saved for the customers. The garments are brushed and pre-spotted, then they are cleaned and taken to the second floor for inspection and spotted again before they are pressed. We have a man who does nothing else but inspect and spot the dry cleaning.
"We can clean 50 suits at one time in the same tub on what is sometimes called the wheel. After they are taken from the wheel, they are put in an extractor that takes out all the surplus solvent. This machine makes 18,000 revolutions a minute. After that they are put in a tumbler, through which hot air is forced, and tumbled until the odor of solvent is out of the garments. After this they are taken to the second floor, inspected again, and steam pressed, then they are inspected by two girls to see if all the spots are removed and if they are pressed correctly before checking out. When they are checked they are placed on their respective route men's lines. We also do repair work at a small charge, but if there is no material used we do not charge for repairs.
"The laundry is handled practically the same way. Each driver has his own laundry vat and every family has its own mark. The smaller pieces are put in a net with the laundry mark pinned on it.
"Our business was just a one-story plant when we first moved to this building, but it was growing rapidly when our partner started drinking. Finally, one night when he was on one of his drinking sprees somebody backed a truck up to the back door, broke in, and took off every garment we had in the plant. They were dry cleaned and hanging on the respective drivers' lines. The clothes stolen amounted to over $3,000. My husband and the police searched everywhere for a trace of the clothes, but they found only three of the garments. These were in a pawn shop in Atlanta. When the search was ended we paid our partner his part of the business and ran him off.
"Taking the plant in charge ourselves, we worked hard day and night to build up our business and in a year's time paid every one of our customers for their losses because of the robbery.
"We now agreed to let a friend of ours came into business with us as a partner. Soon our business outgrew the ground floor, so we added the second story. We surely have had to work hard for what success we have attained, and it has taken cooperation on the part of each of us to build up our business. We do have a nice volume of business; we take in between eight and nine hundred dollars a week. Our pay roll runs around $300 a week.
"Since we have added the second story the business has increased to the extent that it has enabled us to buy a hundred-acre farm with a good house and out-buildings on it. There is also a nice pasture and good farming land. We rent the house we live in here in town, however, our partner owns his home here, and his wife works in the plant every day. One of their three sons is married.
"We are members of the Methodist church. I was brought up to go to church and Sunday School and I still enjoy attending our church here.
"Last year we decided to speculate and go into another business. We tried selling fish and poultry, but we found out we couldn't handle two businesses successfully. After 3 months we gave that up, finding we had sunk $15,000 in that enterprise with no hope of getting it back. We contributed that failure to our entering the business in an off season.
"Our business has afforded us the pleasure of some nice trips in the last few years. We went to Florida, Detroit, Charleston, and Savannah. We take lots of trips on Sunday and we always take our children with us. I'm not the kind to want to leave them at home while we are running around, and we do enjoy the privilege of a family car.
"Going back to our dry cleaning and laundry, we decided our pick-up business in the country didn't bring in sufficient revenue so we have called some of our drivers in. Now, we have four trucks working in town and it surely keeps us busy keeping up with them and their work when they come in from gathering laundry and dry cleaning. We are very proud of our business and we hope it will continue to grow."
"Veona," called Mr. Bryant, "hurry and deposit this money before the bank closes." He came in the office with a handful of checks.
"Now, if we have finished the story, come on and I'll give you a lift," she said. I needed no second invitation to get in the Studebaker beside her. "Oh, what a nice car!" I said.
"This don't belong to us," she explained, with evident amusement. "Ours is a Packard; it's in the garage being overhauled to take a trip in Sunday. I do hope it won't rain."
"This is where I get out," I told her, when we reacted the post office. As I closed the car door and thanked her for the story and ride, she changed gears, and was soon on her way to the bank.
<text not clear>
