There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Approximately 3200 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
TITLE:
Date of First Writing	December 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Mamie Collins (white)
Fictitious Name	None
Street Address	Rains, R. F. D.
Place	Marion, S. C.
Occupation	Housewife
Name of Writer	Annie Ruth Davis
Name of Reviser	State Office
Real names used--none fictitious.
Project #3613
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, S.C.
December 8, 1938
MAMIECOLLINS
(White)
RAINS, MARION COUNTY
(Rural)
SOUTH CAROLINA
A narrow, winding cornfield path led to the weather-beaten home of Mamie Collins. Wiry branches of a tall hedge framed the little yard surrounding the two-room dwelling. Large red hens walked contentedly about the yard pecking grass seed and chuckled contentedly when a grass-hopper came their way. Others wallowed in beds of clean sand here and there, while many wandered over the surrounding fields picking up scattered peas and insects. A rooster crowed proudly from a near-by grapevine. So numerous were the chickens, a hundred or more, that the owners themselves could not tell how many were in the drove, because the fowls ranged over such a large space.
One end of the house seemed to be fairly well preserved, although the roof and porch of the opposite side had almost completely fallen through. On the good end of the porch stood a wooden bench, one home-made chair, a few pot flowers, and a oat lay in the warm sunshine, purring softly. A string of red pepper and a bag of dry beans hung on the wall by the little door, showing signs of some preparations for winter.
Could anyone be at home? The latch dangled loosely; some one must be near. A red cow, a tiny calf beside her; lowed long and clear from a lot to the extreme left front side of the house.
Almost at the same moment, Mamie Collins came running across the field in great haste, jumping cornstalks and dodging briers which hindered her. Under one am she lugged a bushel basket of fresh green peas. She was in field dress - a tom brown gingham apron over a brown checked gingham dress. A rod sweater, with elbows out and wrist band frazzled, blended with a red knitted cap. And black cotton stockings matched her heavy leather shoes. Her shoulders had become slightly stooped from years of toil. She looked about the average woman's size - around five feet four inches in height, I would say, and one hundred twenty-five pounds in weight. From the tight knot of long, light brown hair, a few stray hairs dangled over her forehead, neck, and face, sallow and roughened from exposure and work. But her weathered face was lightened by bright gray eyes, gleamingly alive with interest in her visitor and surroundings.
"Oh, I'm so tired and nervous I don't know what to do, I've got this neuritis so bad. You people mustn't think hard the way you caught me appearing this time. Just pulled on these old stockings and tore-up apron to go over yonder and help Miss Richardson pick her a mess of peas. Miss Richardson, she's my good neigh or. We helps one another out oftentimes, 'cause it's just come to the place that niggers is getting so no-count that white people can't depend on none of them no more. Being I was done over there a laboring, I says to myself, I might as well store in a mess for me and Bud, too. Bud he's my brother, and just we two lives here by ourselves since my sister, Elwood, died last year.
"Bud was a saying, setting right on them doorsteps last evening, cold weather ain't far off hitting us now, and I've sho got to be getting plenty of fodder stacked to feed my cow on this winter. Honey, you know if you can have your milk and a few chickens, you've got something, and she is my little pet cow, too. She's been mighty pretty, but she's fell off some now. That calf in the stall over there is just five months old, and I know it's fine as you've ever seen. Lord knows, it takes many a hundred steps to see after them, and I know I do lots more than I'm able with this here neuritis and me fifty-seven year old, but then it's mighty nice. The milk is all and all in the home, I cay. Cose, my cow, she don't give 30 much milk, but she's small and done better than I expected, being a yearling. I bought that cow when it wan't nothing but hip high.
"Come over here and set down, honey, and I'll sho' spare you a minute to talk anyhow, I'm so glad to see you. Lord knows, I wish you could have come while Elwood was living. Me and her was a talking of you and them club meetings up to Rains just before she got hurt. (Honey, I done finished my sunflower quilt. Remember me to show it to you when you get ready to go). Elwood, poor creature, she started up the road there to Rains one day last November and made a misstep that sprawled her right out on the pavement. I tell you, child, highways is the worse curse the Lord ever sent on us good people here. It's been a puzzle to me how long she did live, for every rib she didn't break, she fractured. We carried her to Dukes, but couldn't no doctor do nothing for her on this earth. Said the cancer had done set in and was eating clean through her. We took her off the Monday before Thanksgiving, and she lived all of sixteen days in that condition. Lord knows, when Elwood come, home a corpse, I like to went crazy, 'cause I never had stayed a whole week by myself before in all my born days. Seems like if I'm busy, it takes things off my mind, but if I drops down to rest, you knows I'm lonesome.
"Oh, my shoulder does hurt mo so bad." (Mamie Collins, standing, continues to talk). "No, child, I ain't never been one to set still long to a time, and since this neuritis is settled in this here plump spot on my hip, I just has to get up and twist now and then. I say, it must be a ailment from my teeth, 'cause I got seven loose now," (She fingered this one and that one, all badly discolored from the use of snuff), "so loose till they are near 'bout dangling. And look here, my fingers is swell so till I can't hardly sew myself a garment. Honey, it hurts me to tell anybody howdy. Hurts me to squeeze a dishrag dry.
"The good Lord knows me and Bud's boon up against it this here last year. Cose our business is our business, but we got Elwood's burial expenses laying heavy on us, and we ain't neither one had ne'er a rag of clothes out our last year's crop yet. We didn't get but $150.00 out this whole place last year and, Lord knows, that's just what Elwood's sickness cost us. We would've done pulled out of this here hole if we could just get enough tobacco to plant, but it's plum scandalous how that agent up yonder is treated us. He ain't allow us but a little over a acre of tobacco on this hero place and that's every bit the money crop we had coming to us last year. Cose Bud, ho made a bunker crop at that. Bud said ho hauled 2,000 pounds of tobacco himself to that warehouse in Mullins, but he never got nothing for 300 pounds of it. They just told him up there to Mullins that his tobacco figured that much more poundage than his government card said was coming to him and that was all ho could get. Lord knows, it never brought but $300.00, and half that went to the sharecropper. Being Bud and me can't keep a mule on this place, with no money crop much, we has to sharecrop our land with another fellow. We furnishes the land, the seed, and the fertilizer, and the other man, he does the work and supplies the team. Cose when the work gets in a jam, me and Bud helps all we can. We usually makes a little peas and pots toes along with some com, but time we parts half with that other fellow, we don't make enough to last no time. We've got to try and borrow enough from somebody on our next year's crop to pull through somehow. Bud said it was his honest intention to plant more corn than he did this year, but the man just didn't have the team to carry it. Just made 40 bushels of corn, and that ain't half enough. Then we sho' meant to get more than just them two row of peas planted that we got over there in the garden, but we couldn't get no work done hardly with all this W. P. A. going on. We been making anywhere from one to two banks of potatoes a year, and now we don't have none. It's been so dry, we got our potatoes out late this year, and the people got so busy in the tobacco, we couldn't get them worked like they ought to been neither. No, we ain't ne'er a potato this year, only what Miss Richardson drops in my apron now and then. We hoping to get four acres of tobacco to put out next year, so as we can fix our house. The good Lord knows, we need it if anybody does. Poor people needs tobacco more than these here rich ones, and the rich folks is the ones that's getting it. Didn't plant no cotton this year neither, but them what did, the boll weevil hit it pretty heavy. Bud was a saying last evening, we mustn't let another year pass without us getting all the money crop we can get hold of.
"But, Lord knows, I do love this old place, 'cause it was my great-grandpa's place, the old man John J. Collins. I'll tell you, I don't care if that was my great-grandpa, he was a knocker. His father come to this country way back yonder, the Lord only knows how far back, and settled over to Florence County. When he died, he left great-grandpa one fine plantation over there, and soon after he got that he married Elizabeth E. Howard. Then, long about 1830, he sold out all he owned over there and moved cross here to Marion County to this very same place. I don't know what prompted him to take up and move, but I reckon he saw a better outlook over this way, and some said he thought it would be more healthy. Honey, he bought 12,000 acres over here and, at that time, never paid but fifteen cents a acre for it. Well, he had two boys and one girl by that first wife, John E., Richard, and Mary. Then after she died, ho married a Wheeler, and they had four children born to them. But I just can't recall none but Sofia, of them last ones. The Wheeler woman died with the typhoid fever, and then great-grandpa married a Rogers. She was his last wife, and she didn't have no children. All them children married, but Lord knows, I can't keep up with all that bunch.. All I know, John E. married Catherine Davis, and them was my grandparents.
"It was like this, when my great-grandpa come over here to live, he had 200 head of slaves on the place - run 48 plough team. Long in the 1860's the war come on and freed his niggers. And when they freed his niggers they killed his money. Oh, my soul, my great-grandpa had a pile of money in them days. Bet he had a flour barrel full of Confederate money, and that wan't no good after the war was over. You see he planted no end of cotton in them times. Well the war near 'bout ruined him, and then he stood security for old man Wheeler, brother of his second wife, and that most finished him. The Wheeler man, he left the country, and great-grandpa'a land had to go to pay the security. Great-grandpa, he died brokenhearted. The court come in and set out his widow's dower, but it out her short 600 acres and it ought've give her 2,000 acres. She was my great-grandma by marriage, 'cause my father was the son of and named for John E. Collins, one of great-grandpa's first children. Well, she deeded them 600 acres to my mother and father to take care of her long as she lived, and, at their death, what was left of it come on down to Bud, Elwood, and me. The children of great-grandpa's first two wives that didn't get no share, they raised such a racket and kept on stirring up so much trouble a wanting some, ma and pa decided it was best to sell off three tracts and give them a little to hush up their mouths. They sold 93 acres in one tract, 104 acres in another, and still 117 acres in another. Wan't but 300 acres loft in the end to come to me and Bud and Elwood. In 1909, we three divided the place up, but Bud about run it all for us. First one thing and then another come. In 1919, Bud planted 80 acres of cotton and would've made a bale to the acre, but the boll weevil eat it up. In 1920, we had 10½ acres of tobacco. But there come a wet spell, and the sun just naturally burned it up - could see it flop in the field. Then a man over yonder had run us that year, and when we couldn't meet the payment, he sued us and took part our land for it. Yes, we've had some trouble, I'll tell you. The old man Holliday down there, he claimed Bud had given him a lien on part of the place, and he sued us for some more of the land and just took it away from us. It wan't a word of it so, but Bud said nobody couldn't do nothing with that man. Wan't no use to say nothing. Don't think me and Bud owns but ten acres of all them lands today. Yes, we used to have plenty of lands - just lost out - just lost out.
"Honey, I reckon I've got some of the oldest things in all Marion County Got my great-grandma's old dress that was made every stitch with her fingers, and them stitches couldn't be told from machine ones by nobody. I'll get it toreckly and let you look at it. I knew it's the oldest one you ever seen, 'cause it was made before the time of machines. Wan't no town of Marion when it was bought, wan't no corsets, wan't no whalebones. Why, honey the people used oak splits for whalebones when that silk gingham dress was made, and my grandma wove the cloth to cover them with. Bud and me was a thinking the other evening how some folks wouldn't take nothing for that dress, if it belonged to them. But it's just an old keepsake - grandma's old dress.
"Well, I'm telling you the blessed truth, my yard looks worse than it's ever looked. The good Lord knows I ain't able to keep it hoed up noways decent. I keeps it clean when I'm able, 'cause like as I've a mind, there ain't nothing prettier than a clean yard and house. This yard used to be mighty pretty when all them old time mulberry trees was out there. That one you see there now, I know it's over a hundred years old. This one here, that's grandma's peach japonica, and she give this evergreen to sister when she wan't nothing more than a knee-high baby. I sho' want to get this yard cleaned up before Thanksgiving, for the good Lord knows I do love grandma's old things.
"No'um, I'm not planning on going nowhere Thanksgiving - just planning on having the day. I don't never know from one day till the next what I'll cook, but I'm telling you, if I had a nice piece of fresh pork, it would be mighty nice. Well, it's just about as good as turkey - only it's the name of the meat what counts. Cose I likes turkey moat good as anybody, but nothing can't beat them nice fresh neat.
"Bud and me was a saying here yesterday that there ain't nothing in this world like having a shoat or two to kill for the winter, but Lord knows, we ain't got no place to keep no hogs in. Peoples 'bout hero generally turns their hogs out to pick up corn and peas, but we don't darsen to let our out, being some niggers stole the last one we had and killed it. Bud said he was go try and see could he pick us one reasonable-like and fix a pen for her under the grapevine. Cose people's hogs cost money, and we not able to buy no high-priced hog.
"But I was saying to Miss Richardson cross yonder this morning. I've got as nice a flock of chickens as anybody's got, and I sho' feels thankful for them. Sometimes we eats a egg along, and sometimes I sells a few. I got seven right fresh ones today, and I been a thinking I would like mighty well to get shed of them eggs, being anybody's likely to be a wanting some. My hens, I hates to part with them, 'cause they my pets. But then we eats one now and then, when we gets hard up for some sort of meat. Cose I had to sell some of them hens last year so as to buy com to raise my young chickens on.
"I'll tell you, there ain't no better piece of land nowhere to live on than this one right hero, and I sho' thank my stars it come down to we throe children. I got the prettiest garden you ever did see, and any time we take a notion we wants a fish, we just goes to the pond and gets it. Me and my sister went down there one morning and caught nine nice flat ones. We wan't down there long either. I'll tell you what's mice, and that's one of them picnics on the river. I sho' enjoys it. The good Lord knows them fish do taste good that jumps most right out the river in the frying pan.
"Talking of them fish brings to my mind old Miss Godbold, poor creature, cross the branch yonder. You know, child, that woman is near 'bout eat up with the cancer. You ought to go and see her, 'cause I tell you, it's awful on this earth what she's been a suffering. Ain't one Lord's thing that keeps her a living but a little bit of huckleberry juice and a cup of milk at odd times during the day. It's sho' terrible to stay in that room, I'm telling you. It wan't long I been round that bed till I had to got where the air could blow me. She told Miss Gasque and Miss Martin yesterday there wan't nothing she craved to eat but a fish, and my brother, he got word of it and left here for the pond right after dinner. Said he thought he would try and catch that old lady a fish. I told him to bring it on home and I would boil it, pick all the bones out and fix it nice for her. I knows when a person's in that fix, if they wants a thing, it's a satisfaction to get it even if they can't eat it. Honey, there ain't nothing I likes to do no better than fixing nice things for sick folks. I know one time I had a chill and fever, and I didn't want nothing to eat. Didn't want ne'er a thing but pickles and biscuit. But Miss Martin, she cone over here one day with the nicest plate of dinner, and she wouldn't rest till she made no cat it. Seems like it just give me a appetite and started me mending right off.
"Child, do tell me where Miss Kathleen is now. Lord knows, I did love that little woman. She used to come down here and help mo and Elwood can all day long, and I ain't been to but one canning meeting since Miss Kathleen left. One woman come here one day and helped all we ladies in the neighborhood can right out here under that cedar tree. She brought a cook stove and one of them big pots, and we ladies furnished the stuff to put up and spread dinner out there on the ground. Lord knows, that woman never put up half the stuff Miss Kathleen used to can in a meeting. But, honey, I don't care, 'cause I likes to put up my things just like Miss Kathleen learned me. Now, them ladies what's on this government resettlement, they've got something, but I've sho' got something, too. I've got 18 quarts of butter beans, 32 quarts of mixed soup, 25 quarts of tomatoes, and all the jolly me and Bud can eat. I didn't make no jelly this year, being the grapes wan't no good, but I had a plenty loft over from last year. I wanted some apples, but I didn't have none, and I wan't able to get nothing that didn't grow on our land. I'm telling you, I'm sho' proud of them canned things. If we don't eat much, I loves to have them for my own satisfaction, 'cause I'm not able to buy. And if anybody stops in, I can fix the nicest dinner in no time.
"Yes'um, no and Bud is a getting along pretty good on what we've got.
Just like I was a saying a time back, I think me and Bud does mighty fine not to been to no better school than we has. Pa and ma used to send us to Aerial to school, but we didn't go but three and four months out the year, being school was short in them days. I don't go out much, but judging from what I sees up hero to the church, I believe education does some people more harm than it does good. Me and Bud goes up there to Aerial Baptist Church, and I've decided I would as soon be a Methodist as a Baptist. I know children ain't brought up like they used to be, and I tell you, the sin's going to be on the mother and the father for it. Just don't find no good girls these days, and few good boys. Pa was a Methodist, and a big- hearted man. When he told me to do a thing, I know I had to do it. Never sassed my old parents in all my life. Just like me and Miss Richardson was a talking, parents is to blame for the sins of their children. For if you don't bend a child when it's email, it will be like unto a tree, you can't bend it when it gets old. Lord knows, I can't stand no sassy children.
"No, my Savior, we ain't got no house much to live in, but it beats one of somebody elsen. I say, you can go off and have a good time, but it feels mighty good to come back home. No, Lord, there's no place like home."