Date of first writing	January 13, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	J. Harry Hopkins (White)
Address:	127 East Edenton Street.
	Raleigh, N. C.
Occupation:	Clerical Worker.
Name of writer:	W.B. Sedberry, Raleigh, N.C.
Revisers:	Edwin Massengill--W.J. Sadler
No. of words:.	About 5,700
<text not clear>
MACK, THE CON MAN
The clouds were low and it looked as if it would pour rain any minute. There was a group of mill workers and housewives and a large number of children standing around a 1932 black Dodge sedan parked on a street in the heart of the Caraleigh Mill section just south of Raleigh.
"I'm not selling anything," came a voice from the car.
"I am advertising for the factory. Only one complete treatment to the family. Here it is, my friends. It is the New and Improved Swamp Root."
The voice belonged to Maurice Haskins, or 'Mack,' as he is called, who was in the car handing out bottles of his tonic. Mack is a crippled man of medium build. He is bald and wears a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles, through which he seldom looks, and a rumpled and dirty, light grey suit.
"Are you bilious, do you have dizzy spells, swimming in the head, pains around the heart?" he questioned his audience. "Well, that's not heart trouble. Those pains come from gas that has accumulated around the heart. This New and Improved Swamp Root dispels all that gas.
"Here you are, here you are! Did you get yours? Did you get yours?" was the language he used as he placed some bottles into the hands of several people. After he had distributed a few bottles he resumed his "spiel."
"Now folks," he said, "this medicine is absolutely free. It doesn't cost you a cent, but just to help defray expenses it is with regret that my company finds it necessary to attach a little fee to each bottle to cover the cost of the bottle and label and my coming down here to give it to you. That fee isn't much, just thirty-five cents for each bottle, or, better still, three bottles, a complete treatment, for only one dollar. Step right up now, folks. Don't rush, don't crowd. You can get your bottle in time. There will be enough to go around to every one of you."
The children seemed to be the only ones trying to rush to Mack, but as he wanted to evade them he told them that the medicine was for adults only. After the people had sauntered away Mack called to me, "Come here. Now, listen, you know me, where I work, and what I do regular, so for God's sake don't say anything about this around my office.
"You know the reason I'm doing this?" he asked."Dick Burton and Bud Suggs came in town last night. They were 'riding the hog,' didn't have but just a little money and lost that in a poker game up the street, trying to double what they had so both of them could sleep. They went over to the office and got my phone number from the watchman and called me. I got them a place to stay in a boarding house. I couldn't turn those boys down; I was raised up with them. They'll do more for me than my own brother.
"This morning I got up early and borrowed enough money to get a gross of bottles and enough stock to make a bathtub half full of medicine. I went by the office and put in a leave card, and then I went out to my Aunt Annie's and borrowed this car.
"Dick and Bud are on some of these blocks pitching. That's what we call it when we canvass from door to door. We pitch a bottle at a person, and he has to catch it. Once it's in his hands he'll never hand it back to you, if you know your stuff.
"Ted, this is my old racket, and a good one, too. Shorty, Dick, Bud and I have traveled all over the South with it and have really made some money. In 1928 I was sending $50 a week to my wife and baby, but she made me stop and come home.
"This town isn't much good for this business, but, knowing the racket, I can always make enough money to get where business is good. That's what Dick and Bud want now, just enough to get them to Birmingham. That's the best pitch town in the United States.
"These labels are mine. I always keep labels on hand just in case of an emergency. We don't work but a few hours a day and make $10 to $15. If I can keep Dick and Bud sober I'll have enough money in a couple of days for them to make Birmingham. This racket is too carefree, or something. It seems like as soon as you make a little money you have to go off, get drunk, and spend it.
"Where was I born? In Parkton, Virginia, in 1897. When I was nearly three years old I had infantile paralysis, and I went back into infancy. I couldn't walk or talk. The doctors thought it was tuberculosis of the hip bone and treated it for such. My Aunt Bess was a mother to me and kept nagging the doctors to do something for me. They had given up hope of my ever getting well, but Aunt Bess, Goa bless her soul, kept those doctors trying and I'm still here. If she hadn't worked so hard I don't know where I'd be.
"My father was an architect. He went to college in New York state. After finishing he came to Parkton to work.
He didn't make enough money to be called rich, but he made a good living for his family. He sent my brother to college in Virginia, and Sister went to N.C.C.W. (Woman's College of the University of North Carolina). I guess he would have sent me to college if I'd wanted to go.
"Daddy was too much of an idealist to make big money. He loved perfect work regardless of whether he made money or not and wouldn't go against his ideas just for money. His biggest ambition in life was realized when a judge in Greensboro let him design his home. The judge and his wife went to Europe and left the whole thing up to Daddy. There were only two things he had orders to do. One was to put a closet in every room, and the other was to build a den where the judge could have quietness. The house is still there and is perfect in every respect.
"Mother went to a finishing school in Virginia, and she's been trying to finish people ever since. I think she made a good job of Brother. He's an accountant and is doing all right. Sister's married to a nice man that's making good. Mother just loves to be sticking her hands and mouth in something--social work, church work, school work, or anything she can talk about, even politics. She isn't such a good politician, though.
"Daddy always voted the Democratic ticket and the family naturally did the same. I do a little work around the polls on election day, but I didn't until I got this job with the government. I'm not compelled to now, but I love to be out messing around. I'm really going to work like hell for the Democrats next election, for I don't want to see things get back like they were during Hoover's Administration.
"We moved to Greensboro when I was six years old, and that's where I started to school. When I was eight years old I caught a freight train and rode the rods for thirty five miles. Mother had whipped me for something I didn't do. That's the reason I left home. I just got a few things together and caught the next freight for Danville. I stayed there with Aunt Bess, but Daddy came after me the next day. I told him if there ever was another whipping like that one I'd go where he'd never find me. Daddy said, 'Well, if you want to stay here, son, you can.' So I stayed in Parkton with Aunt Bess.
"My right leg was five inches shorter than the left one, and my ankle was stiff. This was due to that case of infantile paralysis. The shoes I wore had to be special made. When I was eleven years old Aunt Bess sent me to a' hospital in Washington, D.C., for an operation. I stayed in the hospital there for fifteen months. They stretched my leg and limbered my ankle. There's some difference now but only about one inch. But I can pitch more medicine than anybody else, more than two men usually can.
"Talking about my school days, I was a mean one. I was expelled twice. I'll never forget one time when we had a little social affair in the lab at school. We had made up some of the smellingest perfume you've ever smelled, and at the party we poured it all over a professor. Damn, was he hot. They let three of us go for the rest of the term. When Aunt Bess found out about it she went to see the principal and got me back in school, and my two friends, too. Boy, she was a power in that town. It wasn't two years later when I was at a football game, and the professor called me down for cheering too loud in front of everybody there. I just lit in and cussed him for every son-of-a-bitch I knew how to say. Aunt Bess made me go and apologize to him. The professor was down in the lab holding a rack of test tubes when I started apologizing. He was so surprised he dropped the rack, and every one of the test tubes broke. I'll never forget that day. I just broke down and laughed and quit school. I figured I had enough education.
"I got a job on the Parkton newspaper, and soon I was circulation manager. I made good money on that job, but I got mad and quit. That's where I played hell. In those days we could paint the town red and get away with it. My Aunt Bess was one of the largest taxpayers in town. Roy Sessoms' daddy was one of the big shots on the city board, lack Potter was related to the prosecuting attorney, and his daddy owned a large plumbing and heating place there. Those boys didn't work. Hell, no, they said work was made for horses and Negroes.
"Old Man Potter had a different idea about his son. 'Yes you will work,' he told Jack. 'Come on down to the office; I'll let you start with me.' Before the week was out Jack found out where his mother was going to one of her club's social affairs. She was the highbrow type person, understand. She had her own carriage with well-groomed horses and, of course, a driver, Well, that afternoon Jack borrowed a pair of old, dirty overalls, and when she came by in all of her dignity he was standing in the middle of the street with a commode on his shoulder. As she drove by Jack yelled, 'Hello, Mama.' That night when he got home he was told that he didn't have to work any more.
"That's just to show you what kind of people I was going around with. We would drink whiskey, play cards, and go down to the red light district. They tightened down on the district, it got so rough. We were practically the only people that could get in the district after dark. Boy, we had some parties down there. That Roy sure did have a pull with the women. When he'd walk in a house two or three would swarm all over him.
"One night while we were there a hell of a fight started. Blood and beer bottles were flying everywhere. We scrammed out at once. There was a cop on the corner, so we split up and went in different directions. We were to meet later and decide what to do about it if anybody got caught, and what alibi we were going to use if we were involved in a murder. I took the riverbank for my way back to town and met a policeman just as I was coming up on the bridge. I was trembling like a leaf.
"'Mack,' the cop asked me, 'what are you doing down here by yourself? Where are your buddies?'
"'They're up the street,' I stammered, then hurried on.
"That was a close shave. There was a stink in court about it, but our names were never mentioned. Thanks to the cop, for he wouldn't give us away.
"We raised hell around there for about another year and were always in some trouble. When we broke up Roy went to Florida and I caught a freight train to Hopewell, Virginia. I didn't have but ten cents in my pocket, and when I got to Hopewell I couldn't find my buddy or anyone that I knew. Buns were selling for five cents a dozen. I bought two dozen and lived on buns and water for a week. I slept in the woods one night. That won't much sleeping, so. I started sneaking into houses that had a barroom, dance floor, and women of easy virtue downstairs. Upstairs were rooms for rent. The stairs going up to these rooms were built on the outside, so I could easily slip upstairs any time after dark. These shacks were plentiful, so I just changed every night to keep from getting caught.
"I found out that my buddy, Dick Burton, was in James River Village. That was fifteen miles down the river. That night I went to the river and found a rowboat. I broke the lock, stole the boat, and set out to see Dick. I went down the Appomattox River to where it met the James, and up Black Creek to James River Village. I found Dick's living quarters, but he had gone to work. I helped myself to two cans of kippered herrings and some crackers that I found on a mantel. I went to see Dick at the plant where he worked, but they wouldn't let anybody in without a pass. They had double guards on each gate. I went back to his quarters and waited for him.
"When Dick came in he was Plenty glad to see me. He glanced at the empty herring cans and said, 'Are you still hungry?'
"'Hell yes, I could eat a cow,' I replied.
"'Come on and I'll buy you a dinner,' he told me.
"After we had gone to the Y.M.C.A., and I had eaten one dinner Dick asked me if I was still hungry.
"'I could eat one more full dinner,' I told him.
"He ordered me another meal and that filled me up. The next day he carried me over to the plant and got me a job.
"Oh, boy, that was a job working with chemicals that cleaned cotton. I was made a foreman and made $213.40 a week. I deserved it, though. I had to pay $25 a week just for a room to sleep in. I was in a four-story plant that made guncotton. Tons of the blackest and dirtiest old cotton and clothes were put in a vat on the fourth floor, and after it had gone through all the washing processes it would come out on the first floor, the prettiest and fluffiest pure cotton you've ever seen. It should have been clean, because we used two tons of live caustic and one ton of dead caustic to each vat. There was an agitator in the vat that kept it churning all the time. The company furnished us with special kinds of clothes to wear so they wouldn't be eaten off. The first week or so it bothered me as I could feel it burning through those special suits. My nose and face gave me some trouble, but I got used to it.
"I hadn't been there but a short time before I met all the poker players around there. We'd go out and play poker on a bluff over the James River. I'm telling you, that was a beautiful place and ideal for poker. We'd put two or three jars of whiskey under the table and play all day or night, according to our shifts at the plant. I won two barber shops and an athletic club. I kept them a long time. They were making me a little money, but money in those days didn't mean a thing. I had more than I needed. I was sending my brother in the army $50 every week. He said he needed it, and I didn't, so why not? The best I can figure I sent him over $5,000, but he didn't appreciate it a bit. I asked him a few years ago to let me have $50, but he wouldn't even lend it to me.
"'I've got the money in the bank, but I'm going to keep it there for my wife,' he told me. 'You know my wife is liable to get sick any time, and I might need it. Why don't you get it from Aunt Bess?'
"I told him I couldn't because I couldn't let her know what kind of trouble I was in. I reminded him of all the money I had given him while he was in the army, but then he wouldn't even let me have it.
"Boy, here is a true experience in my life that really is history. After Roy went to Florida we didn't hear from him for five months. One day I got a letter from him inviting the old gang of his up to New York. He said that while he was in Florida he had married one of the Porter girls of the pork and bean Porter millions. Furthermore, he said she was maintaining an apartment in the city which we could live in as they were staying further out. She gave him $50 a day just for spending money, he said, but he was lonesome as hell for the old gang.
"Well, sir, it took we four just three and a half days to get to New York. Roy met us and carried us to the apartment. It was a swell outlay, too. We had a refrigerator full of drinks and food, carpets on the floor half an inch thick, nice beds, and draperies at the windows. Hell, boy, that was a swell dump.
"Roy was nineteen years old, and the woman he married was forty-five. We lived like kings for a few months. Roy would come into town every morning with his $50, and we'd play the ponies, hang out in speakeasies, and take in the city proper. Roy didn't even have to buy his clothes. She'd do that for him. He said she wax afraid she wouldn't like the colors of the ties he might buy. Well, we didn't see much of Roy at night. He stepped out with us a few nights, but he said she raised hell about it. We lived like that for four or five months. Then one morning Roy came in boiling mad.
"His wife decided that she was ruining him, so she cut his allowance to $5 a day. He was to use this for carfare so that he might find a job. Boy, that sounded bad to us.
"Roy took his $5 and came into town every morning. His wife thought he was looking for a job, but instead we were taking the money and playing the ponies. Sometimes we hit; sometimes we didn't. When we did hit we lived like kings. Then things went on the rocks. That $5 wasn't going anywhere, so Roy began pawning his wife's diamond brooches and silver fox furs. He continued this until she caught up with him and began to steal the pawn tickets out of his pockets.
"One day we had a confidential talk. Roy told me that he was tired of living with her, that she was expecting too much from him, and that it was killing him.
"That put an end on our stay in New York, so I came down to Hopewell. Roy left pretty soon like he said, and now he's over in Parkton with the T. B.
"I stayed in Hopewell about two years, then I got patriotic and joined the army. I hadn't been in the army but a few weeks when I caught the flu and it went into pneumonia. I nearly died. When I was recuperating I cussed out the captain. He just laughed at me and said he had heard people cuss before, but never the words I used, and would I please give him a written list of them for his own use in the future. That was the kind of man he was. He'd cuss you and you could cuss him back. He rather liked it. Soon after that they gave me my discharge. They didn't want an old cripple in the army. The war was over anyway. I stayed in the army about three months.
"Then I joined the Simpson, a ship that carried coal to the Panama Canal Zone. I was in Norfolk when I went on the Simpson; I made two trips on her. Then I went on a Ship called the Uwharrie and made several trips on her. I changed because I thought I was getting a better ship, but both of them had their faults. In some respects one was better than the other, and vice versa. I enjoyed that life. It was hard as hell, but just as carefree as any life you can live with never a damn thing to worry about. I had the responsibility of the engines. Keeping the pistons cool was the big job, but my help was good and we only had trouble a couple of times. Boy, it was hell then, or hotter than hell. We couldn't stay in a boiler to make repairs two minutes at a time. We'd have to go in there, do a little work, and come right out. Then one of the other fellows would go in, and so on like that.
"Once it took us five days to get a boiler fixed. During that time there was a calm on the sea, with not a breath of air stirring anywhere. That's the hottest I've ever seen in my life. If hell's that hot I don't want anything to do with it. It was so hot we couldn't stand our regular watch and had to split it up, two hours on and four hours off. I'd go on watch with just a pair of dungarees on, and they'd be wet through with sweat in two minutes. I'd take a drink of water and sweat it right out. If I stood still a few minutes I'd be standing in a pool of my own sweat. But that kind of weather was unusual.
"All those hard times on shipboard were forgotten when we hit port. I never will forget Negro Lill's place in Colon, Panama. She was big and fat and just as black as the ace of spades. Believe it or not, she was a North Carolina Negro. She ran this dance hall, or barroom, and there were plenty of good-looking girls working for her all the time--Asiatics, Spaniards, dagoes, and crosses of every breed. She kept all of them well in hand. Lill would only have to speak once and the girls would mind. Boy, I never saw anything to beat that; her word was law around that place. She sure was making money, too. I fell for one of her girls once. She was a cross of something, and as pretty as a picture. It's a good thing we left when we did, or my life might have been altogether different from what it is.
"In strange ports you couldn't get to see the better class of people, for all sailors were just alike in their estimation. Unless you had a letter of introduction or an entree through a friend, you just couldn't crash any kind of decent society. Now, in Norfolk I had friends that fixed me up all right.
"Aunt Bess and Mama won't satisfied with me being at sea, so they persuaded me to come home. I went in the chicken business, and the first year and a half I made money. The following spring a disease got in among my chickens, and nearly every one of them died. I hauled away over 500 hens in one wagonload at one trip. That made me sick of the chicken business and I quit.
"I came to Raleigh and bought a half interest in a garage for $6,000. We made money there for awhile, and I had a nice bank account and so did my partner. We both were able to take trips up to New York to see ball games and do most anything we wanted to in reason. That's when I fell in love with my wife. That's also when I played hell. I had a nice car then and I kept it shined up to a million. I had a special compartment in the back that just fit a five-gallon keg, and I kept that keg full of the best corn whiskey money could buy. I got married and we went to New York on our honeymoon. We just traveled about up there, seeing things and doing things. I think my wife really enjoyed it, and I got a big kick out of her having such a good time.
"We came home and rented an apartment. Everything went on all right until things got so bad at the garage. I sold out for $700 cash. I didn't exactly sell out; we just split up, and $700 was all my partner said he could pay. Anyway, and for good reasons I have, I know he crooked me out of the $6,000 I paid him for half interest in the place.
"My first boy was born the first year we were married. I couldn't get a job anywhere then. I loafed around here out of work and nearly going crazy, for I'm the type person that's got to be doing something. I just can't stay around and hold my hands like some people I know. One night I told my wife I was going to take a short trip. I went to see Roy, and we decided to go to Birmingham and pitch some medicine.
"The way we learned to pitch medicine was from Old Man Banks there in Danville. I reckon he's the best con man in the country. I once saw him bet $2,000 that he could take $2,000 out of Atlanta in two weeks. Well, you may not know it, but Atlanta is the hardest town in the South on con men. I mean, you can't even stop in the city limits. The bet was put up, and Mr. Banks bought him a brand new car and went to Atlanta.
"When we got there he put up a little stand just outside the city limits. Each day he'd ride through the streets of the city, dressed in his tailored suit and ten-gallon hat. His grey Van Dyke beard gave him the appearance and dignity of some great statesman. As he rode through the streets he'd throw out new one-dollar bills and invite the people out to his place. The public, thinking they could get some free money, would go out there. In two weeks he took over $3,000 out of Atlanta.
"Roy and myself got to Birmingham and did a landslide business. I'd send the wife $50 every week, and we still had money to throw away.
"Roy decided he wanted to go down and visit the red light district. Well, that suited me fine as I'm always in for a little fun.
"'How much money do we have?' Roy asked me. I counted our money and above expenses we had $150, I told him.
"'Well, you just watch me,' he said, 'and I'll show you how to buy the house. Now, when I tell you to spend money spend it just as free as you can, just like a dollar don't mean a thing.'
"We caught a cab and the driver carried us to a very nice house. It was furnished with overstuffed chairs and a long settee. Heavy drapes were on the windows, and everything was as clean as could be. The girls looked exceptionally nice. Two came over on the settee with me, and two or three were messing around the chair Roy was sitting in. They wanted a quarter to play the piano.
"'O.K., here's two quarters, play it twice,' I said.
"Roy wasn't having anything to do with the girls, he was playing up to the landlady who was a few pounds overweight and not so good looking. The girls then wanted a drink.
"They brought two gallons of white corn liquor for $30. The landlady locked the door, and not another soul was admitted that night. Several callers came, but she told them it was a full house. Boy, from that night on we lived like kings. It didn't cost us hardly anything to go out and have steak suppers, spend the night with the girls, and when we were there nobody else was admitted. Of course, Roy was playing up to the landlady only. If you're going to mess around with the landlady you can't play around with any of her girls, too. That's the way landladies are.
"Just before my wife raised so much hell for me to come home Roy called me in his room one morning early.
"'Look here,' he said.
"'Oh, boy, you have a bad case of venereal disease,' I told him.
"I hated to tell him, but it was the truth. I knew the quicker we got it treated the easier it would be to cure, so off to the doctor we went. I kidded him a long time about what the landlady gave him for buying her house.
"Then my wife got next to me, telling me that my boy was just the age that he needed his father with him. Then she told me that Mr. Camp in the bank was going to see that I got a good job just as soon as I got home. I finally got so damn tired of those letters that I went home.
"Yes, he saw that I got a good job," Mack continued sneeringly. "I shoveled dirt filling in the lot where the old Yarborough hotel was, and after getting it filled and level so you could park a car there business wasn't worth a damn. The people in Raleigh would rather drive a dollar's worth looking for a place to park than pay ten or fifteen cents to a person to park their car and look after it. Hell yes, I had to cut the price to ten cents, and then they wouldn't park there. Don't tell me anything about what people promise you. That's the good job Mr. Camp gave me. I didn't even make $15 a week.
"My wife was satisfied, though. She seems to just want me to be near her, and when I am she's raising hell about one thing or another. I'd like to invite you and a lot of my friends around to the house, but she'd be liable to insult us all, and if she didn't her mother would.
"You see, her mother lives with us, and I'll swear I don't have a minute's peace. I went in the house the last pay day, and my mother-in-law met me in the hall and said, Where did you throw your check away this time?' I just ignored her and went in and gave my wife some money. I can't under stand women. I see that they have plenty to eat and enough coal to keep the house warm, in fact, I attend to the furnace myself.
"Aunt Bess died last week, and not yet has my wife been up to me and put her arms around me and told me she was sorry. When I came back to the house from Aunt Bess' funeral my mother-in-law met me in the hall and said, 'If you don't do something for Ada--that's my wife--you're going to have another one to bury.' Ada had a cold and I'd been after her a week to go to the doctor. I offered to get a car and carry her, but she wouldn't go. After her mother said that, and I had just lost everything in the world that meant anything to me except my two boys, I went in and got Ada's coat, put it around her, picked her up, and told her I was carrying her to Dr. Lanning. The doctor said it was just a cold and gave her some prescriptions, which I stopped by a drug store and got filled. I carried her back home, and that seemed to please her mother very much.
"Ada threatened to leave me several months ago, and I talked sweet to her on account of the children. I do have two of the finest boys in the country. One of them is eleven; the other, seven. They love their mother, and she carries them to Sunday school every Sunday, or sees that they are ready to go if she don't feel like going with them. She's a good mother to them.
"Christmas her brother from Tarboro came to see us, and she asked him to give her a job there. Boy, that burned me up. I told him I was damn tired of hearing about her leaving me and to give her the job and let her go. I didn't give a damn any more. We went in to see Ada, and she wanted to know how much money I'd send her each month if she left. I told her $60, half of my check. I figured I'd come out better than I'd been in the past, for I never had $60 for myself living with her and her mother. Well, since I blew up and told her to go I haven't heard anything else about her leaving. I told you that women just couldn't be figured out. We've been to the picture show three times lately, and Ada was her old self again, but maybe when I go home she'll start arguing again. We average at least one show a week.
"I can't get over the way she treated me when Aunt Bess died. I'll tell you something, Ada's daddy died not very long ago, and I held her in my arms for two days doing everything I possibly could for her. Now, she knew how much I thought of Aunt Bess, and how good Aunt Bess had been to us both. Why, she gave us $50 many times when I was hard-up and couldn't make ends meet. I had to go out of town on business, and there's where I was when Aunt Bess died. When I came in I went to the office, and got a message there to go home at once. I called up and they said, 'You come home just as soon as you can.' I couldn't figure out what was wrong. I never dreamed it was Aunt Bess. I went home, and as I entered the door they blurted out in cold, hard tones, without any warning or anything, 'Your Aunt Bess is dead.' My wife never came near me at all.
"Mother was in Florida where she had gone against my wishes. As usual she took Sister's advice and went on down without Aunt Bess or Aunt Annie. The three generally went down together and spent the winter. I don't know what'll happen when they tell Mother that Aunt Bess is dead, for she is expecting her and Aunt Annie down soon now. I wouldn't be the one to tell Mother for anything. We didn't wire her because the family thought it'd be better to wait and go and tell her. I wouldn't be surprised if Mother didn't fall out also.
"Aunt Bess, God bless her soul, loved children, and she and her husband tried twice to have some. The first was a still-born case, and the second time it was twins that only lived three days. The doctor told them never to try again as it would most likely mean her death. I reckon that was one reason she was always so good to me. I haven't heard for sure, but-she must have left something over $5,000. I imagine she was worth, in real estate and all, between $5,000 and $10,000. I'm not expecting to be remembered in her will, for she gave me mine while she was here on earth. Boy, she really got me out of some jams. I expect Sister will get one of the houses in Danville, and maybe more, for Aunt Bess thought lots of her.
"I didn't even have a dark suit, so I had to go up the street and buy one. The clerk showed me a dark blue double-breasted that I liked very much until I saw the pleats running down the front of the pants. Then I told him nothing doing, that when I started wearing pleats; I'd buy skirts instead of pants. I found one that suited me pretty good, a single-breasted. I wore it to the funeral, and then I had to carry it back for alterations, as the pants were too short. The alterations and all didn't cost but $22.50. I've got a little business to attend to here for Aunt Bess, and then I think I'll check out. I can't get a raise on my job, and I'm just staying in the same old rut.
"I worked like the dickens on that parking lot job but couldn't make a go of it, so I got a job with the ERA. It paid me $75 a month to start with. I was working with the files and trying to keep a record of everything else. I finally got a raise to $90. When the Resettlement Administration took over the old ERA I asked Mr. Plant about my job. He asked me what I could do, and I told him I could do anything that was to be done.
"'That's the way I like to hear a man talk,' he said. 'I've got one jumbled-up mess here on my hands, with the files and all that cattle that has been shipped in here, and I can't get anybody to get heads or tails out of it. The number of head of cattle has got to balance with the number shipped in here. The reports to date are off up in the thousands. Now, I'm going to give you that job. Balance that, I don't care what you do or how long it takes, but it's got to balance, and it's now your job.'
"I wrote hundreds of letters to the field asking for the information I needed. The reports they sent in were all wrong. Why, some of them would vary 900 head a month, which was impossible. I made my letters so hot and gave the field supervisors so much hell that they reported me. Mr. Plant came to see me about it, and I told him that was the only way I'd been able to get correct reports.
"'Well, I'll take over the writing of letters to the field,' he said. When he did the reports started coming in wrong again, and I showed them to him. 'well, you just do the writing then,' he told me, 'and if they don't like it they can lump it. I've tried to be nice to them and they won't let me, so go your way and get me that report balanced. The supervisor from Washington will be down any day now. '
"In ten more days I had the exact number of cows, living or dead, the number of calves born, and every detail that anyone could ask for. The man from Washington came down and saw my report, studied it for two or three hours, and came over to me and said, 'Mr. Haskins, I want to congratulate you on that report. I have traveled in practically every state that cattle has been shipped to, and this is the first time I haven't had to spend at least six weeks trying to find out what I had to know.' He told my boss what a nice report I had given him, and that put me in solid with him.
"Then my boss gave me charge of the files. We had a hard time taking the files away from the Rural Rehab. Old Man Donald put up so much opposition that I thought at one time we wouldn't get them. He argued Business Management couldn't handle them properly, that it wasn't any place for them. Mr. Donald was so mad with me that he hardly spoke for two or three months. Then, after I got my set-up all fixed the file service was as perfect as it was possible to get it. Mr. Donald called me in the office one day and half-way apologized to me for the way he had acted.
"'I had so much trouble with them when I had them,' he said, 'I just thought I'd have twice as much when it was out from under my supervision. Mr. Haskins, I'm getting the best service from the files now that I've ever had.'
"Boy, I went out of his office smiling all over. I never dreamed a man like him would ever admit anything, much less pay somebody a compliment. Well, it took hard work and long hours. I've worked until one and two o'clock in the morning many times getting the filing system I wanted set up properly. Every time I get a good clerk and train him some department will come along and offer him more money, and I have to start in a new person to take his place. It sure is hell that I can't pay my help more than $1,080 a year. That's all I can pay my file clerks, but other departments can pay up to $1,500. I've been to my boss about it several times, but he says there's nothing he can do about it right at this time. Well, until we can do something I'm not going to be able to keep any good help.
"You see, I didn't get my job through politics, but through honest-to-God hard work. I don't feel under obligations to anybody. If it wasn't for my two boys I'd leave town with Dick and Bud and really make some big money one more time in my life. I'm absolutely at a loss to know what to do about my two boys. They're just the finest in the country, and I'd like to see them amount to something in this world. They always bring in good report cards from school, and we don't have much trouble with them about their homework.
"I walk up the street and see college graduates looking for jobs, then go a little further and see a lawyer who is broke and wants to borrow fifty cents until he can go around the corner and collect a fee. That's just his excuse; he hasn't any fee to collect or he would have collected it before. If I send them to college what are they going to do when they come out? Well, time will tell. Maybe their old dad will have some money by then, enough to let them be playboys on Broadway. That's what I did, just played around and enjoyed life, so why deprive them of the pleasure?
"I've got to go now and pick up Dick and Bud. Come to see me sometime. Good-bye."
