THE WANDERING MAGICIAN
Date of First Version:February 28, 1939
Person Interviewed:Frank Hageman
Occupation:Magician, radio announcer
Address:New York, N.Y. (Formerly of Chapel Hill, N.C.)
Writer:Claude V. Dunnagan
Revisor:
THE WANDERING MAGICIAN
Dear John: I received your letter last week requesting an account of my travels in North Carolina as a magician and also a brief sketch of my wanderings before I came to your fair state. Of course you realize it isn't easy for a magician who is skilled solely in digital dexterity and hokus-pokus to write a perfect autobiography. Consequently, I will try to give you a somewhat chronological story of my travels, with emphasis on my sojourn in your state, with its unusual incidents, and a few impressions I got while in North Carolina. You may use or discard them, as you like.
As a child on the streets of New York, I acquired an almost hallowed admiration for that master magician, Houdini. I attended nearly every performance he gave on Broadway..... whenever my finances permitted. I would sit enthralled while, in a mist of magic vapor, he sent a human body rising toward the ceiling, or sawed a living woman in half, or turned a cage of snakes into a litter of rabbits, and vice-versa. I would go home and ponder over the illusions, attempting to satisfy myself that each trick he performed had a logical, natural solution. Sometimes (with simpler tricks) I succeeded; more often, I didn't. At times, I actually believed Houdini to be endowed with supernatural powers, so utterly inexplicable were some of his illusions.
This early fascination for magic caused me to spend practically all of my meager earnings for magician's equipment and books dealing with their operation. I would work for hours on one trick, perfecting the motions of the hand, creating pose and control of bodily movement, and improving the mechanism of the trick itself. I accompanied this with numerous readings about the psychology of human beings and their susceptibility to suggestion and misdirection.
At the time I reached the age when I thought I should be making some money through my magic skill, the great White Way was overrun with would-be-Houdinis and starving prestidigitators. With my lack of stage experience, there was little hope of my breaking into Broadway. Then, one day I went to a small circus in Brooklyn with the sole purpose of seeing a sideshow attraction of "mystic and Oriental magic". When I reached the ticket office, I saw several circus hands taking down the "Oriental Magic" sign, and upon inquiry, the manager told me that Barnelli, the magician, had suddenly been taken ill and the magic show was being discarded. I asked him to show me Barnelli's equipment, and he did. Every trick there was either one that I had at home or one that I had learned to do while watching it on the stage. Then I told the manager that if he would give me two helpers and put the sign back up, he could start selling tickets in twenty minutes. This, he assented to sceptically, admonishing me that if it flopped, I would pay dearly. The show was a success, and an hour after the performance was over, I had a ten dollar bill and a four month contract with the circus.
From there we went to Buffalo, Philadelphia, Pittsburg, Cleveland, and several smaller towns. While in Baltimore, I learned that the show was in bad financial condition. Several of the performers' salaries were overdue, including my own. Then, without notice, the manager announced that the circus was without funds and mortgaged, and that a new company was taking over the equipment, but not the performers. One by one, the acrobats, dancers and clowns packed up and left. Then, one of the barkers who had a car asked me if I wanted to ride south with him and his wife. He said he was going as far as North Carolina. I accepted and the next morning at dawn we were on our way south. I didn't learn till we were in Virginia that the woman with us was not his wife. We'd stopped in Richmond that night for supper and he called me aside.
"I guess you know by now that dame ain't my wife, " he said. "I picked her up in Pittsburg, and I'm takin' her to North Carolina for somethin' that could get me slapped in jail for ten years. Ever hear of the Mann Law? "Yes." "When we get to Durville, you forget about me an' her, see? In the meantime we're short on dough so we're stayin' here for the night. Grab you a flophouse room and we'll pick you up at the bus terminal in the mornin'." The next morning, he had a pocket full of money. I was tired when we reached Durville that night. The barker parked in front of a cheap hotel. "This joint don't look so bad for business, " he said, lighting a cigarette. "Good luck to you, kid, " he said, as I stepped to the sidewalk. "Don't take no wooden nickels." He turned to the woman in the back seat. "Come on, Cleopatra, we ain't got all night." I walked down the street with a feeling of relief and freedom. I had been under a strain ever since I learned what the man's business was, because had I heard and read of cases in which white slave-runners and their companions had been given long sentences in prison, and I didn't want to be with them if they were caught. The thought was nauseating. It was the first time I had ever been south of the Mason-Dixon line and the first thing that struck me as I walked down the street was the town's similarity to many parts of New York...it was more modern and up to date than I had ever had any conception a small - southern town could be. Gayly colored lights, theatres, cafes, taxi-cabs.....it seemed like a miniature Broadway. I had, as I suppose many New Yorkers have, the impression that most southern towns were small, sleepy villages whose inhabitants went to bed with the chickens, awake at cock-crow, ate corn-pone and chitilings, and spent their time playing checkers or drinking mint-julep in the shade of magnolia trees.
The town of Durville was an industrial center and, I realized, not any too good a stamping ground for a stranded prestidigitator. Standing on the corner of a busy thoroughfare waiting for the green light, I felt in my pocket and drew out my total wealth...... forty eight cents. Aside from that, my sole possession was a ragged shirt, a pair of patched cotton trousers, axx pair of "air-cooled" shoes that didn't match, and a deck of playing cards that would hardly be accepted for any self-respecting poker game.
Upon inquiry, I learned that the nearest town was Churchtown, seat of the state University. Realizing that those people who consider themselves educated are susceptible to illusion and suggestion (in circus brogue, suckers), I immediately thumbed my way in the direction of that metropolis of culture. University students are not hard to meet, particularly those in the south. They seem eager to meet people and make friends quickly. Nor are they often wrong in their appraisals of strangers. You either don't click at first, and seek your friends elsewhere, or you do, and immediately become "one of the gang". Although the student body seems to be closely knit and the individual students have a lot in common with every other student, they invariably form groups among themselves, or "circles", in which scholars with particular likings meet regularly with companions with similar tastes. These groups, I learned, are rather distinct. There are the musicians, who meet for "jam" sessions and "swing" discussions, and the more serious minded music-lovers who find their diversion in the concert hall. Then there are the intellectual groups who discuss everything from the mute "h" in Chaucer to the doctrine of pre-existence in Wordsworth. This group consists of the greater part of the students and includes disciples of such doctrines as Marxianism, agnosticism, platonism, asceticism, stoicism, and converts of the Ivory Tower, not to mention numerous informal organizations among foreign students. Then there are, of course, the drinkers, crap-shooters, and woman-chasers. This group, the worshippers of Bacchus and Venus, invariably flock together. They occasionally take off time to study when they are not too busy. Other groups consist of the athletes, fraternity men, assistant professors, actors, sprouting politicians, beer guzzlers, and poets, 
The group with which I found acceptance upon my arrival in Churchtownwas a combination of beer-drinking philosophers and poetic poker-players. The first night I joined them they were gathered around the counter at a beer-tavern off campus singing "At the Bar" and "Hark the Sound of Drunken Voices" to the accompaniment of considerable schooner clinking and vocal discord.
When I had shown them a few disappearing card tricks and had finally eaten the deck, I was welcomed into their circle in true North Carolina style. I found lodging in an empty dormitory room and soon found myself making pocket change by teaching amateur magicians the rudiments of prestidigitation. One of the strange things I noticed while in Churchtown, which I had never noticed up north, was that everyone spoke to everybody else, whether they were acquainted or not, on the campus or on Main Street. The genial spirit of the students and townfolk was something new to me.
Later, in the fall of the year when the schools were opening, I decided to tour the state, One of the students whom I had met during the summer wanted to go along with me and book some magic shows in the schools. I sent a wire to my home in New York and a week later I received my trunk of magic equipment. Taking what little money we had, we pooled it and made the down-payment on an antiquated semblance of an automobile. We left that evening with twenty cents between us and the back-end of the car full of disappearing boxes, secret contraptions and a cage of animals. Our menagerie consisted of Peter, a white chinchilla rabbit; Donald, a noisy half-grown duck; Jeep, a fat little guinea pig; a couple of anonymous white rats, and an erratic White-Leghorn rooster whom we called Rembrandt, until he got loose in an audience one day and started a small riot; his name was Dillinger thereafter. When we got to Burnsville that night, Bing suggested we buy two hot-dogs and a bottle of milk with the twenty cents we had and sleep in the car for the night. We did. The next day we booked two shows in the city schools. Having nothing to do the rest of the afternoon, we drove to the edge of town in search of food. We found an apple orchard some distance from a farm-house and proceeded cautiously to avail ourselves of its fruit. Everything would have been well had not "Uncle Ezra" been watching us from the edge of the woods, whereupon he came forth and gave us a lecture on the penalties of thievery. Bing, who had socialist inclinations and a habit of opening his mouth and sticking his foot in it, replied that people who were hungry didn't always reckon the consequences of raiding an apple orchard.
I explained our circumstances and proceeded to show Ezra some card tricks that made the corn-husks fall out of his hair. Then he invited us up to the house for supper and stated that his barn was at our disposal for the night. We graciously accepted.
A barn loft is a bad place for a sleepwalker to spend the night, particularly where one is bothered by rats running over one's legs.
I realized this fact when I awoke suddenly and found myself, jarred and aching, lying on the soft floor of a cow stable. Looking up, I saw Bing staring wild-eyed through a gaping hole in the loft floor.
Then he began laughing. It was indeed lucky for me that when I fell through I brought with me an avalanche of hay that softened my fall.
As I climbed back up the rickety ladder, the odor that pervaded my nostrils was not exactly that of cologne. The next morning I took a bath in cold well water.
Bing was a good traveling companion, but as a magician's assistant he would have made an excellent dish-washer. His chief defect was absent-mindedness, and I discovered this at a very inopportune moment. It was at the first show in Burnsville. One of the feature tricks of the performance was to be a mechanical illusion billed as "the Boiled Guinea-Pig", in which I would dump an egg, hair tonic, and a bottle of shoe polish into a metal container. Then I would proceed to borrow a handkerchief from someone in the audience with which I would build a fire under the can to "cook" the contents. The "trick" was a secret compartment in the lid, and when the "boiling" and hokus-pokus was over, I would remove the lid and out would hop a surprised Guinea-Pig, none the worse from having been cooked. It was Bin's job to set the trick while I was on the stage and hand me the apparatus when I was ready for it. That morning, there were over four hundred students and teachers in the audience. Everything was set. The trick was nearing the climax. I asked for a handkerchief, which a youngster in the audience handed me. Switching it quickly for a paper napkin, I started a fire under the can to boil the "soup". Then I faced the audience with a beaming smile.
"Now, boys and girls, what do you think we've got in the can now? A cake? Oh, no!.Stewed shoe polish? Not quite." I pulled the lid off and stared into the can. It was empty! "Nothing", I said slowly."Not a thing....not a living thing...." As I pushed the trick aside, I glanced backstage. Bing was half sitting, half lying in a chair, his eyes shut tight, and emitting sounds through his nose that, on a Major Bowes Amateur program, would have been a fair imitation of an oak-wood sawmill running full force. On the floor in his cage sat Jeep, the Guinea-Pig, placidly gnawing oats to the accompaniment of my assistant's rythmic snoring, utterly unaware of the consternation his absence from my kettle had caused. I am not, as a poised, self-controlled magician, often given to orgies of expletive vulgarity, but at the end of that show when I had finally, laboriously and indignantly lowered the curtain, I lit into a spasm of slanderous swearing that would have put a sailor's vocabulary on a pedestal of virginal purity. Bing did not stop sawing logs until I had finally removed his foundation by suddenly plucking his chair from beneath him, leaving him suspended in the air at the mercy of the law of gravitation, which took its course effectively.
When we had finished working the Burnsville schools, we started across the Piedmont section toward the mountains. Before we left, we went back to Uncle Ezra's, paid him for the meals and got some more oats and hay for the animals. White Bing was piling hay in the back-end, Pete, the rabbit, got loose and ran under the car. When we were ready to leave, he would not come out, coax as we might. I suggested to Bing that he back-fire the motor and scare him out. He thought it was a good idea, and in a moment he had the motor roaring at full speed. He quickly cut the switch off and pushed up the spark lever. As the drone of the motor died down, he snapped the switch back on. I clapped my hands to my ears just in time. There was a reverberating explosion that shook the dust from the barn-loft and left a queer ringing sensation in my ears.
When the smoke cleared away, there was a peculiar roaring sound coming from under the car. I bent down on my knee and looked. What had once been a very good muffler was now a mass of twisted, torn metal, hanging uselessly from a bent exhaust pipe. I got up with a painful moan. Still no rabbit had come out. When I glanced around, all the chickens were gone from the yard, but there stood Uncle Ezra leaning against the fence with an amused smile on his face.
"Ef ye'd roll the car back a-piece, " he drawled, "Ye c'd git at 'im."
Bing looked at me with the expression of a sheep, shifted the gears into reverse, and backed the car several feet, leaving Peter Rabbit sitting nonchalantly in the middle of a thick bunch of grass. He was somewhat blacker than a Harlem alley-cat at midnight. We billed him thereafter as "the Black Rabbit of Borneo".
The next day we gave a performance in the high school at Danburg. There was a dilapidated relic of a piano backstage and Bing sat down and played the Double Eagle March for the students as they marched into the auditorium white I set the tricks for the show. One of the main features of the act was to be a "materializing rooster" illusion. It worked with a fake-back box that had hidden hinges in the rear. I carried the box up to the front of the stage and invited some of the students up to inspect it. They did, and found nothing wrong with it. Putting the box back on the table, I proceeded to tap the insides to show that it was empty. Then I slammed the lid shut and waved my wand. As I did, I saw the bag hanging behind the table begin to rip. I rushed around the table to grab it, but too late. Rembrandt, the rooster, had clawed his way through. He dashed over to the front of the stage with a startled cackle. Then, with a crow of exultation, he flapped his wings and gave vent to a natural inclination. The audience laughed and I could tell by the expression and color of the teachers' faces that their dignity had been damaged. Not content with this, the scoundrel spread his wings and sailed down into the audience. There followed a small riot in which Rembrandt lost most of his feathers and all of his self-respect. That was the day we re-named him Dillinger.
Donald, the duck, was no saint, either. Dillinger was getting so big we traded him for two pigeons, and decided to use Donald in the box illusion. Everything went all right until one day, just at the climax of the trick, he let out an ear-splitting quack and gave the whole stunt away. Bing was in favor of making duck soup out of Donald, but I suggested that a rubber-band aroung his beak would prevent any further outbursts at crucial moments. That would have been a good idea if, one day, we had not packed up hurriedly and left the rubberband wrapped tightly around his bill. The next morning, poor Donald's mouth was swollen, he was starved, dry, and sick unto death. We removed the band and tried to pour water into him, but to no avail. Then we placed some chicken feed before him. He wasn't hungry any more. We gave him a hot bath, but succeeded only in removing most of his feathers. I shall never forget those last few moments when poor Donald, weak and pale, looked up at me with a sad smile, gave one final little quack and closed his eyes. We put him in a shoe-box and carried him gently to the edge of a cornfield, where we dug a tiny hole and laid him in the ground. Then we placed a small stone at his head and left him there along in the twilight. I've often thought, since then, that he really wanted to die...that he was tired of life, and the heaven he thought of was probably a big, shady duck pond where there was plenty of corn and no magicians or rubber bands, especially no magicians.
Jeep, the Guinea-Pig, never gave us any trouble except once when he invaded a torn bag of oats in the rear of the car and ate so much that we were unable to squeeze him into the can. We tried it once, but it resulted in tragedy. I was standing in front of the stage one night, gesticulating and planting some "misdirection" for the boiled guinea-pig trick, when the audience began laughing. When I turned around to see what had started the commotion, Jeep had forced the lid off the secret compartment and was crawling down the side of the table. We abandoned the trick temporarily and put Jeep on a starvation diet.
Animal antics were not out only trouble. We encountered some strange antics on the part of school-teachers and principals. In one case, I was permanently impressed with the fact that North Carolinians are clever geneological experts. One day we stopped at a cross-roads school near Winston-Salem. It turned out that madame who was principal had a second-cousin whose brother-in-law was uncle to a girl whose boy friend's father used to know a third cousin of Bing's grandmother. We spent two hours absorbing her geneological knowledge, and she finally told us that she couldn't book a show with us because the parents thought magic was detrimental to the children's morals. Then there was the school-principal who was hipped on football. He'd been to the Rose Bowl once and a newsreel couldn't have given a more picturesque account of that bloody game, nor more detailed. When we left, we had an entirely new understanding of foot-ballology, but no gate-receipts from a magic show.
We'd just given a show at a small rural school and the attendance was better than average. When we had divided the money with the principal, he put the school's share in an envelope and sealed in up.
"I wouldn't have let you give this show, boys, " he said, "except that the school needs some new curtains for the auditorium and the P.T.A. is out of money at present." That night we stopped in a barber shop at the nearest town for a shave, shower, and haircut. While we were there, the same principal walked in, unaware of our presence at the moment, and got a shave, haircut, shampoo, and shoe-shine. As he stepped down from the shine stand, he pulled out the same envelope he'd put in his pocket that morning, unsealed it and paid the barber."Oh, hello, boys", he said in a surprised tone of voice when he saw us. He grinned sheepishly and hurried out the door. In the fall of the year, we worked toward the western part of the state on the assumption that Carolina mountaineers liked to be fooled, too. We were not incorrect. We gave some of our best shows among the hill-billy folk of Carolina's mountain country and found them a rather appreciative, though somewhat skeptical, audience.
Being something of an esthete, I cannot well pass over this phase of our travels without mentioning some of the natural beauties we saw while in the hills. The thick, rich color of North Carolina's mountain flora is breath-taking in its magnificence. The rolling hills, immense and clear, can be seen for an eternity of miles from any vantage point above the foot-hills. In every velley or gorge, there is a crystal clear stream laden with speckled trout. There is practically no rocky terrain.....just an infinite expanse of grassy, wooded hills.
The homely hospitality of the folk who dwell in these hills is an exclusive and hallowed tradition. They never turn a stranger from their door. On an occasion, we spent the night with such a family. For supper we had corn-pone, "chitlin's", sorghum molasses, and goat's milk. We ate plentifully (as they expected us to do) and at night, we sat around a roaring fireplace and listened to Granpappy Stoogie play "Red River Valley" on an ancient, home-made banjo.
Then the Bible was read and we retired to listen to the occasional rasp of crickets, the distant howl of a hound dog, and the throbbing silence of the infinite mountains.
After that, we had some bad luck with our menagerie. The two pigeons we'd traded Dillinger for must not have been homing pigeons, because they didn't return after they had flown away one day while we were feeding them. Jeep, the Guinea-Pig became ill and died of pneumonia (?) when we were up on top of the Blue Ridge mountains. Peter Rabbit crawled under the car one day when the motor was running and probably died of asphyxiation by carbon monoxide. We gave the oats and corn to a farmer whose horse pulled us out of a mud hole near Wilkesboro one night.
Our tour of the state was completed. Bing returned to the University to finish work on his degree.(If he is as good a student as he was a magician's assistant, he will be there for sometime to come.).Good old Bing!..... with a heart of gold and a snore like cross-cut buzz saw. I was sorry we finally parted, but he needed a rest and a chance to catch up on some sleep, so he went back to college.
I bought his share of the car and started toward Chicago, magic show and all. At Winston-Salem I rammed Jezebel into the back of a beer truck and tore up my radiator and fenders, Selling the remains to a junk dealer for twenty-five dollars, I shipped my equipment on ahead by express and bent my thumb toward Chicago. Three days later I was standing on Michigan Boulevard in the shadow of the Loop.
And now, after two years of night clubs, hotel ball-rooms, and numerous stage performances, I feel an inner urge to return to my "native" state, where the 'baccy grows tall and the pine needles fall; where a man can eat hot-dogs and onions without hurting his self respect; and where Jeep and Peter Rabbit lie sleeping under a warm southern sun.
The showy living my profession demands does not blur the memory of the past, nor a hope to re-live it somewhat, in the near future perhaps. In the luxury of a plush, cosmopolitan ball-room, I often think of the time we slept in a haystack with the mice, lived on green apples for two days and rolled our cigarettes from barn-cured tobacco.