B. R. Comstock
FEDERAL WRITERS' PROJECT
Miami, Florida
January 13, 1939
Hannah Taylor (Negro)
Miami, Florida
(Teacher)
Bertha R. Comstock, Writer
HANNAH TAYLOR,
Negro Teacher, and Welfare Worker
Approaching her seventieth birthday, and still working with the enthusiasm and energy that marked her entire life of service, Hannah Taylor, Miami's outstanding Negro woman, passed away three weeks ago. In the midst of her daily duties she suffered a stroke that resulted in her death two days later. Her daughter Ruth Polite gave me this story of her mother's life and service.
Hannah was the child of slave parents, her father, Allen Bachellor, being a house servant on a plantation in West Virginia, and her mother a housemaid with a family in Virginia. Becoming free, both had gravitated to northern Florida, where they married and made a little home in Aucilla. Bachellor worked in the turpentine camps or farmed, as he found work, while his wife also worked for the white families of the neighborhood. They had a garden, hunted, and fished, and so lived a humble, comfortable life. Here Hannah was born in 1869. She attended the rural school near her home, and later was sent to Jacksonville, where she graduated from the eighth grade of Cookman Institute, a new school organized under the auspices of the Methodist Episcopal Church for the education of Negroes.
"How were her expenses paid?" we asked. Ruth explained that the family worked and saved toward the amount needed, and the school being supported as a missionary work, made it possible for students to earn part of their way. Hannah early showed unusual aptitude and white friends helped her also. She grades and received the usual "Preliminary" (Third grade) certificate, taught a small school one term, then asked for an examination, and received her first grade certificate.
Continuing her teaching, she took up high school subjects, and passed the High School examination, then went to the Florida A. & M. College for a three year Normal Course, earning her way by house service. She had "Got ready" and saved some money from her teacher's salary, and so made the three years, graduating with honor from the Normal School. She continued to teach and to study.
She married a man named Williams, who made a living for his family farming and carpentering; two children, Edith and Eddie were born, and soon after the father died leaving the young wife with two little ones to support, which she did her teaching, still continuing her studies. For thirty years, Hannah taught in Negro schools in Florida, married again and had two more children, Ruth and Edith Taylor, both of whom survive their mother and are teaching in Miami.
Hannah took up one subject after another of the Florida A. & M. curriculum, and through the years continued her "College Course," although her life was crowded with many responsibilities. She sent her children to the Cookman school which had become the "Bethune-Cookman Junior College" at Daytona Beach. They finished and received their Bachelor's degrees from the A. & M. had she lived, Hannah, at seventy years of age, would also have received her degree on June 1st of the present year.
"My mother's life was one of great activity and of unusual energy, "said Ruth, as she sat quietly behind her desk in the library of the Frederick Douglas Elementary School. "She was never ill in her life, she had all her teeth, and did not wear glasses and she never seemed to need rest. She was busy, happy, ambitious, always helpful, all her life. In all she did, she had her daughters helping her, and she supervised us and directed us, and not us only, but she had the tact for putting others to work, and of directing them in the right way, so that where ever she went, and where ever she worked, others were better prepared because of her co-operation."
"She was especially watchful of our English," continued Ruth.
"We never learned to speak the idioms peculiar to so many of our race. She was a strong teacher in English and grammar and no child in her classes ever spoke anything but correct English. She read much and had as all reading books that were worth while. We owe so much to our mother. I taught in the fourth grade, but was glad to be transferred to the library, where I can lead the children into good ways of reading and also influence their homes by sending the right books to be read ever the weak end. Then, I also give personal supervision to any child that is backward, or has been absent through illness. We watch our attendance very carefully here, and so our truancy is low, but we do have sickness to contend with because so many of our children are under-nourished or otherwise suffer from low vitality. I am happy to be able to carry on my mother's work in helping in the home-making of our people."
"Tell me about her work in home-making, won't you please?"
"Well, my mother believed that character is formed in the home, that even the influence of the church could be neutralized to a large extent, by the home environment. Of course, she knew the importance of molding the children who are to be the future home makers, but she also saw the importance of doing all possible to make the home life normal and also inspiring for the child. To illustrate, you see these little children coming in here with books to exchange; we are making everyone of the homes represented here much better by sending into the homes, the better ideals that go out from this school, and this library. My mother organized the first Mother's Club twenty years ago, and she did a great work, I think, in helping the mothers to do better work with their children, while at the same time, she worked with the teachers to help the children and through them to help the homes. She was just as much interested in the church and so she organized the A.M.E. choir bringing in the young people and giving them something to do for the church. You know our race love music; many of us can sing. So my mother built up the musical features of the church, making the services more attractive through good music, and also training the young people to sustain the musical features of our church services. Then she worked for better organization of the church societies: she built up the young people's work; she used all her skill as a school teacher to improve our Sunday School. She looked after the attendance as she looked after her school attendance. She helped the Sunday School teachers just as she helped the school teachers. She was an inspiration to young teaches. I think perhaps the secret of my mother's wide influence was her ability to correlate every channel of endeavor, making all our various welfare, educational and religious activities, work together to save the child and to help the race. She gave to the Mother's Club the motto "Not for ourselves but for others, "and practically that was the motto of everything she organized."
"What else did she organize?"
"Before we had compulsory education in Florida, she say the need of more schools for little children, who could not go far from home. She organized the Allapattah colored school twenty years ago that has since grown into the large Northwest 17th avenue School at Liberty City. She taught there and had her daughters and other young teachers doing practice work, of which she acted voluntarily as critic teacher. I do not know how many colored teachers in Dade County owe their success to her. For thirty years she has worked as a teacher and for thirty-five years she has been interested in Normal Training work among teachers. Whatever she did, she always found a group of younger workers when she always co-operated and strengthened their work, always improving and extending their programs without lessening the work of others.
"Where ever she went among our people, she found something to do, always some new way to help; she was never tired, never idle. She had no other interest in life, but to help in some way. As colored town grew in size, so grew her work for our people. That is how she came to organize the orphanage and to help the old people."
"You have an orphanage in colored town?"
"Yes, my mother began that over ten yours ago, when she found so many little children without a home. It is called the Harrison B. Moore Home. My mother's work attracted the attention of Mr. Harrison B. Moore of New York, and he made possible this home there over three hundred been given care when they could not do for themselves. It would be well for you to see what is being done at this home; few people know anything about it."
"Now I think have told you most of mother's story, but there are so many things one cannot tell, for she gave her whole life to her work, and never thought of herself. She looked forward so eagerly to going up to the A. & M. on May 30th to receive her degree. But she has received a batter degree from God; don't you think so?" We gave our assent, we do think so.
After a pause, with a wistful manner, Ruth continued, "My mother said to me 'You must carry on; the work must go on.' But I said 'Oh, I cannot, I cannot, I can never do what you have done, mother dear.' But she said firmly, 'You can and must; I have trained my daughters to carry on and they can do it; promise me you will try.' And I promised."
"Tell me something about yourself," I suggested after a silence.
"There isn't much to tell. I was born in Reading, West Virginia. After mother and father were married, they went back to her old family home for a few months and I was born there. We lived there as father had work and as he died shortly after the second child was born, mother decided to come back to Florida. She was in her old birthplace again. That was in 1908. Nether went to teaching and in 1970 came to Miami. I went to the Edward Waters College (A.M.E.) Jacksonville, but decided I would rather go to the A. & M. I graduated with my Bachelor's degree in 1925 and have taught in the Miami schools for thirteen years. I taught with mother in the Allapattah Elementary school for four years, them for six years, I was in Coconut Grove Achool, and now this is my third years at the Frederick Douglas Elementary. I have the English Department, and am librarian, and also give personal instruction to the backward children. As I said before, my special work is in English."
Regarding her sister Edith, she said that Edith had been teaching in the Phyllis Wheatley School, Fifth Grade, for ten years. She also has degree from the A. & M. The two sisters have dedicated themselves to the task of "carrying on" as their mother trained them to do and gave them commission just before she closed her eyes.
