In an otherwise identical version, the following additional information appears on the top of page 10171B: "Names of persons changed but not places," "Date of first writing: December 15, 1938," "Occupation: Tenant Farmer (housewife)," "Number of words: About 2,100," and the handwritten comment, "Brief Later if Tenant Story needed."
R. F. D. Snow Hill, N.C.
Mrs. Sybil Mumford (white)
Christine Taylor, writer
Edwin Massengill, reviser
THE BAXTERS
Beulah Baxter, who lives eleven miles from Snow Hill on a farm near Edwards Bridge, appeared at the door. She had on a yellow-checked dress, a black-checked apron, and a sweater. Her hat had no shape and fitted her head like a bowl. She came out sleepy-eyed, saying she had just dropped off to sleep; that she had washed that day and was so tired she had decided she would take a few minutes off and get some rest.
"You want to know something about the life of our family?" she asked. "Well, when I was nine years old we lived in Grifton. A family from near Greenville by the name of Baxter moved on a farm not far from the farm that we rented. There was a boy about twenty-one years old in the family. He and I became great friends. When I was in the ninth grade and only seventeen years old we foolish like ran off and got married despite all protest. If I had listened to my mother I'd have finished high school at least. One of my aunts had told me if I would go on with my schooling that she would send me to Greenville college.
"I was right successful when I went to school. I won a gold medal for a prohibition speech, and a ring and a pin for other work, let me show you my ring. I can't wear it now; my fingers are too large. The children want it, but I think so much of it I won't let them have it. I lost the pin 'cause it didn't have a safety catch on it. The ring is plain with space left for initials. My husband gave me this other ring when we were married.
"You know, I wish I could get to church more often. Before I was married I used to go to church and Sunday School every Sunday that came unless I was sick. Mr. Henry and the small boys go to the Chapel 'most every Sunday. The big boys always want to sleep late, so I can't ever get off to go to Sunday School. At one time, Mr. Henry was a deacon in the church.
"Well, if I haven't been well-educated in book learning I certainly have in everything else. My name was Beulah Eakins before I married Henry Baxter and I am the mother of five boys, ranging from eight through twenty-two. Two others died in infancy. I feel like we could of got along better if there hadn't been so many. Of course, there's a lot of happiness in a large family living on a farm; it gives the children somebody to play with when they're small. But I feel like you can't take care of them and do your duty by them like if there was only two or three.
"I want my children to do better than I did. I still have four in school. I've worked in tobacco many a night for my oldest son to finish. Finally, I was took sick when my boy was in the tenth grade, and he had to stop and help me do the work at home. He drove a school truck for two years; now my second son drives a truck. My children ride eleven miles to school and they go nearly every day. Logan had a time getting off this morning. When it was time to go he found he had a flat tire. Mr. Henry and Gordon had to stop their work and help him. We got to go to the schoolhouse tonight to a Christmas program."
Blair, the fourth son, spoke up and said he had to sing.
"Speaking of sickness, we've had our share. Mr. Henry said the other day that the doctors has got all the money we ever made. My baby boy fell in the fire a few years ago and burnt the top of his head, and it took a long time for that to git all right. Had to keep carrying him to the doctor. The place has healed all right but he'll be handicapped for life.
"Two years ago this spring the doctor told me to go to Duke and let them look me over. They found I needed an operation. The doctors said it was quite serious, and if I didn't be operated on real soon it would be too late. They were afraid it might turn into a cancer. After the operation I had to go back every once in awhile for examinations. I am much better but I am always having to go to the doctor. I shore do wish I could feel real well again. I reckon one thing that has caused me to be sick so much was working in the field like a man when I didn't feel like it; yes mam, working in a field and doing my own work probably had a lot to do with it.
"I'm telling you, as hard as I've worked in rain and sun for the little we've got I certainly want to take care of it. That's one of the reasons I'd hate to move; you always tear up something."
The furniture in the house was very plain. The children are provided with enough sleeping space. One room upstairs is sometimes used as a storage place for tobacco after it is worked up, "cause people around here are always stealing tobacco when it is ready to take to the market," Beulah explained.
An unusual thing about her parlor was the array of pictures on the walls, on the dressers, and on the mantel. There were more than twenty pictures in all: pictures of ancestors, of the family, and many of movie stars. She calls this her parlor but it might as well be styled a bedroom. Besides a bed in the room, there are two dressers. On the bed was a home-made bedspread with a white background and blue thread to imitate tufting.
Seeing me glance at the unusual bedspread, she asked, "You want to know how I made that spread? Well, first I took a cup and drew a circle around it, then tufted around the circle, using just a plain needle and some coarse thread, for I didn't have a regular tufting needle and thread. Next I used a saucer, then a plate and a number of pans, and finally, to make the largest circle I used a dishpan."
A blue rug was on the floor. The whole room was spotlessly clean. There was also a piano in the room.
"I shore do wish I could play," Beulah said. "I used to a little bit, but I can't now. None of them here can play. I don't know why I got it 'cept I just wanted one. That's one thing I have I wish I had my money back for."
On top of the piano were songbooks and vases. Besides the piano, there was also a Victrola which looked as though it might be quite old. Above the mantel there was a framed memorial in commemoration of Mr. Henry's sisters. The memorial resembled a tomb designed with a wreath of lilies above which flew a dove with a ribbon in his mouth, bearing the words, "Gone but not forgotten." The inscription read:
In loving remembrance of our dear little babies.
Susan L. Baxter
Died Oct. 17, 1870. Aged 3 years, 10 months
Anniel Baxter
Died July 21, 1880. 2 years, 5 months.
We loved them, yes we loved them
But angels loved them more
And they have sweetly called them
To yonder shining shore.
The golden gates were opened
A gentle voice said come
And with farewells unspoken
They calmly entered home.
"I want to show you a picture of Mr. Henry's mother," Beulah said. "You know this old album is over twenty years old; Mr. Henry give it to me for a birthday present. Here's Mr. Henry's brother's picture. You didn't know him, did you? He died last week from heart trouble. And here's a picture of Gordon's girl friend. Do you know here? Oh, here's that picture I was looking for. It shore does favor his mother. It's one of the best pictures I have ever seen of her."
"I calls this my string quilt," she said, pointing to a quilt. I sewed every piece of this on paper before I cut my squares. I'm quilting the fan design on it. You see the lining of this one is blue. There is nothing I enjoy anymore than piecing quilts. One time I pieced up a quilt out of sugar sacks. Some in the neighborhood say it's cheaper to buy blankets, but seems like I likes my quilts. And then it keeps me from being lonesome.
"I been hearing that Gordon was going to get married, but I won't let myself believe it 'cause I fell like I'll be ruined if he does. He can do just like I do if I'm sick, but it seems like the rest don't know how to take on. I told Gordon I didn't have the money to buy the material, but if he would get it I would fix him two quilts. So he went to Kinston to the mill and bought fifty cents' worth of cotton. It's going to be enough for two quilts. He took two dozen eggs to sell to get some money for the lining, and, do you know, he couldn't hardly sell them; everybody had a plenty. Finally one man give him twenty cents a dozen.
"You wonder why I wear this skillet; seems like it shades my eyes. I've had a time with my eyes all my life. I had to put on glasses when I was fourteen years old. When I was thirteen I had sore eyes and had to stay in a dark room for three weeks. My head has been bothering me like it did 'bout five years ago when I had to go and have my glasses changed. The last time I went to Kinston the eye doctor told me I had granulated eyelids and my glasses needed changing, but it cost $8.50. Someone told me that there was a man in Ayden would change them for $6, but seems like I rather go to Mr. Manning; for he always gives satisfaction, and, I tell you, I wouldn't take nothing for my eyesight. Grading tobacco nearly ruined my eyes. I have to do nearly all the grading by myself. I'm trying to get this quilt out 'cause next week I'll have to make the plant "bed cloth."
Beulah had four hook-like screws in the ceiling and a strong string which held her quilting poles. At night she raises the quilt to the ceiling by drawing the string. On the walls there were more pictures. Her curtains were white homespun, trimmed in blue. There were several chairs, some of which needed repairs, a linoleum rug, a bed, and two dressers in the room. Her sewing machine is old-fashioned. She had three lovely ferns on stands in different places in the room; on a dresser where the sun was gleaming in sat a beautiful Christmas cactus almost in bloom.
"Mr. Jerry Newsom told me the other day to see the boss and get him to put us some electric lights in this house," Beulah remarked, "but I ain't got the heart to do that, 'cause we still ain't out of debt with him. That'd mean a bill of $2.50 every month. I can think of a lot of things I can buy with $2.50. I'd rather have necessities first. We had a telephone one time before we moved here, but we soon had it took out. I know they're nice to have, but, like I say, when our landlord allows us $35 a month to live on and we can't even pay out, we don't need no light bills yet.
"We need more tobacco acreage out here. You take last year: we didn't have but seven acres, and Gordon--he's twenty-one years old--he had one acre. If we don't give him some I know he'll be leaving us. For our family we need to have more tobacco, 'cause it's the only money crop we have. Cotton ain't never been nothing out here. Last year we had to plant it over and it was so late we didn't make a bale off of three acres. We been here six years and aiming to stay on another. I don't know when we'll move. I rather stay, 'cause when you move you are apt to get with a good or bad owner. We like our present owner; he's near 'bout like a daddy to us.
"One thing I would like to have is a cow, 'cause the children need the milk. We've got right many chickens and seven small pigs. The pigs are too small to kill for meat to keep, so I think we'll sell them. Last year we lost our large sow with the rickets. I saw her dragging around so long it has turned me against meat. You know, after we got rid of her someone told Mr. Henry that sometimes hogs had little holes to come in their feet, and if these holes got filled up with dirt they would have the rickets. If one could find the hole and clean it out the hog would get well. I do wish we had knowed it before we got rid of her.
"We did have a car, but we didn't feel like we were able to keep it up as it was getting in such bad shape. So we got out of the car business. How our oldest son owns a Ford car. It's just as much benefit to us as if 'twas ours. What one has, the others has; if one has a little money we all have it; if one don't have any, we are all in the same fix. But I reckon we get along 'bout as good as anybody who is a tenant.
"I reckon you would call the car one of our amusements. It's about the only real enjoyment I have 'cept visiting my people and a few neighbors. As long as I've been here I don't know so many people. Now, the boys do a little fishing and hunting during the seasons. Then they are always playing ball when they get a chance. They go to little ball games around here that they don't have to pay for. They are just bound to go to the show once in awhile. I often tell them, 'If you would just give me those quarters I could have more.' I reckon we need it, but, after working hard all week, they deserve to have some recreation, but I don't care for those things. Going to the show is about the only thing that worries me, but I would rather they would spend it there than somewhere else. I'm not troubled much with courting since I don't have any girls. The boys just gets in the old Ford and highballs it over the creek and come home 'bout eleven o'clock.
"We take the Progressive Farmer; the boys enjoy reading it, but I don't have time, and, besides, it makes my eyes burn and hurt. The other day a lady came around selling a book called Child Craft. I hesitated about buying it, but finally did. I'm glad I did, because the children certainly have enjoyed it. I reckon we needed that $1.50 for something else, but I'd rather they would read that than some old trash. The other day Mr. Clement come 'round selling flavoring, but I couldn't take any because I didn't feel like I had any money to spend for that.
"Am I going to vote next election? Well, I certainly am, and for a Democrat, too. I'm a solid Democrat from my head to my feet, and nobody can change me. When I'm for a thing, I'm for it. Mr. Henry can't be changed either.
"Our owner must think everything is all right out here, 'cause he don't hardly ever come. He seems satisfied and lets us go on with whatever we are doing just like it was ours. Mr. Henry hain't got so much education but he's plenty good on his figuring."
The house is unusual. The front part is of wood, painted gray; the back part is of brick; the two parts of the house are joined by steps and a porch floor. When asked the reason, Beulah replied, "It seems that this place once belonged to a large family of Kings. At one time it was all brick, but fire destroyed the front, leaving the one-time kitchen and dining room, the lower room being at that time "used for a kitchen, and the upstairs for the dining room. When I first moved here we used the kitchen to house our meat, but now we have a nice little smokehouse. I used the old dining room to cook and eat in. The only thing I object to the house is that I have to climb up them steps to the kitchen, otherwise it is better than a lot of renters can ever hope to rent. I've been after the landlord to take out so many bricks and lower the back with the porch."
The house contains many windows, and has big chimneys on each side. On the porch were severed boxes of flowers, a swing, and two long benches.
Besides the chicken house, is a garage for the Ford car. Then there is a stable for the mules, and a barn for such things as corn and other farm products. Directly back of the house is a packhouse for the tobacco. It consists of a grading and a storage room. Next there are two buildings that they prize most-their two tobacco barns.
"But we had a lot of bad luck with our barns," Beulah said. "We used to cure in two log barns with furnaces. One Sunday when our landlord was out here and Mr. Henry was bragging that he had cured tobacco for twenty-four years and hadn't ever lost but one barn, someone in the crowd told him not to be bragging. And, do you know, the next Sunday he lost that very barn with his fourth curing, which I consider the best tobacco. That year we didn't make anything 'cause we had to haul the tobacco for miles to cure with friends. Of course, the tobacco was badly bruised with handling it so much, and everybody don't know how to cure tobacco like Mr. Henry. That's one thing he does know how to do more than the average person. Some of that we cured with others was green and spotted.
"Well, when it was nearing time to build another barn, the landowner wanted to build a twenty-foot barn and equip it with oil burners. He said a oil burner could cure 'bout three barns while the old furnace type was curing two barns. I wanted him to build me two sixteen-by-sixteen-foot barns, 'cause I said if you lose one barn you wouldn't lose all you had. I was kinder superstitious about building on the same foundation 'cause neighbors told us one barn had already been burned in that spot when the Kings was living here, but he wouldn't listen to me. He built the twenty-foot barn in the same spot, and, do you know, we had our fourth curing with 900 sticks in that new barn equipped with oil burners, and it was almost killed out when the oil gave out. The tank was refilled as soon as we could get some oil. I never will know what happened to cause the fire but that barn was burned right there before our eyes.
"I'm telling you, the landowner was purely sick. He didn't have much to say, only he wished he had built two small barns. Again our tobacco had to be hauled anywhere we could get space. Nothing was cleared that year.
"You just don't know how nice it is to have nice barns and oil burners until you've had to use log barns and furnaces," Beulah continued. "Used to, Mr. Henry had to sit up all night when we were curing tobacco; now all he had to do is to light the burners and go to bed. My, it sure is nice."
The Baxters. Tenant Farmers N.C. Very Good
Family of 7-5 boys-illness plentiful - woman has farm - worked hard - in debt to owner - hence cannot afford electric lights - need more tobacco acreage - need a cow - son owns auto - family's only amusement - solid Democrats - present owner good - experience with burning tobacco barns - use controlled oil burners now.
Features: An average family tenants, with educational aspirations for children; reduced to that grubbing penury characteristic of so many tenants.