How he learned English
by
Robert W. Holmes
There are only two Greeks in Davidson County, both residing in Thomasville, where they operate a small lunch room.
The older of the two, Dimitrios A. Kahahalios, was born in Karpenisi, Greece. He left home at the age of fourteen and went to work in a cafe in Constantinople. He married a Greek woman there but did not come to this country until he was twenty-eight, which was in 1914. He had an uncle in Orangeburg, S. C. from whom he heard he could make plenty of money in America.
Kahahalios landed in New York after an uneventful sea voyage which he discribed as: "I little seasick but I always eat." He worked in a cafe in New York City for about a year and a half. Instead of going out and having "bigga time" he studied English in his spare time, learning it word by word. He would pick up the salt and pepper shakers and pronounce the names, "salt", "peppa".
When he left New York he went to work for his uncle in Orangeburg, S. C. but stayed there only about a year. He then began to migrate; operated cafes in Columbia, S. C. two years; Florence, S. C. six months; Rockingham, N.C. and Sumter, S.C. two years; Greensboro, N. C. eight or ten years, and has been in Thomasville four years. He has nearly always been in partnership with another Greek but the partnerships do not always prove successful so he sells out and moves to another place. He has never worked anywhere except in cafes and restaurants.
Kahahalios cannot read Greek or English and is not a naturalized American citizen although he wouldvery much like to be, so he could bring his wife to America. He has never been back to Greece since he came here in 1914.
He belongs to the Greek society, Ahepa, and to the Moose lodge. He is a member of the Greek Orthodox church which he attends in Winston-Salem. He attends the Ahepa in Greensboro and the Moose in Thomasville. He rooms at a hotel in Thomasville. When asked if he had had any trouble making a living in this country he replied: "No troubles tall, everybody like dis countree."
Dionisios (Dennis) Plakas is associated with Kahahalios in the cafe business in Thomasville. The name of their business is "City Quick Lunch."
Plakas also came from Karpenisi, Greece. He sailed from Patras and landed in New York July 14, 1920, along with other Greeks, "Turkeys" and Syrians. He did not stay in New York but went at once to Petersburg, Va.
where he had cousins. He stayed in Petersburg two years where he "pick him up" English word by word. He then began to migrate. He lived twenty-eight months in Greensboro, thirty-two months in Wilmington, twenty-three months in Florence and some time (4 years) in Charlotte. He had as soon live in one place as another just so he is making money.
Plakas has a wife and two daughters in Karpenisi, Greece and has been back to see them five times, having crossed the ocean nine times, he proudly asserts. He was twenty-six years old when he made the first crossing. In Greece he was "alla time in the army" and he came to America because he heard he could make a good living here. He has always been in cafe work since he has been in this country.
He can read and write Greek and English but only has his first papers towards naturalization.
Plakas and Kahahalios could speak Turkish at one time but have now forgotten it. Plakas is a member of the Greek Orthodox Church. He came to Thomasville about two months ago to go into business with Kahahalios because he had known him previously.
These Greeks areverycongenial fellows andvery are willing to give information about themselves if it would help the country of their adoption.
GREEK STUDY NORTH CAROLINA
Elizabeth City
<text not clear>
There are fourteen native Greeks in Elizabeth City, N. C., five of whom are married, 6 of whom are naturalized. Three have married native American wives and two have built homes and are rearing families. One married in his old country; another married in France and is bringing his family to America.
Elizabeth City Greeks are law-abiding, sober, industrious, self-supporting and accepted as a wholesome cross section of the local population. If they have differences amongst themselves, they settle them amongst themselves. They have never been subject of indictment in any criminal or civil action, except for one lone individual who has become so thoroughly Americanized that he gets drunk once or twice a year, at which time the police say "he is fussy, but gives them no trouble."
All members of the colony were originally members of the Greek Orthodox Church, but most of them have dropped their church memberships, there being no Greek Church in Elizabeth City. Two have affiliated with local Protestant Christian Churches.
The first Greek to settle in Elizabeth City was Harry G. Paulos, deceased, who established a successful restaurant here about 35 years ago. He married a local girl, native American, acquired a small farm home near the city and is survived by his wife and five children, the three elder boys of whom are holding good positions, one of them assistant manager of one of the leading chain stores in this city.




W. O. Saumders
GREEK STUDY NORTH CAROLINA
From W. O. Saunders
Greeks in Elizabeth City, N. C.
George C. Wooler, age 51; prop.; came to this country about 1912 from Gralista, Greece; naturalized about 1928; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; married to Arestea G. Manos Wooler, age 35; came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; naturalized in 1931; no children; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church.
Bill S. Manos, age 38; waiter; came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; not naturalized; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; unmarried.
Staurola Manos, female; age 67; does not work, came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; not naturalized; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; speaks very little English.
Charles Manos, age 32; prop.; came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; will soon get naturalization papers; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; unmarried.
John Kambis, Kambitsis real name; partner; age 47; married French girl whom he met while in the Army in France.
Wife, who joined him in America, leaving their three children, all girls, in the old country, is now in Greece to bring them to America. Girls speak and write Greek, French and English. Kambis has been in this country 30 years; naturalized 1920; was in the Army during the World War; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; came from Cephalonia, Greece. Jerry Kambis, real name Kambitsis; age 45; prop; came to this country in 1920 from Cephalonia, Greece; not naturalized lost first papers; did belong to Greek Orthodox Church but now belongs to Presbyterian Church; married American girl; no children.
Nick Tawfas, age 23 or 24; prop.; came to this country in 1915; has first naturalization papers; belongs to First Christian Church; married an American girl; has 1 boy.
Gus Giftiamkis, age 48, prop.; came to this country in 1920; got first naturalization papers and lost them; belongs to First Christian Church; unmarried. George P. Stamatis, age 55; prop.; came to this country in 1907; got first naturalization papers but lost them, going to try to get more; belongs to First Christian Church; unmarried.
Angelo Mandos, age 32, chef at Central Cafe; not naturalized; no religious affiliation; unmarried. Christ Paulos, age 29; assistant chef at Central Cafe; not naturalized; no religious affiliation; plans to marry American girl; also plans to get naturalization papers.
George Sfetsos, age 45; partner in Central Cafe; came to this country from near Athens, Greece; has naturalization papers; married to American wife; has two children.
Gus Constantine Geraris, age 31; head prop, in Fort Raleigh Grill; naturalized; no religious affiliation; unmarried.
Nicholas Harry Paulos, age 41; head prop. in Central Cafe; came to this country from Cephalonia in 1916; naturalized; no religious affiliation; married American girl of German-American descent; has 6 children.

