Mrs. Ann Waldrop
123 Chatooga Avenue
Athens, Georgia
January 3, 1939
S.B.Hornoby
LIFE HISTORY OF MRS. ANN .WALDROP
Mrs. Jane Ward's residence was my objective when I walked out into the bright sunshine of a wonderful January day, and all too soon I found myself in the neighborhood where I knew my walk must end. The little community is widely scattered on a broad, high hill and, while there was very little breeze in the valley below, the wind that swept over the hilltop and fluttered the clothes on the lines in the back yards almost reached the velocity of a gale. These well-filled clotheslines indicated that the Christmas holidays had ended and the village had again settled down to the chores of everyday life. A shrill whistle called attention to an Atlanta bound train, but only the tops of coaches and engine could be seen in the cut at the foot of the hill.
"Where is Mrs. Ward's house?" I asked a man who was sitting in front of an old store building. "Just keep on walkin' 'til you come to the next turn and you'll find her livin' in the first house 'round the corner," he There is barely space for an abelia hedge between Mrs. Ward's attractive yellow frame house and the sidewalk. Low cedars flank the steps, a criss-cross railing surrounds the porch, and a ciger box serves as a mail box.
Following my rep, I could hear considerable shuffling in the house, and in a few moments a little old woman appeared. "Come in," she said, and closed the front door, but suddenly opened it again to call, <text not clear> Come here. You know I ain't gain' to let you get out in that wind and take cold." Thinking that she was talking to a child I was surprised to see a little yellow and white dog come cringing through the doorway. "You see, .Ruth and Jimmy ain't got no chillun to name, so they call this little dog <text not clear>for the singer on the radio barn dance program that's got a husband named Scotty. Belle's pup is named, Lindy Lou for the singer's baby. I don't know how come Ruth and Jimmy don't have some chillun. They sure do look healthy and I know they are strong enough."
The small, slender woman was wearing a green checked apron over a dress made of black figured suiting. A reddish brown sweater covered a black one, and a faded blue sunbonnet completed her costume. She wore glasses and I soon learned that she was very hard of hearing. It was evident that her affections radiate around Jimmy and Ruth.
Jimmy's my son," she said. "He works over here in the machine shop at the Southern Mill. Ruth's his wife, and works at the Climax Hosiery Mill on Oconee Street, but she don't get but three days work a week right now. She's a good work hand. You can tell that by the good money she makes. They pay her by the piece: the more dozens of socks she turns out, the more money she makes. She's workin' at the mill today."
I glanced around the clean but cluttered living room-bedroom. Blue, brown, and gray were the predominant colors in the large linoleum rug and matching scatter rugs. The mahogany living room suite was upholstered in black leather and a showy radio sat on a mahogany table. The mahogany-colored iron bed was spread with a blue rayon cover. A crazy-work pillow of red, black, and blue silk with white featherstitching was on the divan. Two mission rockers and two battered trunks were conveniently at hand. The fire screen was of cardboard decorated with rotagravure pictures from Atlanta newspapers. Family photographs, pictures of moving picture stars, and gay calendars lined the gray-painted, ceiled walls. The green shades were pulled down almost to the bottom of the windows and with the dingy curtains obscured the light. The room seemed very dark when we came in out of the brilliant sunshine.
"Just look at the playthings scattered 'round this room," continued my hasters "You'd think we had a house full of chillun from the looks of 'em. Jimmy won all them things on the what-not from the different fairs that's come to this town." She was apparently very proud of the plaster deer that occupied most of the space on the small mantel. Touching it with her finger tips, she said, Jimmy bought this from a man that rakes 'em at some camp. He lives on t'other side of Athens. I don't reckon Jimmy ever will grow up; he still acts like a young-un." She paused to giggle, and continued: "This nigger doll settin' by the deer is the only baby that Ruth's got. Yes, that's all Jimmy and Ruth's got, just dogs and toys.' She laughed again and pointing to the hat rack by the door, said: "All them hats on that rack belongs to Jimmy and Ruth."
"What did you say might be your name?" she asked. "You'll have to talk louder 'cause I can't hear none too good, and anyway I've done stayed in this comp'ny room longer than I ought to. Come on back here and have a seat by the fire." I followed her into a bedroom which, like the first, had a little of everything in it. Two iron beds, painted white, were neatly made up with candlewick spreads. Here were more trunks, a golden oak dresser, a sewing machine, and chirping away in its cage by the window was a canary.
"Well, if you ain't callin' me Mrs. Ward" she declared. "I ain't Jimmy She's my sister and she ain't here, she's gone to town. What do you want with her?"
When my mission had been explained, she grinned and announced: "Huh, I'm lots older'n Janie and I don't mind tellin' you what I know, which ain't much, and yet it's lots too. Still it might not be what you want to know. I'm Mrs. Onn Pratt, but everybody 'round here calls me Aunt Sadie. I reckon that's 'cause I've got so many grandchillun about on this here hill." When she had settled herself in a large porch rocker before the fire and filled her mouth with the brown dust from a snuffbox she took from her apron pocket, she was ready to begin.
"I've been here a long time now, and I can't do no more work. Why, I'll be seventy-eight the first day of May, and I was born right here in Athens on Foundry Street. No, my pa never worked in no mill. He worked for Miss Ann Grady, you know - Henry Grady's mother. That family owned the gas works. When the war broke out pa went and fought under Major Grady. I was named for Miss Ann Grady. My ma didn't work in no mill neither. Hadn't I told you my pa's name? He was Charlie Dowell no, there ain't no Mac to that name, just plain Dowell. I ought to know; it's my maiden name."
Glancing at a picture of Franklin D. Roosevelt hung over the mantel, her attention was diverted. "Do you see that picture?" she demanded. "Well, that's the greatest man since George Washington was President. You know folks - I mean poor folks - was 'most starved. Rations were awful high, and folks out of work. The mill had shut down, and we had one terrible time 'til he got to be President." With accurate aim she directed a mouthful of amber colored spittle at a cuspidor placed near her chair, then invited me to follow her back to the front room, where she called my attention to a picture in a tarnished gilt frame. It represented American soldiers fighting in France. Jimmy's crazy 'bout that picture. He wouldn't take the world for it," she declared. Pointing to a motto hanging over the bed and another above the divan, she said: "Them's the ones I like best." Both mottoes were made of felt pasted on cardboard. The one over the bed featured a large red rose on a white background, and beneath the rose were gilt letters forming the words, "The Lord Bless Thee." The motto over the divan had a red background against which a white cross was in sharp contrast, and the white lettering read:
"Remove not
The Ancient Landmarks
Which Thy Lord Hath Set."
"Wouldn't you like to see Ruth's new dress?" she asked as we went back to the fire. "She got the cloth at the mill, and Mrs. Ruth made it for her. Mine's brown, but I ain't had it made yet. You just ought to see the cloth they make there. It's some pretty, just as white and shiny. I don't know what they get for that sort, or what Ruth, paid for this dress, but I paid 37½¢ a yard for mine." She put the dress away carefully and sat down again. Lula Belle came close and rested herself against my feet. When the fire blazed up again after Mrs. Pratt had replenished it with a few lumps of coal from a bucket, the dog quickly arose and sought a cooler place in the corner farthest from the fireplace.
"I growed up in a mill," said, Mrs. Pratt "I started to work when I was 11 years old to keep from having to go to school. Now I wish I had some learnin'. I never worked in no mill but the Athens Manufacturin' Company. Old man <text not clear> owned that mill then, and he paid me $9.30 a month. I done ever'thing there was to be done from sweepin' the floors and reelin' to spoolin' and spinnin'. You see, I just growed up in the mill. Them days you was 'lowed to go to work soon as you was big enough to do the work. 'Fore I was big enough to work myself, my oldest sisters worked there in that same mill, and I remember hearin' 'em tell 'bout two nigger girls workin' by 'em. They said them niggers warn't right black; they was almost white. I reckon they was some white man's chillun. When I started to work the war had done freed the niggers, and white folks wouldn't let nigger women work in mills no more. Several nigger men worked in the mill when i did, but they Just toted rope and done things like that what was too heavy for womenfolks to handle. I'm sure glad niggers are free, for if they warn't this mill down here would be filled up with 'em."
The telephone rang. Mrs. Pratt asked if I could talk over the phone. On receiving an affirmative reply, she quickly muttered, "Well, answer it for me." The caller asked that <text not clear> be called to the phone. "You just tell <text not clear> I (ain't stud'in' 'bout huntin' up <text not clear> to get her to no phone. If I see her I'll tell 'er, but I ain't goin' to call her. Jest hang up that receiver. .they're always botherin' me. They know I can't hear what they say.... Call -4563-J? Yes, that's it. I know who that is. It's horie Burrough, just like I said. Hang up."
"Let's go out in the kitchen and get a taste of Jane's preserves," she urged. We passed through a third bedroom. Curtains were stretched across two corners of the room to form closets. On entering the kitchen, which also served as the dining room, Mrs. Pratt called my attention to the electric refrigerator. This modern appliance was in marked contrast to the old-fashioned kitchen safe. A cheerful note was furnished by the bright colored oil cloth that covered the dining table. An oil stove and a kitchen cabinet were among the more modern items in the kitchen. She took a fork from the cupboard and with its wooden handle beat a tattoo on the table as she talked.
"Yes, I've been in this same house 51 years, and all my young-uns was raised right here. For a long time we didn't pay but $4.00 a month rent, but after they run the 'lectric lights through here we had to pay $7.00 a month. Oh, yes, I remember now what I brought you out here for. I wanted to give you a taste of Jane's pear preserves. They taste mighty good to me. Jane's a good cook. How can you get them preserves out of that can and me standin' here holdin' the fork?" The preserves had been made of watermelon rind instead of pears, but I did not call her attention to the difference.
"Ain't Jane a good cook?" asked Mrs. Pratt "My son that works at the waterworks gives us all the fruit and vegetables we can use. It took Jane a right smart spell to do all that cannin', and then she wrapped the cans and packed them in boxes to keep 'em from freezin'. If you just won't have no more, come on out here on the back porch. I want to show you a place I think it's mighty nice and convenient-like to have.
"Look," she said, "there's Lindy Lou lying out there in the yard." On the back porch we came to a closed door; she opened it, saying "Here's what I wanted to show you. It's our toilet. It ain't been put in long, and we sure are proud of it. We could have hot water for baths any time we wanted it if we had a tub and the hot water tank, but me and Jone don't need no bathtub. We takes our baths by the fire in the bedroom. It's too jammed up with old furniture and things in here now, 'specially since Ruth had to bring the victroly and other things out to make room for the Christmas tree. Did you see that package on the table in the room where the fire is? My grandson that's in the Three-C camp in Californy sent us some Californy presents. I ain't goin' to open 'em 'til Ruth comes from the mill."
We returned to the fire and soon Mrs. Jane ward came in from a shopping trip and displayed the new frock she had purchased. "Look at my new dress, Ann," she said. "It's the first one I ever bought that didn't have to be raised up at the waist." Ann replied, "That's sayin' lots, 'cause big as you are, it takes a heap of cloth to go 'round you." "Just 'cause you are so little ain't no need for you to make fun of me," retorted Jone. "I reckon I'd better start supper. Ruth and Jimmy'll be comin' in soon. Well, I'll declare, it's 'most nigh four o'clock. I didn't know I was gone so long." She went to the phone and called a number. When the party at the other end responded Mrs. Ward chuckled, "That you?" she asked, "Well, this is Jane. Yes, ... What are you doing? ... I just got in from town, and let me tell you I bought myself a mighty pretty dress. I'll bring it over right after supper and let you see it ... Yes, I'll be seein' you after supper." She hung up the receiver, put a generous portion of snuff in her mouth, and retired toward the kitchen.
"Don't you think they ought to have barrooms in Athens?" inquired Mrs. Pratt "It's just awful the way folks carry on now. Why, they even send kids down the street here to buy whiskey. I remember way back yonder when they had barrooms there warn't near so much meanness goin' on, 'cause ever'thing was open and aboveboard. I don't believe in these blind tigers, but anyway I don't drink liquor myself, and never did. It's awful the way folks lives now." She pulled off her sunbonnet and threw it on the dresser, saying: "See this dress I have on. It was made in the mills at Crawford, Georgia. The only girl I have livin' lives at Crawford and works in the mill there, Was you ever in Crawford? Susie sure do have to work hard in that mill. Why, they work their hands 'leven hours a day. It just looks like they try to kill 'em workin' 'em so hard, but I reckon that's better'n not workin' a'tall.
"My grandson that was workin' at the Southern will was laid off today. He measured cloth down there. No matter what else he might be doin', Mr. Jane would have him stop and measure off cloth when folks come in to buy it. I told you 'bout their makin' so many kinds of cloth there, didn't I? Well, they make blankets too. Sam - that's my grandson - says he's goin' to Atlanta to look for work, but I told him he'd better stay on here in Athens. If he went to that big place he might get in trouble.
"I worked in the mill for 15 years. I didn't make no big money, but we got on a heap better, for things were lots cheaper. Ma and pa lived in a two-room house that belonged to the Gas Works, and they never had to pay no rent on it. Ma raised chickens, cows, and hogs. We just had plenty of the right sort of things to eat, and whet rations and clothes we did have to buy didn't cost as much as they do now. Even snuff cost a lots less. Now it costs twice as much as it used to. Rations costs so much that it takes ever'thing folks make just to live now. The money we spent in a whole month wouldn't last the same sized fam'ly a week now. My chillun used to make as much in a week as I made in a month, but now they make twice as much in a week's time. The old ways of livin' was the best as I looks back on it. Yes, it sure do take a heap to buy rations now. 
"You recollect I told you about startin' to work when I was 'leven years old to get out of havin' to go to school. Well, there didn't none of us amount to nothin'. There warn't no free schools then. It cost a dollar a head to send us, and pa 'lowed it would take too much money to school us, so we all went to work. Them days you fairly lived at school when you did go. You went at 8 o'clock in the mornin' and was let out at 5 o'clock in the afternoon. I heard them that went say that it warn't so bad goin' to school. At recess ever'body got together and had a fine time. They couldn't go home to eat, so they took their victuals along in a tin bucket, and when school was let out for dinner they got together and swapped their lunches among one another. No, I ain't had no schoolin'," she remarked in a rather rueful tone.
Mrs. Ward made her appearance about that time and, hearing Mrs. Pratt remark, said; "You ought to have went to school so you could talk better." Mrs. Pratt replied, "Huh, what are you talkin' 'bout? Are you tellin' this lady 'bout life or me? Anyhow you can't talk no better than me." Mrs. Ward went back in the direction of the kitchen with the parting query, "Well, I'm a good cook, ain't I?"
When Mrs. Pratt had put her bonnet on again and adjusted her spectacles, several seconds were required to maneuver a fresh dip of snuff into the right position in her mouth. The contortions of her facial muscles Indicated distress, and finally she drew a long breath and, in a tone of relief, said; "Good gracious! I 'most nigh swallowed my false teeth. You see, I ain't had 'em but 2 years and I ain't used to 'em good yet. My teeth was hurtin' me so bad I just went to a doctor and had 'em all pulled out. That didn't amount to so much as you might think, for I just had two in the upper part of my mouth and three down here." She indicated the exact location of those last teeth with her finger on the gums and continued her story. "It was 'bout 2 months 'fore I got these teeth, and I learned to eat pretty good. I would mash up soft victuals with my gums. Now, I can't enjoy cornbread no more 'cause it gets under my plate - that's what they calls it - and worries me half to death 'til I get it out."
Lifting her bonnet above her right ear, she said: "Did you say something? You know I don't hear so good, and you don't talk none too loud. Oh, you wanted to know more about ma and pa. Well, ma died 'bout 25 years before pa did. He was in the war 3 years and 10 months and never got a scratch. You see, he was Irish and hard to kill. I reckon that's how come I'm still livin'. They say you can't kill an Irishman.
"After ma died, Brother george and his wife, come to live with us. moisie kept house for us, and I kept on at work in the mill. Gearge worked on the Southern Railroad from Athens to Lula. I met Fred my husband, through him. Fred was born in Pinckneyville, South Ca'lina, but I reckon they have changed the name of that old settlement by now. Fred's pa left there and come to Cherokee County to live a long time ago. They were farmers. They left Cherokee County and moved to lula, Georgy, Fred sold lunches from a little eatin' place to the train men. George got acquainted with him, and, seein' that he was a right smart boy, he hired him to wipe grease off his engine. -george. brought george our house to live. Re paid him $10 a month and his board. He'd been livin' at our house 'bout 9 months when we got married. All the courtin' we ever done was right before pa. Girls didn't get off in dark corners to court then. When ma was livin', we girls used to go to candy pullin's and dances at the homes of our girl friends. At them candy pullin's the boys thought it was lots of fun to see how much candy they could put in our hair. After ma died and there warn't nobody to stop me, I went to sure enough big dances at the Odd Fellows' and the Firemen's halls.
"Me and Fred went to the country to live when we got married, but things didn't go so well with us. Cotton dropped to 5¢ a pound, and we couldn't get nothin' for what we raised. I'm tellin' you, we 'most nigh starved, so we took our gang of young-uns and come back to town. We lived in East Athens and Fred drayed for Mr. Woodall Rations was so high we couldn't live on what he made, so we left that side of town and moved to where I am now, and Fred got cliff a job in the boiler room at the Southern Mill. He worked there 25 years. He got a job at the mill with him. Cliff works at the waterworks now, but all of my chillun have worked in the mill. Elbert and clarence were mule spinners. Dora and Susie were, warpers. Hattie was a spinner. All my girls are dead now but Susie.
"No, I never worked in the mill no more after I got married, for when we lived near enough to the mill for me to work there, I was always tied down with a little one comin' on. Yes, I have been livin' in this house 31 years, and it don't belong to me, but they ought to give it to me. I've paid enough rent for it to be mine."
Someone walked up on the porch. Lula Belle barked excitedly; the canary stirred in its cage and began to chirp. "Hush, Lula Belle," commanded Mrs. Pratt. "Tain't nobody but Ruth. Ruth came in and her expectant glance fell on the parcels on the table. "Open up them packages," Mrs. Pratt told her, "and let's see what's in 'em." Each package was eagerly opened and passed around the room, to be admired. When the gold wrappings were removed from a little parcel addressed to her, and revealed a handkerchief, Mrs. Pratt plainly showed her disappointment. "Huh! Ain't that a little thing to send such a long way?" she asked. The next package unwrapped proved to be a sofa pillow addressed to her and she laughed with delight. "Now ain't that the prettiest thing you ever seen? Bless his sweet heart: He sent me a pillow with "MOTHER" worked on it, and here I am, just his old gran'ma."
The tantalizing odor of sausage come from the kitchen. Mrs. Ward came in, glanced at the clock, and asked Ruth, "I wonder what's keepin' Jimmy I sure am hungry. Is them the packages that come from Californy? Ain't that there gold paper pretty?" "Yes," answered Ruth "and. I can't wait no longer. I'm goin' to fill up my mouth, Jim or no Jim." She walked to the mantile, picked up the snuff box, and when she had taken a liberal dip, settled herself in a chair and began to rock vigorously back and forth. She asked me, "What are you doing? Taking census" When I had explained my work, she exclaimed, "Well, Mrs. Pratt ought to give you a good story. She's been here a long time and has seen many changes. Her history ought to be interest-in."
Mrs. Ward wanted to know when 1 would be ready for her life history. Ruth and Mrs.Ward insisted that Mrs. Pratt continue her story, but my consultant's idea was different. "I sure wish Jimmy would come on," she said, "I'm hungry and I want to eat. I can't eat many things now, at least nothin' heavy. When I was nursin' my chillun I had to eat so much to give milk enough for 'em, that I ruined my stomach. I'm crazy 'bout collards, and no matter how many of 'em I eat, they don't hurt me none. I don't do no more cookin' since I fell 'bout 2 years ago and broke my hip. I can't stand on my feet long at a time now. Jane come here to live with me, and I turned the cookin' over to her. She had to have somethin' to do, and it might as well be the cookin'. I take up the ashes, do a little sweepin' and darnin', and things like that that don't keep me up on my feet long at a time. I think I've done my part. I raised seven chillun, cooked for 'em, and done all the work 'round the house durin' the years they was growin' up. Now I think it's time for me to rest, don't you? Anyway, it gives me the swimmin'-in-the-head to stand over the stove and get too hot.
"What church do you belong to?" she queried. I told her I was a member of the First Baptist Church. "Huh, I'm a Methodist," was her reply. "I had one girl that was a Baptist, and the other two was Methodists like me. I go to church when the weather is pretty, but I don't do much good 'bout goin' out in the winter, 'cause it's too cold' No, my boys don't belong to no church. They never took no interest in joinin'."
Jim came in and expressed his pleasure over the packages from California. Not willing to delay their evening meal, " to go, declining the urgent invitations to stay for supper. Ruth followed me to the door. Noticing a vine that fringed the porch, I asked her its name. "To tell the truth, I don't know it's real name," she answered, "but some says it's 'traveler's delight,' others calls it by other names. All I know 'bout it is, it sure do grow."
As I went down the steps I recalled Mrs. Pratt's last remark. "I believe I've told you 'bout all I know. One thing I can say is, I'm an old broken-down mill-hand and a retired cook. I can't cook no more, but ain't Jannie a good cook?"