LIFE HISTORIES
Dr. Arthur Graham Harris
General Practitioner
Fairfield, Hyde County, N. C.
Writer: W. O. Saunders
Seven Hundred Dollar A Year
ORIORIGINAL NAMES	CHANGED NAMES
Dr. Dr. A. G. Harris	Name not mentioned in story
Fairfield	Fairhaven
Richmond Medical College	University of Maryland
Dr. J. B. Griggs, Decd.
Elizabeth city	Dr. Grigsby Grimes
<Text Not Clear>
Arthur, the son	John Arden
Hobby: chickens	Turkeys
"My father was a wonderful man. He was an excellent blacksmith and a machinist, and he could take a watch to pieces and put it together as good as any watchmaker. He was, at the same time, one of the best farmers I ever saw. He believed in corn and hogs. I don't suppose his cash income was ever more than a thousand dollars a year. But he acquired farm land, built himself a home, gave his children -- eight of them -- all the education they could take, always had a dollar for any one in need; and yet, when he died he didn't owe so much as twenty five dollars in the world. And it seemed to me at times that he often went out of his way and denied himself in helping others.
"I was educated for the practice of medicine and pharmacy. I graduated from the University of Maryland in 1905. Before I graduated, one of the professors at the University gave the graduating class a talk that never impressed me very much at the time, but I have thought of it a thousand times since.
"He said, 'Young men, I don't want you to go out in the world with any illusions of becoming rich in medicine. I know that you will not believe me -- and if I thought you would believe me I wouldn't tell you -- but the average one of you who makes $700 a year will be doing about as well as he could expect.
"I served a year as interne in a hospital before re turning to my home in Fairhaven to establish myself as a doctor. On my way to Fairhaven I stopped in Bessemer and dropped into chat with an old friend of my father's, Dr. Grigsby Grimes, who had been practicing medicine in Bessemer for 40 years. He asked me what I was going to do. I told him. He said, 'Don't do it; go on your father's farm and be a good farmer; there's more money in it. You'll never own a home practicing medicine; a country doctor may marry a home, or he may inherit one; but he'll never build one. I have lived to see that my old professor and old Dr. Grimes were, both, right. I didn't find it that way to start.
"In fact, not long after I was established in Fair- haven, I met the superintendent of a big industrial establishment who offered me the position of company physician at his works in a neighboring county. He offered me $3600 a year. The works in question were in a backwoods region, far removed from a rail road, where several hundred men, living in company owned shacks and barracks got out raw material to be shipped by water to the company's mills. I told him I would go for $5,000 a year. He said he couldn't pay that much, but would give me $4,000. I told him I'd let him know.
"I came home and talked with my father and he told me not to consider it. 'I know the money looks good, but you are asked to locate in a very hell-hole of ignorance, drunkeness and loose living. It is no place for you and if you stayed long enough it would put scars on your soul.' I took my father's advice.
"I had a good practice in Fairhaven and in all that end of the county in which we were located. There was no rail road within many miles of it and it was a purely rural region in which people lived by farming, logging and boating. There was some little fishing and oyster tonging. But everybody worked, almost everybody produced their own food and most of them could pay for a doctor's visit when they needed him. They never called him except as a last resort.
"Life was rather primitive and hard for them. No electric lights, no telephones and roads that were almost impassable in winter. Most of their water came from sur face wells, their outdoor toilets were awful there was little screening, and the pig sty was often in a too close proximity to the house. Fly-borne diseases -- typhoid and dysentery -- were endemic.
"But father died and I took charge of the farm. He had good tenants and I knew enough to direct them and to carry on my practice. I have taken as much as $5,000 off that farm in a year. That was in World War times; nothing like that now.
"In those times too I fell into a pretty good thing in the way of a government job that interfered but little with my private practice. It paid me $200 a month over a period of several years.
"With the government job, the income from the farm and my private practice, I was making money -- and spending it. I thought it would always be that way. I built this house in which I live; I put in a Delco system and a bath room with hot and cold running water. I bought automobiles -- and drove them hard. I would just about wear out a first class automobile in a year. But I didn't count costs then. I was extravagant in other ways. I always carried a pocketful of cigars that I handed out generously. When I dropped into a country store to buy a bottle of pop, I would set up the crowd.
"Times changed. The government finished its job in the locality and my services were no longer needed there. Farm prices had hit bottom. I could hardly make enough off the farm in the years from 1930 to 1933 to keep up repairs, improvements and taxes. I found my income restricted largely to my private practice. And then I remembered everything that my old professor and Dr. Grimes had told me in those early years. My net income from my practice today is less than $700 a year; for you see, a rural doctor has to carry his own stock of drugs and fill his own prescriptions. This country had come upon hard times. Eighty per cent -- yes, eighty per cent of the people in this county today can't pay for a doctor's visit or for his medicine. Hundreds of them on WPA make barely enough to feed and clothe themselves wretchedly. Their poverty is heart-breaking.
"I went into a home the other day -- if you could call it a home -- in which there was not a chair to sit on. I asked for a teaspoon; they didn't have a teaspoon. I know of a family who, resolved to get out of debt, lived practically on corn bread for a year. No sugar, no flour, no butter, no tea, no coffee.
"I know families in which the mother, father and several children will huddle in one bed to keep from freezing to death in winter, because there are not enough beds or covering to go round.
"I had educated our two sons. One of them had located in New York City and was doing fairly well according to city standards. John Arden, the other son, was farm-minded and, when he left college, he was eager to come home and take a try at the farm. I turned it over to him and he has done a good job of it. He too is a corn and hog farmer.
"His mother had other ambitions for John; a college bred woman of fine sensibilities, she has never reconciled herself to the sweat and barnyard smell of a dirt farmer fresh from his fields. She would like to see John in a white collar job. But I tell her that the white collar class is pathetically insecure in this age in which we are living, and I think the farmer, with all of his discouragements and handicaps, is on sound economic ground and the happiest man on earth. You can't starve him; when all the rest of the world is threatened with a shortage of food, he can always produce his hog and hominy, his potatoes and salad greens, his chickens and eggs, his milk and his butter.
"But I suppose I must stick to my own personal life history. Well, things got so tight with me back in 1932 that I decided to leave my automobile in its garage until times got better. I have never owned an automobile since.
"Of course, you are wondering how a country doctor can get along without an automobile? That was a question that puzzled me too until I was forced to lay my car up. But it was costing me $50 a month to run that automobile and I wasn't getting enough out of my practice to keep up the expense of it and buy my drugs.
"The first day I laid my car up a man came to me to get me to pay a visit to his wife in the other end of the county.
"I asked him if he could take me and bring me back, letting me credit him for the transportation on his bill. He said he could take me but that he couldn't bring me back. I then asked him if he was prepared to pay for my transportation if I got some one else to take me He said he would pay me when he got the money. 'That's just it,' I said, 'neither have I got the money to pay for my transportation.' He said he would take me and bring me back.
"The next day one of the wealthiest men in the county, a man who paid cash on the line, dropped in to ask me to see his wife. I asked him if he could take me and bring me back.
"'Is your car broke down?' he asked. 'No,' I re plied, and I told him what I had done. 'Well, get the car out and I'll pay you right now,' he said.
'"But I can't do that; rich and poor must fair alike; I couldn't use that car for a man who paid and turn down some poor devil who just couldn't pay.' And then I told the man that I had an arrangement with a neighbor who would put his car at my disposal when I needed it. 'Wella, get the other fellow's car and I'll pay the bill,' he replied.
"It has been seven years since I laid that car up, and I have never driven it or owned an automobile since."
"What became of the car?" I asked.
"It went away piece by piece until finally there was so little left of it that two men picked up what was left of it, put it on a truck and took it to the junk pile. The car was in first rate condition when I laid it up, and I might have sold it for a fair price; but I thought I would resume the use of it when times got better; but times didn't get better and neighbors, knowing the car was laid up, would run over and borrow from it whenever they needed a spare part. In a few years they had got all the tires, the rims, the battery, the generator, the carburetor and even the seat cushions. And then one day a neighbor came in to ask me if I'd let him have the engine block.
"No, I don't have the practice that I once did, but my net income from what is left is better than it was when the Depression compelled me to lay my car up.
"I have more time with my family and time for a hobby that is turning me in some money all the time."
"And what's the hobby?" I asked.
"Turkeys," he replied.
"I am raising turkeys; I always thought turkeys could be made to pay. Our mothers raised turkeys and always had trouble with them. They had unlimited range and were forever getting lost, picking up poultry diseases or getting drowned out.
"Once one learns that turkeys and chickens must not be mixed and that the important thing about a turkey is to keep its feet off the ground and its head dry, one can grow turkeys and make money. My turkeys are kept in small houses, built well off the ground, with a sheltered run way a part of the house. All off the ground. Giving them a balanced ration, plenty of clean, fresh water and keeping their shelters clean requires perhaps even less work than running after turkeys on a free range; and you may always count your turkeys. I lose very few birds in the year and there is always a good market for turkeys at Easter, Thanksgiving and Christmas, if there is less demand at other times."
I asked the doctor what he thought of socialized medicine?
"I think it would be a good thing," he replied. "The country doctor, at least, would be happier on a fixed income paid by the State and free to give his services to all who need him. And the people need socialized medicine. I told you that eighty per cent of the people in my county can't pay their doctor's bills or pay for the medicine they require. Few of them do not send for a doctor until a crisis is reached; they put it off until the patient may be in grave danger.
"Recently the State Board of Health tried to get the county to share half the expense of a county health unit, consisting of a whole-time medical health officer, a sanitary inspector and two trained nurses. Wouldn't it be more practical for the State to give its part of the contribution to the expense of such a unit to the four doctors in the county, to enable them to take care of the indigent sick? The Wagner Bill may be the solution of the medical problem for the poor, and a boon to family practitioners as well as to the indigent sick."
The doctor's wife had been a silent listener to the interview. Turning to her, I said: "Maybe you would like to get in on this?"
"Not now," she replied; and then: "Maybe sometime I'll give you the life story of a country doctor's wife. It will be the story of a woman who was long encouraged to believe that 'things would be better another year', but who has always realized that 'Tomorrow is just another Day'. So many things I have wanted and had to do without; so many trips I have planned and so little of the world I've seen."
"But if the doctor does as well with his turkeys as he expects this year, maybe you will see the World's Fair," I suggested.
"The doctor will always be a farmer," she replied, "and farmers always live in hopes of another and better year. I do not expect to see the World's Fair; but the Ivory Soap people are offering free trips to the World's Fair to people who will give them the best reasons why they want to see the Fair. I think I shall try for one of those trips; I shall say that 'I have seen so little of the world today that I would like to see a bit of the World Tomorrow.'
"But," she added wistfully, "if I should be lucky I wouldn't take the trip; I would take the cash instead and put it on our home."