LIFE HISTORY
(Date of gathering of material) - 26 and 27 April, 1 and 2 May, 1939.
(Name of Writer) - Jeanne deLavigne Scott, 532 St. Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Name & address of person written about) - Lois Lapiene, 1228 Decatur St., New Orleans, La.
(Profession of person written about) – Prostitute.
AND THERE WAS A MAN…..
Picture to yourself an old, old street along the waterfront. In the New Orleans Vieux Carre --- a street where sailors and pirates and all manner of flotsem and jetsam of humanity swarmed in the old days, and still swarm today, only in a more subdued manner. Picture one of the moldy old brick buildings --- a street door and a shadowy passage, with the inevitable electric meters clustering on one wall like giant bugs with huge, staring eyes. We reach the stairs at the far and with a rat trap at the turn. At the top of the stairs is Lois' door, with a hasp ready for the padlook. Lois answers our knock. She is a slight woman like a slip of a girl, and she wears a neat, starched, blue-flowered house-dress with a wide bolt of black leather. The soft blonds curls are thick or- her well-poised head, Her voice is light, almost childish, pleasant, with an undertone of cautic and experience Her narrow, quick eyes …her well-controlled mouth, sensitive but wary…There she stands, bidding us welcome.
The apartment consists of a single room and a tiny, green-curtained alcove under the stairs --- in the latter Lois has an oil-stove and a kitchen-safe, where she cooks her meals and keeps her provisions. There are three windows, ea hung with ecru laco curtains. One of them admits the sounds of raucous quarrelin of a couple on the adjoining gallery. The other two open onto Lois' gallery, and it is here that the rats squeal and scamrper among the tubs and buckets when the night grows still. Everything is very clean. There is a double bed in the room; also a dresser, dressing-table, chifforobe and a chair, all in gray and old-roam enamel. Besides these are two rockers, a stand, a sewing machine, and a kitchen table with a yellow oilcloth and some dishes. On the stand is a white embroidered cloth, an ash-tray, and a vase of honeysuckle. On one wall is a shelf with bric-a-brac. A tan-and-blue brussels rug covers the floor, with an oval braidod rug of old-rose beside the bed On another wall, above the bed, hangs a good-size velvet tapestry in rich, dark colors. The bed is spread with a lustrous quilt of old-gold and crimson silk.
And Lois herself … She has but one arm, and that is a mere pipesten, with two great fingers in place of a hand. Her other shoulder -- the left -- is not fully developed, although under her dress that is not apparent. But for a left arm she has a sort of long finger -- really a miniature arm, perhaps five inches long, with a little nub which is an undeveloped hand She is five feet, two inches tall, and weighs eighty-nine pounds She does everything --- sweops, scrubs, washes and irons, writes, and makes most of her own clothes, using her left knee in place of the missing arm. Glancing at her, one sees a dainty, slim girl with a gravely-sweet triangular face And here is her brave, strange, pitiful story, exactly as she told it… cigarettes and black coffee, and now and then a shift in position…
I was born Ola Burgess, in Greenville, South Carolina, in June, 1906, It must be the middle of June --- I wrote to a woman in Greenville, and she said it must be that time.
Now, you see, as far back as I remember --- I should say I was two or three years old --- well, I remember I was in a Home, and there was lots of other little children That was in Greenville. There was a lady that used to cometo visit me, and she used to bring me big roundcookies with a big raisin in the middle. After a while, this lady failed to come any more. I was very small then, and I asked the lady that kept the home --- Mrs. Flora Lathum — where was the pretty lady who used to come and bring me cakes And she says, "That was your mother --- she's dead."
It was Mrs. Lathum's own home and she kept it herself. Well I lot it go at that, and stayed there in the home. Then she took me on a farm and left me. She would come and take me and keep me for a month or two and travel around, and she had leaflets printed of me with a picture showing my shoulders She would take me to office buildings raising money for this home --- I don't remember the name of the home She -was mean to me; she'd go off and look me up in the room She'd leave a tin doll-cup of kerosene on the dresser Once I drank it and it made me sick --- and she whipped me with her rubber If I cried in the bath tub she ducked my head under the water. She'd take me around until she'd raised as much money as she wanted that time then she'd take me back to the farm It was a big farm — they raised cotton and sugarcane, and they had a sow-mill They ginned their own cotton and ground their own cane --- they're well off now They were good to me They had a family of twelve boys and no girl They were Mr. and Mrs. George Nalley Mrs. Nalley --- her name was Emma --- was the only one in the world that ever treated me like a real mother.
"Well, I was there from three years old until I was seven I saw some of the boys in Jacksonville (I'll be back here seven years in July) about eight or nine years ago They recognized me but I didn't recognize them They said, "I'm Paul," and "I'm George “
Well, Mrs. Nalley's husband used to complain about Mrs. Lathum's coming and taking me away and using me for wrong purposes —- he'd got so he wouldn't let her take me. And then he got sick and he died And I don't think it was long after that that she come and took me agin When she'd travel around like that, she'd go to a hotel. But that time instead of going to a hotel, she took me to the Volunteers of America, in Atlanta Georgia She was out one day, and I was sittin' in the hall playing with a little girl. She had a picture of herself, and I told her I was prettier than her —- and I went and got one of the leaflets with my picture on We were sittin' there playin; and the Captain of the Volunteers come along, and stopped and asked us what we was doin' He talked, and kicked the picture with his foot, and said, "What's that?" I said, "That's my picture." He picked it up and start readin: and then the first thing I know we was in court. I was too small to remember, but I know she lost custody of me. I was seven years old, and they kept me there in the Volunteers' Home --- from seven to sixteen. Then they would change hands --- the Captains would came and go. Some of ‘am was good and some of ‘am was bad Soma of ‘am sent me to school, and some of ‘am didn't Some of 'am made me nice little dresses, and sometimes I didn't have anything decent --- pillar to post.
And then the Captain come from Montgomery, Alabama, and he took me to the Volunteers' Home in Montgomery And jist the time I’d got used to the children in the public school, they’d change my school and I'd have to get used to a new lot of children. Some of ‘am didn't want to play with me --- they'd whisper to one another, and I'd hear," I don't like you -- you've only got one arm" I was just like in a shell… I'd go off by myself. They'd have lunch, and I didn't have any lunch.
There was no Volunteers’ Home in Pensaoola Captain Bigley (of the Montgomery Home) wanted to open up a Home in Pensaoola He was married, and had a little girl around nine, and a little boy about five years old Well, Mr. Bigley and his wife and little boy went over to Pensaoola to make arrangements with the mayor and everything, and then they came back. The Montgomery Home sat up on a hill Bell street run along on the side of it, and was a very busy street. The little girl and little boy were playing in a playhouse, and Mrs. Bigley told me to look after them and keep them out of the street I was around twelve There was another little boy in the Home, about five and before the little girl or I know anything about it, we heard a lot of excitement and we come around the sign board on the side of the hill; and we saw all the cars stopped and people gather in’ round --- and it was her little brother what had got run over Him and this other little boy had slipped off and went to the store across the streets and when they was comin’ back they was holdin’ hands, and the other little boy said, Wait " and ;Jumped back. And the little Bigley boy run across, and a car ran him down They rushed him to the hospital and performed an operation, but he died that night After the funeral was over, the Captain and his wife went to Pensa-cola; and they took me and another little orphan girl named Fay She was from New Iberia.
I start goin' to school there agin, and I was wav behind in school, and I was ashamed I thought I was too big for the class, and I didn’t want to go any more So I rebelled so much, until they didn't try to make me go any more.
Than they had a chapel, and they used to hold church and prayer meeting two or three times a week, and I used to sing in the choir --- I liked it then Pretty soon I thought I was old enough for boy friends --- that was two or three years after I went to Pensaools There was a boy comin’ there, and he was a nice boy. The only place I ever see him was at church Mrs. Bigley cut her eyes at me and give me hard looks Then they had a prayer meeting at the Home, and I had put same rouge on my face because this boy was comin' -I got it from some woman in the Home Mrs. Bigley kept lookin’ daggers at am all through the meeting, and he was sittin' by me When the meeting broke up and everybody start talkin', he left, and him and I talked on the front poroh After he left, I went to bed. This girl Fay and I had a room together. She was nice, and a year younger than me.
The Home was in the midst of the red light district, and the Volunteers had thought the Home would break it up. The Navy yard is there, and soldier barracks --- Fort Barrancas. But the district was no place for a young girl. Well, after the meeting broke up, Mrs. Bigley didn't say anything to me. The next morning I was in the kitchen washing dishes. My hair was way down my back them. Mrs. Bigley rushed in --- didn't say a word to me --- just grabbed me by the hair and pulled me out onto the porch (not by the arm) and into the hall, and she says, "You thought I didn't see you with that rouge on your face last night:” She took me so sudden, she come at it so funny, before I knew what was happenin' I start to fire back. Her father came to help her, and I bit him on the arm Then her husband came out and broke it up He was always nice to me, except when she would make him get onto me about some little thing that I did During this squabble ---which was three or four years after the little boy got killed -- she says. "You murdered my baby:”--- because I was supposed to keep him out of the street. And that's what she'd had in her mind all these years…..
There was a woman runuin' a house there in the district. She had a boy of thirteen or fourteen. The boy’s mother died, and Mrs. Bigley wanted to adopt him, to try to fill in the loss of her little boy. They had their own dinin'-room --- they didn't eat with the inmates. So this boy was jist like their own — he ate with them and stayed in their part of the house.
Then the girls started bobbin' their hair — and I was beggin’ ‘am to let me out mine, 'cause I couldn't fix it myself. I had to have somebody fix it for me. And Mrs. Bigley says, "No.if you don't out your hair, in five or six months you can put on the bonnet and pass the tambourine on the street, and take up collections." He figured I'd get in more, seoin' I was crippled.
Well, then, there was some people that used to come to the chapel --- Mr. and Mrs.Harvey --- and they had a young daughter fixin' to get married. I used to go to their house, and at their house I met a soldier that had come back from war He was nice to me, and start showin' interest in me --- met me in church, that's the only place I ever could see anybody. So we start talkin' 'bout gettin' married, and I went and saw the house that Mrs. Harvey's daughter was goin' to have when she got married. It was nothin’ fancy, but it was neat, and I always wanted a home and family. So he --- his name was James Paul Weeks --- was talkin’ 'bout gettin' married, and I thought I was in love, so I told him Yes He was writin’ me letters (he couldn't come to the Home to see me), and they had made me a white dress for Mothers' Day. I'd do little odd jobs for people in the home --- twenty-five cents and fifty cents — and they was makin’ me some underwear and things. I saw him at a prayer-meeting Saturday night, and there was supposed to bo a baptisin’ the next day at the Bay So him and I planned that night to go to a show the next day — and to say that I was sick, so as not to go to the baptisin' So I got out o’goin’ the next day by sayin’ I was sick, and we went to the show Sittin’ behind us in the show was somebody that know I was from the Home, and the next day they stopped by and told about it Mrs. Bigley says "That's why you was sick, and not able to go to the baptisin’.” To make it a little stranger (but I hadn't denied bein’ at the show), I stayed in bed the next day, like I was sick. The doctor that they always called to the Home if anybody was sick (Bootor Stokes), she called him He came in the room, and she came in with him He asked her if she'd step out for a minute, and she stopped out, and he said he'd seen me before, from bad colds and things), "Ola," he says, "Mrs.Bigley has called me here to see if you've done anything wrong." (And I was only pretending I was sick:) I was fifteen when I first "come round." He says, "Now, if you tell me the truth, I'm not goin to examine you." I started cryin', and I said, "I want you to examine me --I'm tired of bein’ accused of doin' things I don't know anything about :” So he says, "I'm goin’ to tell her that I examined you. And," he says, "don’t let anything show up on you that would make a liar out of me.”
So then there was a boy in the neighborhood, and he was always passin’ His father was a real estate man, and his name was James Fisher He got to stoppin' and talkin* with me Really I wasn't in love with the soldier. When met this James Fisher, I liked him better, and he got talkin' with me. The park was jest one block, and liked him a whole lot He start talkin' 'bout getting’ married; I told him I was goin’to bob my hair and he begged me not to He came to the Home and asked the Captain if he could marry me. I wasn't there when he came, and I didn't know anything about it until the Captain told me. I told the Captain that I loved James and I went to get married, and they told me he was married. I told 'am that he told me he was divorced from his wife But the Captain told me he was separated but not divorced, and that he was always in the district, drink in’, And he says, "You wait until some rich man comes along —- you need to marry a rich man.”I told him that no rich man would ever want to marry me.
So then I was still writin' to Mr. Weeks. Someone made it their business to come to the Home and tell that I was getting’ mail General Delivery So, I was upstairs one day and the Captain called me When I got downstairs he handed me e piece of paper, and he says, "Read this*" I started to read, and it was a letter to me, from the Post Office, And I says,' "I'll have you put in jail for openin’ my mail:" He showed me onto the balcony and took his ragor-strap and started to whip me with it. They had got the Probation Officer to go to the Post Office and get the letter and open it I start to fightin' ‘am back. The Captain said, "Go upstairs and pack your suitcase. You're goin’ to New Orleans." They was goin’ to bring me to the Volunteers’ Home here in New Orleans.
I went upstairs and there was a woman in the room, and I run straight for the window. I was goin’ to jump out the window --- upstairs I’d have broke my legs and everything else. She grabbed me, and the Captain run upstairs and start to beatin’ me with a shoe I was on the floor and I bit him on the legs He turned me loose and says, "I'm through with you --I'm goin’ to turn you over to the police!" So he went downstairs and called 'am up and says, "Come get this girl — I can't do anything with her any more:”
An officer came — Jail was only about two blocks — and we walked over to the jail and they locked me up. There was a train leavin’ at ten o'clock that night for New Orleans, and the Captain come back over there to the jail and he was almost cryin’ He says, "We’ve got about twenty-five minutes to catch that train —come on and go with no:”He says, "If you don't go with me to the Home in New Orleans, they're goin' to put you in the House of Good Shepherd in New Orleans (it's got a twelve-foot wall around it, you know.) So I told him, I said, "If I can't have whatI want, you-all aren't goin’ to got what you want*" They wanted to keep no so I could git a lootle bit bigger, and then send me out with the tambourine to git money for 'em They used to give you a bonnot and a tambourine, but they don’t do that any more — least, not the bonnet. He was almost cryin’.
So he went back. And the next day the Probation Officer and a couple detactives came. In the cell… trial to soars me and bully me … hollerin' at me … The Probation Officer says, “Have you made up your mind yet? Are you goin’ to the Volunteers in New Orleans or you goin’ to the House of Good Shepherd?” I told him I wanted to stay in Pensaoola, and I cried. He says, "You can't stay in Pensacola, and you might as well get that soldier off your mind.” So the next day I was in the window of the cell. The jail was on the some street the Home was on, but it was a couple blocks. The Home took, in a whole block, and at the back a streetcar used to pass that went out to the Navy Yard They had a little concrete wall at the edge of the yard, and I had a little playhouse there that I still played in A conductor on the streetcar used to wave at me and smile at me. And one day the car was goin' to the Navy Yard and he got a man that was standln' up in the front of the car with him to throw about half a dozen oranges for us towards the playhouse I was afraid to go and get 'am and the other little girl went and got, ‘am This was a short time before they put me in jail. Well, the and of the carline was right back of the jail I was in this window and this conductor saw me They had steps comin' up outside of the jail at the back; he got off the car and come up the steps to the window, and asked me what they had me In there for I told him because I was fixin’ to run away and git married. And he says, "I'm goin’ in and see what your fine is My mother's be tickled to I death to have a little girl like you" So then he went in the office, and he came out and he says, "I'm sorry —they's no fine. They're just holdin’ you till they decide what to do with you." My, this sounds all police and jail, don't it: It looks like I was a criminal or somethin’.
Well, In about two days, Probation Officer Penny took me out, and took me over to the Salvation Army Home I was there a couple of days, and they were nice and kind to me. Then Mr. Penny came and got me and my suitcase, and we got on the train to come to New Orleans. We got off at the L. and N. station (it was in the daytime), and got on a streetcar and went out to the House of Good Shepherd That was in 1922
When I saw that big wall and that big iron gate, I leaned up against it and started to cry. He says, "It's too late now" And he took me by the arm and took me in He turned me over to the Sisters and left Mother Alphonse had charge of the girls. They took me to the Clothes Room and gave me a blue uniform, and took away my own clothes. Then they sat ms on a chair, and I was cryin’ and cryin’ the bell rang to go eat dinner, and I went and ate dinner I went back and sat in the Clothes Room again) and then the next mornin' they took me there agin and I sat in there, and I was jist cryin’ — nothin’ to do. The woman that had charge of the Clothes Room might have give me somethin’ to do So she told Mother Alphonse that I wanted somethin’ to do. The room where they made shirts they called a Steam Room So Mother Alphonse sent for one of the girls from the Steam Room, and she told her, "This girl wants somethin' to do I don't know what she can do" And she says, "Take her up there and tell Mother St. Clement to give her somethin’ to do --- foldin’ shirts or somethin’;" She took me up there and asked me could I use scissors, and I could; she started me off outtin’ threads on shirts that was finished Then, after that, I start sewin' bottoms on shirts Then packin’ them into bundles.
I didn't get any mail And if you didn't have any people to send you tooth paste and sweett soap, you had to bathe with Octagon soap. For Christmas you’d get a little tube of toothpaste and a little bar of sweet soap We had to get up every mornin' and go to Mass, whether you was a Catholic or not So-many girls was assigned to the dormitories, halls, bathrooms; the dining-room was called a refectory After Hass each girl was sent wherever she was assigned to work I guess I was dustin' by that time. I was there two years and four months--- eight hours a day, workin’ and recitin’ prayers They'd punish you by puttin’ you to bed for a week, on bread and water — a glass of water and a piece of bread about six inches long, three times a day I was on it once and once in a tickin sack — for jumpin' into a argument against Mother Alphonse*s pet.
I wrote to Mr and Mrs. Bigley, and I asked her If she would come and take me out She wrote and says, "You got a good home, and you’re leadin’ a Christian life — and try to be satisfied." Then I didn't hear any more from her, I was jist makin' up my mind — the first chance I had to git out, I was goin' te git out. I'd been listenin' to a lot of girls talk about what they did before they was in there, and the money they made so I started makin' plans for the same. They was havin’ some paintin' done; and when they come to paint the classroom windows — they had this heavy wire on the window --- and they took the wire off. Every night they made the painter lay the ladders flat down in the yard — they was all extension ladders. Another girl and I was plaanin' to run away together. We all went under names given us by the Sisters —- all after saints — and they called me Elise. I don't remember what the girl's name was, We were supposed to run away that night Everybody was sittin' in the classroom around the Sister I says, “We can git out of one of those windows without anybody seein' us," But she got cold feet.
I didn't go right then I told her if she didn't see as at Mass in the morning, she'd know I'd gone They preached religion Into you there — It was somethin’ to do I was baptised and confirmed. I had joined the Order called the Children of Mary First I got the green ribbon. When you got the green ribbon, you was considered for the blue ribbon — and I got that After you got the blue ribbon you could sleep in a dormitory that wasn't locked. The other girl didn't.
So that night I waited until everybody had gone to sleep, and I slipped all the way from the third floor to the first, to see if the classroom was locked. It wasn't locked, and I had to go all the way back to git my shoes —- I'd left ‘am up there I come down, and I climbed out the window, and I had to move two big ladders off of a small one Mother Alphonse's room locked out on this yard, too, and I kept lookin’ for her to stick her head out. I got a ladder up to the street wall, and I pushed it up there and I thought it was goin' to come over on me once I climbed up and got on the wall, and I walked about half a block to. the Sisters' side where the wall was a little lower to jump And then I jumped.
There was a little strip of grass, and I landed in that I saw a couple conductors comin’' up the street, and I hadn't soon anyone on the outside for so long I thought they were policemen, I started walkin' fast, and they was a man pulled up to the curb in a car, and he says, "You better git in here —the police is comin'’. It was twelve or one o'clock. So I got in. He asked me where I was goin' and I told him I didn't know So he says, "Well, what you goin' to do?" I says, "I'm goin’ to make money." I thought I knew a lot, but I didn't know much* We drove around He seemed nice We got in the back part of the car — and he tried, but he couldn’t do anything. We got back in the front and drove around scene more and he tried again He seem he couldn't, and he hurt me and he was afraid So he says "Well, what do you want to do now? I can’t drive you around all night." He said he had to go home "I’ll give you a dollar to go rent you a room*" he says So he gave me a dollar and let me out It was either that or stay looked out.
So I started walkin’ in my blue uniform and a little brown sweater, I didn't have nothin' else, and I was that desperate My hair the Sisters wouldn't let me keep it bobbed (I'd kept at the Captain and his wife in Pensaoola till they let me bob it.) It was long now and parted in the middle -— two plaits across the top of my head, so anybody could see I'd ran away from somewhere I found myself walkin' on a big lit-up street — it was Canal street ---and I was dressed like that:---but I didn't know it was Canal street then.
There was a man comin’' along with a little black grip in his hand, and he says, "Good mornin’.” and I said, "Good mornin’.”It was in March and he says, “It's kind of chilly.” And I says* "Yes, it is." And he says, "What are you doin’ out so early in the mornin'?" And I told him I was lookin’ for a room, He says, “Come on --- I’II show you where you can get a room." Of course he said that…
So it wasn't very far he went — it must have been North Rampart or South Rampart or Tulano —— I don't know which. He knew this woman what was runnin’ the place, ‘cause he went up and told her I wanted a room. And she took me. In a room, and she say, "I'll be back.”I got the dollar out of my shoe, and I was waitin’ for her to come back. And instead of her comin', he came, He was in his thirties about. So I says "Here's a dollar to give to the lady for the room" And he says, "Oh, keep that — I done paid for the room" I told him I wanted to stay there by myself --- I didn't want him to stay there with me He set his grip down and took his hat off, and he says, “In the mornin’ she's 'goin' to give you a nice little dress and a hat and bob your hair* And I'll put you on a oar and you can go out to a little country town and stay two-three days, till the police quit lookin' for you" I'd told him I'd run away, while we were walkin’ I told him my name was Lois, and I've stuck to that name ever since.
He went ahead and undressed hisself and got in bed I was still sittin' in the chair. Finally he kept tellin’ me to come on and go to bed, and I put out the light and I took off my dress and got as far on the edge of the other side as I could I had on a blue flannel petticoat, and a heavy union suit --- I had tore 'am off at the knees He started pullin' me over close to him and beggin’ me and askin' me if I'd been with anybody, and I told him No Well, he succeeded to go with me…
Then the next mornin' the woman out my hair, and gave me a different dress and a hat. It was jist a block or so around the corner that he took me and put me on the Kenner car, paid my fare, and handed me a half a dollar. Instead of being warned against these things, I'd always been kept ignorant… Well, I got in Kenner with a dollar and a half I start wanderin' around I got to talkin’ with some girls that was comin’ from fishin,’ and I made like I was lookin’ for an aunt that was supposed to live there They took me to a lady's house to see if she knew who I was lookin’ for. She had fresh milk and biscuits and jelly — and I was hungry and it tasted good Then these three girls took me home with them, and I spent the day with 'am* They jist made a big fuss over me —- how cute I was and how sweet I was And so that night I told 'am I was goin’ home. I didn't want to be caught there, and spoil all the kindness they'd showed me, you know I came back to New Orleans, got off the car, and start wanderin’ round again. I didn’t get a room.
The next experience I believe was in City Park I met a young man, and he made me a lot of promises about what he was goin' to do for me. I went with him, right there in the Park — it was after dark. Afterwards he promised to meet me a couple nights later with some money, but he didn't give me any Then I went and got a room with my dollar. The next day I got up and start wanderin’ 'round the streets agin. I went back to City Park that night, to see if I could see this same boy And I was right there at the same spot where I had met him, and a nice-dressed, heavy-set man come along; and he says, "Little girl, aren't you afraid the Needle Man'll get you?" And me, with my ignorance, I says, "No, the only one I'm afraid of is the police" And he says, "Why are you afraid of the police?” I says, "'Cause I ran away.”He says, "You're jist the very little girl I'm lookin' for" — and flashed his badge I'd talked too much that time I started cryin’, and beggin’ him not to take me. He caught a-hold of me — I guess maybe he thought I'd try to run He says, "Didn't you see this stripe up theside of my pants?" I never knew nothin' about them things I told him I wasn't lookin' for anything like that. Well, he was nice. He says, "While we're waitin for 'am to come and git you, I'm goin’ to buy you some ice cream." We went over to a concession in the Park, and he used the telephone and he bought me a dish of ice cream, and he ate with me. And then he bought a big chocolate Easter egg in a box, and handed me about seventy-five cents. In change. He says, "You might want some gum or candy." Everybody took me for younger than I was.
Then a touring car came with three policeman, and I sat in the back with two. There was an old Sergeant in the back, and he put his arm up around the back of the seat --- but he didn't get fresh or anything. And he says, "Where did you run away from?” I told him the House of Good Shepherd. He said that they had orders from Pensaoola to pick me up I was eighteen then; so when I ran away, the House of Good Shepherd notified Pensaoola.
He says, "I guess we'll take you to the House of Good Shepherd +--- we didn't know that." And he says, "You mean to tell me you had tha nerve to git over that wall by yourself?” I said, "Yes." And he says, "Well, nobody ought to have the nerve to put you back:” That’s what the policeman told me He asked no how old I was, and I told him eighteen Ha says, "Well, you’re eighteen — talk up to that Sister. They can't Keep you there. And," he says, "don't be afraid. She won't hurt you -while we're there." They rang the bell and she came to the door, and he says, "We had orders from Pencacola to pick up this little girl, and aha told us she ran army from here. So we don't know what to do with bar, and we brought her here." So she says, "Well, she's eighteen years old, and she had a good homo here, and she's practically helpless." I says, "You're a dam liar --- I worked eight hours a day:" Which we did. She got red in the face and awful mad, and she says, "I'll leave her to you-all to do what you want with her."
So they drove to Tulane and Saratoga, the parish Prison then. One stayed outside with me, and one went in and rang up Mrs. Sullivan, the Probation Woman. So then they came out and drove me to the Volunteers' Home, after all --- after two years and four months. Hajor Davis was in charge of the Home here, and he had visited the Home in Pensacola and he knew me. I didn't see him that night --- the matron took me in. The next morning I saw Major Davis, and he says, "Well, Ola, you ran away in Pensacola, and you ran away from the House of Good Shepherd," he says, "When are you goin' to run away from here?" I said, "I don't know."
The Home here was much stricter than It was in Pensacola. You couldn't go sit on the porch or go shoppin' by yourself. In Pensaoola we could go out any time --- you had more freedom There was no young girls in the Home here --- it -was all elderly women. Well, I was dissatisfied there, and I asked Major" Davis if I could go shopping. I had the change the detective had given me, and I wanted to get some rouge and powder. He says, "Yes, the matron's going up about eleven o'clock. You can go along with her." I decided I wanted a little Freedom. When she got ready to go, I didn't go.
They had a wood fence with two strips of barb wire on top. They put the garbage cans out in the mornin’, and the back gate stood open all day --- they forgot to lock it. I kept watchin' it all day, to see if anybody was goin’ to look it. About six o'clock that even in' it was still unlocked I went in the dormitory to git my hat, and these old ladies was sittin' in there talkin' They'd ask me somethin’ once in a while, but I didn't have my mind on the conversation I was cravin’ young company. All I was thinkin’ about was how I was goin’ to git my hat out of there without them see in' me. And I was afraid somebody was goin’ to look the gate. I walked out into the hall and picked up some woman's hat off the rack, and walked out. The first cab I saw was a Yellow Cab, and I took it — instead of keeping my money to eat on.
I told him to drive me to City Park. I was still tryin’ to find the young man who had made me so many promises --- even after the police had picked me up there and all I didn't see anything of him, and I start walkin' back to town. Then I passed a Yellow Cab stand — there was three-four cabs there I got to talkin' to a Yellow Cab driver, and he got a room and spent the night with me. I'd done so much walkin' -… but I had to vacate the roan by ten in the mornin', or pay again. He was gone. I didn't have a cent of money then, and I was too proud to let anybody know I was hungry. He had said, "If you haven't got any place to sleep tonight, come back again and I'll get you a room.” So I met him again that night. I hadn't had anything to eat yet. He said he could get me a room, to keep me from bein’ on the street all night, but that was all he could do for me.
So the next night I didn't meet him. I was hungry and half sick. I walked all night. It was dark, and I was scairt to sit in the Park, and scairt of niggers. I was walkin' on Rampart, near Iberville, and there was a dark-complected man, Italian or Spanish. He says, "Hello," and I told him Hello. He says, "You look lonesome. Are you lonesome?" I told him No, I wasn't lonesome. I said, "I'm hungry." He says, "You are?" I says Yes. He says, "Come on ---
I’ll get you somethin' to eat." And he took me in a chop suey restaurant there on Rampart. There was two well-dressed women sittin' in there, and he took me over to them and told 'am that I said I was hungry. So one of ‘am says, "Sit down" And I sat down, and she start to question me. Where did I run away from or where was my home? I told her in Pensacola -- that I hadn't ran away from anywhere. She says she could put me in her house, and dress me up, but that she knew I must have run away from somewhere and that I couldn't be over fifteen years old I was eighteen. She said she didn't want to get into any trouble."I know a nice old lady that would love to have a little girl like you." she says,” "and if you go over there and be a good girl. I'll bring you some nice little dresses and a hat and shoes." And I told her Yes, that I would. I was eating all this time we were talkin'---stew, I believe.
She took me over there - it was on Basin street. An old lady, about sixty-nine or seventy years old, and she had a home for old men. I never could git into the right spot. One old man was blind and one had a sore foot. She was pretty nice to me at first. She was strict on me — she wouldn't let me go nowhere by myself I washed dishes, and I had a little freedom around the house. She start questionin' me about my people, in two-three days, and I give her a false address where my mother was supposed to live in Pensacola. So, unbeknown to me, she sends a telegram, and the telegram came back to her. And then the next day there come Mrs. Sullivan, the Probation Woman. The old lady called me in, and Mrs. Sullivan Jumped on me ---why I had give the false address, and the old woman had spent money on a telegram and it had come back. So I Jumped on her I said, "I'm eighteen years old, and," I says "you can't put me back in the House of Good Shepherd:" So she says, "No, I can't --- but the police can handle you." So I fingered I better git out of there before I got locked up again.
The old lady went to town that day, and I left. The other lady never did come with the dresses or anything, though I was with the old woman a week. If she had, I would have stayed. So I started roamin' around the street again. At four o'clock the next mornin’, I was hungry and I had a nickel, So I went and got a box of crackers and want and sat on the old women's steps and drank up the bottle of milk that stood there. I roamed around all day and that night. The next mornin’ I went back to git the milk, and she had took it inside and had a light burnin' So I walked out to City Park that day, so I could have a place to sit down.
I sat down on a bench —I couldn't more, I was so hungry and my foot hurt so from all the walkin' And there was a man drove by in a Ford sedan, and he smiled at me I didn't like his looks, and I turned my head the other way. He circled around and come back again. And I got to thinkin’, Maybe he'll get me somethin’ to eat, anyway. So when he passed by agin , I sailed at him, and he stopped, and he says, "You lonesome?" I said Yes. He says, "You want to take a ride?" I says, "I don't care." So I got in the car, and he asked me if I didn't want somethin' to drink. I told him I was hungry… I was gittin' a little nerves lie says, "You are?" And he says, “Well, we'll surest you some-thin’ to eat" Then he says, "You married?" I says So He says, "Tell me the truth, 'cause I don't want to get into any trouble," I told him No, that I wasn't married He asked me where I lived I told him that I didn't have any place to stay. He asked me agin was I tellin’' the truth, and I told him Yes, I was He says, "I'll get you a room, but I'm married and I can't do much." So he drove to Little Woods and ordered club sandwiches and near-beer It sure tasted good to me. Then he drove on Royal street and got me a room, and left me a little change to eat on for the next day He said he would come and see me every day. And he told me if I did go with anybody, not to go with 'em until they gave me two dollars.
So, about a week after that, I met a cab driver that It took a liking to (I didn't like the other one, but I thought he'd get me somethin’ to eat. The ones I liked never would do nothin’.) I started goin' with him - I'll call him Johnny — pretty regular. He didn't give me much of anything … a little money to eat on. He was married, too. Well, one night he hadn't got off yet —- he -was workin' — and I was walkin’ up the street with a man. Johnny pulled up to the curb with his cab, and he says, "Come here:” in a rough voice.I left the man on the street and went over Johnny had another man in the cab, and he says, "Git in this cab --- I've been lookin' all over for you:” I got in the back with this man, and he started talkin' to me, and told Johnny to drive where we could git a bottle of home brew. So he drove us to a place, and I told him he could git it in there. The man went in, and Johnny told me, he says, "This is a seaman, and he asked me to find him a girl, and," he says, "I've been runnin’ up his bill lookin' for you’. He bawled me out. Then he says,” Don't have nothin' to do with this man for less than five dollars.” So then he went back, and I went to a room with the seaman, and he gave me seven dollars -- the most money I'd ever had in my life at one time. He wanted to ride around some more: and he got another cab and I rode around a while with him, and he said he wanted to spend the rest of the night with me. So we went back to the room, and spent the rest of the night. He gave me nine dollars more. I didn't see him any more; He spent easy, but a lot of ’am is married and can't.
I went to town and bought three yards of blue cloth for a dress, and white shoes. A lady in the house made the dress. The men who had rented the room for me came that afternoon. I told him about the good luck, and showed him the things I had bought. He wanted me to give him the rest of the money -- and I wouldn't do it. So after that he didn't pay the rent for me any more, and he didn't come back any more.
I thought a lot of Johnny, but he was married. I spent the rest of that money foolishly, and I was gittin’ behind with the rent … Three dollars a week, it was. There was a girl in the next room to me. She got friendly, and one day she was sick --- I'll call her Anna --- and she called me in her room. She was vomitin’ and had a high fever, and she asked me If I'd take a note somewhere for her. I told her Yes, and she gave me a note. I don't remember near If that address was on Bourbon or Royal, but it was up somewhere near Canal I rang the bell, and the door opened without anyone comin’' down. There was a lady and a man at the head of the stairs, and I went up and gave the lady the note. Her and the man went inside, and then they came out, and she says, "Tell her she’ll have to come herself," and not to send anyone there with any notes any more. So I want back and told Anna, She says, "I’II try to go. If you go with me and help me," she says, "It's somethin' I've got to have:" I went with her, and she got what she went after. It was dope, She got back, and she got a spoon and a hypodermic needle; and she put this little grain of stuff in a spoon with a little water and heated it with a match. She injected that in her arm, and she says, "How I'll feel all right in a little while." She asked me If I didn't want to try some. She says, "It'll make you feel good." I says, "No, I feel all right," I felt sorry for her. In a couple days she sent me to another place, for a man to come to her room. He came; and that afternoon she sent me after him again. Then she did a lot of oursin', and says to him, "You took my three dollars and gave me chalk: I’m goin’ to git a bunch of my man to beat you up," And he says, "Yeah -- I'm going to call the police to put you in jail:" And he left. She was frightened. She told me she had a ticket to Birmingham, Alabama, and for me to go with her to the Western Union to have this ticket re-dated ---- it was a month old. We went there, and she got it re-dated, and left right away.
There was a men about thirty-nine years old. Most every time I went out I would see him, and he would start follerin’ me, and pass me and tell me Hello. But I didn't like his looks … I'd tell him to go to hell. So, one night I went out and I was broke and I was cravin’ tomatoes. He passed me and told me Hello, and he stopped on the corner. So I says maybe he'd buy me some tomatoes if I'd talk to him, I was there in Royal street about a month, and had never been in the French Market yet - didn't know anything about it When I got to the corner he says, "Takin' a walk?" I said, "I'm lookin’ for tomatoes," So he says, "Come on - I'll got you tomatoes," And we come to the French Market and he bought me twenty-five cents of nice big tomatoes, and walked back to the door with me and asked me for a date I says, "Not tonight – I’m sick." He says, "Well, when can I see you?" I says, "Next Saturday." This was on a Saturday, and I put him off till the next Saturday --- I didn't want anything to do with him. I went up and got in the middle of the bed, put the tomatoes and salt on a chair, and start eatin’. And then I was goin’ about all that week, and Johnny was kind of weanin’ away from me…
I met another young man --- I'll call him Billy--- and he swept me right off my feet He was very handsome He was on a boat that lands across the river, and he took me over there. I spent two days on the boat---when they were in port, the Captain didn't come aboard at night, and I stayed in the room in the daytime. At night we went in the galley – that’s the kitchen - and eat all kinds of good things. One boy played a harmonica, and another a guitar. I had a real good time; and when the boat was to leave, he made me go to Canal street and wave Goodby to him I fell madly la love with him. When Saturday come, I had forgot I had a date with the tomato man, and was gittin’ ready to go out when he come up the stairs, My room was at the head of the steps He Says, "Oh, you're ready, huh?" I'd forgot all about him. I didn’t see any way to get out of it, so I said Yes. We stopped at a drugstore and ate ice cream. Then we caught the street car and he took me to his houseboat on Bayou St.John. When he opened the door, there was a big glass dish full of tomatoes and lottuco waitin’ for me. I sat down and went to work on ‘em I stayed with him about two hours, and he gave me four dollars Then he took me back to town and to my door, and made a date for the next Saturday. That was fourteen years ago, and ha’s been a good friend many a time since.
I was startin’ to feel sick and nauseated, and cravin’ tomatoes all the time, and was afraid that I was pregnant. I jist lived for the time Billy would come back. When his boat come in, I went across the river to meet him. When I met him he had to go to town on business, and he put me in his room on the boat and locked the door so nobody couldn't come in. He was gone I guess three hours, and came back. And then I was there with him a couple o’nights, and we’d take walks on the levee, and I was happy He gave me a little money, but not much and then he left again, and I went to Canal street to wave him Goodby. During the time he was gone this time, the landlord wanted the room where I was stayin’ - I was two or three weeks behind.
So, when I met the man on the houseboat the next Saturday, I told him that I had to get out, and asked him could I come and stay on the houseboat; and he said Yes, and was tickled to death, he was I told him I was sick, and thought I was pregnant. But he said No, I was jist bilious and needed a good dose of medicine... Ignorant … He fixed me up a dose of salts, and I couldn't convince him I was pregnant. He said that at two months I'd be bigger than what I was He gave me a dollar a day to cook with, but I didn't know how to cook He was happy to come home and find someone there tryin' to prepare his meals, anyway But I was eatin' my heart out for Billy. When the boat come in I went over to meet him, and he had done left his boat One of the men said for me to meet him the next evenin’ I left his boat heartbroken. I met him the next evenin', and he treated me as though nothing was wrong.
We went and took a waIk on the leveo, and I started talkin' to him and told him that I wanted a home, and that "you say you love me and I love you, so why don't you marry me and give me a home?" He looked out across the River, and he had tears in his eyes. He says, "No, Lois, I'll come home sometime and find a man in the house and have to kill someone." Well, he went away again and when he come back again I went over and he was gone. The next evenin’ I went back, and he was gone, too.
This man on the houseboat know that I was in love with Billy. I went back and sat up till about twelve o'clock He went in and laid down. And I took a bottle of iodine off a shelf in the kitchen, and went on the bow of the boat. I drank as much as I could swallow, and stayed quiet until I couldn't stand it any more He was callin' me, and I was moanin' then. He came outside and found me, and soon what I had done, and called a man on the next boat to come and hold me while he called an ambulance, They rushed me to the hospital and pumped mo out I stayed in the hospital about a week, and went back to the house boat.
I was grievin' about Billy, and I start feelin’ life, I'd tell the houseboat man I felt somethin' move, and I'd tell him to put his hand there But he kept tellin' me I wasn't pregnant I used to carry the washtub up against me, and hold it with the other side Time went on and I didn't see Billy any more - didn't go over there any more. One day I was sweepin.’ I swept the dirt right up by the edge of the table, and the table was made stationary to the wall, I stooped down to pick up the dirt, and put myself under the table. When I raised up I caught an awful liok across my back. And a few minutes after, pains started in my stomach He was outside talkin' with a man, and I couldn't tell him anything. and it kept gittin' worse. It was around eleven o'clock in the mornin' By night I jist couldn't be still any longer, it was such pain. So I told him I said,” I know I'm pregnant,” And he says, "Well, if you are, I'll take care of that," He heated some water, and told me to sit over a pot of hot water. It didn't do any good.
Well, he went to bed — he had to go to work the next mornin’, I laid down, and I was in such pain I was drawin' my knees right up, pushin’ 'am in the back. I'd got up and walk awound, and stoop dowm … I couldn't get no relief any kind of way. At five o'clock in the mornin’ I called him, and told him I couldn't stand It any longer. He got up and went and called a ambulance. The doctors came and put a stethoscope to my stomach, and he asked me how long I had been feelin’ life. I didn't even know. I hadn't kept track of nothin’ There was six months when I was in the House of Good Shepherd when I didn't menstruate, and there wasn't nothin’ wrong with me then. So this time I didn't pay it no mind at first. I told the doctor a month or two. He says, "You been feelin' it longer than that. And,” he says, "we've got to move her, and move her quick.” It was that lick on the back. That was five o'clock in the mornin’…and it wasn't born until nine o'clock. It was a perfectly formed boy, and it lived two hours in the incubator. The man on the houseboat gave my baby his name, although he know he wasn't the father. I went to the hospital as his wife, too. I stayed in the hospital about fifteen days.
I had never been satisfied on the houseboat. He was so much older than as, and his ways was so much different from mine. After I got stronger, I started goin’ out. One night someone in a car hollered at me --- spoke to me. I says, "Hello, Johnny." But it wasn't Johnny. It was his brother — the dead image of him. Says, "Come on and go for a ride." And I was in the car a few minutes before I discovered that it wasn't Johnny, He says, "Come on --- I'll take you around to my bar-room.” It was on a riverfront street. I stayed there a while with him, and I got mad at his for makin' me think at first he was Johnny. He treated me nice, and I went back to see him. I was growin' more and more dissatisfied on the houseboat. This man's ways was more like mine.
When I got to know him better, I asked him if he had any rooms upstairs. He said there was a roam upstairs -- a man was stayin’' in it - but he said, "It's so filthy that you'd never be able to live in it." I told him I could clean it He said, "No, you'd have to get a nigger." Well, I want up and cleaned it When he come up and saw it, he was surprised. I left the houseboat and started stayin' there, and workin' behind the bar and meeting lots of friends. He put me wise not to go with anyone unless I got the money first, and to look out for sickness. So I start getting’ along all right, start puttin’ a little money in the bank … He was the one that made me do it.
I stayed there a while, and had a run-in with him. Then I'd meet someone else I thought I was in love with, and leave him for a while. He would bring someone else in there to make me jealous — then I'd go and run ‘am out. It went on like that for about two years. And then I run into Billy He was tickled to death to see me, and a lot of that old feelin' that I had for him come back; and we went in a bar-room and sat down and had a drink together. He wanted to know where I had been keepin’ myself; and I asked him where he kept hisself those evenin’s I went to the boat and he was gone. We talked a good while, and he says, "I'll see you tomorrow," And then the next day I was upstairs in my room, and I heard a woman's voice comin' up the steps callin' me. I went out to see who she was I didn't know her ---I never had seen her before, She said, “I suppose you find it strange that you don't know mc, and I'm comin’ to see you," I said, "That's all right - come on in." And she says. "I'm Mrs. Billy - and 'My girl Lois' is all I've heard out of him since yesterday!” I said, "Well, I'll tell you: I met him two years ago and was madly in love with him, and I never knew he was married. I lost track of him, and never knew where he was till yesterday that I met him. And he never told me that he was married. You'll never have to worry," I says, "If he's married, I don't want nothin' to do with any Married men." She said they had been married nine years, and that he had treated her pretty dirty. She was very nice to me, and she left. They was livin' right around the corner from me.
The next day she come back, and asked if he was there. She said that ho made her sell some of the furniture, and that he told her he was ‘going to Lois." I said, "When you was here yesterday, I gave you my word that he'd never come back here, and I haven't seen him today. And don't you dare come back here agin to look for him:" I seen him a few times after that with her, and he waved to me. I guess it was jest to make her mad But she was ugly ---oh, I don't see how she ever got that good-lookin’ man: Well, I think that is why he had the tears in his eyes as he looked out across the River, and told me No, that he would come home and find someone else in the house and have to kill someone. And also why he would slip away from me before I got to the boat - that he had to go home to his wife.
Well, I fooled around the bar-room about two years. I had a few men friends --- money friends… And then I run up against somebody what messed me up --- disease --- gonorrhea. It led to an operation … I couldn't never became a mother again. Well, I hadn't never been put wise as to how to take care of that kind of thing. It was, I should say, six months after the operation. I looked terrible I was in the hospital from 18 July to the 9th of August, in bed. Some folks thought I must be a dope fiend. I looked so awful after I got out. I didn't go up and down stairs for months. I was in a room up over a bar-room. The operation was in 1927, and I continued in the same way until 1928.
There was a lady who had lived here in New Orleans, that I had met and got acquainted with. She'd left a couple years before I went to Florida. Her mother was here in the Old Folks’ Home. She had got in a accident over there in Florida, and she got nine hundred dollars out of it — but the lawyer got four hundred of it. Around this time I was gettin' disgusted. I was makin’ pretty good money, but I didn't have anyone I cared for I was stayin' alone. I had a bottle of whisky that I'd been savin' a good while; and I thought if somethin' didn't change pretty soon, I'd drink this whisky and it'd give me nerve to go jump in the River. This woman came from Florida to get her mother out of the Home She looked me up, and she asked me if I wanted to go with her and take care of her mother while she worked out I was tickled to death to make the change I sold my furniture for twelve dollars — three rooms of furniture - but it was all I could git. I drank the whisky to celebrate, instead of committin’ suicide.
We left New Orleans on Friday night for Jacksonville, Florida, at nine o'olock I couldn't sleep and I couldn't read, so I was lookin' around, I noticed standin' in the door of the coach, a man; and I noticed that he kept lookin’ at me all the time Every time I looked, he seemed to be lookin’ at me. And I says to this lady, "I wonder why that man keeps starin' at me." There was high water then, and the train slowed up almost to a stop. The conductor came and was talkin’ with this man in the coach door, and this lady says, "I'm goin’ to ask the conductor what's the trouble.”And I went behind her, and she spoke to the conductor He told her they had to slow up because there was water on the tracks. And the conductor went on, and this man started talkin’ to her about the high water. And he looked over her shoulder and smiled at me. After that I couldn't keep my mind off of him, or my eyes either. He had his baggage in the next coach, where they could smoke. And I should say, around one or two o'clock in the mornin', I still wasn't able to sleep any (we was in a day coach); and he spent the biggest part of his time standin' in that doorway. Most everyone had gone to sleep; and I suggested to the lady that we move to the last seat next to the door -where he was standin' So we moved. He started leanin’ in, so we could talk, and I asked him. if he wanted to sit down. He said No, he was goin' back and read. But finally he sat down on the arm of the seat and then he sat down in the seat, and we begin talkin' about where we was goin’. When the train stopped, we got off and had coffee. Then, later on, we was standin’ on the platform between the two cars, and the train had started} and he grabbed me and kissed me. And I says, "Don't do that --- not here:”
The train got in Jacksonville About four o'clock Sunday mornin’ He told me he was goin' home to West Palm Beach, and could catch a train at nine o'clock that mornin'. I had already become hardened. In the business, and I suggested that we get a roam until his train left. So we did — we re istereds as man and wife at a hotel He told the porter to call him at eight o'clock. When the porter called, we hadn't went to sleep yet We went over to the rooming-house where the lady had went with her mother. and told her I was goin' to the depot and stay with him until train-time. She had been around herself, so she didn't say anything.
She had told me, when she had asked me to go to Jacksonville with her, that she was in business and making good money. Now I saw she was going to put me on the line, because she was old and I was only twenty-two. So she said she'd go get the horse and wagon and go meet me at the depot. I found out later that her "business" was a junk business. So she met us at the depot with a horse and wagon and a dog. The young man saw that horse and wagon and said it sure looked good to him --- that he was raised on a farm, and that if she'd let him drive that horse and wagon home, that he believed he's wait and go that night. He was the same age of me — twenty-two. I'll call him Walter here.
We got out there, in the suburbs, to a house. I'd been cooped up in brick buildings so long that I just went wild with Joy — open air and sky and everything. We went to a lady's house and she fixed us breakfast; and after breakfast, everybody started talkin' I says, "I'm goin' to clean up that house" --- it was two blocks down a dirt road. When I went out, Walter come out behind me. I started runnin', and he started chasin' me — we was like two kids. If I was as happy now as I was then, I'd be all right, I guess.
We got to the house. He says, "I'm goin' to help you clean up," He had his suitcase there; and he'd took out a pair of white duck pants, spotless, to put on to he'p me scrub the house: We started scrubbin', throwin' buckets of water, and I started arrangin' the furniture --- she didn't know nothin’ about keepin’ house. It was all plain and common stuff. Her and her mother was tickled to death at the way we fixed up the house. That evenin' we sat down and talked - Walter was still there. He told me that he had always told his people that if he loved a woman enough, no matter what she was, that he'd marry her. And he told me he loved me enough to marry me, and wanted to know if I'd go straight I loved him, and I told him that I'd go straight … On a Tuesday evenin' at five o'clock we were married by a justice of the peace.
(Here she wept … the first and only tears she shed during the whole recital.)
We was very happy for a while. Then we start runnin' out of money, and she (this woman — we was livin’ with her) started throwin' slurs. She wanted Walter to go away and look for work-but she really just wanted him to get away from me. So then came the 1926 hurricane — and West Palm Beach was where Walter's mother was, But before the hurricane he had wrote and told his mother he was married, and ask her to send him some of his things. She wrote and bawled him out. He had been goin' with a girl next door to her for a year and a half. And that letter said, "You and her agreed that if either of you met anybody you liked better, you'd let each other know." Also that she cried for two days when she found out Walter was married, and for him to write her a letter of apology. But he didn't do it.
Then this hurricane come along, the 16th of September, and the paper was full of deaths and damage done. Walter told me that he was worried about his mother and father, and that he didn't have money to go and take me too, and he didn't want to leave me. He'd go off and sit in the yard by hisself and look miserable. I'd go and ask him what was the matter --- didn't he love me any more and was he sorry he'd married me? He told me No, that he was worryin' about his mother Everything was so disrupted that you couldn't get mail through, and he didn't hear from her. So he said he could burn his way down there - hitch hike --- but he didn't want to leave me.
By this time we was broke, and the lady was broke. She'd spent most of her money, and made very little on the wagon — enough to feed the two horses. So I told Walter I'd never hiked before, but I'd go with him. I'd carried an old sewing-machine over there to Jacksonville with me, and he had a little automatic, and all to got for the automatic and the machine was one dollar from a second hand store.
There was a man who stayed at the house and worked at a railroad cross he had a credit account at a grocery store, and he used to give her the book and she'd go buy groceries — and that's the way we ate most of the time. He told my husband that she was very disappointed in me meeting him —that she was goin' to try to claim me as her daughter, as they pay a widow with children a pension in Florida … a widow's pension. And he gave us a dollar to start on our trip. That made two dollars.
We started out about six o'clock in the evenin’, on Saturday. I had on over-alls and high-heeled pumps to start hikin'. I thought it was a lot of fun --- in the beginnin' Ten o'clock that night I couldn't go any further — we had walked six miles in four hours. We sat down. in San José in front of a restaurant on a bench to rest, and a policeman called my husband on the side. I thought sure he was goin' to put us in jail, and I was scared He ask Walter if I was his wife; he told him Yes. The policeman says, "She looks tired," and that he had a place where we might lay down and get a little sleep until three o'clock in the mornin'
He said he went off from duty then, so we'd have to get out then. He took us there, and it was a big room with a cement-paved floor. He threw his light around the wall and says, "There's no centipedes here — that's one good thing.”And he brought me a rookin' chair. My husband had a lumber jacket with him, and he says, "Maybe you kin roll that up for a pillow and git a little sleep.”
Soon Walter was snorin'. But the policeman had frightened me, throwin' his light around lookin' for centipedes. There wasn't no light now. So I just sat there. I couldn't sleep. Every once in a while the policeman would come to the door and put on his light --- this was a big place, and he was a private policeman I was afraid maybe that he wasn't going to let us go --- wasn't as common to see a lady on the road as it is now. At three o'clock we had to get out, so we started out.
We walked out of San José, and there was nothin’ on each side of the highway but woods. Frogs was a-croakin'; Walter’d boat the mosquitoes off me and I'd beat 'am off him Folks called ‘em gallinippers At five o'clock it was breakin' day. We come to a two-story farmhouse and there was a light in it. I asked Walter to go and ask 'em if they'd sell us a cup o’ coffee. I couldn't go any farther till I had a cup. So he went and called, and an old man come out and he says, "I'll get you a cup o' coffee; but this is no restaurant, and I don't like to be woke up this time o’ Mornin’.” I told him we saw a bright light and thought they were up, and that we was sorry. He gave us a cup of coffee, and we walked then until six-thirty. We sat down on the side of the road, and my husband got some rain-water out of the ditch to shave with.
About seven o'clock we got a ride on a ice-cream truck. They was three fellows in the front seat; so we had to sit up on the ice in the back, and there was a tarpaulion over it We rode like that a few miles, and then they told Walter they believed they could make room for me in the front We had us a leaf of bread and some potted meat; and they stopped to make a delivery, and we got us a bottle of root beer apiece to wash our sandwich down. They told us they didn't have time to wait for us to drink it; we'd paid ten cents deposit on the bottles, and we didn't want to leave that. The next place we stopped, one of the men said, "Give me the bottles, and I’II get your dime back." But they didn't give us the dime, They were drinking and whisperin’' among themselves and winkin', I could see 'em in the mirror. They turned off of the rain highways; said they had to go up the road and make a delivery, and they'd pick us up again when they come out on the highway. We got out, and I told Walter that I was afraid of ‘em — that they were actin’ funny. So he said, "We’ll duck 'en when we see the truck comin' back on the highway.”
They was a canal runnin’ along the highway there, with a high bank;and that's where we planned to duck, behind the bank. They was a fillin’ station at the crossroad, and a car was gettin' gas, When they started off (there was a man and a little boy) they asked us if we wanted a ride, In that way we got away from the men in the truck. The man put us off in St. Augustine. That was about noon on Sunday, He had put us off right near a church, and the church had broke up and all the people was comin’ out. I was so ashamed -I had on overalls, and a loaf of bread under my arm:
The next ride we got was with an old nigger. He gave us a ride about ten miles, in a Ford tourin’ car. Then we started walkin' again, and my feet was beginnin’ to swell. I took off my shoes --- the road was shells on tar --- and Walter took off his. But he couldn't stand it ---his feet was too tender. They was some long stretches between towns and rides, and the sun was awful hot --- there ain't much winter there in September --- and no water to drink. We sat down on the side of the road to rests we had a little drinkin’'-glass with us, and I dipped up a glass of water out of the ditch. It was clear, and Walter said it was rain-water. I tasted it, and it tasted all right, so I drank a couple a' glasses.
Then the next ride we got was on a big heavy iron trucks about a hundred and sixty miles it carried us. He put us out in a town on Sunday afternoon --- the same Sunday. People was sittin’ out on porches - I was ashamed agin. The next ride we got was with niggers -- two in front and one in the back. When we got in the car there was a whisky bottle on the floor, and I was frightened. They gave us a ride about eighteen miles, and we was on the outskirts I believe of Oak Hill, Florida. Around dark - seven o'clock, I guess it was — we was comin' to a few scattered houses, walkin', and I told Walter he'd have to ask someone to let me lay down somewhere. I couldn't go on any farther. He says, "I can't do that ---I never did this before." I told him that I never had either, but I was doin’ it for his sake. So he went up and knocked on a door; and a lady come out and he asked her if she had any place that his wife could lay down a while and rest. She told him No, that she was sick and had seven children; and she wanted to know why he'd brought his wife out on the highway I told him to come on, and he started away from the house. She says, "Wait -my brother-in-law and my husband is goin' to Oak Hill --- it's six miles from here. And," she says, "you kin sleep in the depot, if the Sheriff don't git you." So they took us there, and we went in the depot and sat down, and it felt good until the mosquitoes found us.
So I told Walter I couldn't stand it any more --- I had to lay down. We had fifty cents left We walked over to the hotel on the highway, and asked the clerk if he could let us have a room for fifty cents. He said, "No, our rooms are all one dollar." Walter said, "well, my wife is awful tired --- can't you let her have a bed for fifty cents?" He says, "Sorry — can't do it." And he began to ask why Walter'd brought his wife out onto the highway. We got to the door, and the clerk said, "They's a cheap roomin'-house over on the hill. You might get a room there for fifty cents.” And we did — a nice cool room, all screened, and a soft bed and I needed it. The man at the roomin'-house told us if we'd be on the corner at six o'clock in the mornin', we'd catch the paper truck goin' through to West Palm Beach. He called us the next mornin', but my legs was so stiff I couldn't hardly move around.We washed up good — it was the first chance wo'd had — and wo got to the corner. But the truck had gone through already. So we started walkin'.
On tho outskirts was a fillin' station and restaurant combined. Walter says, "I'm goin' to see If I can get you a cup o’ coffee." he says, "I know you can't go far until you have a cup o' coffee.” We went in, and they was a elderly couple, and Walter asked the man, "Could you give my wife a cup o’ coffee?" He says, "Sure." And he told his wife to give me a cup o’ coffee. And he says, "You could stand a cup, too, couldn't you, son?" And they gave us a sandwich and a cup o' coffee apiece. He asked my husband, he says, "How's the road?" And Walter says, "Not so good," and about his people bein' over there in the storm. The wife says, "You two stay right here. They's relief trucks comin' through here and I’II get you a ride all the way through.” She took me back in the kitchen with her and she was very friendly, and I he'ped her wash dishes She made us promise to write to her, and she got us a ride.
The man on the truck stopped around noon to eat dinner Walter asked me if I wanted to eat. I said, "W,e haven't any money," He says, "Where's that envelope with her address on it?"She'd folded it over about four times lengthways, and I took it out of my pocket. He said, "Let me see it." I handed it to him and he opened it up, and there was fifty cents in it. He said he saw her when she put it in.
We arrived in West Palm Beach about seven o'clock Monday night, with my shoes in my hand —— I couldn't even git 'em on. I had a blister on each heel about like a half a dollar, I guess Walter's mother was pretty much shocked at the bride he brought home. We had some tea and sandwiches. She acted as pleased as she could --- he hadn't wrote about my bein' crippled, and she was surprised We talked a while, and went to bed. The next mornin’ Walter wont with his father to work, and took the car to get our trunk out of express. It had cost us a dollar to get the trunk hauled to the depot in Jacksonville. The express was around two dollars. They brought it home and I cleaned up. In a couple days I was feelin' all right again.
I saw the girl Walter had wont with a year and a half. She was older than him --- twenty-seven years old, and a artist. Her father and sister --- the three of 'em --- lived, together, and they had a art store on the main street in West Palm Beach. Climatis street, it is, I know that she was his mother's choice. Walter got work right army as a laborer, fifty cents an hour ---all that repairin’ was goin’ on then, and they was plenty work. They charged us eight dollars a week for board, and we start savin’ a little money, and his father seemed to like me. He told Walter, "If you listen to that girl, some day you’ll have somethin'," But his mother seemed to want to mingle with aristocrats. We stayed with them about eight months. Walter and I had a argument one night, and he asked his father if he'd loan him seventy-five dollars to send me back here to New Orleans. He said. He, I could git back the way I got over there. I told him that I wanted to go back, but "if you think I'm goin' back the way I come, you're a damn fool."
Well, the next mornin' when Walter started to work, I told him I wouldn't be there When he come home. He said I'd better be. When he left, I went and start packin' my things. His mother start cryin' She says, "You can't do that. Our religion doesn't believe in divoroe." They was Catholies. When she started cryin’I forgot my troubles and start foelin' sorry for her. Then once again I got in a argument with Walter's father, and he threw somethin’ in my face about keepin' me. I told his that my husband was payin’ my board, and he says, "He's not payin' anything for you, We charged his ten dollars a week when he was single - we're just doin' this to he'p you out," And for about three days I didn't go to the table to eat, I was sick from it, Finally my mother-in-law and my husband kept beggin' me to eat. My place was next to my father-in-law.and When I'd think about what he'd said, I'd about choke. There was one month that . he didn't speak to me; and then everything went all right for a while.
Then she scart havin’ some snooty company --- a young couple, and they had a little baby, And my husband's youngest brother was home on a visit, She was puttin’ on big dinners for the couple and the brother, and she didn't invite us in the parlor when this company was there, She comein the back one Sunday mornin’-she was fixin’ dinner -and asked Walter to get a gallon of oil. The youngest son was in the parlor with the company. I ask her what was the matter — did she think he was too good to carry a gallon of oil. She went and ask him to go, and he says,” ha make Walter go."
Walter was notioin' the way she was treatin' us, too. They was goin’ to town one mornin', and they dropped Walter off to look for work --- he -was out of work then, I ask them could - go along, wad they told me No. After they was gone I dressed myself and took a walk - I should say about a mile -to a lady's house they had made me acquainted with. My mother-in-law liked this lady until she seen that she took an interest in me. This lady told me that my mother-in-law told her that I was a nice girl, but she didn't see why Walter married me. That evenin' Walter come to this lady's house, He says, "Come on, let’s go the home." I said, "have you got the car?" He said, "No, Dad give me bus fare to come and get you," So we got outside and I said, "Well, if l’m not good enough to ride in his car, I’m not good enough to use his bus money." Dut Walter forced me on the bus, He was very angry — his face was rod, We got off the bus and he says, Mamma told me to came and git you, She’s fixin' suppor," I said, "Well, I’m goin’ in, but I'm not goin' to eat," And I went straight to our room, His mother come to the door and told me to case on to supper, I told her if I wasn't good enough to ride in their car, I wasn't good enough to eat their food. The old can walked in and he gave me a shove and I fell on the bed, He says, "That’s my car, and you're not good enough -to ride in it," So I got me a couple o' dresses and went right back to the lady's house.
The next day Walter come and wanted to know if I was comin’ back, I told him I'd never go back as long as he was with his people, He says, "Well, I think I got some work now, and if you want to go back to New Orleans when I git paid, I’II send you back," They was four brothers --- he was the oldest, and the only one that had ever stuck at home, He acted as though he was afraid to get out and try to live for hisself. His father was a brick mason, and he got walter on this job as a brick mason. He made about four days' work. This lady and I went on the job where he was workin’, and I ask him what he was goin' to do. He says, "When I git paid, I'll give you the money to go back to New Orleans.” I says, "Walter, we was so happy before we went to stay with your people. Why not take that money that you want to send me to New Orleans with, and move to ourselves and try it again?" And he says, "Well, when this money's gone, and I haven't got any work, you know what you'll have to do." I said, "What is it?" He says, "Go back with my people." I told him then that I'd go back to New Orleans.
In West Palm Beach all the houses were rented furnished, to tourists, and rents were very high. When Walter got paid, we found a darlin' little stucoo house, three rooms --- bedroom, parlor, kitchen and bath---all furnished----gas stove and all --- twelve dollars a month. Walter's people was from the North, and their cookin’ was much different from mine, and he liked my New Orleans style of cookin’. He come home the first evenin' … I had string beans with new potatoes, and ham, and had baked him a cake. He said he didn't know when he'd enjoyed a meal so much or been so happy. And he got a job right away — the other job had run out. This couple that was so friendly with his mother moved right on the next street from us. His mother would go there most every day, and didn't even look toward our house. One day Walter was sittin' in the front room readin', and I saw her on her way to this couple's house. I said, "Look, Walter --- there goes your mother over there." And he looked, and seen that she never looked in our direction. He said, "I never thought my own mother would do me that:"
We got along all right, and he always got work, and we never had to go back to their house. He had a job as truck driver, and he used to meet a truck at Clewiston, Florida, and he got well acquainted with the driver from Tampa. This driver had told his boss about what a good driver Walter was; so they sent my husband a telegram to come over there and go to work. It was more money. He went over there and went to work, and then sent for me. We lived in Tampa about six months.
Walter had to pay his own helper, and he was eighteen or twenty hours on the road. He fell asleep and run in the ditch one night. Some butter and meat spoiled on him before he got out, and they charged him up thirty-five dollars - took it out, five dollars a -week. I got to writin’ to the lady in Jacksonville again (the one I went to Florida with), and she wanted me to come over and pay her a visit. We had got us a second-hand car, and Walter drove me over there; and then he left Sunday evenin', to be back to work for Monday mornin' I got a letter from him every-other day - how much he missed me and how tired he was of eatin' in restaurants and out of tin cans. Well, this woman she tricked me again She had plenty to eat there the day I got there. After that---well, I had to buy the eats, and Walter had to wire me money on Saturday so we could have somethin' to eat. She had wrote me about comin' to see her new husband He was flat in the bed with rheumatism - couldn't walk. And that was the private policemen that had let me sleep with the centipedes.
Walter was writin’ me about the Company takin' out the five dollars a week, and how disgusted he was with the job - and he found out that the insurance company had paid for the loss, and the Company was gittin’ it double — and that he felt like quittin' and comin' over there, and didn't I think he*d be able to find somethin' to do?... I told him to suit hisself about quittin.’ but I thought he'd be able to find somethin' to do.So he came -got in Sunday mornin’ about seven o'clock. This woman had a three-room apartment. She opened the door, and had to come through her room first, and she says, "I'll wake her up" (meaning me). He says, “No ---let me wake her up." When I woke up, he was. sittin' on the bed kissin’ me, We had a nice dinner, and we went for a ride after dinner, and he met his boss that he had drove for in West Palm Beach His boss was glad to see him, and told him he had put a line through from Jacksonville to Miami. Walter ask him could he give him a job? He says, "Come to the warehouse this evenin' ---I might be able to give you an extra trip,"
Walter went that evenin’, and he came back and told me that he had to take a truck out for Miami that night. I was angry, because I hadn't seen him for three weeks. He said, "You ought to be tickled. I’II maybe git a steady job." And he did. We got along all right for about a year. He had never sown many wild oats before I met him, and he start meetin’ girls --- I guess waitresses from restaurants He was givin' me ten dollars a week to run the house (we was by ourselves now) and buy hatever clothes I had to have. He started throwin' money away. There was a time when he never touched me for three weeks. I ask him if he was goin’ with someone else, but he wouldn't admit it. He had a helper on the truck, and they each got the same ---twenty-five dollars a week.
They took Walter off the Miami run and he was workin' on the pick-up truck in town. I met the helper once, and his wife; and I didn't like 'em from the beginnin' Walter starts stayin' out late at night. He rang me up one night, and ask me if I eat supper yet. I told him No, I was waitin' for him. He said, "Go ahead and eat --- I got two more trucks and a trailer to load." I said, "I'm goin' to wait." About a hour later he rang up again and ask me if I ate, and I told him No. "Well, you damn fool, eat!” he says, "I got another truck to load." I sat up. Eleven o'clock came. Twelve o'clock came. I was sittin' up to see if his helper brought him home. At one o'clock, instead of his helper bringin' him, home, he drove the helper's car in the yard. He'd been throwin' so much money away that he hadn't got a license for our car. I guess the helper let Walter take the car to take Walter's lady friend home in. This was a big roomin'-house where we lived; and there was two men roomin' there that was very interested in me. But I wouldn't give 'em a tumble…I was madly in love with my husband. One was a barber, and the other was a iron worker. The iron worker had told me any time I had a divorce I could sure git married agin.
Our apartment was on the third floor, and I flew down the back steps that was on the outside of the house. He was just comin’ around the corner to come in at the front. I told him to git in that car and go back and spend the rest of the night. He says, "If you start raisin’ hell with me, I'm not comin' in." I said, "That's what I'm tellin’ you not to do!" He come on in, anyway. I ask him what was at their house to keep him there with another man and his wife until one o'clock in the mornin’. The trucks got their gasoline a half a block from our house, and I saw them when they left about ton o'clock that night. And that's how I knew he wasn't workin' that night.
I said, "You didn't think enough to come home and eat with me. How you're hore, and I'm goin'!" I start packin' my suitcase. I had a wrist watch he gave me the first Christmas we were married. He was sittin' at the table in the middle of the room. I took the watch and the change I had and laid it on the table by him. I says, "Here's your watch and the money -- I don't want anything that belongs to you!" And I went on past him. He says, "You better get your sheets and pillow-slips -- when you go out of hero, I'm goin', and the landlady will git everything that's left in here." I said, "I don't want anything that belongs to you!" When he'd get mad his face would git red and his eyes would almost close -- and I could see that he was gittin' madder and madder. I got the suitcase packed, and got on it with my knees to try to close it. He says, "Do you want me to close that for you?" I said, "I don't want you to do nothin' for me!" I got it closed, and put on the dress I'd left out.
He jumped up and throw the watch and the change against the other side of the wall, and ho went and looked the door and throw the key across the room. Then he picked up the suitcase and he says, "Here's your suitcase!" He tore it open and tore it to pieces -- scattered my clothes all over the room, and his eyes was just like a piece o' glass. We had a big four-burner oil stove with a back on it. He went and stood with his back to it, and had his hands clenched on the stove. And he was starin' at me, and he slung that stove out into the middle of the room, oil and all -- about two o'clock in the mornin' -- and I couldn't git out, and nobody interfered, He run to the kitchen safe and grabbed the butcher knife and he run at me with it. He was tremblin', and he told me he was goin’ to kill me and I believed him. I fell on my knees and begged and pleaded, and he was tremblin' and comin’ closer to me all the time. I was pleadin’ so much, his hand just went limp and the knife fell on the floor.
He went and sat on the bed and put his head down in his hands -- O Lord -- and I went and sat by him. I ask him why he wanted to treat me that way. I said, "You know I love you!" He says, "You don't deserve to be treated like I'm treatin’ you -- I'm goin' off and kill myself." He had a dirk that he kept in the dresser drawer. He got that and started out. I pleaded with him, and begged him to come on and go to bed. And he came and helped me pick up the clothes off the floor and picked up the pieces of the suitcase. I didn't have any wood or coal, and it was chilly. He put the pieces of the suitcase in the fireplace and lit 'em, and took me on his lap, and he says, "It makes pretty good fire-wood, don't it?" And that's what he did me when I wanted to leave him.
Well, we got along all right for a good while after that. One day him and his helper got laid off, and he come home and wanted us to pack up and go to California with them. I told him that I didn't know these people, and that they probably had friends there; and when we got over there, they'd maybe leave us stranded. I said, "If I'm goin' anywhere, I'm goin' to go to New Orleans where I know people." Well, he was mad because he couldn't persuade me and he says, "Pack your trunk -- you're goin' to New Orleans!" I said, "We don't necessarily have to go anywhere." He says, "Pack! You're goin' to New Orleans!" So I started packin’. While I was packin', someone knocked on the door. He went to the door, and the boss had sent for him. They laid 'em both off -- to git rid of the helper. They found out he'd been doin' some stealin'. My hunch about them people was right in the beginnin'.
We lost a gun there in the house -- somebody went into our apartment with a pass key. Walter told me to git out and find us another place. At one time he wanted me to take an apartment next to the helper and his wife. I knew that they had left town now, so I said, "Why not take the helper's apartment?" He said he didn't want to move there. I ask him why -- he said he jist didn't want to move there. This was only about two blocks from where he worked, and it would have been handy for him.
While I was out lookin' around that day, I passed where they had lived. There was a sign, "Apartment for Rent." I rang the bell. The landlady come out, and I ask her if she had an apartment. She said Yes, and we started upstairs. I said, "I guess you know my husband." She asked me what his name was, and I told her. She said. No, she didn't know him. I say, "Well, he used to come here to visit the Henrys." She stopped on the steps. She says, "Do you associate with them people?" I said, "No, but my husband did," She said She didn't want anyone in her house that associated with 'em, and she asked no if my husband was a blond, heavy-set fellow. I told her Yes. She said that one night they was makin' so much noise at twelve o'clock that she wanted to ring up the police, but her husband told her to go tell 'em jest to quiet down and that there was a big fat blonde sittin' on Walter's lap. The landlady says, "Don't mention this to your husband. Get him to move in, and I'll face him with it." She said there was a reward out for the Henrys. His wife worked for a lawyer, and had stole some money and a diamond ring; and he had stole sane drums of oil, and they went away with a stolen license on their car. That's the kind of people Walter wanted to go to California with!
I left there sick, and I walked over two blocks to where he was workin'. He came out, and - told him I'd been lookin' round most all day and couldn't find anything; and that the Henrys' apartment was still vacant, and ask him agin if he wanted to move there. He said No, and I ask him why. He said he'd rather get a little house. "You never told me to hunt a house --- you told no to hunt a apartment, "I said, "and I know why." And he asked me why. I said, "I'd have liked to caught that big fat blonde on your lap," I told him I wouldn't be home when he got home that evenin'. He walked a block with me, with his arm around my waist, and made me promise him I'd be at home. I had supper ready when he came. I ask him why he did those things. He said it would hang over his head the rest of his life, and that he'd never do it again.
We got along pretty good for a while after that. And then he start givin' me less money, and didn't want no to keep my hair waved. They had put him on the road again, from Jacksonville to Miami; and was puttin' off to give me the rent. The landlady never did say anything to him; but after he left, she asked me if he had left the rent with me. He says in his sleep one night, "I've got to take care of that poor kid in Jacksonville." That meant me. I looked in his pocket book to see how ranch money he had -- the first time I'd ever done that. He had twenty-four dollars. When he got up I ask him if he was goin' to pay the rent. He A said No, he'd pay it when he come back. I said, "Well, why don't you pay it now? You've got the money." And I says, "If you don't love me any more, you don't have to feel sorry for me or take care of me." And I told him, "There's a man right here in this house that would marry me if I had a divorce!" I told him what he had said in his sleep, and he laughed. I follered him down to the car, beggin' him for the money to pay the rent. He handed me a five-dollar bill, and said, "I guess you're satisfied that you've got that out of me." The rent was three dollars a week.
He came home to dinner, and I made him give mo two dollars more to get my hair waved. He never wanted me to fix up or to look nice. I seen that he didn't love me any more, and I set in to git what I could. If found out later on about a couple more girls that he had. And he told me, he says, "Yes, I've got girls -- I've got two or three. But as long as you stay with me I'll take care of you." And he said that one of 'em was in the family way, and she claimed it was him, and that he was tryin' to git rid of her. If he brought me the baby, would I raise it? He said that he never told her he was married till she told him she was pregnant; and that he was afraid she was goin' to try to make some trouble for him. I told him No, that I wouldn't raise it -- I'd kill it.
He was braggin' to me one night about one of the women --- how crazy she was about him. They put on a relay to Miami, so now he only went half-way. This woman got on the bus and rode to the town half-way from Miami, and asked if Walter was registered there at the hotel (he laid over there eight hours for sleep). The clerk told her Yes, and she said she was Walter's wife. He gave her the number of the room, and she went up. She couldn't wake him up, and she went down and told the clerk she had to see him. The clerk told her he would go up and break the look if she could assure him her husband would pay for it, (The nerve of him, to tell me all that) She said that he would. The clerk broke the look, and she went in and sat on the bed, and wake him up kissin' him.
He was tellin' me all this while he was sittin' in a chair and I was layin' in bed. I laid there and didn't say anything -- I must have had a terrible look in my eye. And I says, "Why don't you go to bed?" He says, "I'm afraid you might cut my throat." I says, "No, you're not worth it!" 'Well, in the meantime, Walter had start work with another Company. His father was out of work, and they was down and out and writin' to us for help. I'd put a couple o' dollars in a letter when he didn't want to send it. They ms on Relief, and she couldn't eat the grits and the peas. I'd send her money when Walter didn't want to; and I wrote and told her how hard he was gettin' to please since he was eatin' in the restaurants so much, and he didn't want string boans and ham any more. She wrote back and said he'd better be glad he had it --- that she wouldn't mind having some right then. Then the old man start writin', instead of her --- that she was in the hospital, and the doctor said it was from under-nourishment and nervous breakdown. I continued to send them a dollar, two dollars, three dollars, when I could, every week. Then the old man wrote and told me she was out of the hospital, but she was in a rollin' chair -- that she couldn't walk.
Well, Walter started talkin' about gittin' transferred to Atlanta-to-Birmingham. He said ho'd have a longer run and make more money. I told him he'd be away from home more, and it would cost him more to live on the road. He suggested that I go ever to West Palm Beach and stay with his mother and father, and ho would send 'em money over there. I told him my place was with him., and not with them and that when we were down, we had to go to them; and now they was down, find I didn't like West Palm Beach --- for them to came and stay with me. And they didn't want to do that.
Well, he got transferred. We was gettin' along good at the time. But I had a feelin' that when he and, it was the end. We went to the show on Sunday night, and stopped in a drugstore and got some ice cream to take home. On the way home I asked him could I go with him tomorrow. He said No, that he might not like it; and that if he didn't, he was comin' back. We went home, and I went in the kitchen to get some saucers for the ice cream. While I was gittin' them saucers, I start singin' "Careless Love." I don't know why it come into my head. When I come out of the kitchen he was sittin' in a study. We ate the ice cream and went to bed. He went to work the next mornin', and I washed up what little dirty clothes he had and ironed 'em, and packed his suitcase.
I don't believe he was intendin' to leave me, He said, "I wonder if I should take all my clothes." I told him it would be 1ess for me to carry when I went over to Atlanta, and to take 'em all. He care home to supper, and he made me go to the bathroom with him to clean up and shave. He had a seven dollars comin' in Jacksonville, and he gave me five dollars; and ho said he'd be able to draw when he got to Atlanta, I went down to the car with him, and put the grips in the car. And he put both arms around me and says, "Brace up, kid --- everything's going to be all right!" When he got in the car I went around to the other side, to the steering-wheel, and he had tears in his eyes, He says, "I don't want to go!" So I tried to cheer him up, and I says, "Oh, you may like it!" I am sure he meant it, and that he was afraid of the woman who was to become a mother I believe that when he went to Atlanta, she joined him; or else he left me because his father and mother needed help and I wouldn't go to there. So he gave no up to give them what he had to give me.
Then he went. He wrote me a couple times a week, and sent me money for eight weeks. Out of that I'd send his mother a dollar or two a week. The letters was much different than ho used to write me before, and he never said anything about me comin' over to Atlanta. He wrote and told me about losin' his underwear in a laundry. I'd learned to make fudge. And I made some fudge and went and got him some underwear, and sent him the candy and the underwear. He never montioned it in his letter -- whether he got it, or if the underwear fit him or if the candy was good. The next letter I wrote I ask him if the underwear fit him and if he ate the candy, or was he afraid it was poisoned. He wrote and told me that the underwear fit, and that the candy was good. Then the last letter I got, with money, was six dollars.
I was lonesome and I was worried, and it was a short letter. When X sat down and wrote him a letter on Sunday afternoon, I told him it was plain for me to see that he didn't love me any more; and that If I carried out my plans, when he received that letter I'd be dead. I went to the drug-store and got a bottle of chloride mercury tablets. I once knew a girl here that took two, and they killed her. I decided then, by her coffin, that I knew what to take if I ever got ready to end my life. I got a box of aspirins; and then I went to another drug-store and told them I couldn't sleep at night, and I wanted somethin' to make me sleep. He gave me a small bottle of medicine. I went home and I dissolved about six aspirins in this here medicine that was supposed to make you sleep. Then I took two of the chloride mercury tablets out of the bottle.
Whenever I take a pill I have to take a piece of bread to make it go down. I wanted to die, but I was afraid --- I wanted to go to sleep and not know anything about it. I took one tablet, and a piece of broad to make it go down; I took a swallow of the sleepin' medicine; then I took the other tablet, and I drank the rest of the medicine. I took the letter and went downstairs, and my landlady and her husband was sittin' on the front porch. I asked her if she would mind for her husband to step to the corner and mail the letter for me. And he did. I sat there...my throat was startin' to burn, and my stomach was startin' to burn, and shivers started to pass over me, and I was frightened. I sat there and I didn't say anything. She says, "Are you lonesome?" I shook my head. She asked me was I sick, and I shook my head. I got up and started to go in, and this medicine all started to comin' up. I leaned over the edge of the porch, and it was burnin' me and I start screamin'. She asked me what was the matter ... and I told her I took poison.
She rang up the ambulance, and they came and rushed me to the hospital. The nigger says to the ambulance driver, "You sure got here quick!" And they rolled me in. It didn't seem quick to me --- I was throwing up all the time. They rolled an up to a big sink, and my head was hangin' off, throwin' up in the sink. The nigger said to the nurse, "This lady sure done took herseff sumpin’!" It all green and brown and white. The nurse says, "It's a pity she didn't know what to take." They don't waste no pity on suicide cases. The doctor come and he says, “How, if you can drink water, I won't have to pump you out." But I couldn't swallow --- it was still comin’ up. He was trying to put the hose down my throat, and I was hollerin', "O God! I'll never do this any more!" lie says, "If you don't let me git this hose down in your stomach, you won't have a chance to do nothin' no more!" They kept me in the hospital about a week. My mouth was all burnt. I still can't eat eggs. All I could do was just drink milk and eat ice cream. Then I went home, and some of my neighbors come and see that I had something to eat and milk to drink. My mouth was still raw. No word from Walter yet.
I told my landlady that if I had a ticket, I had friends in New Orleans that I could go to. She tried the Salvation Army and different societies to get me a ticket; and they tried, and they couldn't do it. Then she rang up the mayor, and explained my case to him he said to send tin little lady right dorm. I went. I didn't even see the mayor. His secretary took a paper out of the drawer, and a ten-dollar bill; and she asked me would I rather go on a train or bus. I told her it didn't make any difference to me --- that I was glad to git any ticket, She said she thought I could see much more ridin' on the bus, and that it was cheaper. She says to present that paper to the ticket agent at the bus station, and it would entitle me to a half-rate ticket. It was eight dollars --- and there was two dollars for me to eat on till I got to New Orleans, I thanked her very much, and went home and packed up, and left the next day.
I went to a woman friend’s house that I had been correspondin’ with ever since I left New Orleans. When I get off from the bus and start walkin' towards the River (it was at night), the streets looked so dark, and the big brick buildings looked so spooky ... and I didn't know if I was goin’ to find her livin’ in the same place. I had a heavy lump in my heart till I reached the house. I'd spent about seventy-cents of the two dollars on my way; and I knew if I didn't find her I'd only have money for a room for one night.
But I found the house and she was there. About five minutes after I got there, Johnny's brother, the bar tender, rang the bell. She looked to see who was comin’; and she seen it was him, and she told me to hide. I hid, and ho come in the kitchen and said, "Where is she at?" She says, "Where's who?" He said, "Lois," She says, "In Jacksonville, I guess," He says, "No -- somebody seen her with a little red box under her arm. And there's the box on the table," So we sat up till about ten o'clock, and I was tired out and went to bed. The next day I went to the bus station and got my suitcase. I wrote my husband a letter and told him I wasn't dead, as he probably hoped, and that I was glad to find out how much he thought about me, He wrote back and said that when my letter arrived in Atlanta, he was in Birmingham, and that he didn't think -very much of what I did; and that he was out of a job; and that when he got a job he'd either send me some money or send for me.
Johnny’s brother didn't have any more bar-room --- he was down and out. This lady was very strict and wouldn't allow me to have any company. He want and borrowed fifteen dollars from Johnny, and got me a couple of rooms and start me off. I had to start the same old thing again, to earn my livin'. I wrote and told Walter that I had told him about my past life, and told him now who I was with; but that I didn't love this one and was waitin' for him to send for me. After that I didn't receive any more letters from him.
Then I got hold of an old friend of mine that had quite a lot of money, and he fixed me up better than I was. It went on like that for about two years --- different men friends; and the old man helped me, too. Most anything I wanted, he'd buy for me; and said if I'd stick with him a while, he’d put money in a homestead for me. He was old enough to be my father, and I didn't love him, and I just couldn't stick with him. I had three golden opportunities like that with old men --- they’d have left me a home when they died. But I couldn't stay with no one I didn't care for.
Then two years later I met a boy eight years younger than myself. He was workin’ with a friend of mine. This friend come to rent a room from me, and this boy was to stay with him. I’ll call the boy Charley. The friend wanted to get in with me hisself. He was in his thirties, and Charley was eighteen and very handsome. This friend told me not to have anything to do with Charley, because it was his friend. My friend was goin’ out with a decent girl, and he wanted to break away from, her gradually. He wanted me to cook every day for him; and then he would dress up in the evenin' and go to see this girl. But Charley would stay in and read and play the radio, and find excuses to come in and talk to me.
I got sick with indigestion one night, and there was no one there but him and I. He fixed me a big dose of salts, and sat on the bed and talked to me a while. We heard my friend comin’ up the steps, and he rushed in the other room, My friend left one evenin' to put some shirts in the laundry, and Charley and I was sittin’ on a settee in their room. He heard my friend comin’, but not in time to get out of the position we was in --- he had his arm around my shoulder. My friend said he know it, and that he was goin' out and got drunk, I told Charley that I’d have to go after him, just for friendship's sake. He was drinkin’ beer, and he threw the glass on the floor and broke it. I got him to come home. Charley had gone to bed, and he tried to rum Charley in my room --- he said, “You don't belong hero any more!” I told Charley the next day that if my friend told him that again that night, to come on in. He was kind of bashful --- but he did come into my room.
We started stayin' together. Then my friend went out and found him a lady friend to stay with him. Their work ran out; my friend was a painter, and he would get jobs for hisself, They couldn't get any more jobs, so they went to work for a Jow, Charley was not a painter, so they gave him a job of drivin’ the car every day, and gave him three dollars a week. He kept tellin’ me, "I know I'll find somethin’ to do --- I’ll get some work." And I had to continue to go with the men friends I had --- we couldn’t live on three dollars a week. He'd say terrible things to me after someone would leave. I cared quite a bit for him; and I told him I was goin’ to quit If I lost my radio and got thrown in the street. And then he did get some work --- two-seventy a day, and he was pretty good to me.
His brothers found out he had a girl, and they came to see me. The whole family was pretty poor and on Relief, and I was better fixed for a house than they were. His mother and his sisters come to see me, and they seemed to like me a great deal in the beginnin'. He would get little crazy notions, and go out and drink and leave me by myself; and he'd pack up his clothes and leave, and I'd beg him not to go. If he was workin’, it was all right; but if he wasn't workin', his mother didn't want him. Sometimes he'd stay away two or three days, and then he'd be back --- sometimes a week. When his mother'd see him comin' with his bundle, she'd get to where she'd laugh. We was together about a year and three months.
Billy come into my life again during the first year I was with Charley. One day a little girl who live in the same house as I, came upstairs and told me that a drunk man gave her a nickel to come tell me he wanted to see me. I went to see who it was, and it was Billy… dirty, ragged, unshaven. He frightened me. He said his wife had divorced him and re-married, and that he was free to come to me. I told him that I was with someone else, and asked him to straighten hisself up. He said that he would if I helped him. I told him that I couldn't, as I now cared for someone else. Then I left him, and went upstairs. One day he got the nerve to come up. There was two entrances to this house, as it took in a block. He came the back entrance. I saw him. through the glass at the kitchen door. I went to the door quick and looked it. Charley was home, and wanted to go out and run him away; but I wouldn't let him, as Billy was much more powerful than Charley, and Charley was younger and had never been in any trouble. So Billy stayed at the kitchen door, begging me to take him back. He said he would go to church or do anything I asked him to do, if I would help him. He was full of that stuff he was drinkin', and didn't know what a fool he was makin' of hisself. This stuff he was drinkin', I found out from a old friend of his, was what is used to remove paint, known here as derail. I was drinkin’ a cup of coffee, and he was wringin’ his hands and sayin', "For God's sake, don't do that!" I said, "Don't do what?" He said, "What's that you're drinkin'?" He knew I had took poison over him when I first knew him. I laughed at him and told him it was coffee. I was drinkin’. He said, "Oh, I thought it was poison!" Then he left, but still hung around the block I lived in. Two or three times I had to call someone to make him turn me loose, on the street. He grabbed me and told me I was not goin' anywhere unless he went with me. Then I didn't see him any more.
There was a young girl … Charley had met her through her brother, and she liked him. I don't know where he met her and talked with her. But he came home and he had been drinkin', and he told me he was leavin' me --- that he was goin’ to get married, I ask him why he made me give up all my friends; for I knew he was much younger than me and would fall in love with some young girl. He'd chased the man from the houseboat away with a blackjack. Well, Charley left, and start keepin' company with this girl. He was away about a month, and then he start comin’ around.
When he start goin’ out with her, he went to stay with his aunt. When his work run out, his aunt didn't want him around. So I guess he was missin' a few meals; and if I was eatin' when he came around, I'd offer him somethin’. He was wearin’ his girl's ring on his finger, and come around one night and wanted to borrow a dollar. Said he wanted to buy ten cans of Prince Albert. I told him if he needed tobacco, I'd get him a package; but if he thought I was goin' to give him any money to take her to a shew or a dance, he was crazy. I says, "If you're goin’ out with her, keep away from me. And if you're comin’ back to me, you'll have to stay away from her." He continued to come back and forth --- to her house and to see me.
He came one day, and I had met one of my friends off of a ship, who took me to town in a taxi to buy me a dress to take me out in that night. While we were in the house, Charley come. I didn't have the man in my room; I had him in the next room. I told Charley I had company in the next room, and that we was goin' out that night. We went to a beer parlor, my friend and me, and danced. And Charley was there and lookin’ on.
I still liked Charley, and this ship man was pretty drunk when we went home. I took him in the next room, and he went right to sleep. I let Charley in my room, and I told him I wanted to go git me a sandwich, He said, "You want to go get another beer!" --- the beer parlor was just a couple doors away. I did – I went and got a beer, I wanted to treat him like he had treated me. He came right down after me, and took me back upstairs.I told him he had another girl's ring on his finger; and that he didn't have any right to deprive me of my freedom; and that I was goin' to git me a sandwich. I went out, and he threw the ring out the window on the porch.
Then I went out again to get the sandwich, and went farther up the street to another beer parlor. I ordered me a beer, and someone asked me to dance. I danced, and then I started over to drink my beer … and Charley walked in and took me by the arm and led me out. Outside we met his girl's father, and he says, "That's the way you do, huh?" Her father had come to my house several times, when I didn't even know he was a married man. And Charley says, "Yeah, that's the way I do!" So I started to get on her father, and he crossed the street and left us.
The next mornin’ she come, with her sister and another girl, and knocked on the gate downstairs. I slipped on a dress --- a beautiful long black silk dress --- and went on the porch to see who was downstairs. She stepped out in the street, and I says, "What do you want?" She says, “I want to see Charley." I told her that he didn't want to see her. She said he was yellow --- he was afraid to come out. And she said she wanted her ring --- and I looked where he had threw it on the porch, and I picked it up. And I said, "You see where your ring was?" And I threw it at her. And she cursed me. I told her, I said, "I thought you was a decent girl." And she left.He got a job with the WPA, and I was supposed to be his wife.He stayed with me nine months after that. She sent him a note one day, and he read it and told me it was from her. Then he wadded it up and threw it on the floor.
I don't know when he start seein’ her again, but he told me he was gettin’ married. I didn’t believe him --- had told me that before. He picked a argument with me one Friday mornin'; and he packed hisclothes --- he had just got a new suit --- and he left. Every day I kept lookin’ for him to come back. He was gone a week and wasn't back yet. Then his sister come to seeme, and told me that he was married. It hurt me a lot --- and I had one dollar left. I started goin’ out to beer parlors to forgot, and to start makin' my livin’ again. Then, after Charley was married, Billy come in the beer parlor whore I worked.He was straighten up again and looked nice.He said he was workin’, and wanted me to go home with him.He seemed awful glad to see me. But the great love I had for him when I was a girl of eighteen had vanished, and I had no desire to be with him or near him. So I slipped out and left him in the beer parlor. I have never seen him since. I start makin' lots of friends, and start goin' to see the man on the houseboat, and he was he'pin’ me out.
Three months after Charlev's marriage, I went in a restaurant to drink a cup o' coffee. The waiter said, "Sure," and he brought me a cup o’coffee. I'll call him Fred. I start makin' inquiries to people that I knew ate there, and they told me he was from Florida. I said, "Well, maybe he knows my husband.” This party I was askin', told Fred; and he come to the beer parler where I was workin' and asked me what part of Florida Icome from.We talked a while, and he asked me if I’d come up to his room. I told him that I probably would, later on that night.He left. I'd pictured him to be a high-hat guy, and maybe after that night he wouldn't look at me the next day.
I drank a few more beers, and I went. He treated me very nice. There was be a decent girl next door that seemed to be interested in him; and he talked quite a bit with her, out on the corner. He either came to see me or I went to see him, most every day. He was liberal with his money. Sometimes he'd bring up an ice-cold watermelon, and we'd eat it. Then one night I was supposed to meet the man from the houseboat at the beer parlor. Fred and I went to the beer parlor; and when the man from the houseboat come, I ask Fred to excuse me, that the man wouldn't be there very long. I went and talked with him, and drank some beer with him. Fred had gave me seven dollars to keep for him.Now Fred got some girl to dance with him, and then he come over and says, "Give me some money." I said, “You asked me to keep this money for you, and not to give it to you to buy some other woman drinks." He says, "Give me a dollar --- I'm in debt to the bar-tender." I gave him a dollar, and he went and paid the bar-tender. He came and slammed down eighty cents change on the bar for me, and went out. The man from the houseboat left.
I went up to Fred's room to get him, and I start stumblin’ over things. I couldn't find the light --- he'd broke it. I struck some matches, and everything in the room was busted up.He was in the bed asleep. I shook him, and ask him what in the world he had done. I said, "You'll sure lose your job now!" He says, "You've got my money and I guess you're satisfied.Now go on and leave me alone!" I slapped him in the face. I says, "You asked me to keep your money for you, didn't you? Come on and let's go home." So he got up and went with me. The next day he went to work.
I was goin’ to see the man on the houseboat that Sunday, and Fred says, "You better leave the key, in case I get fired." I came home on Monday, and he was there. And he told me he was goin’ to look around for work; and that if he couldn't find any, he'd have to go away. I started to cry, and I told him I didn't want him to go away.His eyes kind o’ filled up, too, and he told me that I was startin' to mean a lot to him, too. So I continued to go out, and he was lookin’ for work. I had quite a few friends at that time. And about a month, he hadn't found anything to do yet, and I was beginnin' to think that he didn't want any work … and it was quite an expense to me. I thought a lot of him and I didn't want him to go, but I thought that was probably his way of gittin' by. It got on my nerves so much that I got pretty full of beer, and said all kind of terrible things to him ••• and I run him out.
He went away from town lookin’ for work, and wrote to meevery-other day --- pitiful letters --- how unfair life was. He'd see somany happy couples walkin' up the street, and that due to this Depression he was deprived of his happiness, and for me not to believe the worst about him. He would write me about his cold rides on the freight trains --- and I still thought he was jist writin' all that to git back. He was gone about three months.
He come back about three o'clock one mornin', cold and hungry. I had someone in the room with me. There was an old man roomin' there with me,that let him in and took him in his room. This man made a fire and made coffee for him, and told him I had someone in the room with me. I woke up about five o'clock that mornin’, and I heard him talkin'. I looked through a crack and I seen it was him; and I got this man out of my room, and then I went in where Fred was. He came on in my room with me, and told me how much he had missed me, and wanted to know who I had in there. We tried agin, and for about a month and a half he tried to find work. I was gittin' aggavated with him agin, and I told him he'd have to go. He cried, and he told me that if I never had the love of a man before, that I could say I had it from one man. He said he wasn't cryin’ because he had to git out and hunt his meals --- that it jist hurt him so much to leave me. And I loved him ... but I had been fooled so many times ... and he was much handsomer than the others. But I jest couldn't place any confidence in him. I wanted him there with me; and I wanted to save a little money, and he deprived me of the few luxuries that I could have if he wasn't there. I hardened my heart ... and sent him away again.
I'd receive letters from him all the time, and I'd long for him. But I didn't think there was any hopes, because I knew I couldn't continue to support him. In 1936 I received a letter, that he had gone back to the life of a sailor; and that he'd be in New Orleans in a couple o' days and wanted to see me. He did come, and he told me what his wages was, and made plans if I wanted to settle down, what he would do for me. So I did.
Whenever he is away, he always sends me some money --- and he has made me feel little and cheap many times, he is so liberal. Anything I want, that he can give me, he tries to give it to me. And that's why it makes me feel little, when I think how I treated him.When he's home, if I'm sick or anything, he waits on me like I was a baby. And I often tell him how it hurts, when I think about how I treated him. But I'd been fooled so much ....
He says he understands the circumstances ---- that I was alone and under a strain, and so many of 'em had fooled me. Well, I've settled down and I'm happy again --- but I don't know for how long. Sometimes now Fred wants to go to the another city, where we wouldn't meet men on the street all the time that I've been with. It makes him feel queer, and we want to get away from that. I had a little dog once --- a little dog that had ears standin' up straight,and with a lot of sense. She liked to be with me so much that twice she jumped off of the gallery --- second floor. Once she broke her leg; and when that healed, she jumped off after me agin. I loved her. And I used to say to her, "Queenie, if I could ever git a man as crazy over me as you are, I'd be fixed for life." But she's dead now. Love is a funny thing, and I've always wanted a home more than anything else in the world --- a home, and to be like other people … nice people … I don't think I could go through with another heart-break…..
