530 Runion Avenue
Knoxville, Tennessee
October 28, 1938
D. N. [Dean Newman]
FOR THOSE WHO LOVE
"My grandfather often said that God would always provide a way for those who love Him and obey His commandments. God certainly has been good to me. He never failed to send me friends to help me when my need was greatest.
"I don't know what would have happened to my rooming house when I was in the hospital if He hadn't provided. About three years ago I was crossing the street here in Knoxville. It was on a dark, rainy night. I didn't even see the auto when it cut out of the line of traffic. I guess I was lucky not to have been killed. I was knocked senseless. The doctors found my right knee cap and right wrist were broken when they got me to the hospital. I was past sixty. They told me it was going to be a long time before the bones would knit.
"I had no money ahead. No accident insurance. I didn't mind being in the charity ward, but I was worried to death about my roomers. Being men, I just knew they couldn't put up with things very long. The last one of them came out to the General Hospital to see me. Said they could carry on -- fire the furnace, and make up their own beds until I'd see my way to making some kind of arrangements.
"The very next day God's loving care provided my arrangements. An old friend of mine -- I'd known her since she was eighteen years old -- read about my accident in the newspaper. She and her, husband came out to see me. They told me they had been looking for a comfortable furnished apartment where they could spend the winter. My accident just fitted into their circumstances. I turned over my room and kitchen to them rent free. They were to take care of the house and the roomers, collect the rent, pay hills. They did well. And they hadn't had twenty-five years experience in the rooming business like I had, either.
"I started in the rooming house business after my husband died. I took the five hundred dollars left over from funeral expenses and set myself up. I rented a big house not far from the L. & N. railroad station. It had plenty of rooms. I knew how to furnish them cheap. Make them comfortable. My boy and girl had both finished high school when my husband died. They were a big help to me at first. Wasn't long before Wilfrey got a job that took him out of Knoxville. Susan helped me out for a while with the roomers, but she married before she'd scarcely turned sixteen. She has two children of her own now. I never was one to think it was my children's business to look out for me. I've managed to make enough out of the rooming business not to starve.
"It's not an easy business. When the depression hit Knoxville I had it hard like other folks even to get by. But at times since then, I've picked up a little extra on to the side to make ends meet. When times were good -- like in the war and for a few years after -- I just cleaned up in that first house down by the L. & N. I'd clear a hundred dollars any month. Railroad men and transients are good pay. The railroad men who stayed regular with me on this end of their run were always bringing in some passenger with them. They pumped up my place all the time. I next to ran a hotel for years. I'd charge transients a dollar a night for room and bed. Mine were comfortable and clean as any hotel's. I made enough then to have a Negro woman to help me with the cleaning.
"Things were going good for me when the landlord up and sold the corner for a filling station. That meant me finding some place else for my business. This house here's what I found. Never has been the stand my first one was. But it's near enough the station to get railroad trade. I wouldn't ask for better. Good railroad men aren't like that bunch of boys I've got upstairs now -- coming home half the time lit -- losing their jobs -- putting off paying me. Just one thing after another.
"After I had to move, it seemed like I started on the down-road with the rest of the world. Railroads kept cutting off freight and passenger trains. Men that'd had good jobs for years -- conductors, engineers -- were laid off. My rooms got vacant and stayed vacant. Long about the time when President Roosevelt was elected and the depression was going strong, I had dropped down just to one regular roomer, Mr. Watson, a flagman on the L. & N. He sure stuck by me. I couldn't meet my rent half the time but I near about lived for a year off the fifteen dollars a month he paid me for room rent. He is a true gentleman and the best friend I ever had. I never have paid him back all the money he loaned me little at a time to piece out that year. He's still with me. That front bedroom there, the best room in the house, is Mr. Watson's and Mr. Sim's. Mr. Sim's a conductor on a passenger and his and Mr. Watson's runs end so as to make one hit here one night and the other one on the next. Mr. Watson's been here ten years. Mr. Sim's been here seven. And the two of them have yet to spend a night together in that front bedroom.
"Way things are now when this house is full up of regular roomers I get in about ninety-two dollars. By the time rent and water and lights and laundry and telephone and the rest of the bills are paid I sometimes have about twenty dollars left over --- that is in summer time. Not in winter. When you have to buy coal and lights are used more, there's less than nothing left. God don't want anybody to skimp along on just nothing where there're ways that's not wrong to pick up a little money. I guess there's not a woman living, even if she has turned sixty, who doesn't like a little spending change for face powder and perfume and such that keep her from looking like a hag. I didn't make folks what they are and I haven't got anything to say one way or the next if the mated or unmated shop around a little to get space for their loving.
"I have never run a regular assignation house. But since the depression I have been picking up a few dollars every week from lovers. This part of my business runs on the quiet. It's a good sideline hut I wouldn't have it to get around that I did it. And it hasn't. So far no couple has ever been caught by the law in my house, nor has any husband or wife come around later to cross question me. I am sure that not a single one of my roomers has ever suspected that these meetings take place in my house. I'm strict on the boys here and when one of them brings a girl up to his room, I throw her out and give him Hail Columbia.
"Lovers' meeting in my house always takes place during daylight business hours, between ten and three o'clock. My two railroad roomers don't get off their runs before four- thirty in the afternoon and leave by ten next morning. All the boys upstairs have left by seven o'clock and none come back till late afternoon. They work long hours at the sort of jobs they have.
"I haven't anything to do with supplying the women that come here. I don't make the dates for the men or women. Lot of them knew each other years ago, some are strangers that took a liking to each other. The women are scarcely ever young girls. I wouldn't stand for much of that. They're married women not satisfied with their husbands or divorced women working hard for their living and hoping to get married again. Most of the men are married. So both parties have to be careful.
"The man just telephones me and says he is coming around in a few minutes. That's the reason I have to keep ray telephone. I used to make out without it when I just depended on regular roomers. The man's one who can get away from his work in my open hours or has his own business so that he can go and come whenever. I just let them use one of my downstairs rooms that's vacant or my own room if all are filled. I don't hang around for two of them to get here. The one that gets here first I shows them the room and I go right on upstairs about my cleaning. They don't have any trouble finding each other.
"A couple never spends more than an hour here. I always allow them that much time. When I go back to my bedroom both are gone. A gift of money is always left on the table for me. It is never less than a dollar, often a dollar and a half or two dollars. If they just leave a dollar they usually stick around some small change to pay for the laundering of the linen. One of my best customers is a rich man. His woman friend is not always the same. He never does leave less than five dollars on the table.
"The neighbors don't think anything about any man or woman coming into my house. Roomers are always changing and there's insurance agents and collectors coming most any day. Neighbors don't know I wouldn't put up with a regular woman roomer. Women stay in the house all day and bother me gabbing. They ask so many all-fired Questions and always have their noses in the other roomer's affair. I've got to "be a lots worse off than I am now to go after women roomers. But my room rent sign don't say "men only," so the lady part of the lover trade could be thought to be looking for rooms. Most anything goes in this neighborhood anyway. Folks that might get curious are probably doing something in their own house worse than giving folks a little pleasure. Sending folks to ruination half the time selling whiskey.
"I don't know any other respectable way I could pick up that extra money. I do know God never would have seen me through that accident if he'd thought I was making my living anyways wrong. He could have let that car kill me right out. But he didn't. He just smoothed things out for me at every turn. Those friends just dropping out of nowhere to look after the house while I was laid up. And not a one of my lover trade letting out on me by calling up home to fix their arrangements.
"I know they saw in the newspaper's what had happened to me. I got some of the prettiest flowers while I was sick. It's nice to have money enough to have pleasure your ownself and give other folks pleasure too by being thoughtful. When I got home and got hold of things again and got it circulated around I was up and about, they started back. Stuck to me just like regular roomers. I appreciated it more then than ever.
"If times got flush again -- rooms rented regular and for good money -- I wouldn't shut down on them. You just can't help having a heart for helping folks out. Not when you stop to think how God has always been ready to give a hand to help you over like He has me."