June 20, 1939
John Lowery (Negro)
823 E. 7th Street
Charlotte, N. C.
Pullman porter
Cora Bennett, writer
Mary Northrop, reviser
“I’ve Seen These States.”
Original Names	Changed Names
Charlotte	Riverton
Margaret	Ellen
Thomas Tourist Agency	Calloway Tourist Agency
“I’ve Seen These States.”
"I've traveled all over the country and seen many places but I never saw but one place in all my travels that I'd think about living in instead of right here in North Carolina. That was a little town out in Oklahoma. It was such a clean peaceful little town that I decided I'd move my family out there but they wouldn't even talk about moving away. So I gave up the idea and don't guess I care if they didn't agree to go.
"I was born in South Carolina but I left there when I was a young man. My father was a farmer and owned sixty acres of land. He was the father of twenty children. Yes, he was proud of his big family 'cause we could do all the farm work and was a mighty lot of help to him. He managed to make enough off the farm to keep us in clothes and food but that's about all. He thought he had done big things if he kept us clothed and fed. I guess with twenty children, he had; I can't see how he did that good. I remember when he'd go to town on Saturday and bring a bag of candy home. By the time it was divided between all of us we didn't have much candy a piece.
But still it was a big day in our lives. We lived pretty good for country folks, I think.
"We didn't get to go to school much because the schools wasn't much good. The school session didn't last but about four months in all and we couldn't go all the time during those months. Sometimes it would be nearly 'bout Christmas before we'd git the cotton out. Then early in the spring we'd have to start to work for the summer crops. 'Course while we was too little to work I guess we could have gone to school but the school was so far away from our house that little folks couldn't walk it much. I don't know what I wouldn't of done if I had had the chance to go to school like my chaps. Plenty people tell me that I've had a education anyway, traveling around like I have, but I don't think it's taken the place of book learning. But I like to catch the chaps on questions they should've learned at school. I laugh at the things they don't know about this country. I learned my geography looking out the window.
"I came to Riverton in 1901 and started working for the Pullman Company that same year and I've been there ever since. When I first started they had wooden sleepers, then they changed to steel underframes and now they have solid steel sleepers. In those early days the cars was heated by stoves in each car and the lights was kerosene lamps. After the Jamestown Exposition in Virginia they started using gas lights and of course you know now we have 'lectric lights. I've seen all those changes.
"When I first started working I was a regular porter, that is I was on one particular run. That kept me away from home just about all the time. But then I got married about a year after I came to Riverton. I had ten children of my first marriage. I'm the father of fourteen children in all. That's about as bad as my father did, ain't it? Well, after several years my wife's health got so bad that I had to stop going out on those regular runs. I asked the boss if he'd try to change my work for me and he did. They give me work as a utility man, cleaner and porter. When I wasn't on the run I was in the yard cleaning cars and that's what I'm doing up to this time. It's been a great life and I don't know as I'd take anything for the experience.
“When I started with the company I was making fifty cents a day and for about two years that's all I made. Then they raised me several times until I was making six dollars a day in war times. Now I make about three dollars a day. I think that's pretty good wages for a man these days. It was kinda hard for me when my children was small but now since the older ones are grown I can make ends meet.
"My first wife never worked any at all, never was able to work much. When she died my youngest child was about six months old so I had to have somebody to help me take care of the children. I got married again about a year after my wife died. Some of the older children gave my second wife a good bit of trouble but they finally got along all right. They worried me a great deal at first. One of my girls run off from home and I had to go find her. After she came back I just give her a good whipping and I didn't have much trouble out of them, any more.
"Now all of the first group of chaps is married and living in different places. One of my girls married a no-count feller that took her off to Virginia. She's always writing home about this being wrong and that being wrong. I have to do for her just like I do for my own home. And the next time she writes I'm gonna send her a ticket and tell her to put them chaps on the train and come home. It might be a bit crowded but I'd let those people that rooms with us move. I can't stand the idea of one of my chaps being mistreated.
"None of the first crowd of chaps was so crazy about going to school but these four young ones are smart as can be. I mean to see every one of them through school as far as I'm able. If health lasts me I'll send the last one of them to college if they want to go and can take schooling. The oldest one has been to an academy two years already. I guess I'll let her go on to Smith University next year. Ellen finished High School this year and she'll have to go away next year. She wants to take a business course. I hope she'll be able to do it but she's always been sickly. She has some kind of rheumatism and we’ve had to take her to a specialist several times. But she's been doing pretty good lately. That's one thing that I've always tried to do -- see to it that my family got the doctor's 'tention when they needed it.
"My present wife works a little and helps to buy the chaps little things they need. She usta teach school when we was first married but then she had to quit on account of the chaps. The last two years she's been working at one of the schools here as a maid.
"During these thirty-seven years I've been a porter I've been to some mighty interesting places. I've been in about every State, I think, and Mexico and Canada.
Now I go out on special trips most of the time. When Al Smith was running for President I traveled over forty-two states with his campaigning party. I was out with them sixty-four days.
"Then for seven years straight I went as a porter with the Calloway Tourist Agency to the west coast. That was a thirty day trip and hard work. But I loved to go out with that party. This lady would take teachers and girls from all over the United States on this sight seeing tour. We'd, have a four day stay in San Francisco and that's about the only time I'd get any real rest while I was gone. The rest of the time we'd be on the move and I'd make them beds so often, and they was so many of them, that I'd be glad to come back home. We'd go to the Yellowstone National Park, to the Grand Canyon, and to see "Old Faithful" and every interesting place on the west coast.
"I never will forget once when I was in Needles, Arizona. That’s the hottest place I ever been in in my life. It was so hot we'd have to leave the windows down in the cars to keep the hot air out. All through the desert you could see dead dogs and the like that'd died from that awful heat.
"I like to go up in Canada. I think the weather is nice up there. Once when we were coming back home I remember one of those big pine trees fell across the track at Hells Gap, a dangerous place, I mean too. We had to stay there four hours on a bridge while the men moved that tree piece by piece. You talk about some scared people I mean they was some on that train. My car was on the bridge and the water under that bridge was full a hundred feet deep, I know. That's where they got those big salmon, fish from, that river.
"I don't guess I can even remember all the places I have been but I've seen these States. I don't go on such long trips now. I'm getting too old. I don't suppose I could stand up under the strain of all that work. Anyway, I liked it while I was at it. Now I go on a trip to New York or to Florida, and now and then out to some of the Western States, but I'm never gone very long at the time.
"I take part in all elections whether it’s national or local, and especially these tax elections. You see it's mighty hard on the man that ain't got but a little property to pay such high taxes. After you've scrambled around and got yourself a little home it takes all you can make to keep up the taxes on it.
“I'm active in my church too. Been going to the same church ever since I've been in Riverton. One job, one church, two wives; that's not such a bad record, is it? Take all my chaps to church with me too, been doing that all my life. I always did believe in taking the lead in whatever I wanted my family to do. You may think it sort of rigid or strict, but you know what I do? When I go to bed at night everybody in my family goes too. Never could stand the lights on in the house after I go to bed. The chaps make too much noise if I let them stay up. And if my wife goes out and stays to some meeting or something till after I go to sleep she just has to sleep with some of the chaps that night.
"I say if they can't get everything they want to do done before bedtime, they don't need to do it nohow. I like for my chaps to have plenty to eat, to go out to shows and the like if they want to, but when it's time to go to bed I mean for them to do that too. I enjoy my family and I think they are happy."
