110 Caldwell St.
Golden Peacock Co.
Paris, Tennessee
N. G. T
WE'VE DONE THE BEST WE COULD"
My life has jist been a hard struggle from beginning to end. Some days I wonder what's left for me to live for. Of course, I lore Jehu Don't know what he would do without me, because life has been hard and bad for him, too. He's not able to do any work, you know. The doctors say they's not much chance for him to live but for a short while longer. And I can't find the money to give him the treatment he needs or put him in a sanatorium where he belongs. It's a trial on me, and no mistake!
"Maybe it's a judgement unto the third generation because my grandmammy never married. She come of a big family in this county. Her pa was one of the leading men here. But she fell in love with a sharecropper on their place. Well, that man he run off and left her when she got in trouble.
"SO then my mama started coming on and my grandma's folks wanted to go and leave the baby somewheres. But grandma wouldn't hear of it. And them fine folks of hare turned her out of doors in her condition. She left carrying her clothes in a market basket and went to the County Home and stayed there. After awhile mama was born. When she got pretty big and they was going to take her away and send her to the reform school, or orphans' home or whatever it is, my granny left here and wouldn't give her up. She wandered and roamed, living jist anyway she could. Alongabout sundown one day she come by my granddad's house and he was out feeding the pigs. Granny stopped and watched him and passed a chat of talk with him. Pretty soon she asked him to let her stay all night and work for her supper.
"Well, he was a good man. His wife was dead and him and my little boy daddy lived there all alone. So he taken granny in. She worked for her supper and when it come to the next day she jist sort of stayed on. She never did leave there, and my mama growed up on the place. It was just about three miles from Paris, but mama newer went to school or anywhere. My dad didn't neither. They neither one couldn't read nor write at all.
"One morning granny went out to milk and she found a little baby in the pig pen that somebody had throwed in there. So she taken it in and raised it up, too, and he's now married and got a house full of children. They also raised another child that was brought there and left on them. Seemed mighty hard then, but they had 'taters to eat and they raised corn and pigs. Somehow they managed to keep their hones cowered with meat.
"Well, my mammy growed up there with my daddy and they jist lived together. They didn't git married at first no more than granny and grandpa. About three of their children was borned before they ever made them marry. Some of the neighbors come around and told them they was doing wrong. Said they ought to git married, and they'd better, too, if they knowed what was good for them. So they did when they found out they had to do it.
"They was a big family of us, three toys, and four girls. My two oldest brothers left home when they was big enough to work out and hired out. My dad, now, he sure was a peculiar man. He didn't know schooling nor nothing, and he didn't believe in it, neither.
"So we just growed up there on the place. We newer went to school or nothing else. Never saw much of anybody till a family moved about a mile from us and the woman come over to git mama to help her wash and clean tip the house because she'd been sick. That was the year the flu epidemic was so bad. I was about fifteen year old and I'd never been to town in my life, never been to church, nor heard a prayer prayed then. Well, this woman use to hire me to help her work. I picked dewberries and she would take me to town with her, me and my oldest sister. I mean my oldest sister at home. My real oldest sister was married when she was a little girl of about thirteen. She runned off and married, and my oldest brother was married too, but they didn't never home home. They was ashamed of us all, I guess.
"This Miss Peggy use to make us dresses, and teach us to cook and sew, sweep and wash and be clean and she got us to going to school. She was the best woman ever lived. She taught us to go to church and Sunday School and use to take us with her. They was a Tabernacle here where the Reverend Brother Tod sawyers preached. She taken us to hear him lots. We didn't have no clothes so she made us some and gived my little sisters her little girls' clothes so they could go.
"She was good to my mama and talked te her and taught her things she ought to know about raising us girls right and not living with men without being married. Well, soon as the cigar factory come here I got a job there and never did stay home much more. But I helped my people then, though, all I could. It wasn't much, because I didn't make but eight dollars a week to begin, and by the tine I paid room and board and dressed myself they wasn't much to give them.
"My sisters they went on to school. Some good women here" in town begin to give them clothes and git mama to do work for them and help out a lot that way. We done the Very best we could. You know, times was so hard them days we didn't hardly know how to do. I'd never had no boyfriends nor nothing. Well, after I got to staying at town and knowing how to act I begin going with jehu here He worked at the cigar factory too. Him and his wife was separated. She fussed so much and she nagged him till she finally up and left him with another man. He done the best he could on the job he had and saved what he could. Well, we got married eight year ago and he's been awfully good to me ever since. We've had some hard times because he hasn't had a job all the time. His education wasn't what it ought to be neither, so we had to take hard jobs that didn't take much brain work.
"He got a job at a shirt factory as bundle boy and worked there at twelve dollars a week till his health give way on him. Now he's got TB and asthma and can't hardly breathe much of the time. But we've been happy together all this time.
"I got a job at the Bird of paradise face powder plant about thirteen year ago and been there ever since. I work in the powder room up there, breathing the powder till it sometimes makes me sick. But it's a good clean place to work and I like it there. They're awful good to us, too. I make nine dollars a week when I git to work: regular. Sometimes they lay us off for a month or two at a time. Then I have an awful time because this summer when I was off I couldn't find a thing to do. We like to have gotten hungry that time.
"I try not to go in debt no more than I have to. I never do if I can git out of it because it's too hard to pay up and I've had so much trouble with my family. I've been sick now for about two weeks, but think I can go back to work soon. I was operated on three year ago for 'pendicitis and stricture of the womb and I can't never have no children. I ain't ever got all right yet. I've got spasms of the inside of my intestines and the doctor says it's my nerves. When one of them spells hits me, I jist have an awful time.
"Jehu here in bed all time and me too makes it hard. We didn't have a bit of coal in the house, not a speck, this last cold spell. jehu was staying in bed all day with me to keep warm. We had to pick up chips and dust in the back yard trying to keep the room warm enough, to keep from freezing when that snow come. I was so happy when the girls where I work sent me half a ton of coal because I owed for half a ton already and hated to buy any sore till I could git back to work and pay for what I already owed.
"The girls is awful good to me where I work. The people we rent this house from is good, too. This furniture is ours, all paid for, ever bit of it. We've had so much sickness we ain't got a penny in the bank, but all I owe is my doctor bill for this spell of sickness and my coal.
"Not a one of my folks has set foot to see me. My brother runs a service station there at the corner. He ain't even asked about me. They don't none of them care nothing for us. Course you know the boys stayed away from home so long they got completely weaned away from us all.
"One of my sisters, my prettiest one, done wrong. I guess the streak was born in us and had to crop out in some of us. Reha she jist played rich men. She had two babies and got lots of money out of the men, too, but she runned through with it. She lives now with my mama and by brother pays the rent. Another brother pays the grocery bill, and my sister don't do nothing but kick around and lay up and sleep. Mama raises the dead about it. But sister jist rides around in a taxi and has dates, no matter what. I don't see why she can't go straight. She's a pretty girl and we tried to raise her right and sent her to school. We gived her a business course, but she wouldn't go. She went out on dates with men instead of being at school all the time. She's plenty wild! It hurts me awful because I've lived straight and I'm a good woman, but she jist won't do nothing but run around with men She has lots of pretty clothes and lots of money to spend but I'd rather be like I am than to be like her.
"My daddy was down sick for four years before he died and my brother never put his foot in the house but once to see about him. Ee helped us put him away though, and helps mama now. when my daddy breathed his last breath the beat friend in the world I had died. I ain't had nobody since to sympathize and pet me. Mama thinks anything the boys does is perfect. They're her gods. and she never did want me nohow, she said.
"Well I've always worked and always will and when I come to die, I'LL have done my part in this world. Wish I had a job paying me enough money to git a little ahead so I could do things for jehu like he ought to have. I can't buy him the right kind of food he needs, nor nothing for him like I'd like to do. Some days he can't be up at all all day. Sometimes gits up and walks around a little. Since I've been sick too its hard on us and I git to worrying.
"I use to sometimes wonder what was in store for us and if it will ever be any future for us ever at all. But guess I hadn't ought to complain. It could be so much worse."
<text not clear>