[North Carolina]
TERRA CEIA
About twelve miles from the blue waters of the Pamlico Sound in Beaufort County there lies an area of drained swamp land, so rich that it was once given the name "Heavenly Earth" although the people who live there facetiously call the region "The Dismal". Oddly enough, both names fit because it is a community of sharp contrasts. There are comfortable, well-built houses with all conveniences and there are miserable little shacks that seem to be falling apart; there are big dairy farms with sixty, seventy, or a hundred cows, but many families do not possess even one; on the vast, black fields thousands of bushels of potatoes and corn, grain and beans are grown, yet laborers steal because they are hungry.
To find out about the past of Terra Ceia, I was told to go to Mr. Sam Wilkinson. "He and his brother started this place," Elizabeth Respess, pretty daughter of a local land owner told me the first day I arrived. "He lives over at Wilkinson, about five miles from here, but it's really a part of Terra Ceia. I tell you what, I'll bring my ponies and we'll ride over there in the morning."
So the next morning we set out under a hot May sun to see Mr. Wilkinson. The soft, sandy road, built some feet higher than the black fields which stretched to the horizon on the right, was bordered on the left by a canal with steep, overgrown banks. Occasionally a cypress or a sycamore tree rose from the tangle of green and cast a cool shadow across the dust of the highway.
We crossed a canal bridge and turned down a road that was built up on both sides enough to shut off the sweep of fields. Two of the houses in the group were painted, their lawns were shady and green. Elisabeth explained that these were hones owned by old inhabitants of Terra Ceia, while the other dwellings --- drab, untended little places without grass, trees, or plants of any kind to break the monotony of the dark soil that lay around them --- were the houses of tenants and laborers.
Beyond this small settlement the road again cut between wide open fields and turned to follow another canal. We passed by acres of small peonies, acres of silvery-green oats, of rye that had been used for grazing cattle; we saw hundreds of acres of young corn, of lush potato plants which were almost ready for harvest; we heard the hum of tractors and saw them, surrounded by a haze of black dust, preparing large tracts for the planting of soy beans and peas.
"We're not far from Mr. Wilkinson's now," Elizabeth said while we passed by long furrows of delicate young onion plants. "There are some of his onions. He's about the biggest onion grower anywhere in the State, I guess. Raises them for pickles and has his own brine plant for them to be kept in until he ships them off somewhere for canning. It's hard to raise onions for pickles. They have to be a certain size, if they're too big or too little they're no good. And they have to be weeded by hand so you can imagine how much help you have to hire. Mr. Wilkinson usually gets Negro women to do the weeding.
"They say one year he makes a pile of money and maybe the next he'll lose it. Nobody knows how much he's worth now."
Mr. Wilkinson lives in a big white house with wide porches and a pretty lawn. Across the road from it is a country store, run by the Wilkinson son who lives with his wife and daughter above the store. Nearby is the dingy brine plant and over by a railroad siding there is a large shed containing an onion and potato grader, a shed bearing at one end the sign Wilkinson. This is the heart of Wilkinson; apparently the laborers live back from the road and railroad.
At the house we were told that Mr. Wilkinson was out in the fields, so we galloped out to find him. He was riding in a buggy on a road around the potato field when we stopped him and explained that we would like to talk to him.
"I can't hear much," he answered loudly, "but come on to the store and I'll get my son to talk to you." He smiled broadly showing two even rows of false teeth.
"You wouldn't think to look at him that he's over seventy- years old, would you?" Elizabeth said as we rode the half mile or more to the store. "He still looks after this whole big farm by himself too. That's a job."
Mr. Sam led us briskly into the dimly lit store and introduced us to his plump, middle-aged son who seemed glad of a chance to let his daughter tend shop while he talked. It was a large store, plentifully stocked with overalls, straw hats, tools, lanterns, candy, canned goods, kerosense oil, wire and nails. Several men sat placidly on stacks of merchandise and looked at us curiously; one man stood at the counter eating sardines from a can with his knife. All of them listened with interest while the two Mr. Wilkinsons poured out their story in spurts --- first one talking, then the other.
"We spent the money, but all we got out of it was the experience," Mr. Sam began. "We didn't get anything but loss out of Terra Ceia, my son can tell you that. He was with us for a number of years when we were trying to develop that section.
"I was born right here at this place and have lived here all my life. This is higher land than that right in Terra Ceia. When I was a boy all that land over there wasn't anything but swamp. It was full of great big cypress and juniper trees --- timber that never had been cut.
"Well, back in 1905 I was working for the Roper Lumber Company, located over in Belhaven, and they started logging that swamp. To do that they had to dig ditches and drain off some of the water, but it still wasn't fit for anything when me and my brother bought up 20,000 acres in 1911. The first thing ever put in that land was stick corn --- you know what that is, don't you? You just stick a hole in the ground, drop in a grain of corn and cover it up. That corn was put in before the stumps were cleared or the land really drained, but it produced between 15 and 20 bushels an acre. That's when the stories got started about how rich the land was over there.
"If you don't believe we spent the money, I'll tell you what we had to do. That was swamp land, remember, and ditches wouldn't drain off all the water. There had to be over 40 miles of canals besides the ditches. We paid $20,000 for a dredge to dig canals; it broke after the first seven miles. We bought another dredge and it broke too before we finished.
"Then we had to nut through a branch line of the railroad --- eleven miles of it at $1,000 a mile. Before we could lay a track we had to buy the right of way and buy $70,000 worth of Norfolk & Southern stock. But we got the railroad through. There it is today.
"Our original plan was to get the land in a good state for cultivation, divide it into 50 acre plots and make it available to poor people --- give them a long time to pay for it. We might have been able to do this, if we hadn't had some more bad luck. My brother and I both had stock in the Roper Lumber Company, and it burned without being covered with a cent of insurance. Another trouble was land fires. A lot of that land over at Terra Ceia is peat soil and once it gets on fire you can't hardly put it out. When you do get it to stop smoldering, it's been ruined.
"All the reverses we had made it impossible for us to carry out our plan. We didn't have any capital left. My brother went North, he knew some big men up there, and he sold off big plots of land to capitalists. They thought they could make some money by putting overseers and men down here to farm for them. The people they sent down didn't understand the land and just didn't care; some of them never had done any farm work before in their lives and they didn't want to start.
"When they got a chance most of them Northern capitalists sold out, although I believe there's one or two of them still in Terra Ceia. Lot of the Dutch flower growers rent their places from a Northern company that has sense enough to have an overseer who knows what he's doing. The Northerners mostly sold out though, to North Carolina capitalists and local folks who know how to handle this land.
"There's been a sight of money spent on Terra Ceia, and there was a time when money was made there, when land that first sold for $18 to $20 an acre brought $200 to $300 an acre. Anyway, I know one fellow who made money, that's Boshen. He came down from New Jersey, bought a big farm, spent plenty getting it in shape, and built that great big house with every convenience and hardwood floors from top to bottom. Then he sold, for $120,000 dollars. The man who bought the place paid $90,000 then got behind in his payments. Boshen foreclosed. Now he's got the farm back and $90,000 to ran it on.
"Well, we got experience, but it cost us mighty high," Mr. San said again as he walked toward the white house to get his dinner.
***
In Terra Ceia I roomed and boarded with the Columbus Snows, who live in a dingy, shingle bungalow surrounded by poplar trees and a grassy lawn. For the past twelve years Columbus has been overseer on a 2,200 acre farm owned by him, his brother, and a firm in Winston-Salem. Both he and Odell, his wife, had lived on farms in the mountains near Mt. Airy, but they like the eastern part of the state.
"It's mighty fine land. Don't take any fertilizer like the soil in most places. Sometimes it gets a little sour and we have to lime it, but that's about all we ever do," Columbus stated very seriously. "Yessir, this land will grow the finest potatoes, and soy beans and corn you ever saw, but I declare the last couple years nobody's been able to make a thing, prices have dropped so low. Last year I had a hundred acres in potatoes; I didn't make a cent on 'em.
"I don't believe in putting all my eggs in one basket, though what I do is raise stock too. Last year the only way I made anything was by selling hogs and cattle. I cleared right around $2,000 on them. I don't cost much, to feed them, and this year I'm turning more land into pastures. I haven't got but just 40 acres in potatoes. If one thing don't pay, maybe something else will. That's the way I figure.
"But you take times like this are mighty hard on people who don't have much. I don't see how the little farmers without anyone or anything behind them can make it. If they lose one year, they're just gone. And they always have a houseful of children to feed. There ought to be a law against people having children when they can't take care of them, and give them what they need. I sure want to do the best I can by my two. Kenneth's just five now, but ever since he was a year old I've been paying on a policy to provide for his education, When he's sixteen, he'll get one thousand dollars every year for four years. And it's a double indemnity policy. If I was to die before then Odell would get paid too. When Edward's a little older I'm going to take out a policy just like it for him. Kenneth is four years older than Edward so that when one gets out of college, the other one will be ready to start. So far it hasn't been any trouble to keep up the payments on the policy I've got, and they come right high. That's going to be the first thing paid every time."
Columbus is in his early thirties and Odell in her late twenties. Life in their house is pleasant sine leisurely, and although I was a mere boarder Odell treated me like an honored house guest --- included me in the outings of the family, took me calling to introduce me to the community, and asked her friends to come to see me.
Day in the Snow household began between 5:30 and 6:00 when the colored man came to feed the stock, milk, and start a fire in the kitchen range. Soon afterwards Columbus would be up and out in the fields to start the hands on their day's work by seven; Odell would be stirring about tending to Edward and starting breakfast. About 7:30, when Columbus came in, we had breakfast --- fruit or fruit juice, cereal, bacon and eggs, hot biscuits, jelly or syrup, coffee. Conversation always flourished at breakfast. The three of us sat talking about farming, Terra Ceia and its inhabitants, until long after the second cup of coffee was drunk and the left-over eggs grew stiff on the platter.
"You ought to come back here in potato digging time, if you want to see a sight," Columbus would say fervently. "Have you ever seen a potato digger work? It runs right down the furrows and turns over the hills of potatoes as pretty as anything you ever saw. All you have to do is come along and pick them up. We pay hands 10 cents an hour for that. Every single day during potato digging time the train comes through here and picks up cars loaded plum full of 'em.
"I just made a trade with Mr. Van Dorp for a potato digger. You know that calico pony of ours? Well, I traded that, plus a hundred dollars cash for a digger that cost around $500. That was a good trade, all right. Mr. Van Dorp don't grow anything but flowers now so he didn't need the digger, but his boys will sure have a big time on that pony.
Odell looked concerned. "Oh Columbus, don't say anything about it to Kenneth yet. He'll never miss the calico unless he knows it's gone, but he'll have a fit if you tell him."
"No, I won't say anything to him. He's not big enough to ride that pony yet, anyway. When he's a little older, I'm going to get him a good saddle pony.
"Well, I guess I better get out to see how they're doing in the field. You've got to keep right after these Niggers if you expect to get any work out of them. I've got a dozen or so down there now. They get a dollar a day; that's the same thing as 10 cents an hour. Tractor drivers get 121/2 cents an hour. Everybody pays these wages.
"I tell you, most people around here are trying to do away with just farming on shares, it don't work out. What we do is supply a house for a man and his family, let him have some land to work for himself --- he gives us a part of his crop as rent --- and then pay him enough a week working for us to keep him in groceries. An average hand makes around $2.50 or more a week. It's better to pay them something every week. If you don't, they'll steal everything you've got."
Kenneth appeared in the breakfast room door, his hair tousled and eyes puffed from sleep. "Daddy, wait a minute, I want to go with you," he cried, then proceeded to gulp down his fruit, eat a bowl of cereal and drink a glass of milk while Columbus went out and started the old brown pick up.
Odell watched him run out and climb in the truck. "He thinks he's got to go everywhere his daddy goes, Columbus always takes him.
"Oh me, I've got to give Edward his breakfast and dress him. And I've got to see after my chickens. Some big old wharf rats that stay in the feed house have been eating my biddies. If they keep on we won't have any fried chicken this summer. They eat the eggs, too, I believe, or else someone has been taking them. I get to keep all the egg money for myself, so naturally I'm worried.
"I told Lemon to come early this morning to help with the dishes and things before she started ironing, but of course she's late. Poor old Lemon, she can't do much anymore, she's so slow. Anyway we can leave Edward with her while we go over to Eva Tancrelle's ---- she asked us to come this morning."
While she dressed the squirming, unwilling Edward, Odell told me about the woman we were going to visit --- Eva Tancrelle. "Eva is Dutch but she's more like an American because she was born and raised in Wilmington. She hates Terra Ceia and wants to go back to Wilmington to live. The Dutch people here are kind of funny, stick to them-selves and don't do much but work all the time. We didn't used to have but one church here, we called it the Christian church and everybody went to it. But the Dutch wanted to be by themselves so they split off and have their own church, the Dutch Reformed or something like that, over there in the old school building that's not used since the children go to school in Pantego.
"Eva goes to their church, but I don't believe she cares much about the Dutch people here. Most of the time she runs around with Americans. She belongs to our bridge club and everything.
"Eva and Louis, that's her husband, have been in Terra Ceia seven years and they have made money sometimes, but when Louis makes it he has to spend it --- gambling, going to movies, baseball games and things like that. Couple years ago he was an overseer on a farm, made $75 a month besides his house rent. He could use all the land he wanted to grow his own stuff too. But they didn't save a thing. Now they rent a place, grow bulbs that those Dutch people in Castle Hayne buy, and they ship flowers to the North. This year something happened that hurt all the flower growers a lot. Frost killed all the iris just when they were ready to cut.
"Columbus said Louis had a note due at the bank today, and I surely wonder how he's going to meet it. Columbus likes him a lot, but he says you can't depend on Louis where money is concerned because he just throws it away. It's like Columbus says, when a person doesn't get along it's not always hard luck; if you watch right close you'll see how that person makes mistakes that keep things from working out right."
There was a knock at the back door. A tall, rangy looking white man dressed in overalls said he wanted to see Columbus. "He's not here right now Mr. Watson," Odell said pleasantly, "but he ought to be back any minute. If you can wait a little while, I know you'll get to see him."
Mr. Watson sat on the backsteps until Columbus drove the truck into the yard, then the two men stood under a tree at the side of the yard and talked very seriously for a while before coming into the house.
"Odell," Columbus called, "Are you busy? I want you to come here and fill something out for me." Columbus had explained to me earlier that he couldn't write good, that he gets Odell to do most of it, including check writing.
The living room in the Snow's house is large and long. It is furnished with an overstuffed suite, a new studio couch, several end tables, a big table with a radio, scatter rugs, photographs of Odell and the children. At one end is a big office desk where papers, checks and farm accounts are kept. Odell sat at this desk and puzzled over filling out a lien paper, while Mr. Watson stood patiently near her and looked around the room. Columbus was out in the front yard talking to a friend who had bought a bird dog from him.
After a long period of silence, Odell went to the front door, turning the paper over and over to see if she had missed anything.
"Columbus, come here and see if this is all right. If it is, you and Mr. Watson have to sign it!"
They signed, I witnessed, and we all went out to look at the young bird dog. "Isn't he pretty," Columbus asked. "He's just like two dogs I have that I wouldn't hardly take a thousand dollars for. Those dogs have helped me earn plenty.
"This is good hunting country," he went on after Mr. Watson and the other visitor had left. "Every year a sight of hunters come down from the North and It's a law that they can't hunt without a guide. I'm a licensed guide. Well, those men have plenty of money and they don't think nothing of giving you ten or twenty-five dollars when you take them out. Last year I made over $500 taking out parties to hunt deer and duck and birds, besides the money we took in from keeping them here at the house. Two fellows from Sew York were staying with us at Christmas and you ought to have saw the presents they give us. "
"They gave me a satin housecoat and when they left one of them handed me a $25 bill, besides what they owed me," Odell added.
"They were mighty nice fellows all right. One man that comes down here every year told us to come up and stay with him this summer if we go to the World's Fair."
"Oh my goodness, I've got to go dress or it'll be dinner time before we get to Mrs. Tancrelle's," Odell exclaimed. She hurried into the house, disturbing the white hen who insisted upon laying her eggs in the sagging rush bottom of a front porch rocker.
It was mid-morning when we started out in the new Plymouth. The Snows live in a small settlement which might be called the center of Terra Ceia. Here is the only store run by a white in the community, here the Christian church and the Dutch church which was once the schoolhouse. We drove down the dusty road. On one side of it a few scattered houses stood in bare dirt on the edge of the fields; along the other side ran the canal and the railroad track, beyond which were fields.
Odell drove slowly and explained the landscape. "Negro tenants live in that house, and there too. Yes, most of them are Negroes, except in that place. They're some white tenants of Mr. Radcliff's. --- An Italian man lives in the place there by that big barn; they say he can write music and poetry and play any kind of instrument. --- See how far down from the road this land is? I can remember when it was almost level with the road, but it's burned down that far. --- Now down here is the land owned by that Winston-Salem man who doesn't do no farming at all. He just ships the dirt. His overseer has a gang of Negro men working most all the time, digging up the dirt, packing it in bags and loading it on that freight car that stands over on the siding. When they have a carload, the train will come through and pick it up. They say he sets a good price from people who buy the soil to put on their lawns and gardens. It's so rich I guess it takes the place of fertilizer."
When we had come about a mile down the road from Odell's, we crossed the canal to turn into the road where the Tancrelles lived. Built by a Northern company many years before, this little settlement had an overgrown, uncared for look which was somehow very picturesque. About a dozen steep-roofed cottages were spaced along both sides of a shady road and a canal bordered with sycamore trees. We left the car in the road and reached the Tancrelle's house by way of a bridge that arched over the canal where several ducks were swimming.
Eva, Tancrelle met us at the door of her cottage and led us into a neat, comfortably furnished living room, delicately perfumed by a large bunch of peonies which stood on a bookcase in the corner. Except for the Dutch pictures and a center table draped with a heavy, characteristically Dutch spread, it was a room that looked completely American.
Mrs. Tancrelle, a thin young woman with a brittle personality, talked rapidly about her sister, her mother, the people she knew in Castle Hayne, the loss of the iris crop, digging the iris bulbs, the prospects of the gladiolus crop, and the shipping of peonies for Mother's Day. At Mrs. Snow's request she showed me her coffee spoons from India and another set from Holland.
We did not stay long because we were to call on someone else be for dinner. Mrs. Tancrelle walked to the canal with us, bemoaning the fact that she could have neither grass nor flowers in her front yard, or a garden near her house. "Everything bums right up in this muck soil, and when it rains this yard looks like a lake. Old black dirt; I hate it!"
As we got in the car Odell pointed to a house across the road. "That's where Mr. Greenfield, the Dutch preacher lives. He's a real nice man. Yes, his people were Dutch; I believe he come from Iowa. There're a couple of families living on this road, but the Dutch settlement is about a mile down that road we turned off of while ago. They seem to like to stick to themselves, but they're fine people."
While we drove through the fields to the little white bungalow where the Cases lived, Odell told me their history. "Mr. and Mrs. Case are from Kansas City. They've been living in Terra Ceia for 18 years and Mrs. Case hates it. No wonder. They've sure had it hard, here and she was used to a better kind of life, judging from things I've heard her say. Couple of years ago she went away and swore she wouldn't come back to this place, but she did.
"She certainly is ambitious for her children. Her oldest daughter got married, so now she's trying to put the young one through college, last year she paid all that girl's tuition with the money she made from raising turkeys ---- never had done it before but she just decided to make some money and she started.
"They're trying to get a Federal loan to finish paying for their farm and I hope they can. It must be awful to put everything you have into getting to a place, thinking you'll make money, and then be stuck there for life, even if you hate it, because you can't make enough money to get away. That's what happened to them. Maybe things will be better if they own their place."
We found Mrs. Case in the living room, writing a letter to her daughter who is at Woman's College in Greensboro. It was an attractive room in spite of mediocre furniture. Flowers, books, a piano, a cot with a bright cover, a large sideboard with some silver pieces, numerous photographs, and a well-shaped Alladin lamp created a pleasant effect. The kitchen, which could be seen through an open door, was gayly done in red and white.
Mrs. Case, with her carefully groomed white hair and delicate spectacles, looked distinctly urbane. In a hard, middle-western voice, she poured out a stream of talk about her daughters, her turkeys, the flowers she was coaxing to grow in her front yard. There were frequent references to Kansas City. Our visit was short because it was almost dinner time. We drove hone on a road that led through fine looking fields and by good houses. One belonged to Mr. Boshen, the man who made $90,000 and then retrieved his farm. Terra Ceians think him queer, but they explain this by adding, "Well, he's a Northerner, you know."
Other houses along the road belonged to Mr. Respess, to his brother, to his wife's brother. A Beaufort County native who came to Terra Ceia as a laborer, Mr. Respess helped sow the pastures and tend cattle on a big, Northern owned dairy farm. He worked very hard, accumulated enough to become a part owner, then finally he bought the substantial white house, outbuildings, 600 acres of good land, and started farming for himself. Two big empty silos, built of tile, stand near the barn --- a remnant of the dairy farm era. Elizabeth often mentions her father's farming methods --- "Daddy don't ever plant corn in the same field for two years straight because it takes the nitrogen out of the soil. He puts in peas the second year," or "Daddy just finished selling his last year's corn crop. He was holding it trying to get a better price."
Mr. Respess' eyesight has begun to fail, but his oldest son, married and living in a cottage on his father's farm helps with the work as do the three husky teen-age boys when they're not in school. Elizabeth is the only girl. Since she was dismissed from college last year for a minor misdeed, she has stayed at home under the watchful, suspicious eyes of Mrs. Respess who is known to be something of a religious fanatic. Elizabeth says her mother has never recovered since one of her children was killed by a falling tree many years ago.
It was past noon when we turned into the driveway at the Snow's. Columbus was sitting on the front porch steps reading the baseball news in the Raleigh News and Observer, little Edward was in his play pen in the yard, and Kenneth alternated between asking his father for a nickel and chasing the white hen out of the chair where she had decided to set. Odell rushed in the house to make the cornbread and see that Lemon had things almost ready for the meal.
There was always good, hot cornbread for lunch at the Snows. And usually at that time of the year, turnip greens, several other vegetables --- all well prepared --- salad, ice tea and dessert. Everyone ate well, even Kenneth who had just finished a chocolate bar. Odell urged second helpings end kept going to the kitchen to refill the bread plate with hot cornbread, but conversation did not languish. Columbus mentioned Mr. Watson, who had been there earlier in the day.
"He's a mountaineer, don't he look like one though? Seems to be a right good fellow too. This is the first year he's worked on my place, last year he was on Mr. van Dorp's.
"He's under a little different arrangement from my other tenants, and now he's going to work mostly for himself. That paper you seen this morning was a mortgage on part of his crops --- $150 worth. It's enough to get groceries and stuff for his crowd until the end of the year I reckon. They can raise a lot of what they have to eat.
"I sure hope potatoes urine something this year. Farming sure is a gamble. You go ahead and spend a lot to put in a crop, you cultivate it, care for it the best you can, you harvest it --- and all the time you don't know whether you can even sell it or not. There ought to be some way of guaranteeing a farmer a certain price for it when he puts a crop in the ground. It would save a lot of worry and work and money. That's what tobacco control was aiming at and I believe it's a good thing. This year the State don't have it but I'll bet the tobacco companies see that the crop brings a good price just to prove to the growers they can get a good price without control. Wait until next year, though."
After dinner everyone relaxed in the cool dim living room until "dinner was settled", reading the paper, commenting on the news, or just sitting. The telephone rang four short and Odell answered. She chatted for a while about the things she had done during the day, then, "Oh yes, Mrs. Williams, we'd love to come --- no, I don't think she has planned anything else. Well we'll be there around three thirty."
She hung up the phone. "Columbus are you going to be using the car this afternoon, cause if you're not I'd like to have it. Mrs. Williams wants us to come over to her house."
"Yall can have it," Columbus answered, yawning and getting up slowly. "I'm going down to the back pasture to count cattle as soon as I saddle my horse."
Odell began arranging her time. "Well, I've got to feed Edward and put him to bed for a while. I've got to take a bath and dress myself and him. I reckon we'll have to take him along because lemon has to go home. I better be moving."
At three-thirty we were on our way to the Dutch settlement where Mrs. Williams lived. Her white cottage stood in a grassy lawn, surrounded by hedge and boasting a maple tree. Mrs. Williams, a plump, cheerful little woman, greeted us with enthusiasm and introduced me to two women from Acre's Station --- a neighboring community --- who were in the living room with Mrs. Tancrelle. The Home Demonstation Club, to which Terra Ceia and Acre's Station women belong, had been having programs on flower gardening and arrangements and conversation for the afternoon dealt mainly with those subjects in spite of the fact that many Terra Ceia women can't have so much as grass in their yards. It was pleasant conversation, however, and after a while Mrs. Williams served oatmeal cookies with cold limeade.
When the other visitors had gone, Mrs. Williams told me she had been living in Terra Ceia for 18 years. "We came from Illinois," she said. "A real estate agent out there got us interested; it sounded like a wonderful place, so we came with a whole group from Illinois. We're the only ones that stuck. The man who persuaded us to come didn't stay hut a year himself. He had bought several big tractors, had them shipped here and when he tried to use them they just bogged down in the muck soil. He sued the company, but I never did hear who won the case.
"I don't think I'd choose this place to spend my life in, but I'm here so I may as well make the best of it. We've managed to get along all right. My husband has cows, you know, and delivers milk in Washington every day. He didn't know much about farm work when we came, but he's crazy about it now.
"People think it's queer for me to live down here with the Dutch people; maybe it is but I like them. They're good neighbors. I go to their church too, in fact I play the piano for them. They way they worship is more to my taste, and they do have service every Sunday. You get out of the habit of going to that Christian Church because they don't have a preacher but once a month. I intend to keep right on going to the Dutch church, queer or not."
Back in the Snow's neighborhood we found Kenneth watching some fishermen. A little white boy and two negro boys were trying their luck in the canal, and on our way to the store for a dope, we stopped on the bridge to watch too. Already several cat fish and perch lay in a pile on the bank and there was great excitement because one of the Negroes had just pulled, up a "turtle". Frances Radcliff, daughter of the proprietor of the store came out to join us and tell about her shopping trip to Washington that day.
"I got the cutest bathing suit and sport dress," she drawled languidly, "Now I can't wait to go to the beach. When brother gets home from Mars Hill maybe we'll go." Frances rides horseback occasionally, she rides her bicycle, she takes piano lessons in Belhaven, but most of her time is devoted to her appearance. She longs to go to St. Mary's in the fall.
The Radcliffs live over the store. Mrs. Radcliff was upstairs being fitted for a corset when we arrived for our dope, but Gladys, the adopted girl who lives with the Radcliffs and helps in the store, sat on the counter and talked to us, jumping down to wait on the few customers who came at that time of day --- a woman bought a straw hat, a Negro man an orange crush. About supper time Mr. Radcliff, a slight, gentle mannered man, came in from his farm. He seemed much depressed as he talked.
"I've lived in this section all my life," he began, "but I've never seen it as hard hit as it's been recently ---- that is except for the flower growers. You can't get a decent price for potatoes or corn or beans. All these canals need dredging too. They haven't been dredged since Terra Ceia was started, but it will cost $1,000 a mile or more and there's about 50 miles of them. It's been estimated that $90,000 will be required to dredge the old canals and open up some new ones that are needed. The government can't help because they're on private property, no one who lives here can afford to have the work done, so I don't know what's going to happen to this section."
The quiet of evening lay across the fields as we crossed the canal to home, but the barn lot was alive with sounds. A Negro laborer was feeding Odell's chickens, while the hogs set up an uproar of squeals and grunts which did not stop until he had thrown them quantities of corn, still on the ear and unshucked.
As soon as she put Edward to bed with a bottle of milk, Odell rushed to the kitchen to kindle a fire in the range and start preparations for supper. Columbus had bought some fresh trout, rock, and croakers from the fish truck that comes through the community every day. These were to be fried for supper and eaten along with hot cornbread, tomato salad, left-over beans, ice tea, strawberries and whipped cream. While she flurried about in the kitchen and laid the table in the breakfast room (the dining room, furnished with a suite of Hepplewhite reproductions, was used only on Sunday), Odell sent Kenneth out to gather the eggs. Columbus wandered about looking for cheese with which to set rat traps in the feed house.
"Them things are big as squirrels," he remarked. "I can't catch then in a trap to save my life. Have to shoot 'em I reckon." And until supper was ready lie stood on the back steps, gun, in hand, watching through the twilight for a chance to make a kill. Odell had to urge him to come in before the fish grew cold.
Supper was by lamplight. Only a few houses in Terra Ceia have electricity, although everyone hopes that when the new paved road from Washington is finished, the Rural Electrification plan will provide power for the community. The Snows have running water, a telephone, and are one of the four or five families to have plumbing.
Company came before we finished supper --- Frances Radcliff, Gladys and Richard Williams. "We'll just leave everything on the table, Lemon will be here early in the morning to clean up," Odell whispered as we got up to go in the living room. "Kenneth, you better go to bed pretty soon."
"No mama, I don't want to," Kenneth protested.
We talked a while, listened to the radio, played several games of Chinese Checkers, and still Kenneth did not want to go to bed. After the company said goodnight, somewhere past ten, he went off peacefully with Columbus, who had been on the verge of going to sleep all evening.
"I'll declare, Columbus is ready to go to bed quick as he's finished with his supper," Odell commented. For a while we sat together in the dim living room while Odell told about a recent trip she and Columbus had made to Richmond.
"We stayed in the John Marshall Hotel. Just our room cost us six dollars a day, but I sure enjoyed it. The University of Virginia had a dance there one night, and we watched it. The girls looked so pretty, all dressed up. I just love to get out and see how different people live.
"Oh law, I about forgot. I've got to strain the milk and put it in the ice box before I go to bed."
Odell took the dim lamp, gave me the bright one and I went to my room --- a small room with a new suite of reddish maple furniture. There were deer skins on the floor. The night was still except for the barking of Columbus' old bird dog.
***
The Androlia family lives beside the dusty road that goes to the Dutch settlement and on to Washington, twenty-odd miles away. Odell Snow had pointed out the house to me, a shabby little place, standing in a cluster of maple trees and surrounded by the bare, black earth. However, behind the house there was a large, solidly built bam and a silo, beyond which spread acres of green pasture.
The front of the house looked deserted, so I went to the backyard where a pretty, curly-haired little girl was playing with a wagon. Before I could ask if her mother was at home, a woman came to the kitchen door, a handsome woman, with delicate pink and white skin, blue eyes and black hair. She spoke in the soft accent of Beaufort County.
"Come in the house, won't you? It's a shame you have to see this dirty kitchen. I've just got done ironing. My baby's not but three weeks old and I'm not supposed to work much, but I do a little every day."
We passed through the simply furnished, neat kitchen, down a hall and into the living room. The trees outside cast so much shade over the windows it was hard to distinguish the exact furnishings of the neat little room at first. There were several stiff chairs and a sofa upholstered with leather, a radio, a table spread with a fringed cloth. The ceiled walls and the floor were freshly painted.
"You'll have to excuse the dust," Mrs. Androlia apologized. "It looks like you just can't keep that fine road dust from sifting in no matter what and I'm not able to keep up with everything the way I ought. I had a colored woman staying here to help me until this week, but she had to go home for a few days. She's one of the smartest, cleanest Negroes I've ever had anything to do with and a good nurse too. I had a doctor from Belhaven to deliver the baby, but that woman stayed here and nursed me, did all the work and the cooking, and looked after the children. I always have a hard time. This one wasn't no worse than when my boy or the little girl you seen was born --- he's ten and she's five. For the first three or four months with all three of them, I couldn't hold a thing on my stomach and just to smell anything cooking would make me sick. Yes, I kept on doing my own cooking, but my husband got mighty tired of eating canned stuff and cheese. When I did get so I could eat, you couldn't fill me up. Seemed like I was hungry all the time.
"Oh no, I'm not Italian. My people has always lived out here at Acres Station. My father farmed. My husband's people come from Italy thirty-four years ago when my husband wasn't but four years old. He said he don't remember a thing about the trip except getting on the big boat.
"His people stayed up North until 17 years ago when they come down here. I don't know how they happened to hear about it, but around that time a lot of stories was put out about how rich this land was. Anyway, my husband's people come and settled in Acres Station. His father still has a dairy farm there; I reckon you've seen it if you've ever been to Acres Station.
"After we was married, my husband helped his father, then we come here. We rented for a couple of years. The last place we had was Mr. Boshen's farm --- you've seen it I guess. It's a big farm. My husband liked it for his cattle and dairy business, but we would rather have our own place. When you rent, you hate to put many improvements around a place because you don't know when you'll have to move. We put in water pipes over at Mr. Boshen's --- well, that was lost when we left. We couldn't bring the pipes with us and we didn't get anything for them.
"Everybody used to ask me if I didn't like living in that big pretty house over there. To me it was just too big. Taking care of it kept me busy all the time. I don't like such a big house myself. This one's about the right size for me. It has six rooms in it. I know this looks a sight yet, because we've not done anything to it but clean up and paint. All our cash had to go into fixing up the barn, so we haven't really gotten around to the house yet. Soon as we're able we'll make it look better. Negro tenants used to live here.
"We've just been on this farm since January. My husband is buying it from a man in Winston-Salem --- 160 acres in all. We have 60 head of cattle, and every other day he trucks the milk over to Greenville. We keep it here in a cooler until time to ship it. It's A grade milk.
"Our two milder and their families live in that double house a little piece beyond here. I reckon you saw it when you come down the road. They help tend the cattle, run the milking machines, and work with my husband on the place. My boy tries to be a big help to his daddy. He'll get out and plow or harrow just as good as the next one. He thirties he's mighty grown up.
"I'm sure glad you come to see me and I wish you didn't have to leave. I haven't been able to get out in so long that I enjoy having someone to talk to. Tell Mrs. Snow to come to see me; she's not seen the baby yet."
***
It was a hot morning. The two miles from Radcliff's store to the Dutch settlement seemed like a great distance as I walked down the shadeless road. There had been a shower the previous night, and rich fields, steaming beneath the sun, threw off a heavy, swamp-like odor; the drooping foliage along canal banks hung still except when the terrapins which had been sunning themselves slipped into the water as I passed.
Long before I reached the side road that led to the Dutch settlement, I could see across the level fields a scattering of houses and outbuildings. It is understandable why these people "stick to them-selves" as Odell Snow had explained: the majority live to themselves. Strung along this side road away from the other inhabitants of Terra Ceia, live Heinrich van Dorp, his brother, Jan; the Van Guysen family, the Van Dykes, and others. These are the flower growers of Terra Ceia.
H. Van Dorp is known to be the richest, the most powerful of the flower growers. Not only is he manager for the New York owned Broad Acres Farm, but he has many acres of his own. Odell once pointed out to me a tract of 250 acres that Van Dorp had bought at auction for $40 an acre. "He's a smart man," Columbus Snow said, "and a hard worker."
He was such a hard worker that I had the Snows to make an appointment for me to call at his house in the evening. It was an unpretentious house outwardly, a low, rambling bungalow shut off from the road by a thick hedge. The lawn was grassy and planted with shrubs. An electric light was burning outside the front door.
"He has a home Delco plant," Odell whispered. "And he supplies electricity to everyone in this settlement. It's grand for them."
Before we could knock, the door was opened wide by Mr. van Dorp. He stood before us, shirt sleeves rolled above his elbow and only socks on his feet --- a powerfully built man, with thick arms and hands, broad shoulders, a large head bristling with thick, straight black hair. His features were regular and strong, but his lips were delicately cut and sensual.
Mrs. van Dorp did not get up, but she smiled at us wanly when we came in. I had been told by various persons in the community that she wasn't "quite right", that she was unable to keep her house in decent order or look after the children properly, that Mr. van Dorp had to see to buying all the groceries, but there was something startling about the woman's vacant hazel eyes set in a chalk white face. The general opinion is that too much childbearing is responsible for Mrs. van Dorp's condition. Although she is only twenty-four and has been married but eight years, she has given birth to seven children.
The room in which we sat was furnished with new pieces, heavy and ornate. There was a massive sofa, several upholstered chairs, a big center table covered with a lace cloth, a big, streamlined radio, a roccoco model of the Mayflower which could be lighted up inside as Mr. van Dorp showed us with great pride. Over the piano was a picture, an enlarged photograph faint and slightly distorted, of a stern looking man and woman and eleven unsmiling sons and daughters. One of the eleven was Heinrich van Dorp, and the brick house showing in the picture had been his family home on a farm in Holland.
Briefly Mr. van Dorp told about his career in America. It was difficult to catch all his words since he spoke English with a thick Dutch accent.
"I come here in 1925. Already I make agreement with the agent of a company in New York what own this farm. They want me to come here, grow truck, and if it don't go so good, the company promise to take the loss.
"When I land in New York an agent meet me and bring me straight here. For several years I grow truck, but we don't make anything because there are no markets. The land I had then was badly drained; that damaged many crops. After several years go by the company write off the loss just as they promise me.
"I start to grow bulbs two years or more after I come. A salesman was through here and from him I buy a few tulip bulbs, enough to plant one-fourth an acre. The people in this country were mad about tulips then ---- they were something new, I could take them in to Washington and sell everyone I have with me just as fast as I could hand them to the people and take their money. They would pay fifty cents or seventy-five cents a dozen for them gladly. I make so much with a few flowers and they grow so well on this land, I plant more bulbs the next year. Later I add iris, peonies, gladiolus. This year I have about 75 acres in bulbs, 25 in tulips. My iris all were killed by the frost just before they were ready to ship. We lose money on them this year."
At this point Columbus Snow enquired how much Mr. van Dorp thought he had lost when the iris were frozen.
"I don't know how much we lose, you cannot say before you know what price they bring. The bulbs are not hurt, so we don't lose on those. We market the bulbs as well as flowers.
"Yes, I know most of the Castle Hayne flower growers. Some of them buy bulbs from us and the bulb growers here belong to the same association with them, the Flower Growers Association of New Hanover County. That way we get our supplies at association prices and also use the same ways to market.
Columbus tried to get information about how much land Mr. van Dorp managed for the New York company, and how much he had for his own use, but Mr. van Dorp very cleverly evaded answering these questions. He seemed to be getting very sleepy, yawned broadly at frequent intervals and curled his toes under. Mrs. van Dorp drooped over her crocheting. It was almost nine o'clock and time to go home.
"Van Dorp is some fellow," Columbus said on the way home. "You never can get a word out of him about how he's doing. That man's made a lot of money, but I wouldn't be surprised if he was in debt right now. He's got nerve enough to gamble on things. Bet he'll be a rich man some day or else he won't have anything.
"Tell you how that company he works for felt about him. When he lost money there at first, he was about ready to leave but they said if he'd stay they'd cancel the debt and he could just about write his own ticket. Even when he was new here, he didn't take orders from no manager. His dealings was direct from the company.
"Don't he have some build though? I mean he can sure turn out the work too. You heard him say he drove his car 800 miles in one day the time he come from Ohio here. Well, that's just exactly the way he is. He keeps right on pushing till he gets something done."
***
Three years ago Jan van Dorp came from Holland to work on his brother's farm. I net him first at the Dutch church --- a blonde, serious young man, very shy about talking because he felt his English inadequate.
His house is the first in a scattered row which makes up the Dutch settlement. After a long walk in the hot sun, I was very glad to reach this steep-roofed white cottage with its precise little yard brightened by roses and a clump of sweet peas. Since it was somewhat early in the morning, I went to the back door, thinking that a housewife would be in her kitchen at that hour, but I had reckoned without the characteristics of the Dutch. The back porch and the kitchen, which I could glimpse through the screen door, were immaculate and deserted. However, my knock soon brought Katherine van Dorp to the door.
"I thought I heard someone knocking," she said pleasantly, but I was in the living room ironing. It's cooler in there. I'm sorry you had to come all the way around."
Everything in the living room was new, polished, in perfect order. I sank into a large cushioned chair, upholstered with red, silky plush to match the sofa. Over by one wall was a substantial table covered with a bright Navajo spread. There were interesting pictures on the walls --- well-framed photographs of western scenery and primitive looking Indian prints. In the center of the room was the ironing board and beside it a large peach basket, lined with oilcloth, to hold the dampened clothes.
Katherine van Dorp stooped to take a shirt out of the basket, and smoothed back her already neat brown hair. "Do you mind if I finish with this ironing? I don't have many more pieces and I can talk to you while I do them. It's good to have someone to talk with My husband comes in for morning coffee when he's working nearby and he comes in for lunch, but otherwise he's out all day. No, we don't own any property here. My husband works for his brother on a salary basis.
"We like it here very well, but we don't expect to stay indefinitely. I guess within several years we'll go somewhere else, after my husband learns English well enough to go into another kind of work. Both he and I have been around too much to want to settle here. He lived in Holland until three years ago; my home was in the West. Oh yes, my people are Dutch, we speak the language and observe many of the old country customs, but since I've been old enough to remember anything we've lived in California. My father has a truck farm. After I finished college --- I went to a Dutch Reformed college at home --- I taught in some of our mission schools for Navajo and Crow Indians in New Mexico. It was fascinating work. Some of my students painted the pictures you were admiring on that wall. I think they're quite remarkable. Even the tiny Indian children have an unbelievable sense of design and color combination.
"Isn't it strange how things happen to you? I never thought of coming to North Carolina. I studied about it in school, but as for knowing anything about this part of the country, I didn't. Do you know how I happened to come here first? My sister had married the preacher here --- you've heard of Mr. Greenfield I suppose --- and they planned a Bible school for six weeks in the summer. Well, they asked me to come and teach, I agreed to because I wanted to help with the work they were trying to do here. That was when I met my husband. I went back home, taught a year, and last June I came back so we could be married."
Katherine disconnected the electric iron, finished the last piece and laid it on top of a neat stack of clothes. "Now," she said, "We'll have some coffee. Mid-morning coffee is a Dutch custom that we keep up."
I went with her to the kitchen while she put the kettle on, got out a glass coffee maker, put a plate of cookies on the table, laid out cups, saucers, and little silver spoons that had been brought from Holland. It was a well equipped kitchen --- electric refrigerator, white enamel oil stove, a sink set in the middle of white cabinets, an electric washing machine in an alcove ---- and a pleasant room. The woodwork, the wall paper with a blue Dutch design, the linoleum, and the blue bordered curtains at the window were all fresh and spotless. We sat at a maple table, drinking coffee, munching crisp cookies and talking.
"There is something I want to know," Katherine began. "Do you find many people in the South like the ones around here that would be called "poor white"? You know, they are mostly tenants. They live in horrible, dirty little shacks, they are filthy themselves and look as if they've never had enough to eat. Last year a family of them lived near here and I tried to help them for a while. It didn't do any good; they pestered me so and imposed on me until I finally had to leave them alone. I feel sorry for such people and for Negroes too. I wish there was something that could be done to help them, but I don't know what it is, do you? When I first came it worried me more than it does now.
"The Negroes are full of so many superstitions, some of them laughable, but once this year I was amused by something they said. I have always been against doing any kind of work on Sunday, and it has worried me here because the flower growers work end hire laborers to work, cutting flowers and packing them, on Sunday. This year all the iris were frozen, you know, and one of the Negro men who works for my husband came to me and said, 'Mis' van Do'p, you was right. De Lawd done punish de people for wuking on de Sabbath day. Now dis year he show us a lesson, he cut us out of doing any wuk a'tall during iris time."
"I don't see how any of the people in this section live on the sort of food they eat. Well, it's not just that what they get is so bad. I guess I'm not used to their way of cooking --- frying most everything, putting grease in vegetables, not seasoning. It's the same way in Holland, the North and South have entirely different ways of doing things. Yet I don't believe there are any cooks in Holland as bad as some you find here. They've learned there that it doesn't cost any more to prepare food well.
"I'm afraid my husband will start speaking English like the natives around here. They have such a sloppy way of talking and their grammar is really incorrect. Surely, all the people in the State don't talk as they do! My husband is anxious to learn to speak English correctly, and every night I give him a lesson. It's almost pathetic yet I have to laugh, when I see him come in from working hard all day end sit down with, his hook to study his lesson. He's making progress though.
"I guess it's the teacher in me, but I am not satisfied with the kind of schooling that the children in the community get. I am trying to get our church interested in starting a Christian school here for the children in our church or any others who want to come in. We are planning to have the Bible school again this summer, but how I should like to see that grow into a full time school! Many of the members here say it can't be done or rather they don't see how it is to be done. I believe if you have faith, you can do anything. If it is something good, God will surely help. I am writing a paper on the value of teaching things from the Christian viewpoint, and will read it at the next meeting held at the church. If you're here then, we would, be gird for you to come."
When Katherine began to peel potatoes for lunch, I realized it was time to start toward the Snow's house.
***
Mrs. Van Guysen was ironing, It was a pleasure to watch her take from the covered hamper a neatly rolled, dampened garment which she spread with deliberation on the metal, collapsible board; a pleasure to watch the strong, sure movements of her plump forearms as she wielded the electric iron and lay the folded clothes in fresh smelling piles.
Mrs. van Guysen looked the typical Dutch housewife ---- buxom figure with ample bosom, strong featured face, bright, black eyes, and dark hair beginning to turn grey. Her voice was deep and hearty, her accent strongly Dutch.
"Now this is too bad, you have to stay here in this room what I use always for my work," she laughed am glanced around the gayly papered little room which looked like a back sitting room. "You see, here I keep my darning and my mending, here I iron and sew. I jus' call it my work room.
"My daughter told me not to iron this morning. She said she come this afternoon and do it for me, because the doctor told me not to work much --- my blood pressure is high. I don't think this little bit will hurt me. I go slow.
"Did you meet my daughters yet? I got two. My oldest daughter live right next to here down the road. She married a fellow Mr. van Dorp bring to this country to work on Broad Acres --- van Dyke his name. Now he work with my husband. My youngest daughter, she engaged to marry another young fellow Mr. van Dorp bring here. I tell my girls they must feel thankful to Mr. van Dorp. My son is engaged to an American girl what lives at Acre Station. She nice girl, hard worker and smart. I like her. I don't say to my son that he shouldn't marry her, that is something he decides. Her people think it is bad and they try to stop Lucille from being with my son. They don't let him come to their house; my son gets her and brings her here. Last year when my son was burned, my daughter went to Acre Station to get Lucille. When she reached the house, Lucille's mother went in the house and stay while my daughter wait for Lucille on the porch. My daughter feel very bad because they do not ask her to come into the house or sit down.
"Lucille already has joined our church and she say she don't mind if her family won't have nothing to do with her when she is married. I don't like, though. It is bad that families be against each other. Her family don't make her change by trying to keep her from marrying, they make unhappiness that is all. It is true we come from another country, we have different ways, like they say, but my boy he say he is American. He was born in this country, already, and his life was spent here. I think this marriage would be all right if Lucille's family did not act so.
"There is my boy --- see from the window? His arm is tied up in what you call a sling because he almost have blood poisoning last week. He can't do work, but he can boss the Niggers; that is something he likes to do. My husband hates to work with diggers. Such a hard time he has making them understand, and he says they don't know how to do nothing right unless you stand beside them and tell them every thing to do. So ignorant they are! I work with them when we bunch and pack the flowers to ship away. I say to them, 'You know how to count twelve'? Always they say 'yas ma'am." Then I count the bunches ---- some have eight, some seventeen, some fifteen. I tell them to put the tops of the flowers together when they make bunches, but they don't understand that either. Almost it is easier to do everything by yourself.
"Now, I will stop. Already I've worked long enough. We will go to sit down in the other room. You say you like this wallpaper, my daughters put it on. Come this way through the kitchen and I will show you what they put in there."
We went to the kitchen, a cool, spotless, attractive room. An electric refrigerator was inserted in the backporch wall. I admired the wall paper which had been out up by the van Guysen girls. They had done a good job.
"Ya, it looks good, I think," my hostess agreed. "They fixed this whole room in one day by themselves. We were going to have everything painted, but then the iris froze this spring. My husband's main crop is iris, so we don't make any improvements until next year. It was just bad luck for everyone."
While we sat in the living room, Mrs. van Guysen told me how she came to Terra Ceia.
"When I was twenty-one year old, I come to America. That is twenty-five year ago already. I go to Iowa because my oncle live there, and I get a job working in a house. My husband worked on a farm. He had just come from Holland too. We meet each other and in several year we marry. We rent a farm in Iowa. It was a good farm and we make good for many years, then the war come. After the war prices go so low and the rent on our farm was so high --- it was $16.50 an acre --- that our hired man was faring better than we. We couldn't make nothing.
"One of our neighbors saw in a paper an ad about Terra Ceia. He thought he would like to go to the place but he was afraid he would not get enough for his expenses after he sold his furniture at auction. He wrote to the company what printed the ad and told them this. Do you know they sent him a personal draft for $25? How could they know he would use it to go to Terra Ceia? They sure trusted that man. He auctioned off his furniture and went to North Carolina. He wrote to us that we should come too, that the land was very rich. We didn't know what we would do. Then an agent of the company come to Iowa to see my hosband. The company was looking for farmers to settle in Terra Ceia; already they had trouble with people who wanted to do nothing but sit on the porch all day in the shade. The agent came to offer to my hosband a free trip if he wanted to go and look at the farm, so my hosband thought he would see that kind of place it was before he sold everything and brought us along. Before he left Iowa, he made out bills of sale for the furniture. Then, if he decided to stay he could send a telegram to me and everything would be ready for me to leave. Less than a week after he left, I get a telegram from my hosband saying for me to sell everything and come with the children to Terra Ceia.
"I hated this place at first. So hot it was and so different from anything I had seen before! We lived then on the East end, that is where Mrs. Tancrelle lives now. We get to know some few families what we liked very much, but we could not bear the life under the manager who was then in charge of the farm Mr. Nicholson. He was just a mean sort. To look at him even made me almost sick --- he had such a great big ugly face and thick lips that turned out at you. He talked to all the people in a mean, bossy way --- like they were Negroes even. My hosband raised truck. There was no market for it, but Mr. Nicholson thought he could sell it. He never did. He couldn't do anything but boss and make the people angry.
"At the end of the season everyone that worked under that man, they move away. My hosband stay eight months, then he say we will leave too. Mr. Nicholson came to us and tried to talk so nice, he say he thought we were friends, and he beg us to stay. But we go to Michigan to raise bulbs. My hosband don't like the climate there, it is too cold. When he get an offer from a company in Hew Holland, Hyde County, he decides to come back to North Carolina.
"A company in the North had drained that Lake Mattamuskeet in Hyde County, and they get four Dutch families to come there to experiment with farming. They pay us a salary, it don't matter if the crops fail or what. That was such a terrible place, I did not believe I could keep living. It was low and damp, there was no town anywhere near, and the mosquitoes --- they swarmed in black clouds over everything. My hosband was growing acres of melons. One day there come nine inches of rain on the fields, then the sun came out. Every melon plant was burned up --- turned yellow and died. That was the last thing we could bear, my hosband says we will go back to Michigan. The company wanted us to stay. They say we have nothing to worry about, we get our pay every week and they take the losses, but all four Dutch families leave.
"When we go back to Michigan, our luck is no better. The first year our celery froze, our onions blew away, and our chickens die of disease. We get a letter from Mr. van Dorp and he says there is a place for us on Broad Acres at Terra Ceia if we will come back. I remembered the place where all the people were unhappy and that terrible Mr. Nicholson bossed us like dogs. I did not want to come back. But there was nothing else to do, and again we sold our furniture to move.
"It was four years ago we came back. This time I like Terra Ceia much better. There are more Dutch people here, we have our church, and everyone is better contented. It is better when they grow flowers. We rent our farm this time from Broad Acres and Mr. van Dorp is the manager. He is a good manager, never bossy or mean like Mr. Nicholson. This year we rent about 100 acres what cost us $5.00 an acre. It is safer to rent land so than it is to own it. Na, we not sure we would like to have a place what belong to us.
"I tell my husband this time I don't move anymore; I am tired of selling everything. I tell him this furniture is here to stay."
Both of us glanced around the room, at the heavy red plush chairs and sofa, at the organ standing across one corner, at the center table covered with a Dutch rug, at the large, framed photographs of relatives on the walls. "Ya," said Mrs. van Guysen, "The Dutch like things cosy."
***
I had been told that the Watsons lived "down in the woods near the swamp" and I left the broad stretches of field behind me to pick my way down a watery little road that led between dense thickets, occasionally cleared out to make space for potato patches. After a while the potato patches disappeared, the woods seemed to become larger and denser, everything was very still except for infrequent bird calls and the humming of the mosquitoes which rose up from the dank earth to swarm about my head. I was wondering if I had come the wrong way when a turn in the road disclosed ahead of me a cleared space and a house --- a house weathered to a greyish-green which seemed to combine the shades of foliage and earth surrounding it. It was one of the steep roofed cottages so common in the low country, but this one had a broad front porch and a kitchen which was connected with the main part of the house only by a plank walkway.
A woman wearing a dark blue cotton dress stood on the walkway and watched as I came through the gate and crossed the yard. She was lean, sharp nosed, wrinkled. Behind her in the doorway was a big, husky girl holding a broom.
"Well, I was jest a-sayin to Hazel here, who in this world could that be a-comin?" Mrs. Watson said in her quick, mountain twang after I had introduced myself. "I knowd I never had seed ye before. Well, come on in and set down. This ain't much of a house, but hit'll keep the hot sun off'n ye."
We stepped from the walkway into the living room. The floors were bare, the walls were bare except for peeling whitewash and one small calendar. A cheap three-piece wicker suite, two tables, thin, drooping curtains at the windows --- that was the furniture. It was a very clean room.
"This here house is over one hundred years old," Mrs. Watson announced after we were settled.
"It sure looks like it," Hazel, who was sprawled in a rocker with the broom lying against her legs, grinned broadly and shook back her long bob.
"They've been a-promising to fix it up ever since we come here at the first of the year, but they never have got around to doing anything yet. I was telling Hazel this morning that if they don't come next week, I'm a-goin to git me some slats to nail over them holes in the floor by the fireplace so I can keep the snakes out of the house. I despise to think about getting in the bed with a snake. I'm as bad about a snake as my youngest boy is about a chinch. He about has a fit if he sees one. I've always kept my beds shut of 'em, but the other night he stayed over with another boy and he come home a-saying he wasn't going to sleep away from home no more, he had woke up and found a chinch on him. Looks to me like this old house would be full of 'em, but I've not found ary one. Maybe the lime on the walls has killed them out. I was telling Hazel the other day if I did happen on one, I was going to pour scalding water over every speck of floor and wall, and the ceiling too if I have to. That will get them, I don't care what people say.
"I jist want you to come here and look at the front porch --- hit's about knocked clean away from the house. Seems like the house is gitting one-sided and drawing away from the porch --- that gap between 'em is growing bigger all the time. Some morning I look to come out here and fine the porch settin out in the front yard, all by hitself.
"Now, I'm not complaining against Mr. Snow, I reckon he's jist too busy to git down here and his brother's been away. But he could spend forty dollars and get this place in right good shape, whereas if he waits till everything is plum in rack and ruin, hit'll cost him a sight.
"I reckon hit don't look much like it, but we put a lot of work on this old house, don't we Hazel? Every single week in this world we scour this whole house --- that's how-come we look so nasty this morning. Me and Hazel was up here by five o'clock to git our work done while hit was cool.
"But we don't git much company since we've been a-living here in the swamp and I sure didn't look for nobody this morning." She ran a roughened hand over her straight black hair and pulled the skirt of her dress closely about her bare legs trying to hide them.
"My legs is so red and scaly, I look like I've got the pellagri, but I've sure not. Jist let me stand out in the sun to do my wash and my arms and legs both gits burnt up and peels this a-way. The sun in the mountains where we come from never done 'em in no such manner. This sun down here is different and the air's different. Law, there's times in the summer when I'd give anything I've got for a chunk of that good mountain air.
"I was raised up there where they have good air and water --- right near Bryson City and after I was married we rented around up near Sylvi and Waynesville; some of the farms we had is on that land that's been took over by the government to make the Smoky Mountain Park. That park has sure ruined the mountains all right. The government bought up all the timber land that folks could make money on, so there's nothing much left for the people who lived there. My mother, she owned a farm and the government took it for $3,100. My sister had one too. When the government come along to take her place, she said she'd not let 'em have it for her husband was dead leaving her with seven head of young'uns to raise and she didn't know how she could care for them if she had to sell out and move off her place. She wouldn't git enough money to buy another one as good, and all her fruit trees and things she had set out were there where she intended to stay. Well, they done everything they could to git her off, but she didn't move. They condemned her place and put the money in the bank for her. She wouldn't touch nar' penny of the money, and the first thing you know the bank went broke. I reckon they give up trying to move her off, for she's laying right there on her farm yet. The government considers that hit owns the place, they don't allow her to lay an axe to a bush without asking them, but she don't care just as long as she can stay there and raise her younguns. She's even got 'em to repair the house and fix things up to look a little better for when tourists come by.
"I reckon we never would have left the mountains, but a man from this part of the country used to come up there every summer and he wanted us to come down and work on his big farm near New Bern. So we come. I wisht you could have heard my girls carrying on when we left! When we come through the main street of Sylvi on the truck with our stuff, Hazel and one of my older girls was hollerin' and bawling loud as they could. You'd a thought they was leaving this world for good.
"We could have made good on Mr. Keyes' place. The farming was good and we had good luck with the crops. Mr. Keyes give us the best house and treated us so nice, 'till all the other' renters got downright jealous. They never showed it to our faces --- would come over and talk so sweet while they was ramming down the best vittles I could cook, then they'd go off and talk about us behind our backs. They went to Mr. Keyes about it, but he told us not to pay no attention to it. Well, I ain't wanting to stay where somebody's ding-donging me all the time, so when we was asked to clear off a pine thicket and farm the land that had just been cleared, we knowed hit was time to emit. Mr. Watson cleared the thicket, and we left to come over here and work for Mr. van Dorp.
"These Terra Cee people was right funny at first. I'm one that likes to git friendly with folks and gabble with 'em when there ain't no work to do, but this crowd was different. Except the Dutchies. They was friendly, come to see me and asked me to go to church with them. So when I lived on Mr. van Dorp's place, I vent to their church about every Sunday, The Dutchies are nice, friendly folks but they eat too much for me. Five times a day is too much.
"Mr. van Dorp is a good man. Last year my husband took with the heart trouble so bad he couldn't put in crop or work ar' bit. Me and the children worked by the day, when we could git it, and my son at the C C camp sent us $18.00 a month --- that was all we had to go on. Whenever we needed any money, Mr. van Dorp would always let us have it without saying a word. But there's one thing about him I can't figure. He'd cut his flowers and throw 'em in the ditch before he'd give one away. If there was a funeral, he'd send a sight of 'em, but I never knowed that man to offer me a flower the whole time we worked for him.
"Last year was such a bad year we come out just about as well as if we had tried to make a crop. We've got along even this year until just recently. Mr. Watson, had to git a loan to keep us running, but if hit's a good year we'll make out all right. I hope it'll be a good year. I believe it will."
The little girl who had been hovering near the door came in with a dust cloth and began to rub one of the tables energetically. She arranged several jars of salve and a bottle of pink lotion at the back of the table, then she held up a round centerpiece bordered with crochet.
"Mama, can I put this on the table?"
"Well, Ruth, Hazel was aiming to scour off them tables. There hain't no need to put it on yet."
"Mama, please let me."
"All right then, if you're bound to do it."
Ruth bent her pale yellow head over the task of getting the centerpiece in exactly the right place. She turned around to her mother, her face full of pleading.
"Oh Mama, please let me git a bunch of then roses to put on the table."
"Don't pull too many, Ruth, and you can. I like to look at the vine all covered with blossoms and you know I got Mis' Tancrelle a bunch yesterday evening. Hit's mighty briary. Watch out."
We vent to the door to watch Ruth selecting her roses from a trailing pink rambler which hung over the wire fence of a well tended vegetable garden. This garden was the front yard. Beyond it rose the green wall of the woods.
"Look out yonder at them woods," Mrs. Watson said. "I think that's the prettiest sight I ever did see. Many's the time I set in the toom where I can see out through the door, and just look. Hit's a pretty sight."
Toward the woods at the side of the house, a boy was hammering boards together and whistling lustily. His bare torso was brown and muscular.
"That's my boy who come home from the C C camp last week," Mrs. Watson explained. Well, he can be a help to his Daddy around here --- beings as the only other boy at home ain't but fifteen, but he shore hated to leave that C C camp over at Hatteras when his time was up. He can't talk about nothing else but what they done there. I reckon they treat them boys awful good, for he said that he's knowed fellers to cry when they was sent home.
"They learn 'em to work, though, and they got my boy so he don't mind gitting right down to doing something. When he come home and found there wasn't no outhouse on this place, he said he would build one and he set right to work. Today he aims to git it nailed up.
"It's a funny thing to me that as long as folks been a-living in this house, they didn't have no outhouse here. I reckon they just went out in the woods the way we've been a-doing since we moved here, but I'm not going to live no sech way any longer than I can help. You never know when a Nigger'll run acrost you.
"These Eastern folks down here has mighty queer ways of doing, and they eat queer too. They don't care nothing about canning stuff and putting things away for the winter like mountain people. Up there we can fruit and vegetables, make krout, put potatoes and apples up, and we bleach a sight of fruit to can in the spring. Here what do they do? They put out collards, and it's collards they eat all winter long. They don't have three or four vegetables and a meat when they set down to eat; everything goes in one pot and that's their meal. If they have a pot of collards boiled with a piece of meat and some dumplings, hit satisfies them. Did you ever eat any of them dumplings they make out of cornmeal and salt and water? Lord, they're hard enough to knock a bull down."
Back in the cool front room we admired the roses Ruth had arranged in a tin can from which the paper had been stripped. The child leaned against a wall, one bare foot on top of the other, and looked at us shyly.
"Ruth's my baby," her mother said. "She's the only one I've got in school now, and hit was so wet and bed last winter she couldn't git out to the road half the time to catch the bus. Hazel and my two boys has finished with all the schooling they're going to git, and my two oldest girls is married, One of them lives up in the mountains. I'd sure like to buy me a bus ticket and go up there. If we make anything this fall, I'm a-going.
"Wisht I could go this sunder when hit's so hot here. When we lived over on the road last summer we could git ice from the truck every day; this summer if we want ice, we'll carry it from the road through the woods about a quarter a mile. Hit's hard to keep your stuff when you've not got any ice. We don't have ar' cow so there' not no milk to keep, but if we buy meat we've got to eat it up right now or hit'll spoil. I wisht you could see my children when we get ice sometime and have ice tea --- they'll fight one another over it, they love it so good."
Hazel rose, stretched her splendid body, "I reckon I better get out to the road now, Mama," She went to the kitchen to wash and comb her hair.
"We git our groceries from Miss Dolly's filling station or from one of the grocery trucks that comes by along the road every day. There's two or three of 'em. You can leave an order with 'em and they'll bring your stuff the next day, or you can buy what you want right there on the truck. Inside hit's fixed up exactly like a little store.
"Everybody thinks hit's right funny fer me to like living way off here where you have to carry everything from the road through the woods, but I like it. If they'd git the house fixed up, I'd be content to stay on here --- if we can make it all right. Mr. Snow is nice, but you take if someone else was to manage this place, we might not git along at all. We might have to move in three or four years. Well, I reckon if we can't git no money, we can see something of the world anyway. Look where all we've been already ---- from the mountains clean down to here and if we go somewhere else after this, we'll see another part of the world.
"This house looks downright bare and I know it, but we don't keep no furniture except enough to fill a truck. Renters don't never know when they're going to move on."
She looked out the door to the green of the woods. "If I could jist take them with me when I go."
***
Jim Lovett is a Negro. He commands considerable respect from the community, not only because he is a preacher in one of the two churches at the Negro settlement of White Six ---- he is a landowner as well.
On one of his plots of black earth, Jim Lovett built a small white house and Sarah, his wife, coaxed thin little borders of verbena, roses, and privette to grow along the edges of the bare front yard. It was in this yard that Sarah stood with me one fresh May morning, while three small boys and one girl looked up at us with solemn black eyes.
Sarah's voice was as soft and charming as her personality. She had a way of cocking her head to one side and squinting at the sky as she talked.
"There's hardly anywhere a person can go to get a living anymore. My people moved over here from Hyde County because they couldn't make anything there --- now Terra Cee is just as bad. It wasn't always this way. When my husband come there was plenty of money and work. A friend of his come down here to work and wrote back that if Jim wanted to make money he better come to Terra Cee, that there was a sight of folks working there and not a barber in the place. He was right. Not long after Jim came here, he had saved up enough to buy a lot; after we got married he bought another one and built this house. Both of us had some education; we been through high school.
"Jim gave up barbering and went to farming. It was good for a while, but lately crops have been so dull there's many a time in the last few years we wished we were rentin'. Believe we'd been better off because there wouldn't have been no taxes to pay. This year we're farming some of Mr. Snow's land on two-thirds --- we supply the team, the seed, fertilizer, everything, and give one third of the crop for rent. Likely as not the crop won't bring enough to pay for itself.
"Jim don't get any regular amount for his preaching, only just what they can give him, so that don't bring in much. I works in the field by the day, when I can get it. Everybody was mighty hurt this year when the flower crop froze; it knocked so many out of work --- especially the women folks. Out here in White Six where most of 'em work by the day it's been a hard spring. Two of these little chill'un I'm keeping today belongs to a neighbor of mine who's been sitting at home worrying for a month because there wasn't nothing for her to do. Today she got a job digging iris. That'll bring her a dollar for every day she works.
"It's a good thing so many of the White Six people owns their houses and enough ground to have a garden, some chickens, and hogs. They manage to raise most of what they has to eat, anyway."
Sarah Lovett's eyes were no longer scanning the edge of the sky. She was looking across a narrow field to where decaying, patched together huts, a dingy church, and a drab wooden schoolbuilding clustered under the green trees. Three teachers come from Pantego to teach about "ninety head of children" in that little schoolhouse --- when the parents want to send them. They are children who rarely have milk to drink, because, so far as Sarah Lovett knows, not a family in White Six owns a cow.
***
Beside the road three tenant houses stood in bare, black dirt. The hot sun beat upon them mercilessly so that children had stopped their play and crawled into the small squares of shade cast by front porch roofs. The children in two houses were black, but staring at me from the porch of the center house were white ones --- two small boys in overalls and. a tiny girl in a tight oink dress. All of them were incredibly filthy. Black dirt had mingled with smears of food on faces and clothes, had coated bare feet, legs, arms, and had given their tow heads a greyish tinge. These were the Blake children, and as I went to the kitchen to find their mother they peered around the corner of the house to watch and follow me.
A fire was burning in the iron cookstove. On top of it two flat irons were heating and a big, black iron pot with a tin cover gave off a thin thread of steam which threw the odor of cooking beans into the stifling air. The dim, unpainted room was almost destitute of furnishings. Besides the stove there was a crudely built cabinet, two greasy looking split bottom chairs, and the table at which Mrs. Blake was ironing.
"Hit's hot, oilroight, this morning --- maybe hit'll be a little bit cooler for you here," she remarked in the soft coastal dialect as she moved a chair near the door for me and went back to the wooden table which had been padded for ironing with a blue and white baby blanket. The clean clothes lay in a dingy heap on a chair. None of them had been starched or dampened.
Mrs. Blake moistened her finger with saliva and tried the iron, then she crossed to the stove to get a hot one. She was a sturdy, stolid looking woman --- broad, bare feet; substantial ankles; well developed chest and arms; regular features. Her blue eyes were bland and prominent.
"Hit's a hot day to be ironing," she said, folding a faded blue shirt haphazardly. "Oi aimed to git at it yesterday, but oi worked in the field instead.
"These clothes is 'bout as black as before oi washed 'em. But a wind come up before I could bring 'em in the other evenin' and hit blowed loose dirt from the field all over 'em." One side of her sandy colored bobbed hair fell in Mrs. Blake's face and she tucked it behind her ear.
"Hit's about as bad here as it was in Hoide County where we come from. Everything gits black. Look at them young'uns. Oi been aimin' to git them cleaned up, but looks like oi hain't never got to it.
"Oi don't spend no time laying in the bed late neither. Every morning Oi'm up here early to git moi husband and his brother their breakfast before they go to the fields. We're a-farming sixty acres for Mr. Radcliff on halfs, this year, and we're, puttin all sixty in corn and peas. Potatoes don't bring nothing any more. Mr. Radcliff ain't got but around twenty-five acres of them hisself. My husband's brother he farms the land we've got whilst my husband has day work. That a-way we have something to live on 'till the crops is ready.
"We'd a sight rather rent on shares as to pay cash rent. Cash rent if you don't make no crop, you've got your rent to put out jist the same. We've did both. In Hoide we was on shares, and hit paid roight good. My daddy was with the same man there for nearly bout twelve year, till he took a notion to move over to Terra Cee after we come. We been here eight year, we farmed fer Mr. Boshen and Mr. van Dorp and Mr. Radcliff on cash rent and on shares. We don't like cash rent."
Again Mrs. Blake tucked the falling hair behind her ear, "Mr. Radcliff said t'other day folks was going to have to wash their potatoes this year. Lord, but that there will mean a sight of work. Hit's work enough to pick them things up and grade 'em and sack 'em ---- Oi know. Many's the toime Oi've bent in the hot sun picking potatoes off the ground. Hit gets your back till you can't hardly straighten out when you quit; Oi'm thirty-foive year old and Oi'm getting stiff I reckon. But you can make ten cent a hour at it and Mr. Radcliff's done promised me Oi could work again this year."
Mrs. Blake out the iron down quickly. "Lord, I smell them beans scorching; Oi'll bet my dinner is burnt clean up." She rushed to the stove and pushed the pot lid off with such haste it clattered to the floor; she got a dipper of water from the bucket on the shelf and poured it into the stiffened white mass of beans, stirring the top of them carefully. The little boys drew near to watch, but the little girl slept peacefully on the grease spattered floor, her pink dress and bare flesh black with crawling flies.
"Moi husband loikes these droid beans when they're scorched a little bit, but I'm afeard these is burnt so bad he'll not eat these today or else he'll have to make his whole dinner off of cornbread. Hit's too late to cook any more now."
***
I had passed the house several times, but I had always thought it deserted. There had never been anyone near the blackened, warped structure with its crumbling foundations, broken windows, and crooked front porch until the morning I met Joanna Credle.
She was standing in the barren front yard when I stopped to ask directions --- a wiry little Negro woman with a bony, chocolate brown face, a few yellowed tusks of teeth, and grey showing in her tight little pigtails. But in spite of these signs of age there was a fierce vitality about Joanna Credle.
"You dis wait heah till ah cuvahs dis rag I's weahing and ah'll show you de way myself," she said vehemently. "Esther Lee, you git dis heah lady a chair to set on de po'ch."
The big-eyed little girl, some ten or eleven years old, disappeared into the house for a chair. A young woman sat placidly on the ragged edge of the porch, holding a baby. She looked straight ahead of her; not once did she move her eyes or speak a word to me.
"Dis heah my granddaughter and her baby chile," Joanna explained, Esther Lee, she my granddaughter too. I got eight head of grandchildren in all, and two head of great-grand ones. Sho', I'm proud of 'em if I could jes' give 'em somethin once every while. Maybe I could if I didn't have to be stickin' somethin' in their bills all the time --- but das' de way it go. Ever'thing you makes got to go for something to eat to stick in dat bill."
Esther Lee came back with a splint-bottom chair which she placed carefully near the edge of the porch, and there I sat with the silent woman, the gurgling baby, the staring child until Joanna reappeared. She had covered the ragged sack of a garment she wore previously with a bright print (the old dress showed a little at the neckline). On her head was a big straw hat.
"Well, ah's ready to staht down de road," she announced. "Ah'll be back Mary, befo' long." The young woman continued to look straight ahead and did not answer.
It was a Pleasure to walk alone with Joanna. She had an easy, swinging stride, so rhythmic that it did not seem vigorous. "What we needs is a deaf and dumb horse," she chuckled. "You know what dat is don't you? Dat's what some folks calls a bicycle.
"I he'ad dat up in Po'tsmouth, Virginia one time. I got two bruthahs living up dere, and sometimes I goes up and stays with dem. Naw suh, I don' stay in dis place all de time. I wouldn' nevah come back to it no mo' if ah could find some other way to snake me a livin'. Fa'm wuk about all I know how to do so ah stays heah to help out my son-in-law. He rent dat place from Mr. Snow and he wuk on Mr. Snow place too --- he got he han's full.
"Ah been he'ah eight year, and ah knows dis --- Terra Gee sho' ain't what it onct was. Deh was de time when you could git along heah, and a puhson Iak any place wheh dey can make out food, but dem times is gone. I ain' had me a new dress since las' yeah and it's dis one whut a white lady give me las' summer.
"It's ha'd times for all de folks, de big ones is complaining too. Dey say dey can't make nothin anymo', dat corn and potatoes don't bring in nothin', but howcome dey keep tendin' co'n and potatoes? If it was me, I'd fin' somethin' to tend that would bring somethin' in. Yas suh, somebody mus' make somethin off'n whuts raised or dey wouldn' keep on wid de same thing all de time.
"Even when you don't make, you got to fill dat ole bill. Dey talk bout folks stealin', but if you don' have nothin' to put in your bill you'se sho' goin' to get it some way --- you'll steal to get it, if dey ain't no other way. What if you is put on de road or de penitentiary? Dey'll feed you in den places, you ain' rot nothin' to wurry bout no mo' den. Ah's tellin' you somethin raight now --- if the United State guv'ment and the No'th Cahlina guv'ment would see to it dat folks gets enough to eat, the penitentiaries wouldn't be so full up no mo'. Dey ought to know folks has to fill dat bill."
We were walking along a road that ran between wide fields. Far across the flat stretch we could see a woman running and waving her arms. "Mamma, mamma," she screamed shrilly, "Come back, come back. Mamma, come back."
Joanna stopped and looked with disgust at the distant figure. "Da's my daughter. She afraid I talk too much. Dey all time trying to tell me whut I mus' and mus'nt do and dat make me mad. I don' belong to nobody in dis world but myself and God."
And we walked on down the road together.