John Campbell,
Overall Factory Worker.
Nashville, Tennessee.
Interviewer, Aswell.
I'D RATHER DIE
Rain lashed, the windows in gusts and somewhere immensely high and remote thunder muttered. Inside the pie Wagon was bright hot light, the smell of greasy fryings, of dish water, beer, and stale cigarette smoke.
The young man with the dark broad face and heavy shoulders poured his beer. "Might as well go on talking," he said. "Looks like this rain's caught me here for some time. I live a mile from the end of the car line here and I'd be drenched before I could get home. Wet enough as it is." His curly hair dripped and the gray work shirt was mottled with rain.
From the cheap radio above the counter, where Gus the owner of the pie wagon leaned chewing on a match stick, the pant and grunt of a Negro singer came through a hammering beat of orchestration.
"Flat-ah foot-ah floogie
"With-ah floy-floy-
"Floy-doy, floy-doy, floy-doy."
The young man got up from the table, stepped across, and rolled his emptied bottle down the counter. "For god's sake, Gus, can't you turn that racket off?"
"Sure, Jeans" Gus nodded. He turned and clicked the switch. "These here popular songs gits crazier everyear. Nothing good on the radio no more but the Saturday night barn dance. I keep the doggone thing on all the time for the customers but it's got so I don't no more hear it than nothing. Gits to be a sort of silence, that noise does."
Gus took the bottle and dropped it in a case. Then he shuffled behind the beaver-board partition to wash the dishes left by the supper crowd. "Y'all need anything, just call me," he said.
<text not clear> dribbled salt over the head of foam in his chill-beaded glass. "Well, as I started telling you, I went to work for Travis and son a few weeks after Dad died. It's an overall factory--Everwear brand, you know. The name Travis and son doesn't mean anything now. The Travises drank themselves to death a long time ago and the company's run now by Old Dave MacGousincal and his four boys.
"I never in my life dreamed I'd ever have to work at that place. Of course, Dad Was a pattern-maker there and worked for. Old Dave over forty-five years. But if things hadn't gone the way they did, I'd never known what he went through to keep us alive all those years. Well, after Dad's death when the bottom dropped out from under the family I couldn't find a job anywhere. Finally I applied to Old Dave Mac Gounigal.
"It was the first time I'd ever seen him. He's a tall man, kind of bent over, and with a long face and a long nose. He used to have a map hair, they tell me but now his head's as blad as a Grass door bush and just about as <text not clear> He looks glum and sour all the time and turns his head sideways and snaps at you when he talks.
"'I'll give you something, boy,' he told me, 'but you've got to work.'
"'I'll do my best, 'I said, just like the boy in the books.
"'Well,' he said to me, 'you needn't think that because you've got that high school diploma you can sit around on your tail here and talk Latin. We work here, boy. I put on overalls and work like the rest. You soldier on me and I'll fire you like a shot-- understand?'
"I stood up straight and looked him in the eye. You're supposed to do that, you know, to show you've got character. I said, 'You can depend on me, sir!'
"'All right,' he said. 'I'll expect you to report to the stock room at seven-thirty Monday morning. And I mean on the dot! I really don't need you, mind, but I'm putting you on because you're one of Bob's boys. Clear out now, boy. I'm busy.'
"Seemed to me at the time that the job was something handed down out of heaven. I was so happy and relieved I didn't even ask the old man how much he was going to pay me. Rushed on home as fast as I could go to tell Mama.
"'Work hard,' she told me, 'and Mr. Mac Gonnigal will certainly advance you. Your father was a valuable man and they'll keep their eyes on you. Wait and see.'
"I promised I would. I guess I was about as happy as I'd ever been in my life.
"I can tell you I didn't feel that way when the end of the first week came around. I drew six dollars and fifty cents.
"But there's a lot before this that I'd better tell.
"I don't ever remember want or any feeling of insecurity when I was little. Dad made good money in those days-- say, about fifty or sixty dollars a week. You know, a pattern maker has a pretty important job in an overall factory. If the patterns he lays out aren't right to the fraction of an inch the cutters will ruin a lot of goods. There's a good deal of figuring to it, complicated figuring, and he can't make mistakes. Dad never learned mathematics because he hadn't had a chance to go to high school. But he'd worked out a system of his own with all sorts of funny little signs and symbols. Nobody else understood it. He could take a problem of figuring up goods and have it done in a minute where some of the efficiency experts Old Tom had in from time to time would take an hour to work it. And Dad's would be nearer the right answer than the experts. The boys in the cutting room told me all about it when I came there to work. So they paid Dad a pretty good salary, though not what he was worth.
"We had our own home in <text not clear> and we had a car. My two older brothers and my sister finished high school. My oldest brother, after being a salesman for a few years with <text not clear> Shoe Company, worked his way through Columbia University I don't guess he could have done it by work alone. But he won one scholarship after another and finally a traveling fellowship that gave him a year in Europe. After that he came back and went into business in<text not clear> My next oldest brother got a job on a newspaper after high school. Mother'd wanted him to be a lawyer but he wasn't interested. Sister married and moved away.
"The first hard times I remember came in 1933, when I was in the eighth grade. Travis and son shut down and for six months Dad didn't draw a penny. Things must have been pinching for two or three years before that because by that time the house was mortgaged and the money spent. I don't know much about the details. Anyhow, my brother in Chicago couldn't help much. He was barely holding his job up there. My brother who worked for the newspaper was cut to practically nothing. He made enough to pay his expenses and that's about all. Then they cut the staff and let the youngest reporters off and he was one of them.
"Then we wore really up against it. For a whole week one time we didn't have anything to eat but potatoes. Another time my brother went around to grocery stores and got them to give him meat for his dog--only he didn't have any dog. We ate that dog meat with the potatoes. I went to school hungry and came home to a house where there wasn't any fire. The lights were cut off. They came out and cut off the water. But each time, as soon as they left, my brother went out and cut it on again with a wrench.
"I remember lying in bed one night and thinking. All at once I realized something. We were poor. Lord! It was weeks before I could get over that. I was ashamed to look at anybody and to talk to them. I thought everybody was saying to themselves, 'This <text not clear> boy is poor.'
"I won't go into all the hard times we had. I hate to think of them. I'll just tell a little. Well, we lost our car and our house and kept moving from one house to another. Bill collectors hunted us down and came in droves. Every now and then my brother or Dad would find some sort of odd job to do, or the other brother in Chicago would send us a little something. Then we'd go wild. I mean we'd go wild over food. We'd eat until we were sick. We'd eat four times a day and between meals. We shouldn't have done it. We ought to have gone easy on it, but we just couldn't help ourselves. The sight and smell of food sort of made us crazy, I guess.
"The winter of 1934 was the hardest time of all. Dad was working again at Travis and son but he wasn't making but around ten dollars a week. My brother was selling a little stuff free-lace, but it hardly amounted to enough to pay for postage and typewriter paper. And debts had piled up until we couldn't get credit anywhere.
"We were completely out of coal one time when we were living away out at the edge of town. The weather was freezing bitter then, so at night my brother and I would bundle up and go about a quarter of a mile away to a big estate on the Tennessee River. We made a hole in the fence and stole some of the wood that was piled a good distance from the house. We just walked in and got it. I don't remember that we tried to be quiet about it in particular.
"We hauled that wood through the fields in a coaster wagon and a wheelbarrow. Lots of times we made nine or ten trips and worked almost -until morning. We took two or three whole stacks of wood that winter, and it's all that kept us from freezing. Mama never did ask us where the wood came from. She always knew somehow when we were going to do it and those nights she went to bed early before we left. I was thirteen then and it was kind of exciting to me. Sometimes I was afraid we'd be caught, but we never were. I don't know why. My brother used to keep one heavy stick of wood sticking in his overcoat pocket while we were taking the stuff. I asked him why he did it and he told me if anybody found us out and tried to stop us I'd see why.
"Another time when we were out of anything to eat and were getting pretty hungry, he went around looking queer. I saw him slip out late at night and he had a foot-long piece of Iron pipe with him. I knew he was going to try to knock somebody in the head to get their money. I stayed awake, scared stiff until he came back. He mustn't have found anybody, because he didn't bring home any money. Maybe he got cold feet. I've never asked him about it.
"We sold everything we could except the piano.
"Mama wouldn't let that go. It was a Steinway upright and she said we'd never get another one if we sold it. All of us had taken our music lessons on it--especially my sister, the one who died when I was little. I guess that was the real reason Mama wouldn't let it go.
"After awhile things got some better. My brother in Chicago got so he could send money home and my other brother got another newspaper job. Dad went back to regular work at Travis and son though he only got about twenty dollars a week. We weren't over the hard time because of the debts from the bad years. Still, compared to those years we were just sailing.
"I went on through high school and made good marks. In my senior year I had an average of ninety-eight and was elected class president and was valedictorian at graduation. I expected to go to college the next fall. Now I can't see how on earth I could have expected to. I knew that there was no money for it. But somehow or other it just seemed to me that a way would turn up.
"Mother felt the same about it. She'd say, 'If you want a college education badly enough you will get it. Any boy who is determined can work his way through. Brother worked his way through Columbia and you can work your way through U. T. All great men have had to struggle.'
"Well, I'd think of what I'd read about Lincoln and all those others and it seemed to me I could do it, too. You see, I thought I was going to be a great man."
Jimmy drained his glass. He set it down with a thump. The rain was drumming steadily on the roof. There was a dull clatter of Gus' thick crockery from behind the partition. Gus was whistling You're The One Rose.
Legs extended, hands in his pockets, Jimmy slouched down in his chair. "I was going to be great. I didn't know just what sort of great, but I was going to be a world-shaker." He gave a short dry laugh.
"The first of the summer after I graduated I stayed at home studying-- reviewing my high school books. Mother wanted me to do that so I'd be ready for college. She had a notion that my brother in Chicago would be able to scare up the money for my first year in The University of <text not clear>. After that, of course, I'd get along on scholarships, I kind of hoped football would help there, too. You see, I'd been a good linesman in high school. And since the football season and the good eating we'd begun to have, I'd been filling out. Gained twenty solid pounds and that brought me up to a hundred and ninety.
"That summer we had a scare. There was some sort of strike at Travis and son. Seems that after the N. R. A. blew up Old Dave put the girls in the sewing room on piece work and some of them just couldn't make a living. They protested but it didn't do any good. They rocked along then for a long time, just talking. Then some organizer came and got them to go out on a strike. The men went out, too, and they ganged around the entrance blocking off part of the sheet.
"Dad didn't know what to do. He walked the floor at home. He said that the girls were right, but he didn't believe they could win out because the mayor had said he'd back Old Dave to the limit. I remember Mama telling Dad, 'Oh, <text not clear>, please don't do anything foolish: We've been through such a hard time. What on earth would we do if we had to face it again? I couldn't bear it!'
"So Dad went to work the next morning. I had some errands to do for Mama I went to town with him. Old Dave had called up and said her a have policemen to carry Dad through the strikers. When we got there the policemen were ready all right. They told Dad they'd rush him through. He started out, with me tagging behind. Then he made me go back to the corner and started again. The strikers were bunched up at the door of the factory. They weren't saying a thing or making a move. Just men and women standing there watching.
"I saw Dad stop again. He had an argument with the police. I heard him say pretty loud, 'No, I'll go by myself or I won't go at all.' He said it two or three times.
"The policemen were mad. 'Okay, Cap,' I heard one of them say. 'It's your look-after, not mine.'
"Dad walked on without them, but they sort of edged along some way behind.
"All at once the strikers began yelling and meeowing. Dad walked on. When he was right at them, about a dozen men and women grabbed at him and started tearing his coat and shirt.
"I started running down there and so did the police.
"But right then the strikers got into a free-for-all fight among themselves. Dad had a lot of good friends among them and these friends jumped on the ones who'd grabbed him. They pulled them off and Dad walked on through and went into the factory. He never was bothered again. Old Dave and the others had to have the police to get in and out. Dad came and went without anybody trying to stop him.
"So the strike petered out and the strikers were out of jobs. Some of them came to Dad and he tried to get them back on. But Old Dave said he wouldn't touch a one of them with a ten-foot pole.
"One night late in July Dad didn't come home at his usual time. Hours passed and there wasn't any sign of him. Mother and I were worried to death. We didn't have a 'phone then and at first mother was ashamed to ask the neighbors. Finally, around seven o'clock she did, though, and called Old Dave. He said Dad had left at the usual time.
"So Mama told me to walk to the car line and go to town and see if I could find Dad. 'I just know something terrible has happened,' she said. Base has never been late. He wouldn't be if something hadn't happened.'
"I started out from home running. It was a mile to the car line, so I took a short cut through the woods. When I came out at the end of Terry Road, still running, I saw a man coming down the last hill. He was sort of weaving as he walked, taking uneven steps, and stopping every third or fourth step. Then I recognized his brown suit and I knew it was Dad.
"My heart almost stopped. I'd seen men walk that way before and I knew what it mean I kept on running.
"When I got to him, he just stared at me for a minute. His face was as white as a sheet. He looked awful.
"He said, Jimmy' Then he caught my arm to keep from falling. And when he was that close to me I could tell that he hadn't been drinking. I knew he was a sick man.
"It took us more than an hour to get home, because we had to stop and rest so many times. A little at a time Dad told me what had happened. He'd been waiting for a street car up Town when all at once he felt dizzy and had to sit down on the curbing. Every time he tried to get up things whirled and dipped so that he had to sit back down.
"'People laughed at me,' he said. 'Must have thought I was drunk. I tried to say something but I couldn't get a word out. I sat there I don't know how long. A while ago I felt steady enough to catch a street car and come on. I've never felt like this before. Just don't know what it could be.'
"Well, it was death coming on. Dad knew it, I believe, but I just couldn't imagine such a thing and Mama couldn't - either. Even when he had to go to the hospital and any fool on earth could see he was sinking. Yet I just couldn't get it through my head until Dad was gone. Then I felt like somebody had hit me with a hammer. I wanted to run, not anywhere, but just run till I dropped. I wanted to fight something and beat it with my fists and tear it to bits with my fingers. Never will be anything that can hurt me like that.
"The doctors never did know what was wrong with Dad. He was sixty, but there wasn't anything like cancer or tuberculosis. One of the doctors at the hospital told me that he was really just worn out completely. I guess he was right."
Jimmy <text not clear> called for his second bottle of beer. He drummed on the table and stared at his fingers while Gus was getting it. He didn't pour the beer in his glass this time. He drank from the bottle and didn't set it down until it was empty.
"Dad's insurance had lapsed during the hard time," Jimmy went on. "We had the funeral expenses and doctors' and hospital bills to pay. Now I know that the funeral ought to have been just as simple as possible. That's the way Dad would have wanted it. But at the time I didn't have any sense. Mama wanted the best and that damned undertaker was smooth. Every time he'd point out a casket and say, 'Now this is a fine piece of merchandise,' I felt like choking him. I was glad when Mama picked out a casket that cost four hundred dollars. She told them Dad had insurance so she could get it.
"I'll skip a lot now. I've already told you how I looked for work and couldn't find it and finally got put on as stock boy at Travis and son.
"The job was hard. Not on your mind but on your back and legs. You see, the stock room is in the basement. I bottle of beer. He drummed have to load lays of overall goods--I can tell you that stuff's heavy, too-- Into a big wheeled push-truck. Then I man-power that truck up a slope of concrete to the elevator door. The elevator takes me up to the cutting room where men cut the goods by pattern. In the cutting room I get the stacks of cut out goods and take it up to the sewing room and the girls sew the stuff into overalls. From the sewing room I haul the finished overalls down to the shipping room. Between times I unload lays of goods from trucks outside and haul it into the stock room or help load boxes of overalls to be shipped out. Fever a minute of rest.
"The cutters and the girls are on piece work, so they are always crying for more goods. Jimmy! Jimmy! Jimmy! Until I feel like I'll go crazy. I didn't think I'd ever get through that first week. When I came on, Fred, the other stock boy, let up and shoved a lot of the work he should have been doing on me. But I didn't know enough about the work to see what he was doing right at the beginning.
"When I started to work I laid out a schedule of what I wanted to do. I was going to keep up my study at home so if my brother in Chicago could help me I'd be ready to go on to college. He was already sending money home to Mama and my other brother was helping as much as he could, but he'd got married about six months before Dad died and had his own family coming on. Well, I was going to study. But I was so dog-tired every night when I got home that I just dropped in bed after I'd eaten and went to sleep. It wasn't sound sleep, either. I had nightmares of trying to buck a truck of goods up a steep slope, and the truck was as big as a house and the slope as high as a mountain, and Old Tom yelling and all of them yelling at me to hurry.
"So I said I'd study Saturday afternoons and Sunday. Sunday, anyhow. We hadn't gone to church for years, so Sundays were open. But I didn't do it. I had to do work around the house on Saturday and on Sunday I just couldn't make myself get up until almost noon. I'd read the Sunday paper and go to sleep lying on the sofa in the afternoon. I found I couldn't get anything out of reading. I used to like to read, but now I was always so tired-- tired down to my bones-- that I couldn't get any sense out of a book and I'd go to sleep trying to read it.
"All that winter and next summer I was hard at it. Got to know all the people at the factory and liked some of them pretty well. But I'll tell you I never before knew that such people existed. Most of them had come in Off of the mountains somewhere and they had such a funny way of talking that plenty of times I wouldn't know what they were saying.
"The girls were usually either sloppy fat or thin and dried up. Their hair all hung in strings and a good many of them dipped snuff and spit all the time. They wore the doggonedest clothes I ever saw, with their stocking wrapped around their legs in folds and full of holes and their heels run down. They told each other the slimiest jokes while they were working and they'd say things to you that would make you want to throw up. I've seen them have fights, pulling hair and scratching and biting.
"Some of them made as little as fifty cents a week. No, I mean it! Fifty cents a week! I've seen their pay checks. You see they were on piece work and hoped to get experience enough to make more. Others of them, the fast workers, made up to sixteen and eighteen dollars. They set the pace and everybody else had to measure up. The sewing room was right under the roof and in summer and I was good and glad that I did some of my work in the basement. It reached a hundred and twenty degrees on hot days in that place and the girls would keel over on the floor. Got so hot in July that Old Dave shut the factory down during the day and had us work at night instead.
"I didn't have as much to do with the girls as with the men. They were funny people and there was only one thing that would make any impression on them. If they didn't think you were tough, they'd pick you to pieces. I got in my bluff as soon as I saw how they were. I'm big and I can make my voice sound like a big dog growling, so I told them I'd studied boxing and how I'd knocked a lot of fellows out. They believed me and sucked up to me then-- even those that had been in jail and always carried knives. Anyway, most of them were awfully measly looking men. Not a beefy man among them.
"But they were tough. Always getting in knife fights on Saturday night out to Fount William joint and being thrown in jail. But my bluff worked and they left me alone. Some of them who hadn't gone on the strike had known Dad and they were always nice to me, too.
"All of them were afraid of Old Daves and hated him. They used to sit around at lunch eating their fried pies and egg sandwiches and talk about all the things they'd like to do to him. When he was around they just yes-sirred him like a bunch of niggers.
"He'd told me that he worked just like anybody else. Well, he does put on overalls and prowl all around. First he'll pop into the sewing room and then in the cutters' room. You can't tell when he'd be in a dark corner of the basement. He's always trying to find somebody loafing. It looks to me like it makes him happy when he can spot somebody and can bawl them out.
"Old Dave never has a pleasant word for anybody. When he's in the stock room it's 'Boy, get that truck moving! You look like the dead lice are falling off you! And, 'Damn it, you lazy no 'count young-un, get those lays loaded-- hear me?' Work your head off and he won't give you the least little praise. Stop to get your breath and he's all over you.
"They say he's worried about conditions and that's what makes him so mean. The way I look at it, that's no excuse. Dad had a hundred times more worry than Old Dave, but the more worried he got the politer he was to you. And another thing-- Old a big man in the <text not clear>. You see his picture in the paper every once and a while. But you'd never know it at the factory.
"The five<text not clear> boys work in the office. I mean they're supposed to work there. I've never seen any of them but John do a tap. John's all right. I'll say this for him he does keep pretty busy. The other four just sit around and read the paper or some magazine. They come in late and go out to lunch early. They stay out two hours and hang over the telephone talking to girls in the afternoon and leave before quitting time. Old Dave raises the roof but they don't pay much attention to him. One thing, though. They all draw good salaries.
"I was saying that Old Dave didn't exactly choke you with praise. He dingdonged at me so that one day I got good and mad. For a minute I didn't know whether I was going to jump on the man and then go upstairs and clean up with his boys or whether I'd quit the job. But I didn't do either one. I said to myself, 'All right. I'll show the old son-of-a-gun. I'll work so hard he'll have to say something.
"I did it. I worked I thought I'd kill myself with it Fred, the other stock boy, told me I didn't have any sense. I worked a whole week that way.
"So when Saturday came Old Dave called me off and said he was going to raise my pay. There were two extra dollars in my envelope."
Jimmy laughed until his body shook.
"Yep-- two extra dollars. And Fred got fired and I had all his work to do as well as mine. Boy! Was I the bright one, though!
"I was so mad I couldn't get to sleep for hours that night. I did everything imaginable to Old Dave all the way from just knocking him down and stomping on him and burning the factory to cutting him up a little at a time.
"Well, I waited for a chance to get back on him. About a month later there was a big rush of order and things were humming and they had me hopping trying to keep the cutters and the girls in enough goods. So I caught Old Dave in the hall. I said, 'I want a raise, Mr<text not clear>
"He looked like he was going to bite my head off. 'You get back to work or I'll fire you.'
"'No you won't,' I said. 'I'll just quit right now.' I started off untying my apron.
"He grabbed my arm--see, he knew they couldn't break a new boy in right in the middle of the rush, and he knew he wasn't likely to get another one that would work as hard as I did.
"So he grabbed my arm and said, 'two dollars."
"I said, 'I'm worth fourteen a week.' That was almost double what I was making, but no more than he'd paid for both Fred and me. It looked like he was going to try to hit me. I kept on walking off, dragging him along because he still had my arm.
"Then all at once he turned loose. 'Twelve dollars. Take it or leave it.'
"You could tell he meant it. So I took the twelve. That's what I'm making now."
Jimmy got up and went to the window. The rain was little more than a misty drizzle now. The tires of the cars that flashed by on the highway sang against the wet asphalt.
"I'd better get going now, while it's slacked up," he said. "But first let me tell you the other surprise I've got for Old Dave.
"I'm quitting next Saturday. My uncle in Florida is sending for Mama to come and live with him. I've got enough money to pay my fare down there and when I get there he's got a job for me. Before I'd work in a place like this again--why I'd rather die first.
"Boy, will I tell Old Dave what I think of him! No, I don't really guess I will. What's the use in it? Anyhow, it's fun to keep on thinking that until the time comes. I can go to sleep grinning like a 'possum."