"HOW MANY DAYS HAVE I REGRETTED... !"
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall Area 6 - Athens and
John N. Booth Area Supervisor Federal Writers ’Project Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Georgia
July 7, 1939
June 25, 1939
Mrs. Mildred Lattrell McKinney (white) 331 Thomas Street Athens, Georgia Boarding House Operator S.B.H.
"HOW MANY DAYS HAVE I REGRETTED!"
The front door of Mrs. Moore’s boarding house was wide open, but it was some time before I received any response to ray raps. Finally a voice called from somewhere in the rear of the house. "Come on in. Just come on back to the kitchen. I’ll be through what I'm doing in a minute."
I walked the full length of the long bare hall - it was entirely without furniture - to the back porch where Mrs. Moore beckoned me to the kitchen, saying; "Just come in here with us." Turning to a little girl, apparently about thirteen years old, she ordered, "Celia, get one of them chairs out of the dining-room for the lady." The child obeyed, but to my dismay when I attempted to move the chair to a suitable spot for my note-taking it fairly came apart in my hands and fell to the floor. Mrs. Moore took the chair-back from my grasp and remarked:"It does make me so durned mad: I just can’t keep a thing nice. Them big old strapping men’ll just set down in a chair and lean back till every chair on the place is ruint, and then never say a word about it."
My hostess was industriously scrubbing a 3-year old boy in the kitchen sink. "Hold tight," she occasionally told him, end he would grip the faucets with both hands while she sauntered over to the cook stove, lifted a lid, and directed a surprising amount of amber-colored spittle into the stove. Then she would reach into a pocket of her pink house dress, draw out a small tin box, and replenish her mouthful of snuff before returning to the sink to resume the bathing of her child. "I’ll bet you don’t have a nasty habit like this," she said, referring to the snuff and spitting. "I wish I could stop dipping the filthy stuff, but it just seems like I can’t to save my life. I’ve dipped it all my life, at least, ever since I can remember. Soon as I git through washing Sonny," she continued, "we’ll go out on the front porch where it's cooler."
Heat from the wood-burning range was rapidly drying the kitchen floor, which had evidently been scrubbed just prior to Sonny’s ablutions in the kitchen sink. The kitchen table, cabinet, and linoleum square were clean and neat. His bath finished, the nude youngster trotted before us through the dining-room to a bedroom for his clothes.
The most conspicuous article in the dining-room was a huge electric refrigerator which, with the gleaning surfaces of the dining table end buffet, presented a marked contrast to the twelve battered chairs. The covers for twelve already in place on the white oilcloth featured a variety of patterns in cheap china; the silver was consistently dime store type. A conglomeration of articles was scattered helter-skelter on the buffet and mantel.
In the bedroom the bed of a very modern suite was covered with a heavy blue rayon spread. Mrs. Moore opened a cedar chest and inspected several faded little garments before she finally selected one that was much too small for the child, but she managed to squeeze him into it. When she had spit on the screen before the fireplace, she said:"I put out a new suit for him first, but since that’s all he’s got I guess I’d better save it. About two months ago I had another miscarriage, and in the six weeks I was in bed the niggers either stole or done away with everything we had that was fittin' to wear. Celia," she called, "take Sonny over to your house and put some adhesive tape on his toe. I can’t see how he blistered it unless he stepped on a hot coal that fell from the cook stove. That must be what he was squalling about this morning when we was so busy.
"Now I’m ready to get out on the porch in the cool," Mrs. Moore announced, and as I followed her through the hall I glanced through the open doors into the bedrooms. Some of the iron beds in the several rooms were white, others mahogany colored, and one was bi-colored. Their covers were hanging at all angles, as though people had been lounging on the beds since they were spread. In several of the rooms clothing was scattered about on the floor, on chairs, and on nails in the walls. With all the untidiness, everything seemed to be fairly clean.
Mrs. Moore seized a mahogany chair that was upholstered with black imitation leather, dragged it into the shade of a kudzu vine that screened one side of the veranda, and sat down without ceremony. I followed her example, but the wicker chair I occupied was very uncomfortable. The swing was piled high with dingy pillows. None of the other porch furniture offered better prospects of ease, so I remained in the rickety willow chair. Newspapers, and magazines of the "confession and true story" type littered the long reading table within easy reach of swing and chairs.
"I don't see what anybody would want to know my life story for," Mrs. Moore protested. "I’ve never known anything but worry and hard work ever since I was a little tiny girl running about on the farm before my father got down sick.
"I was born on a farm in Madison County in 1911, and I was one of four children - three girls and a boy. For several years before he died father was too sick to do any work, so mother and the two oldest children had to work in the field, while I, at seven years old, had to he nursemaid to my sick father and my baby sister. The doctor had said it was dangerous for father to be alone because he had a weak heart in addition to his tuberculosis, and he was apt to pass out just any time. I well remember how tired I'd get of staying at the house, and sometimes when I thought father was sound asleep I'd slip off to the field where the rest of the family was, only to he sent flying back to the house as soon as mother saw me coming.
"Before father got so sick he used to hitch up our old gray mare to the buggy and we’d ride around over the country on Sundays - that was in the days before cars was as plentiful out in the country as they are now. It wasn't long before mother would say whenever she left the house, 'Now, Marjorie, don't you leave your father. Do your playing close enough at hand to watch him careful.’ Once I was mean enough to say back to her, 'I ain't supposed to look after him. He ain’t my husband.' I couldn't seem to understand why I wasn’t free to frolic and play like other children.
"After father’s death we was awful lost and. scared. We couldn't "bear to stay by ourselves. At night we'd set out across the fields to spend the night at some neighbor's house if we couldn't get somebody to spend the night at home with us. Mother told us we couldn't go on like that for we just had to get used to staying by ourselves.
"Mother just had $17 left after paying father's funeral expenses and she applied that to what she owned on our little country home. To others it would have been a poor substitute for a home, but to us it was our mansion, for it was all the home we had. For eight years life went on about the same from year to year. True, I didn't have to stay in the house and take care of father and little sister any more, but I was with the others working away from the time the sun rose until after it got dark. The first year I was free to work with 'em, luck was with us. Cotton was 40 cents a pound, and we was able to finish paying off the land note. We was just about the happiest family in that community that Christmas, for we didn't owe nobody nothing. Our luck never lasted long, for the next year a hailstorm destroyed the crop; old Daisy, our cow, died; and we lost two pigs. What we consider the barest necessities of life now would have been luxuries to us that winter.
"There was a little white schoolhouse in a patch of woods about half-mile down the road from our house, where classes was taught three months in the summer after the crops were laid by, and three more months in winter after the crops were gathered and it was too cold to work in the field anymore. That little one-room schoolhouse could get awful hot in summer, then in winter it would go just as far the other way in being a cold place. An old stove was in the middle of the room, but it didn’t keep us half warm. There was only one teacher to teach all eight of the grades, so you can know we didn't learn much. There wasn’t any such things as report cards, and our only means of promotion was to finish a book on a subject, stand examination on it and then be assigned the next highest book on the same subject. Sometimes we stayed in the same book years. The teacher that was there the longest was an old man about sixty-five years old, if not older. You can just imagine now crabby an old person can get to be. We done everything we could think of to aggervate him. Each desk ’commodated two students. Maude, my desk-mate, was always doing something and then I'd get all the blame, like as not. Sometimes she’d give me a push and down in the floor I’d go. Then Old Cross Fatch - that’s what we called our teacher - would say, ’Now, Marjorie, go out on the porch and stand there until you make up your mind you can be a respectable girl.’ He never let me have a chance to explain anything, and I got many a whipping Maude deserved. Oh, how I did long to get even with her! Her father was a influential man in our little settlement and she seemed to have a lots easier time than I did as we grew up, but life wasn’t so kind to her later, for she fell in love with a married man and had a baby by him. Her father had him sent to the chaingang for a year. That never done no good, for as long as she and her child has got to live in the same settlement with that married man, the neighbors ain’t going to forget her sin or let her forget it either.
"I was just about eight years old when my oldest sister married. We had a right nice home wedding for her. She married a man that had quite a bit of money at the time, but of course her leaving home made it harder for me. I was old enough to wash, iron, milk, and work in the fields. About five years later my brother married. That ’most broke my mother's heart. Brother was so young to get married - he was only nineteen - and besides we never knowed what we was going to do, for we couldn't do much on a farm without a boy or a man to help us with the plowing.
"After many a sleepless night, mother decided to give up faming and to move near Athens. She got a job doing practical nursing, and that kind of business was right good in those days. For over a year she made a fair living for us. My baby sister and I spent that year with our brother on a little rented farm. Brother was awful hard on us little girls. Be just couldn't see no point in us going places or having any fun a t'all. Why, he wouldn't even let us go to church and to the neighborhood singings. We didn't have no other sort of entertainment in the country. One night, while a revival was going on, a girl friend and her brother came by for me to go with 'em to church. Brother said I couldn't go, and every time I started to dress and get ready, he blowed the lamp out. We used kerosene lamps, ’cause only a few of the well-to-do farmers was able to have those Delco light and water systems. My, but we thought they was wonderful! Well, brother blowed out the light so many times I just gave up and went to bed.
"Pretty soon after that when mother came for a visit I told her I simply wasn’t going to stay with brother no longer. She said, ’We’ll manage some way.’ My oldest sister had lost her husband and she had three little children to provide for. She had a little money, so she decided to move to Athens where she could take a business course, and to my great joy and delight we moved with her. I was sure life was going to be easier then, but I was badly mistaken. My duties included caring for the three children, washing big tubs of clothes and ironing them, as well as doing the housework and cooking. The more I done, the more my sister asked of me.
"When September came I was allowed to start to school. How embarrassed I was! There I was, thirteen years old and only in the sixth grade! Since I didn't have a report card my teacher decided I had better stand an examination. That examination didn't include any subject I had studied, and I was so scared I couldn’t even think of what I did know. As a result, I was sent back to the fourth grade. I was lots older than the other children in that grade. My dresses was far too long and they was big enough for two of my size. You. must can't hardly imagine how country-looking and ignorant I must have looked, and because I was so conscious of all this I ’most cried myself to death. I’d get so hungry watching the other children eating hot dogs and drinking chocolate milk that I'd say to myself; ’Some day, when I get enough money, I’m going to buy a dozen hot dogs at one time and eat every one of ’em.' I only went to school two years and stopped. At that time I felt like I’d rather go through life without a education than to be so humiliated. I never seemed to fit in with those children who was so much smaller and younger than I was. How many days have I regretted letting foolish pride ruin my life, for now I know that a education is the most valuable thing a person can hope to have. Only those of us who have to straggle for a living without a education can truly 'predate what it would mean to have one.
"When she finished her business course, my sister went to North Carolina to work. Mother was out of work at the time, and the dearest old woman, Mrs. Simpson, who ran a boarding house, told her if she would help her with the cooking, she would give the three of us a room and our meals. Mother used to sew until midnight and later to make a little extra money to pay for our clothes.
"Finally I got a job as salesgirl in a store on Saturdays and during the summer and Christmas holidays. The $1.25 a day they paid me seemed like lots of money to me, and it went to help pay for the few clothes that I had in those days. Mother always had been a good cook, and soon as she learned all the details of how to manage a boarding house we rented a place and she started keeping boarders. We was mighty lucky about being able to keep the house full of boarders. We had never been used to any servants and so we did all the work and our laundry too until it got to be too big a job for us. by that time we was taking in enough money to hire a cook and put our washing out. Then for the first time in all my life I was situated so as I didn’t have more to do than I could get done each day.
"When finances eased up a little I bought the very first nice dress I ever had. It cost $4 a yard. Silk was more expensive then than it is now, but it did last lots longer.
"About this time I met clem Hammond. Clem was such a nice boy! He had a good job, and it seemed to delight him to do a million pleasing little things for me. Why, he took me to the first picture show I ever saw. On my birthday that year he gave me a lovely ring. I never was as popular with the boys as the other girls because mother taught me that necking and petting would only lead to a bad ending.
"That next summer after Clem gave me the ring I went to the country to visit my cousin while a big revival was going on. We had to walk a mile to the church, and all the way there the first night my cousin was telling me about Sam, her boy friend. I'd gone to school with him when we lived in the country but hadn't seen him since we left there. He had always been my prince charming, but being so much older than I was he never noticed me. My cousin introduced us and his eyes met mine and helt my gaze for a full minute. I knew he belonged to someone else, yet I meant from that minute on to have him. That night I never heard a word the preacher said. After church I got the thrill of my young life when Sam asked if he could walk 'home with me.
"During that visit he came every night, and when I went back home I heard from him every day. Life seemed perfect. Christmas, he came for the week end with us and in that time we got engaged. Mother didn’t like Sam because he drank, but I wouldn’t listen to a thing she said about him after I told her of our engagement. The next fall Sam went to Florida to work, for I couldn’t stand the idea of having to live in the country again. Honest, I believe I’d have broke off that engagement if he hadn’t got work somewhere else. The next Christmas Eve I was working at one of the dime stores during the holiday rush -I’d been working at two different dime stores, off and on, for two years - and about six o'clock in the afternoon Sam came walking in the store. I saw him a few moments during the halfhour we had off for supper, and then went back and worked till midnight. Next morning early I caught a bus end went to visit one of my sisters for the holidays. I was sort of running away from fate. That night I went to a dance with another man, but when I got there the first person I saw was Sam and he was coming straight toward me. While dancing together we made our plens to get married rignt away the next day. I was under age and knew mother wouldn’t give her consent to the marriage, so I persuaded sister to sign the application, and to this day mother has never forgiven her for doing it, and she hasn't forgiven me for marrying against her will. Mother even wanted to have our marriage annulled, but I convinced her it was too late for that.
"Sam had to go back to Florida for three weeks and I stayed with mother. That time seemed more like three months to me. He came on back to Georgia, but he wasn't experienced or trained in any trade or profession and it made it hard for him to find work here. Finally he got work in a plow foundry at $12 a week. Luckily for us, it wasn’t long before he got a raise and by the time our daughter was born he was earning $75 a month. We didn’t have enough money saved up for hospital expenses so I stayed at home and let mother nurse me. She had had lots of experience on maternity cases and the baby and I done fine.
"Three months after the baby came Sam's boss died, and when the estate was wound up he was out of work again. The baby was sick and there was no income to take care of living expenses and doctor bills. To cap the climax, I got sick and the doctor said I had a strictured kidney and the treatments that he said were absolutely necessary cost $25 for each treatment. Those treatments nearly killed me. After being out of work seven months Sam got a temporary job in a chain grocery store here. Pretty soon they gave him steady work and made him manager of their store at Madison, Georgia. I was too sick to know or care what he was making.
"Another baby was on the way and I was staying at mother's house. Our little girl wasn't quite three years old when Junior came. In the meantime Sam's chain store stock was checked up short and he was sent back to Athens to work as assistant manager in a local unit of the same organization. They cut his salary and when Junior was born he wasn't making as much as a hundred dollars a month. We was buying a car and was afraid we would lose it, so we borrowed enough money from mother to finish our payments on it, and in addition to that she loaned us $95 to help out on our other expenses. We sure did have an hard awful hard time in those days.
"Sam soon went to work for another chain store organization and within just a few months they made him manager of one of their stores that was next door to where he had worked for the other chain grocery store. Soon as we could we saved enough to pay mother back all we owed her.
”I Just simply couldn't manage to take care of all our family needs on what my husband gave me, so just as soon as I was strong enough I had to find work. I worked in a dry goods store for a Syrian on Saturdays in the summer and regular in the fall. He paid me $2 a day for the Saturday work, and $10 a week when I was working full time. This Syrian was hard to please. He thought I could go out and just bring in customers to trade. He never seemed to give a thought to the fact that you couldn’t make people buy if they didn’t want to or didn’t have any money. In spite of all this I continued to work for him off and on for five years or more, and I can say that anyone who works for a person like that gets pretty good training in salesmanship - that is, training of a crude sort.
"By combining mine and Sam’s wages we had a fairly decent living in those days. I had better clothes than I’d ever had before My friends said I could make money go further than anybody they knew. Mother was always buying clothes for the children and she sewed lots for us, and all that helped lots. Sam kept on changing jobs and making less money. Drinking so much was the cause of his losing most of them better jobs. Soon it got to the point that I was perfectly miserable whenever I went any place with him for he would always get drunk and do such embarrassing things. I was always in terror for fear he would wreck the car and kill us all. However, he came by his drinking honest, for his father drank before him.
"For the sake of our children I joined the Baptist Church in order to surround them with Christian influence. They was getting old enough to be affected by the sight of their father coming home drunk so often. He never would go with the children and me to Sunday School and church. He began staying out at night more, drinking and gambling worse than ever, and because of his growing neglect of us I wondered if he was spending his time and money on some other woman. That was true. One day I was down town and a friend of mine pointed the ’other woman’ out to me, thinking I knew all about the affair. She didn’t dream that that was my first knowledge of my husband’s unfaithfulness.
“It wasn't long after this before a women’s organization here sponsored a cooking school end they invited the men to the entertainment they gave the night after the last daytime session. I was surprised to find Sam wanted to go. I soon found the reason. His ’other woman’ was president of that women’s organization, and she made a spectacle of herself by hurrying over and making a fuss over my husband the minute she saw us come in the auditorium. I pretended not to notice their antics. Silly old thing! She was fifty and Sam was only thirty. She was mighty prominent in society, club circles, and in church affairs. My lawyers didn’t want me to expose the woman because of her prominence in this town. Every Sunday night Sam would meet her after telling me he had to go to the store to do his book work. If anything happened to prevent his going to her, she would drive by our house from three to five times looking for him. After this had gone on for awhile, my husband stopped taking us to see his father’s family. One day my father-in-law came to the house and asked me to let the children go home with him for a little visit. I telephoned Sam and he told me to let our boy go, but to keep our little girl at home because we was afraid she would have another attack of appendicitis and that we wouldn’t be able to get her to a hospital in time if she was as far out in the country as her grandpa lived. The farm was about twelve miles from town.
"I noticed my father-in-law had been drinking a good deal, but the man that was driving seemed sober, so I got our boy ready and let him go. About ten o’clock that night I heard the siren of an ambulance just after I had remarked to my mother that I guessed they got to the farm all right or we would have heard something from them.
"Soon after ten o'clock that night I got a friend to take me to hunt my husband as he had not come home after phoning me that he was going to a fraternity house to collect some money, and I was afraid he was spending it on liquor when he didn’t show up at home. We couldn’t find him nowhere end when we got home, before the car my came to a full stop, mother was out there telling us that my husband’s father had been instantly killed in an automobile wreck and our boy was in the hospital badly hurt. I begged the doctors to operate if that would save him, but in spite of all that could be done our little boy died about ten o’clock the next morning.
"’That woman’ sent a floral offering - Sam thought it was the prettiest one sent - and she even had the nerve to come to extend sympathy. I told her that neither her flowers or her visit was appreciated. She said she didn’t send the flowers. I told her she was a big old liar, that I knowed she did send 'em. Even during my great sorrow I could’ve killed that old bitch. Sam kept on going with her and she’d come to the store two and three times every day. I learned they was meeting at a certain hotel and beating it for the country. At last I trapped 'em. I had to fight my husband before I could get my hands on her and by that time I was too wore out to do her much damage. I told her husband all about it twice. The first time he wouldn't believe a thing I said, but the next time he checked up and found it was all true.
"About two months before he busted up with that old hussy my husband drew two hundred and fifty dollars from the bank and spent it all on her. Another baby had recently been born to us, but he never paid the doctor one cent, nor had he paid my mother a bit of board for our whole family in over two years. The behavior of 'that woman' grieved her own husband to death and caused the people to ask her to give up her work in church and Sunday School, and she lost out in her club work too. My husband hasn't had a decent job in over three years and he still drinks, but if he ever sees that woman any more I don't know it. I told her the only thing that kept me from blowing her old head off was I didn't want to go to hell when I die on account of her, after having to live in hell on earth on account of her devilment.
"After my husband lost his job because of that hussy we tried to live on what little I made at the store, but it just wouldn't support us all. Mother had made a go of it with her boarding house business so I decided to try my hand at it too. I rented this six-room house at $50 a month about a year ago, went in debt for three hundred dollars worth of furniture, and tacked up my sign on the front. The first week I got ten boarders. My rate was a dollar a day, and I felt sure I was going to get ahead fast. Then I had a miscarriage and had to be in bed six weeks. In that time I lost all but six of my boarders. Since I got back on my feet I’ve had from ten to twelve every week. If any of them men that left when I was flat on my back sick and needed the money so bad cones back here again, I’m going to tell 'em to go to the devil. Now that I’m able to look after the house and do my own cooking I don't need them quitters. Scrubbing is still too much for me and I just can’t stand dirt, so I pay a girl $3 a week to help me with that and the washing and anything else that comes to hand to be done.
"Things are looking better for us, for my husband got work at a chain grocery store about three weeks ago, and he’s giving me a little money every week. It’s not much, not more’n five dollars a week. I put it with what I make and use it to pay bills. I don’t know what he’s making. He never tells me anything like that any more. So far I’ve managed to pay a little every week on the furniture. I never have any spare cash after paying the grocery bills and other expenses of a boarding house, and I’m so deep in debt I don’t know whenever I’ll see daylight again.
"This is the only time I’ve ever got into something I can’t git out of. It ain’t quite as bad as that sounds, for I really do expect to make something out of my boarding house when the students come back this fall. One boy that’s working his way through school stays with me. He works so many hours a day at the climax Hosiery Mill', then carries a paper route, and in the evenings works at a filling station, in addition to doing fine school work. He was planning to take on still another job that had been offered him at a cafe but his professors got wind of it and made him give up that idea as they thought it would be too much for him. They were right too. My point in telling you all this about him is that he has never failed to pay me every week, in addition to paying all his school expenses. Some of the folks with regular jobs and no school expenses don’t pay me so promptly.
"This is hard work and poor pay, but then I'm used to that. As I told you, before I married I worked at different times at two dime stores end the most I got was $8 a week, but I took care of myself on it. Then two years after ray marriage when my husband wasn’t supporting us and I had to go to work again, it was more of an emergency than ever. I told you about the Syrian I worked for. Well, at one time since then I worked for the Montgomery & Ward store that used to be here. They paid me $10 a week. After they left I was paid $8 a week for work in a dress shop. When that work gave out I worked wherever I could get a days work, and at one time I was working at three jobs every week. Three days of the week I worked at a factory where they made uniforms. We were paid according to the number of garments we made. I made from a dollar-fifty to three dollars a day. On Saturdays I worked in a department store run by Jews, and they paid me $1.50 a day. On Sundays I was paid $2 for clerking in an ice cream stand. Working so hard and making so little was what made me decide to stop working for other folks and open my own boarding house. While I don’t make any killing, at least I do make enough to keep the bill collectors off of my neck, and what I make is all mine.
"This year a candidate tried to get to go out and work for votes for him. I told him I'd done most every other sort of work, but that politics was one thing I didn't care for. No matter if he was going to pay me a dollar a day and three dollars on election day. Politics is one thing I never did care nothing about. What does most women actually know about politics anyhow?
"Oh, my Lord, there's old lady White!" she exclaimed as a call came from the rear of her yard, "Do be careful whet you say in front of her for she's the neighborhood gossipper. She's just coming to find out what we're talking about. I just hate old women snooping around, don't you?" Again we heard the call, and as Mrs. Moore arose to hurry toward the back door I noticed how well her neat pink crepe frock fitted her slender form, and complemented her light tan hose and white toe-out slippers. She is of the blue-eyed blonde type and her curly hair forms a pale halo about her face.
Soon she returned trailed by an elderly woman of nondescript appearance. With an impatient gesture she indicated a chair for the woman but did not introduce her to me. For a few moments they chatted casually of this and that. Suddenly with no apology or explanation to the more recently arrived guest, she turned to me and resumed her narrative in a high-pitched, self-conscious tone.
"I don't care any more about having to work so hard on account of my husband wasting his money on that old bitch and losing his job on account of her," she snorted. "I'll just keep as many boarders as I can get and I can get out of debt and make my own way. I don't feed fancy food to my boarders for men don’t like that sort of eating. They want plain substantial food - something that will stay with ’em. Bread, meat, vegetables, dessert, and a cold drink of some kind describes my summertime dinner and supper menu, and by substituting a hot drink for the cold one you have an idea of our wintertime dinners and suppers. We have toast, biscuits, eggs, bacon, cereal, and coffee for breakfast.
”Seems like I’ve told you all there is to know about me. If there is another 28-year old woman that has to work any harder than I have, I hope the good Lord will help her to stand it like he has helped me. I never try to know just what will happen to me next, as I have long since ceased to care. I just laugh and keep on doing the best I can to keep going. What’s the use in giving up? I’ll bet you think what I’ve told you sounds crazy, but every word of it's true, and there's worse, but that’s no use telling. I hope I’ll be rested up and feeling some better when you come back again.”
Mrs. Moore and her visitor were prattling about the hot weather as I gathered up my notes and left. I wondered what they were saying by the time I was out of earshot.
