FAIRFIELD COUNTY
CYNTHIA M. COLEMAN (white)
RIDGEWAY, S. C. 91 YEARS
Mrs. Cynthia Miller Coleman lives with her daughter, Sarah Starnes, who is postmistress in the town of Ridgeway, S. C. She is, for one of her age, active, intelligent, and responsive to all inquiries about her life for the past eighty-five years.
"My father's people, the Millers, and my mother's people, the White's were of Scotch-Irish descent. They came as settlers from Pennsylvania before the Revolutionary War. My father was Robert LeRoy Miller; my mother, Jane White Miller. In religion, my mother and father were strict-laced, blue-stockinged Presbyterians. I was born on their small plantation on Rocky Creek, Chester County, January 17, 1847.
"I learned to spell and read at home out of the blue-backed speller. It was a great text book for beginners. The first school I attended with other pupils was in 1855. Our teacher was a kind man, Mr. John Chisolm. The schoolhouse was the old Covenanter brick church. We had a long school day. We commenced early in the morning and ended just before sundown. We had an hour's intermission for dinner and recreation. The boys played town ball and shot marbles, and the few girls in the school looked on, enjoyed, and applauded the fine plays. Every Friday we had compositions and declamations from the pupils.
"Social amusements in the community consisted of pound parties at some neighbor's home during the winter nights, usually on Friday night. The music was made by a Negro fiddler, Tom Archer. We danced the cotillion, the Virginia reel, and steal partners. Our community would not tolerate waltzes and round dancing of any kind.
"I remember the hoop skirt. I wore one. I put it on over my head, tied it behind, then put on mu corset above this and laced it tight. My outside skirt came over the wire hoop and my bodice came down over the corset and fastened with a collar about my heck.
"Horseback riding was a great diversion for the girls of our day. We had long riding skirts and sidesaddles; also a hitching post and a get on block at the front gate to assist us in mounting on the horse.
"On the first Saturday in May, there was an annual picnic at Catawba Falls, now called Great Falls. The Catawba River at this point was full of shad every year at this time. After enjoying the picnic dinner and the day, we would return home with the back of the buggy or wagon body full of shed, which lasted the family and all the Negroes on the plantation through Sunday.
"My parents were not rich planters and slave owners. We only had six hundred acres of land and about thirty slaves. I don't remember ever seeing one of the slaves whipped. My mother taught them the Presbyterian catechism, where was printed especially for slaves. They were distributed among slave owners in 1840, my mother told me.
"In 1870 I married Walter Francis Marion Coleman, a boy in the neighborhood that I grew up with end loved all my life. The greatest grief of my life was when old A. S. Wallace, Scalawag Congressman, sent troops to the neighborhood to catch him for being a Ku Klux, but he evaded them by escaping to Texas for a time. When he returned, we moved out to Blackstock and lived there until my husband's death.
"Just before the coming of baseball, the annual event at Blackstock was the horseback tournament, with lances, and the crowning of a Queen of Love and Beauty and her two maids of honor. There were three posts erected on a field in a straight line and from there posts were suspended rings on a cross piece. Each rider was costumed as some knight. At a fast gallop they would successively race down the field and strive to gain each ring suspended. Each knight made the attempt there times. The maximum of rings caught on his lance could be nine rings. The one taking the greatest number of rings would have the honor and right to name and crown the Queen of Love and Beauty of the tournament. As each knight would take his place at the standing point, the announcer would proclaim the name of the rider. I remember some of the representations: Knight of Avenel, James Fitz James, Knight of Snowden, Knight of the Leapard, and Knight of Ravenswood. The others I can't recall. It was an exciting, thrilling scene of color, and the plaudit of the populace was deafening if the ring was successively taken by the knight and ran down his lance. I remember Mary Wylie was crowned at one time, Lydia Mobley at mother, and my husband's sister, Minnie Coleman once.
"In the little village of Blackstock, at that time about one hundred inhabitants, there were six barrooms, one church, and two policemen. Everybody was poor, everybody had credit, everybody played cards, (I mean the men), and everybody was happy.
"Matches were a luxury. Fire was covered with ashes over night to save one match. The price of them was twenty-five cents per hundred. Soap was made of ashes and hog grease.
"I have been the mother of eleven children, six of whom are living; the grandmother of twelve children, all living; and the great-grandmother of four children, all living. The Yankees didn't reach us in the route through this part of the State.
"One of my grandsons is a graduate of West Point Military Academy. He is a captain in the cavalry stationed at Fort Oglethorpe. His name is Capt. Logan Carroll Berry. He is a son of my daughter, Julia, with whom you danced fifty years ago. She is out on the porch now waiting to speak to you."
ELIZABETH VANDERVILIE DARBY (white)
84 YEARS OLD.
Elizabeth V. Darby lives with her half sister, Mrs. Edward D. Sloan, and her niece, Margaret Sloan, on the southwest corner of Vanderhorst and Moultrie Streets, in the town of Winnsboro, Fairfield County, South Carolina. She is vivacious, intelligent, a good talker, and an attentive listener. She is one of the interesting personalities of Winnsboro.
"It is quite a pleasure to see you again. I have been longing to see you and ask you about the particulars of the death of my friend, Bill Ellison. His death was so sudden. He was on the streets Saturday, cheerful and full of life, and early Sunday morning the news came that the silent angel of death had visited him and taken him away in a moment. And here I am old enough to be his mother and still living.
"How old am I? If I live to see the 24th of next September, I will be eighty-four years old. I was born fourteen miles from Wilmington, N. C., at Long Creek, a small post office place, in New Hanover County, but the county has been changed to Pender County since then.
"My father was a physician and surgeon, Dr. S. S. Satchell; my mother, Elizabeth Vanderville Satchell, died when I was three years old. I was the only child by mother. When she died, father married Anne Moore. There were four children by this union, James, S. S., Jr., Paul, and Margaret. Margaret is the present Mrs. Sloan, with whom I make my home. Again my father was bereft of his wife, and he embarked in the last matrimonial adventure. This time he was joined in wedlock to Sarah Sell. He had one child by this marriage, Quincy Bell Satchell.
"My father was indulgent toward me as a child. I commenced to learn my A. B. C.'s at his knee. There were no public schools in North Carolina when I was a child; so, with the best of intentions, my father sent the necessary money to D. Appleton & Company, publisher, and they sent him the blue-backed speller, He began teaching me the alphabet. The book ceased to be interesting to me, a child, after I had absorbed all the tales of the pictures in the front and back; pictures of the bear, the fox, the boy in the apple tree, and the vain girl, with the pail of milk on her hear, going to market. In fact so tedious and tiresome became the be (bay), bi (by), be (bee), and bo (bow), that one day father rode off to see a patient in the midst of a lesson, and I crept out to the well in the yard and threw the Yankee blue-book (as I called it) to the bottom of the well.
"Father gave up the task of teaching me and sent me to a private school, taught by a Mr. Richardson in Wilmington, N. C. Here I found the blue-backed speller again and went through it with just appreciation, as the dunce cap hung on a mail back of the teacher's chair and three hickory switches stood admonitory in the corner of the schoolroom, evident signs of compulsory education in that day and time.
"In my ninth year I was sent to the Moravian School, and it's a God's blessing I was. The school was in charge of a Mr. de Schweinitz. The teachers were kind in disposition, conscientious and thorough in their training, and the knowledge and wisdom I acquired there have been useful all my life. I remained at school until the end of the War.
"Anent that war my father enlisted in the regular troops but was soon detached and placed in charge of one of the base hospitals as physician and surgeon. He was under General Ramsome, brother to 'Nat' Ransome, who became U. S. Senator after the war, that is when he first enlisted. The general's name was Robert Ransome.
"On the day the Yankees entered the town, the school bell was tolled for assemblage of the pupils in the chapel. We were, as a body, cautioned that our welfare and treatment by them would depend much on our decorum of respect and politeness toward them. The first one who appeared was on horseback. He was alone; I remember his frying pan and cooking utensils were arranged about his saddle. Then two came and inquired about the location of the post office and disappeared.
"The next day many strolled and lolled about the school yard and promenade grounds. In a bevy of girls there always is a port one or two. Some remarks of an ill nature passed between the girls and a young officer with more bravado than brains, perhaps, and he secured a U. S. flag and put it flying above the school building. The girls wanted it torn down, but Moravians are the kind of Christians who, in their meekness, submit to persecution. The flag remained flying until the Yankees departed.
"Our school ran out of tea, coffee, and sugar. The substitutes used were red sassafras roots for tea, which we liked; ground okra seed and ground parched corn for coffee, and molasses took the place of sugar.
"The Yankees did no burning or damage to property that I remember. In fact there was a good number of people in the locality who did not believe in secession and a few who thought slavery should be abolished.
"The next school I attached, for three years, was the convent school in Wilmington, N. C. Leaving here, I went to my mother's people, the Vandervilles, In New Jersey. They secured me a position to teach in the public school at Summerville, N. J. The school hours were from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. with an hour's intermission for recess and dinner. I remained here until the death of my father's second wife then he had me to return home, keep house, and govern the four children, my younger brothers and sister.
"When my father married the third time, I went back to New Jersey and was governess in a home of four children until I married a prosperous young lawyer, Frank Darby. We were married nine years, but had no children. His mother got the bulk of his property. I connected to receive as my share, $3,700.00.
"Soon afterward, I secured a position as bookkeeper and cashier of Gailord & Co., in Wilmington, N. C. I studied stenography during my idle hours, and became the stenographer of Governor Russell of North Carolina in 1897. He was a Republican, but a fine, nice gentleman. Afterward, I worked under my brother, Paul, in Washington in the employ of the Sou. Ry. Co. Next, I worked for my brother, S. S. Satchell, Jr., in Philadelphia, until General Otis went to the Phillipine Islands and the company sent my brother there. Following this, I lost all I had saved in a Building and Loan Association while acting as bookkeeper for a real estate and insurance operator, J. C. Reiley, in Wilmington, N. C.
"I next became housekeeper for Father J. A. Gallagher, a Roman Catholic priest, and remained in his household thirteen years, at Newbern, N. C. Then I came to Winnsboro in 1924 to my sister, Mrs. E. D. Sloan, and have resided with her family ever since.
"My brother, S. S., Jr., left the railway employment and obtained Government service in the Phillipines, and he was afterward on the Pacific coast in the service. He helped me until he died in the Presidio Hospital, out in California.
"On my mother's side I am descended from the first white child born in New Amsterdam. He was a de Rapalje child, and his father a de Rapalje built the first house on Staten Island. When the English took charge of New Amsterdam, they changed the name to New York. You see that still leaves me a knickerbocker.
"Yes, I remember the firing on Fort Sumter, near Charleston. I was in my seventh year. General Beauregard had twice made a demand for its surrender, and the third time he told them that the 12th day of April would be the last day of grace. Everybody was solemn on that day, something like the expectancy of an impending total eclipse of sun, which I witnessed afterward in the late 90's. There was no playing on that day, but there was sad anxious faces all around. News came that the fort had been fired on, and, soon afterward, war was declared. My father went out in Capt. Clingham's company, but he was soon transferred into the hospital service. He didn't face any bullets afterward, but he had to meet smallpox and diseases which carried away as many soldiers as grape shot.
"As the war went along, the matter of women and girls dresses received much attention. There was no new cloth available. Old dresses were changed, sometimes turned wrong side out or remodeled. Grown folks' clothes were re-cut and fashioned into girl's dresses, dyed, and retrimmed. The girls wanted to look fresh when the boys came home on furlough. Dyes and dye-stuff was a problem. Madder, copperas, barks, and roots were used to produce various shades of coloring. Designs were nearly impossible; stripes predominated. Economy had to be observed and considered. Well, the styles then were long dresses with trails. You must know that in those days it was the height of immodesty for a woman's ankle to be seen by a man; and a man never know the color of his sweetheart's stockings until the night they got married. Dresses, before the war, required fourteen yards in the making. Women in those times were shawls, each had an ambition to own and wear a cashmere shawl. They were lovely things, costly in material and beautiful in delicate embroideries. One of the everlasting griefs to the womanhood of the South was the searching for and taking away of these shawls when the Yankees made their other depredations in their march through the Confederacy.
"I am an old woman now. I have played in the sunshine, walked underneath clouds, and trudged in the rains of troubles that seemed about to overwhelm me, but I have come out of it all, chastened and resigned to the will of our Heavenly Father.
"The first of next month I'll make my annual visit of three weeks to the Convent of the Sacred Heart, at Belmont, N. C. I shall be very glad to send you a postcard after my arrival, and it will please me to hear from you and my friends in Winnsboro occasionally while there."
KATE FLENNIKEN (white)
80 YEARS OLD.
"My parents were Col. A. H. Patton and Ansley Patton of the Long Cane section, Abbeville County, South Carolina, but I was born while my mother was on a visit to relatives in Haversham County in the State of Georgia. My father was a brother of the late Prof. E. L. Patton of the South Carolina Collage, now University of South Carolina. I attached Woodlawn Academy, and was taught by my uncle, Edward L. Patton.
"There were many Union men in our settlement opposed to nullification and secession. A tragedy in our family grew out of these political issues. My grandfather had been selected by a group of families opposed to nullification to go to Tennessee with the idea of looking about for lands to purchase, so they could move there in a body. On the way, he was ambushed and killed by the Murray gang, as they were known in those days. The murderer, a man named Dooley, was caught, tried, convicted, and hanged for the deed.
"I heard my husband, Mr. Flenniken, talking to you about the blue-back speller for beginners. Well, I remember there was a reading lesson in that book at the end of each spelling lesson, and some of the sentences were full of wisdom and knowledge. As examples, I give these.
1. Visitors should not make their visits too long.
2. A judge must not be a bad man.
3. The first joint of a men's thumb is one inch long.
4. A gambler wants to get money without earning it.
5. There is a near intimacy between drunkenness and poverty.
6. A virago is a turbulent, masculine woman.
7. Pompions are now commonly called pumpkins.
8. One good action is worth many good thoughts.
"I remember the quilting parties in our neighborhood. When the crops were laid by in the summer, quilting parties would begin, and they were held at different plantation homes in the community until late in the fall of the year. Generally each home had one frame of slats. To the home where the party took place, neighbors would bring their frame, and sometimes as many as four quilts were being made at the same time. The quilt frames were arranged on the floor of the room in a rectangle the size of the quilt to be made. A narrow strip of cloth was tacked to the frames all around and the lining of the quilt was sowed to this strip. The frames were then lifted up about the height of a table and rested on their backs. Then the cotton or wool was carded and spread in uniform layers on the lining between the frames. The top of the quilt was assigned to individuals. For instance, each lady would undertake to saw and make a number of squares from the material, another, so many, and so on. As the squares were finished, these were sewed together by others in attendance, until the top of the quilt was completed as a whole. Then the top was placed on the cotton, and the stitching began, from right to last of the frame, the thread going through the bottom lining, cotton, and top covering. The folds could be rolled back as the work went on.
"On some occasions a 'crazy quilt' would be made out of the scraps of satin, silk, and bright colored material. No cotton was used in making the 'crazy quilt'. Some colored cotton cloth was generally used for the lining or under part of these quilts. They were made for beauty and show, instead of warmth and comfort. Every bride in those days was presented with one of such quilts.
"In connection with one of the quiltings, a party was given at the home of the quilting, and out of this social festivity, I opine that some boy was inspired, by a girl named Nellie, to write the song, 'Aunt Dinsh's Quilting Party.'
"My father, Col. A. K. Patton was killed at the first battle of Shiloh. He was an attorney at law, at Abbeville, before the Civil War. I was brought up from childhood in the Associate Reformed Presbyterian faith and doctrine. Every Sabbath morning the slaves zero congregated in the dining room of our home and taught the Shorter Catechism.
"I was married to my husband, Warren H. Flenniken, at Abbeville, in 1881, and came as a bride to Winnsboro.
"Outside of our church work and immediate family welfare, I have been deeply interested in the erection of the Confederate Monument in Winnsboro, and in the observance of Memorial Day.
"Shortly after our marriage in the early eighties, the woman of Fairfield County organized the Ladies Memorial Association. This, by the way, was the virtual beginning of the present U. D. C. Chapter, which came into a distance twenty years later. We ladies worked with one end in view, that of erecting a suitable memorial to the brave men of Fairfield, who fought and sacrificed so much for a cause they believed was right. After years of planning and hard work, in the way of entertainments, such as strawberry and ice cream parties and festival suppers, enough money was on hand to build a monument of our own Fairfield granite. Daughters of the Confederacy that the monument was placed and dedicated in the public square at the intersection of Washington and Congress Streets in Winnsboro.
"In these days on a standing occasion of the whole year was Memorial Day. An elaborate program was arranged and curried out. Pride and pleasure thrilled the hearts of the young girls of the town, as they took part in the parade, all dressed alike in costumes made especially for the occasion. The procession marched up Congress Street, headed by the Gordon Light Infantry, with the old veterans bringing up the rear, all keeping step to the music of our own brass band. Mrs. W. R. Robertson was the first president of the association; Mrs. H. A. Gaillard succeeded her and serried a number of years; and she was followed by Mrs. Sailing Wolfe, who I think was the grandmother of Bernard Barton, now a great financier in New York.
"When the merger took place, the U.D.C. Chapter was named for General John Bratton, the highest ranking officer living in the county at the time. A great dinner was given in honor of the veterans, and barrels of lemonade were on the picnic grounds for their refreshment every Memorial Day.
"The ranks of veterans great thinner and thinner as the years rolled by, and now there is only one left. My husband, Warren. Our Chapter once honored me with the presidency. We contributed funds to the erection of the Jefferson Davie Memorial, the Arlington Monument, the Shiloh Monument, and others. At present, the chapter is subscribing and maintaining scholarships in different institutions of learning; namely, Winthrop, the University <text not clear>
