Mrs. Robert Deal (Housewife)
Newton, N. c.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Gertie	Vera
Newton	Bakerton
Catawba County	Cook County
Robert Deal	Bud Neal
Jonny	Jimmy
Charlotte	Riverton
Ollie	Ocie
"You say you want a story of my life. Well of all things. What are you doing? Sounds awful interesting. You know a lot about my life, but I don’t guess anyone knows another’s whole story. Wait till I go look at my dinne and I’ll make a start."
While Vera was in the kitchen, I glanced around the pretty living room where everything was neatly arranged. The house was a bungalow of six rooms; wide front porch, breakfst room and bath. At the side of the house was a rock garden, and back of the kitchen was a flower and vegatable garden. Vera was a hard worker, I had known her since the day she came to Bakerton, as a bride twenty-five years ago.
As Vera came back in the room, she laughed. “You know, I’ve always wanted to write my story but never got around to it. I was born in Cook County, almost forty years ago. My father owned and operated a small store which handled most everything from a box of snuff to a bag of flour. There were ten kids in our family. My father was not any too smart either. Seems to me like, poor as we were, he could have stopped having so many children. My mother worked hard at home trying to help provide a living for us, while father took the easy Job of staying at the store.
"I did not get to finish high school, quit when I got to the ninth grade, because mother was going to have another baby. Father was always grouching and complaining. Our home conditions were not the best. My sisters and I used to pick blackberries to buy our clothes. Father was awful stingy, never wanted us to have nice things like other children. Mother was jealous of him, but I don’t know that she had any grounds to be. We had a farm but the land was poor; we didn’t make anything.
"When I was twelve years old, I was converted at a big meeting. At dinner that day, I told my parents about it, and said I wanted to join the church. Father got mad and raised the devil. My brother, who was sixteen years old, got so mad he wanted to run me off. Mother took my part and told me to go ahead and join the church. I did, and have never regretted it.
” While in Bakerton visiting my aunt I met and married Bud Neal. I was eighteen years old, Bud was twenty one. At the time we married, he was making a dollar a day. That was twenty five years ago. Now he works at the same place for two fifty a day. Times have changed since then. Before I was married, I picked blackberries for ten cents a gallon, carried them as much as a mile and was lucky to sell them, If my children had to do the same thing to get their clothes, they’d feel disgraced for life. Neither one of them ever earned a penny before they were through high school. Now Jimmy, who’s twenty years old makes two dollars a day, working at the plant with his daddy. Does he appreciate it? Good Lord, no. Only this morning he was grumbling terribly on account of it. Young folks are never satisfied. 'Course things are higher now. When I was a girl you could buy pretty dress ginghams for five cents a yard. One gallon and a half of berries would bring enough to pay for a pretty dress.
“Never will forget my first invitation to a party. I was sixteen years old, hadn’t ever had a party dress in my life. I was crazy to go, but had nothing to wear. Mother felt sorry for me, but could do nothing about it. However, she found an old muslin dress she had worn when she was a girl, and with a few alterations, it fitted me beautifully.
"Just before time to go to the party, I spread the dress out on the ironing board near the kitchen stove to be pressed. I left the room for a minute, and when I returned the dress had blown onto the hot stove-completely ruined. I cried and so did mother.
"When Bud and me was married, we moved in a rented house. It was situated on a five acre farm and containd four rooms. Bud walked back and forth to the plant, it was almost a mile. I didn't like the country. I’d had enough of the farm to do me the rest of my life. We didn’t tend the ground, thought one dollar a day to spend was enough to live on and have plenty. We quarreled sometimes like everything. I wanted pretty clothes to wear. I was so tired of looking like a ’frump'.
"We wasn’t getting along any too good and sixteen months later, I found I was going to have a baby. Now babies was one thing I did like, guess it was because I had to tend so many at home. Instead of being sorry, I was glad. Bud didn’t take it so well, he was in debt. I had always wanted a lot of things, now I was worse than ever. I was so sick for the first three months. I thought I was going to die. He left me in bed in the morning anf fixed his own breakfast. He found me there still in bed when he came home from work. I had canned some vegatable soup before I found out I was big, it began to work and spew out of the jars. I knew it had to be emptied. I went to the closet to get it, got so sick from the smell I just throwed jars and all away. I blamed everybody for this condition and made myself miserable.
"After the baby came I got all right. I learned to sew and make her pretty clothes, nothing meant as much to me as dressing my baby up. In 1915, Bud decided to buy us a lot in town and got it for ninety dollars, back of the old college grounds.
I had swore before I married, I’d never live with a man and work like my mammy had; have a baby every nine months and nothing to raise them on.
"We built a five-room bungalow through the building and loan. It cost a thousand dollars. That was about twenty three years ago. Our payments on the house were three dollars and eighty-one cents a week; we got in debt. I got big again, and Bud quit the ice-plant and went to Riverton to work. He made five dollars a day and paid seven a week for board. That was 1916, the year of the flood. This time I was not sick, carrying the baby. I made up my mind while Bud was gone I would take a hand and help. He sent money home every week. I paid every cent I could on debts and lived on as little as possible. I bought fruit and vegatables to can. It made me happy to think I was helping Bud. I canned over two hundred quarts, besides jam and jelly. I also bought a pig. Bud was awful proud of what I did. Jimmy was born in October, and I got along just fine; much better than I had the first time.
"After the war ended, Bud came back from Riverton. He had to take his old job at the ice plant. It took us about six years to pay for our first home. When we got that paid we wanted a nicer one. We built this one twelve years ago, it coat four thousand dollars. We sold the other house for fifteen hundred dollars. We've never been out of debt, our building and loan is still three eighty each week. What with two children to school and Bud drinking up some of the money., we are always borrowing on the house. Ocie finished high school five years ago, she wanted to be a nurse. Dr. Lane also wanted her to. I had been taking sewing to help out school expenses, and had no money to help her. Five dollars a month was all she would get. Where was the money coming from to get her watch, uniforms, white shoes and hose?
"I puzzled over this for weeks. Bud was no help. He refused to borrow another penny. Jimmy was still in school. It hurt me to hear Ocie begging all the time to go in training. I went to our preacher and asked his advise. He was a splendid man. I had heard how interested he was in young folks. His advice was to borrow enough money to start her. He was kind enough to put me in touch with someone I could borrow from.
"I got her ready, sent her away; but the dickens was to pay after she was gone. How could I earn extra money to pay back the fifty dollars I had borrowed to do it with? The only thing I could think of was to let rooms. We had six rooms and a bath. I rented two rooms, cut out hiring my washing done and sewed all I could.
I averaged four dollars a week. Bud gave me four dollars a week for groceries, no more. I managed somehow. Anything can be done if you set your mind to it.
"I'd like to tell you something about my religious experiences I'm a firm believer in prayer. Them three years was so hard I about lost track of my religion. Bud continued to drink and to make matters worse, started to staying out late at night. I was just about ready to give up. Soon as I would get one bill paid out of my scanty earnings, thinking I would get a little reat, a letter would come from Ocie saying she must have books, a dress or something else.
"Trade weeks were starting here and certain amounts of money were being given away every Saturday Afternoon. The one who had the lucky number got the money. Since being converted, I'd decided to give a tenth of what I made to the church. That morning when a letter came asking for money, I walked the house. How was I to send it when I didn't have it? I thought of the money to be given away at the courthouse that day. I went in knelt and prayed that I would get some of it. I promised to give a tenth of it to the church if I got it. That afternoon I took my tickets and went to the courthouse. The third ticket called out was mine. On the way home I had the ten dollar bill changed, I sent Ocie five, gave one to the church and had four left. I'm a firm believer in prayer live got my children through school. Ocie came home a year ago, a graduate nurse. She's working now. Jimmy is also working.
"This spring, my house needed paint and paper on the inside. The children give me the money and I did the work myself.
"My views on politics is this; women have to work hard to make a living. I think it's her right to vote. I also think she should read and study so as to know who she is voting for.
"I'm a firm believer in birth control. I think it's a sin to bring helpless little children into the world without their consent, then after they are born, not provide for them as they should be. I know mothers in this town who go to work in a few weeks after their babies are born. They leave their baby in the hands of older children, sometimes a negro maid. They do not get the care they should have. If a woman has to do this she has no need of children, and if she doesn't have to work, her place is at home taking care of them.
"One more thing, I have one ambition. The desire of my life has been to go from place to place and preach the gospel.”
