Eufaula, Alabama
January 11,1939
G. C.
SAM LYNN, FISHERMAN AND RIVER RAT
Famous for Fish
Sam Lynn lives on the banks of the Chattahoochee River in a little four-room cottage, high up and with concrete steps leading to it.
Sam has five children, all living and all married but the youngest boy. He married Hattie Wright about twenty-five years ago. She is an expert laundress.
Hattie has never had any children of her own. She tells her story in this way:
"Sam just haired his children. All five of them are bastards, but Sam gave them his name; ain't none got the same ma. But Sam has been mighty good to all of them.
"Sam has been a fisherman all of his life. He started when he was just a little boy. Me and Sam been married nigh unto twenty-five years. His youngest child was just two years old when I married him. His ma was dead and he and Sam was living down here all by themselves. He had a 'oman that cooked and looked after little Sam for him, and his other chillun was living with their mas. Sam always took care of them. I mean he supported them, clothed them and fed them. The two oldest boys are fishermen with him. He pays them just like he does his other help. His two girls live up North.
"Little Sam lives with us; he railroads. I loves him just like he is my own and he sho is a smart and good boy. He ain't married; hope he won't; nigger gals is so trifling these days. Ain't got no morals a-tall.
"Sam says the best he can recollect is he was about ten years old when he first started to fishing. He is sixty now. So that means he's been fishing fifty years. The way he started was this. Ransom Lynn, Sam's pa, owned this place on the river. I'll tell you about Ransom later on. He owned this house we live in now, only we have added two rooms and a porch and a lots of other things.
"Mr. George Vaughn had a little one-room house further down on the river. You' member him? He's been dead now 'bout twenty years.
Well he is the that learnt Sam to fish and swim. At first Sam said he used to follow him about just like a little puppy; would get up before day and go with him in his batteau a-fishing. In them days they used to seine in the Chewalla Creek; it's ag'in' the law now. Mr. Vaughn learnt him how to set out traps and lines; he learnt him everything there is about fishing. He makes good money at it. Mr. Vaughn learnt all the older white men in Eufaula to swim and Sam learnt all the niggers. Whenever anybody ever fell in the river or jumped in to kill themselves Sam and Mr. Vaughn would always do the diving to find the bodies. Since Mr. Vaughn has been dead, Sam's been doing it and many a body has he found. Folks don't drown themselves like they used to, though, I am glad to say.
"In Sam's young days -- he don't do it now -- he used to swim across the Chattahoochee right here at the wharf four and five times without stopping, and they says its third to the swiftest river in the world; and its terrible wide. They call him the 'river rat.' When he was a young man he lived on the river, slept in a tent, camped there. I thought it was awful but he would do it. Now, he is not well, his heart is bad, he works too hard. Gets up at four in the morning. I get up and cook his breakfast. He goes all day without food and when he comes home at night he eats too much. Yes'um, he is a fisherman right. In the days when the steam boats was a-running, them was the days for Sam. The 'Kelly' and the 'Bradley' and the 'City of Eufaula'; he never missed a boat. He could hear her miles long 'fore he could see the smoke.
"When Sam gets through in the day, you know the winter days are so short, he puts his lines out at four o'clock in the afternoon, then comes home. I always have a good hot meal for him with plenty of coffee. He won't eat fish except now and then. He smells 'em so much he turns ag'in 'em. He likes his collard greens and beef steak.
"Now he goes back at eight and gets his fish off his lines and puts 'em in the fish boxes all along the sides of the river. That keeps 'em alive. The boxes have a wire top that lets the water in. He has four and five men that work for him. He owns twelve batteaus. He has his fish boxes miles up and down the river and creeks on both sides. He changes 'em every now and then. He fishes mostly in the Chattahoochee River, but he works the Chewalla, the White Oak and Barbour Creeks. His average catch a day is about two hundred pounds; sometimes a hundred and fifty and again two hundred and fifty. He don't fish on Saturday and Sunday. He's got religion. He wouldn't fish on Sunday for nothing!
"Sam couldn't get along without his little 'nip' when he is working: its so damp and foggy and wet on the banks. He would die with pneumonia sho' if he didn't have it. But I ain't never seen him drunk in his life. Be knows how to take it. It's a pity these other nigger men and white gentlemens too don't know how. Sam is honest too. That's his religion. He would cut off his right hand before he would sell a fish that wasn't all right. His fish are all breathing and wiggling on his lines. He works every day and night from January 'til June, then stops off in June. In the Summer months he has his fish frys. Don't sell fish in the Summer because it's too hot to keep them. When he has his fish frys, the fish are still alive; that's why they are so good.
"Sam is famous for his fish. He puts out his nets (he don't seine) from January the first 'till the fifteenth of March. Then after that he just hooks and lines. In September he starts back to work. He don't work in the Christmas month though.
"He has certain days to sell his fish in different places. He sells four lines 25?, 50? , 75?, and $1.00 depending on how many and the kind of fish. He has better luck 'catching' at night than he does in the day. The best time is in the full moon. He catches channel cat fish, bream, perch and carp. These are his best sellers, but sucker fish, rock fish, mud cat, eels and any fish that runs in the stream he sho' gets 'em. He sho' is lucky and they calls him a expert. If he comes across a tamted fish he gives 'em to the niggers. They hangs around him like 'Grant around Richmond.' The stronger a fish smells the better a nigger likes 'em.
"He has made good money too. He has a car; 'tain't much of a car, just a fish car. Ha sells his fish in Eufaula Tuesdays and Wednesdays. Thursdays and Fridays he goes out of town. He don't go hisself though; he sends one of his men. They peddle Georgia Thursday; Cuthbert, Dawson, Albany and little places. Then Friday they peddle Alabama; Clayton, Comer, Midway and Union Springs. He has regular customers and always sells out. Saturdays he sells 'cut fish' to niggers. 'Cut fish' is the big red fish he cuts in small pieces. The red fish he catches weighs from eight to twelve pounds and more. All the red fish he gets in the week time, he puts in his fish boxes and keeps 'live 'till Saturday morning. Then 'bout four o'clock he gets up and with one or two of his men ha gathers 'em up and cuts 'em in small pieces; puts 'em in push carts, takes 'em up town and before nine o'clock he is sold plum out to niggers and poor white folks. Then Sam comes back home and has a day of rest. He sho' needs it, cause he is sho' over-worked. There is a lot of folks right here in Eufaula been living here all their lives, ain't got no idea what a big business the fish business is right here.
"He has had some narrow escapes too. Fell in the river lots. Course he is a fine swimmer, but this last time his clothes and boots was so heavy it was hard to swim and the current was swift. He lost his gun and his batteau. The batteau was over-loaded; that's what made it sink.
"He is a good batteau maker too. He makes his own boats. He also makes boats for sale. They are row boats.
"Fish bite better when the moon is full. He has a camp on the mouth of White Oak Creek, on the banks of the Chattahoochee River.
"He uses spring lizards and stump grubs to bait his hooks and trot lines. A trot line goes from one side of the river to the other with heavy weights on it. The spring lizards are caught in little branches or springs, under leaves and moss and make fine bait. A 'set hook' is just one hook, close on the banks, scattered up and down sometimes a hundred or more tied on willow trees or put on sticks stuck in the bank. Some of these set hooks catch cat fish over night weighing twelve pounds and over. He fishes too with a basket made cone-shape, out of white oak or hickory strips. This is baited with old cheese or peanut meal or sour meal put in the baskets at the bottom of the river or creek bed. A wire is tied to a tree on the bank to hold it. It is made just like a rat trap. If a large fish gets in it, it can never get out. He puts all these lines out at night. His fishing is done mostly at night.
"He has little nigger boys that gets most of his bait; his spring lizards and his stump grubs. They find the stump grubs mostly in old wood, old stumps and old trees. Stump grubs are worms," she explained.
"I'll tell you a secret, missey, I know you won't tell, but that's all right, I ain't gonner call no names. Many a night Sam comes home just a-laughing. A lot of these white gentlemens that goes a-fishing, if they don't have no luck, they buys a string of live fish from Sam. They goes home with a string of fish just a-kicking. They strut up town and tells everybody and their wives and brags about what a fine fisherman they is. That is what you calls 'fish caught with a silver hook.' Sam has the silver jingling in his pocket and he is glad.
"I told you that he don't sell fish in the Summer, but he has his 'fish-frys' from June till September. He makes right good money at it. It depends on how many comes. He gets 50 cents a person. They always lets him know about how many is coming so he will know how much to fix for. They brings the pickles, the bread and the beer and 'things.' She winked at me and said, you know what I means when I said 'things,' I means liquor. He furnishes the fish, the onion bread and the coffee. It ain't no easy job. If it is a big fish-fry, say fifty men or more, he fishes two nights all night long straight running. My God, how them men can eat fish! Some eat ten and fifteen apiece. You know a drink or two before eating sho' gives you an appetite. I help him always at the frys; help him cook.
"He has a long wooden table that he made. We have two large coffee pots that hold two gallons apiece. We puts two pounds of coffee apiece in sacks in each pot. That makes enough coffee. We have over a hundred tin cups and use paper plates. We make two fires. Get our wood first thing, then we cleans our fish. That's not hard; we are used to it. Then we make our onion bread, 'hush puppies.' To make 'em you cut up a pair of onions real fine, mix that with meal, add salt, make in small balls and fry in the same pot the fish are fried in. Put 'em together. When they rise to the top they are done, a golden brown, piping hot, and are they good? We uses as much as three and four gallons of boiling lard. Our frys are sho' wuth fifty cents a plate."
I asked Hattie how she liked living near the river. She said: "It's lonely sometimes, when the wind blows at night. Sounds are lonely, the hooting of an owl from away down the river, the whip-o- will, the bull-frogs, crying for rain; and the crickets. I don't like to hear no screech owl; that's a sign of death. When the river overflows, Sam checks out. He takes out his traps, boxes and lines.
We are too high up on the bluff for it to come to our house. It's a big river and it gets over in Georgia terrible.
"Sam's good and steady now. Before I married him he was one bad man after women in his young days. He ain't no more. We are both getting along.
"Sam was proud of his pa, Ransom Lynn and his ma, Mandy. Ransom been dead 'bout fifteen years. He was born in Virginia and was Lieutenant Lynn' s bodyguard. Went through the War with him until Gettysburg. He died on the battlefield there in the arms of Mr. William Bray of Eufaula and as ha was dying gave Ransom to Mr. Bray. After the War Mr. Bray brought Ransom back to Eufaula with him and built him a house on the bluff. He was carriage driver and butler for Mr. Chauncey Rhodes. He married Mandy Thomas and they had seven children. Sam being one of the youngest. Sam always likes to talk of his father."
To have one's home on the high banks is pleasant: Sam's home is on such a bank. One can look across the lovely Chattahoochee: see the sun rise and set; see in the moonlight and starlight the deep, swift river and the expanse of fertile savannahs below it.
The Alabama aide -- all down the steep one hundred and fifty foot bank of Sam's home -- nature has landscaped lavishly with an abundance of green growth, oak and hickory trees, long and short-leaf pines, white, rare mirica, seven-bark, heart-shaped leaves of red bud, magnolias starred with blossoms, blooming elderberries, mulberries festooned with gray moss; lacy maiden-hair ferns hanging in bunches from the marl banks.
In the spring the yellow jasmine, dog-wood, honey suckle and red bud give color to the green. All of this glorious beauty spreads to the water's edge.
Sandy beaches reach along the opposite shore. A silvery ribbon of road starts at the filigree-like steel bridge, and runs its way on to the inviting tree-covered rises where the river curves.
Nestled in all this loveliness is the cottage of Sam Lynn, fisherman and 'river rat.'
Excellent
Sam Lynn, Fisherman and River Rat -- Ala.
Sam -- all life, fisherman -- no legitimate children -- fathered five woods colts -- learned trade from good teacher -- employs four to five men -- has twelve batteau. -- fanatic for fresh fish -- discussion of fishing -- white men buy fish to exhibit their prowess -- fish fries succulently described.
