In an otherwise identical version, the title is "My Own Story," and line sixteen on page 10228 reads:"A few days later, perhaps a month, more or less."Names of persons and places
Date of first writing:	Feb. 20, 1939
Name of person:	William L. Vaughan
Address:	Washington, N. C.
Occupation:	WPA worker
Name of writer:	William L. Vaughan
Reviser:	George L. Andrews
No. of words:	About 8,000
<Text Not Clear>
HARD BESET
To go or not to go: that was the momentous question.
I sat on the side of the bed in my nightshirt, my bare feet on the floor, my elbows on my knees, my chin in my hands. The rooms were quiet, silent. Adjoining occupants had long since gone to their various duties Street sounds came from below. It was late in the morning in the spring of the year 1909. I had spent a restless night, tossing back and forth--half awake--with troubled dreams. Yesterday, I had thought the matter settled in my mind. Baffled, uncertain, undetermined between two divergent courses of action, for days I had vacillated.
But yesterday, I had suddenly come to a decision, and determined to go. I had packed my typewriter and few books, and crated my desk. After a bit more than a year of frustrated effort, I was giving up the fight, going back to Faxhall. I had failed to make good here.
Only a few more odds and ends to be arranged, and then I would be on the train on my way home, to start all over again. My father would not be there. At the door of the old home, my mother would meet me with open arms and a glad smile but sad heart, distressed at my change of plans, but sympathetic and disturbed. Together we would sit tonight in the old bedroom, almost silent in our troubled thoughts, harassed by the uncertainty of my future. Only a few good-byes would be said and no one would cry on my shoulder for not many close friendships had been formed. After a short while few would realize my absence, and gradually I would be forgotten. Thus my mind raced on, as my thoughts flitted, like a will-o'-the-wisp, from scene to scene in my past.
There was that memorable day in the Hall of the House of Representatives where we took the Supreme Court test for admission to the Bar; and the day when I stepped off the train in the old home town in the fall of 1907, with my law license in my hand. The ensuing months were busy, filled with excitement and action, and quickly slipped by. As supply editor and manager of a county weekly I was suddenly thrust into a lively and bitter campaign for local option. The editor, a strong prohibitionist, pushed the paper into the fight. I became aroused and interested and soon became enthusiastic. I learned all the ins and outs of one side of the contest and have always since been politically and personally a dry. Several ludicrous incidents spiced that campaign, and served to arouse our sense of humor, relieve the tension on both sides, and ease the sting of defeat. The drys won by the skin of the teeth. Every vote had counted. On the morning following the day of election an old soak, a community nuisance, descended from the train. He was one vote the wets had counted on and needed but he had been absent all that day and could not be found. One of the leaders of the wets, with disgust, asked him, "Where in the heck you been?" Mr. Soak, with hesitation and chagrin, finally stammered, "They stold me." It became later known that one of the young drys had tolled the old reprobate into his room, with a promise of liquor, on the night before election, had locked him in, and the better to guard him, had actually slept with him, and next morning early had kidnapped and kept him away until after the election. The story created a big laugh on both sides and afterwards good feeling prevailed.
There were other fascinating angles to this work. The editor was sick, and I had to swing the whole job. My days were spent on the outside, collecting local news and accounts, and soliciting job work, subscriptions and advertisements. My nights and odd moments were spent in the various necessary duties in the office, including the writing. When the force was paid off on week-ends, little was usually left for me, and I never did receive the full amount of my small salary. But the unpaid difference, I willingly forgave him as he had had hard luck, and as we were close friends. Besides, the job had furnished me the opportunity for some interesting and valuable experience, and had served to bridge a time of waiting to carry out my future plans. I had been Senior Editor on the Student Magazine at College, had majored in English, and had later taught there--Rhetoric and Composition in Freshman English. As the saying goes, I have never quite gotten the ink off my fingers, and I still have that hankering after writing, and newspaper work.
Well, the end of the year came soon enough with its serious thoughts, deep laid plans, and resolutions for the new year. But what is that familiar saying about the best laid plans of men, etc? We shall see. If our foresight were always as good as our hindsight, we might sometimes save ourselves much embarrassment and worry, and perhaps even sorrow and care. My friend, the editor, was still sick. As acting editor, I had evidently succeeded to his satisfaction, for he endeavored to persuade me to remain in charge, permanently, as employee, owner or partner. I have often been a stubborn fellow, and at such times I am not easily dissuaded. Very much to my chagrin, but alas too true, when this spirit besets me, I am beyond reason or influence, and gradually become more and more set in my purpose. Once before, I had been diverted from my early ambition to become a practicing attorney, and had spent several years in another direction-- years not wasted, perhaps, but at least, gone from my life, in that day when time seemed to move fast enough, but not anything compared to the present, plans were made. Attracted by publicity at the time of the opening of the Raleigh and Pamlico Sound Railroad into Wadding ton, I had resolved to locate here.
New Year's Day of the year 1908, found me here, with my two diplomas from college, my law license, a few legal textbooks, and a typewriter and desk, which I had purchased on credit at home, all the equipment I then possessed. Most of the small amount of money I had was borrowed and I still owed for my college expenses. I now know that I was then truly a daring young man, or forsooth a very foolish one. Like the nursery rhyme, "Hark, hark, the dogs do bark," I had come to town one step ahead of beggary, but without a silken gown.
That night and the following day I shall not be able soon to forget. The boarding house to which I had been directed by a friend was operated under the name of a middle-aged widow who worked in one of the downtown stores. Julia, the fat Negro servant, who lived in the house, presided over the kitchen. She had been with the family since the infancy of the first child, and had all the devotion and faithfulness of the traditional Southern black mammy. To the children she was "Mammy." The house, with the help of Julia plus an occasional touch from others seemed to run itself. Nobody but Julia seemed to do anything. Yet it was surprising how tidy and attractive everything always appeared. The landlady and her family and friends gave the household a distinctive personality and served to make the place enticing. It was an institution within itself. Here dull moments were few and everyone was made to feel very much at home. One became quickly a part of the household. She had an easy and graceful manner, and was a good talker. To our usual gatherings around her in the evenings after dinner she seemed truly a hostess. Of liberal views and ideas she had no censure or criticisms for the mistakes or follies of others. Even her children seemed without correction. She liked a cocktail or julep, and was at her best after taking one. In the home everyone went about his own affairs, and nobody ever seemed to do anything. Reared by a mother of Victorian ideas, in a home Puritanical in its surroundings, educated in a denominational college where religious ideals and principles prevailed, I had never gone in much for dancing or the social life.
Here I found myself unexpectedly in the midst of a group of gay easy socialites, where drinking was not taboo, where dancing and cards were much of a pastime and where social graces counted. Though beyond twenty- five and several years out of college, in these surroundings I was unsophisticated and at first as self-conscious as a child among strangers, and decidedly ill at ease. On that first night I retired early and lay in the dark, lonely, homesick and blue. Occasionally snatches of animated conversation and bursts of laughter reached me from the living room below. Next morning I awoke with temperature and a case of malaria. The following days I spent in bed in a lonely room in the midst of that jolly household, with no visitor but Julia, who quickly discovered my plight and took me in hand as one of her many "white chillun!' Her attentions, I shall never forget. Even now, after all these years, I can recall her smiling face as she went quietly about her household duties.
Although I soon found more desirable quarters down town where other young men lived, with pleasant associations and more freedom than in a private home, I continued to eat here, until the family moved away. I quickly learned to like the household and all its unusual ways and associations. Its jolly, carefree attitude, its sense of humor and rollicking spirit soon got into my blood, and I too managed to take it in the stride. There was Clint, the oldest son, a gay Lothario, but irresistible. Derwood, still a high school student, was an incessant reader, but always in the midst of things. Sadie, a deep brunette, was usually a disturbing element among them, and provoked many scraps. She was still at the boisterous age and often devilish. Mary, the youngest was but a child, and to Julia still a baby. She seemed to be everywhere at one and the same time. The boys later found their places in a distant city and made good. The girls married. Julia went away with them, and what became of her I have not heard. The mother is no longer living. Their expectation of an inheritance from an uncle of boasted wealth, a retired business man in New York, did not materialize.
The field, I found already well supplied with an admixture of young and middle-aged lawyers, indeed a strong Bar, all of them more or less established and on the road to success. Active and aggressive, all of them were out for business, and they always went for what was in sight. No bit of practice was so trivial, no case so small as not to be accepted and handled; no prospective client so humble as not to be cultivated by the first lawyer consulted. Usually older lawyers will give a young fellow a lift by passing on to him minor matters and otherwise extend encouragement and assistance. If any legal matters were refused during my early experience here and passed on by others, they failed to come my way. As I had been the last to come, the only possible association open to me at the time was with a lawyer of the opposite political faith, a Republican politician and a local Federal officeholder. Some of my friends at home advised against it, but I found it would at least furnish me the use of an adequate library and split the office expenses. So, like an inexperienced swimmer on the brink of a cold pool, I shut my eyes and plunged in. Had I hesitated all might have been different.
With no profound knowledge of the law, not much experience and very little practice, my partner, as I later found had brought me little present benefit and no future prospects. Some months nothing was taken in. Usually after the office expenses had been paid and the net divided, my part was not sufficient to cover even bare necessities. My cash gradually dwindled, and after a few months of waiting and hoping, was entirely consumed. Moreover, my prospects had not brightened.
My first case had seemed a complete flop. Placed in a very awkward position, I had made a rather clumsy appearance and had been embarrassed no little. My partner did not assist me, did not even sit with me. The situation as I now recall it, approached the ludicrous. It was in the Federal Court of the Eastern District, with Judge Purwell presiding. He had the general reputation of being grouchy, irritable, impulsive, erratic, inconsiderate, biased, and altogether without poise or judicial temperament. He was a small man, and in his efforts to appear impressive he was much given to posing. In his presence, one could only think of "a little fish in a big pond." The notorious incident wherein he had arbitrarily cited for contempt and attempted to jail Daniel Joseph because of certain editorial comments, and the prompt reversal by Judge Pickard in the circuit court could not be easily forgotten, and only served to intensify my dread of him. The late Hallam I. Cannard was then Prosecuting Attorney. He had been State Solicitor, a Congressman, had long been a prominent attorney, and was a seasoned prosecutor. I felt myself no match for him, for he was cold-blooded and merciless. The case was of no special importance, and probably should have been settled on a plea. My client was a white man, a political friend of my partner, but without money or influence. A harnessmaker, of insignificant appearance and negative personality, he had made little impression on court or jury. Charged with counterfeiting, he persistently asserted his innocence, and made it a matter of principle. Trouble with his wife had separated them. She was known as a very pretty and attractive woman, but without conscience or scruples. He declared it a frame-up between her and some of her gentlemen friends, a plot to get him out of the way, for he was a fighter and would not hesitate to make a scene. She was suing for divorce and he was not failing to resist. whether he was actually guilty, I have never been able to decide, but the Government evidence, though weak, had presented a bang-up case of a kind. My only material and worth-while witness was my client, who simply denied everything. He was itching to prove a plot against her and get his wife mixed up in the thing, but he could find neither willing nor competent witnesses, for everyone I had examined had seemed to shy-off from testifying in his behalf.
The Government agent who had worked up the case and who appeared as chief witness was an old man, about past his day of usefulness. He probably would not have been assigned to a case of much importance. Pompous and blustering, of the windbag type, he seemed entirely without a deep sense of justice or right. Deep down in my mind I had an impression, or was it intuition, that he was only interested in a record of conviction, to justify his own conclusions and to have another mark chalked up to his credit with his Department, that he realized he was slipping and wanted to justify his reputation. But new in the practice, inexperienced in the trial of cases, untrained in the art of cross examination, as I then was, I was no match for him. I failed to break down his evidence or to dent his superior attitude. He had decidedly the best of it, and I became more frustrated than ever. Before the opening of the case he had called me aside and offered to recommend a suspended judgment, if I would tender a plea of guilty. My client went up in the air and emphatically refused. Had I known more of the psychology of courthouse tactics, I would have forced him to do so, but neither of us even suspected the character and completeness of the chain of evidence against us. I also feel certain that the "Big Ike" Agent would never have made the proposition, had he suspected the ultimate weakness of our defense. But easy and complete as his victory was, he exhibited no less enjoyment of it, and with the air of a "Lord Mogul," and with many flourishes, he gathered together his papers and articles of evidence, which had been scattered all over the table before the jury, and proceeded to put them away in his portfolio.
The evidence he offered was of a sorry sort, and I have often wondered if the case was really a frame. Plaster-of-Paris dies of the crudest type, supposed to be capable of coining nickels were in evidence. No coins were offered. "What might have been," in this conviction and in the light of my later experiences, has often been my thought. If--
The whole situation and all of its surroundings, were to me disconcerting. I had first to be sworn in. It was my first court appearance, for while I had already been sworn in before a Superior Court at Faxhall, I had never tried a case. It was all new, untried. I was nervous, uncertain, confused, and in mortal fear of a possible call-down from His Honor. When in my attempt before the jury I had referred to and tried to argue the proffered compromise, which of course under court rules was not permissible, I had received a sharp rebuke, and almost immediately sat down in confusion.. I received no sympathy, no encouragement, no such consideration as is sometimes extended a raw recruit in the Law, by judges and other court officers and even opposing counsel. I have often seen strong judges of the type of Judge Penter, of the State courts, practically conduct a case for a mistaken or floundering attorney in order to assure the party of a proper chance for justice. But no such favor came my way on this, to me, most momentous occasion.
The session was held in the City Hall, and for a Court was a scene of bustle and commotion. The auditorium was small and crowded. The bar was insufficient. After the judge, clerk and jury had been provided for, and the District Attorney given space, lawyers and their witnesses had to shift for themselves. It could not be stretched, and no place was available for consultation. We were under the very noses of the jury and the District Attorney, and a moderate whisper might have been heard by the judge. All was a sort of jumble. Thrust suddenly into the midst of it, the burden of my client's defense resting as heavily upon me as though his life were in jeopardy, for me it had been a case of confusion worse confounded. I floundered amid disconcerting psychological influences. The impression was deep, keen, and well-nigh fatal. For months afterwards, I shuddered almost at the thought of a court, or a trial, My acute discomfiture and sense of frustration had no doubt exaggerated in my mind the possible unfavorable impression the incident might have made on Court and public.
I was first discouraged and then desperate. Back home, I had some friends. I resolved to arise and go to them for advice. In response to my appeal one of them, a lawyer of strength and prominence and a Congressman, advised me to re-locate at Danfield, had agreed to an association for handling jointly court cases and other important matters, and to assist me financially for a reasonable time until I might become established. But now I sat, again in a dilemma, in a blue funk.
Could I take it on the chin and rather bear those ills that I had than fly to others that I knew not of? Must I admit defeat and surrender, or with bulldog tenacity and sheer determination hang on, live down that disconcerting incident and finally rise above it? These thoughts, rather than lack of money, harassed me as I sat and pondered, and like Hamlet, let "their currents turn away and lose the name of action."
Suddenly I sprang up and seized a coin from my dresser. I would determine the matter now, once and for all, and abide by the consequences. "Heads, I go; tails, I stay." I flipped the coin, and it fell with a ring on the bare floor, and lay "tails up". I dressed., went out, unpacked and replaced my things in my office, and resumed where I had left off.
On that very day, word came to me through a friend that Dick Noll, an old acquaintance and former resident of our home town, wanted to see me. He occupied an office and rooms on the same floor with us. Dick was a construction engineer and contractor and had. just completed a project on which he had made some money. He had learned from Mason something of my troubles. He, too, had. had his ups and downs. Many times under the hazards of his ventures he had been financially flat, but now he was flush. He sat at his desk. Big, ruddy, genial, the whole world was his friend. His voice was in keeping with his personality. He roared at me, "Roy, Mason tells me you are having some financial difficulties and are considering a change of location. Well, I have a few dollars, and if some of my money will help you you can get it." At the same time he handed me $100. "I want no note or security. Take it and keep it as long as you need it and repay it whenever you get damned good and ready. If you are never able to return it, it will be O.K."
Good old Dick! He has long since passed to his reward, and I'm darn certain it's a good reward. I took his money and hurried out, so overcome with emotion that I could scarcely thank him. It gave me a sense of temporary security and tided me over an unproductive period, which later conditions to some extent relieved. In the course of time I was able to repay it and at a time when Dick was in no little need of it.
A month later, more or le ss, a young lawyer, who had inherited a practice established by his father, met me on the street near his office and asked me to come in. He wanted to talk with me. In confidence, he told me of his political aspirations and his plan to become a candidate in the approaching primary for Solicitor in this Judicial District. He planned to make a campaign of the District, and would be out for a month or more until the nomination. He wanted me to come and attend to his office during his absence, and would pay me $125 per month for the time To me, it was truly a supernatural response to a crying necessity. While this employment continued for perhaps less than two months, it later proved but the beginning of a lifelong friendship between us, more or less of business and professional associations, and ultimately an alliance with his family. It made for me some staunch friends and effective supporters, and gave to me the wife who later became the mother of my children. But it also furnished me, at times, bitter relentless enemies and brought with it some vicissitudes, disappointments and sorrows.
My new friend failed of nomination, and in due course returned to his office and resumed his practice With what I had saved from my salary, I was now able to go on my own for a while. I withdrew from my partnership, secured a small office in an old wooden building near the Courthouse, purchased on tick from my partner his library (for he never used it) and hung out my own shingle. I still have a part of those books, the nucleus of my present library. Clients did not come, and discouragement again beset me. Still my circle of acquaintances gradually widened, sane friendships were formed, and waiting became more tolerable. One valued friendship which I enjoyed until his death was with the Register of Deeds. It was entirely unselfish, for it brought me no special advantage, nor material returns or advancement. An old man, he was quiet, lovable, and always a gentleman. He became like a father to me, and when I was low in spirit and discouraged, a talk with this kindly man never failed to give me something I needed, and to send me away better able to continue the fight.
The stenographer of my lawyer friend, his half sister, served his office during my stay there I had met her before and perhaps had called in her home, along with others, for in those days multiple calling without "dates" was not unusual. We had been but casual acquaintances. But thrown with her daily for a period, I became no little impressed, and although marriage was then not even a dream to me, I could not forget her. I seemed entirely unable to stay away. Besides, she often came by my office, yelled through the open door, and sometimes would come in. But at her home I always seemed to sense from her a barrier of reserve which baffled me no little, and which I was unable to fathom. So I was constantly both attracted and repelled. I began to makelove to her, but without definite response, by word or act. Either I was not wise in the ways of a woman with, a man, or she had not yet found herself, for she later became all mine in act and deed and thought, a fascinating sweetheart, a loving wife, a wise and devoted mother. We were married in 1911 in our own quiet way, which did not seem to suit either of our mothers, but it was our wedding and we liked it. She did not live to know the social changes and new ideals of the period following the war, but I suspect she would have been one of the old-fashioned mothers with her children, and fully able to lead and guide them with her innate understanding, common sense, and wonderful personality, for she knew how to share happiness, and she did not shrink from responsibility and care.
In the fall of 1909, when it seemed to me again that nothing would ever happen, and when the future looked cloudy, like thunder from a clear sky, came the information that the Superintendent of County Schools had resigned, and with it, the suggestion that I might have the place. When I had thought it through, I wanted it. Almost unsought, certain influences became active in my behalf Of a three man board one angle was against me. I soon learned that his promptings came from the State Superintendent, who had already recommended someone for appointment. It came to me that Dr. Janer wanted an active teacher on a whole-time basis, and especially opposed me on the theory that no young lawyer should occupy the office, because, he said, I would make it a stepping -stone to success in my profession. The die had been cast, I had made my decision and I did not choose to give up, so it was up to me to fight. In a conference with Dr. Janer, in his office, I frankly told him what I had heard. I reminded him that he himself, had been educated for a lawyer and admitted to practice, and had afterwards become a teacher; that I had several years successful teaching to my credit, first in the old Morson Academy in Riley and lately at Forest Hill College; that it was unfair and arbitrary to assume that I intended to fill the place only long enough to become able to return successfully to the law. He made no response. He simply smiled.
In the end I was elected. Two Board members supported me. The other remained silent. I was a part time man at $75 per month and travelling expenses. For nine months, I was permitted to continue in the law. Without clients and with nothing else to do, I actually gave my full time to the work. After a careful survey of the County, I reported conditions to Dr. Janer, and sought his support. He gladly gave it, and spent a whole week with me in a campaign of the County. We had from one to three speaking appointments each day followed by conferences with interested parties. The following week I continued the campaign with Dr. Nadel, of Carolina, speaking. Thus we reached and influenced every community in the County. The Farm and Home Demonstration agents often accompanied us. They had followers and their influence counted. Frequently members of the Board were present. Even he of the opposition sometimes joined us. Sentiment was aroused, changes were begun, and improvements were put through as rapidly as our limited school fund would permit. Everything was needed, and all at one time. Gradually, unprepared and incompetent teachers were eliminated. New equipment was bought through funds raised by newly formed "Betterment Associations.! School terms were extended and new buildings were erected through private subscriptions and local tax districts. The local district was then the unit, and through it every change and improvement had to be started. Most schools were one-teacher. Consolidation was a problem. All roads were in the mud in wet weather, and often bottomless during the school season in winter. Streams, swamps and embankments, not yet properly bridged, separated adjacent communities and sometimes isolated others. Still where communities could be persuaded, and necessary funds provided, beginnings were made. I left to my successor many two and three teacher schools, and a few with four or more. However, under conditions at that time, consolidations may have been a hardship to the children involved, rather than an advantage. It did educate the public and arouse community pride in better and more effective schools, and prepared the County for real strides later.
But my efforts were not without opposition, and some enemies arose. Where incompetent teachers were pressed out, often they and their families were bitter, and their friends refused to understand. It was all a long and slow process and required every minute of my thought and time. I not only visited schools but made myself welcome in the communities. Wherever possible and convenient I broke bread and slept in the homes. At the regular election in June, 1910, over the continued objection of the same member, I ms re-elected on a new salary basis, and this time required to abandon my practice, and give my full time to the work.
Office work was increasing, teacher-training was imperative; better teachers had to be sought; committeemen in their appreciation for improvements, were willing to dump the whole matter, bag and baggage, into my office, and leave it to me. The board felt unable to furnish me help, so when it became imperative I had to procure it at my own expense. While, the movement started, continued with increased momentum, the public consciousness of it gradually became somewhat blunted, and not so readily aware of it. I did usually succeed in finding better teachers, even at our low salary scale, which was mostly the legal minimum, and as a whole, they were loyal and cooperative. Many of them are my warm friends today.
As time passed, my interest increased, and I became more and more impressed with the idea of making it a life work. In the spring of 1912, information came to me from Mr. Bitner, the one always loyal supporter of mine on the Board, that the other two members had determined to put me out at this June election, and had already selected my successor. The implacable opposition of Mr. Hinton had at last counted with the other member, and was about to become effective. But my friends and supporters had increased and the school forces and general public were satisfied. Quietly a movement formed which asserted itself so forcefully in my behalf on election day, that the opposing members floundered in surprise and confusion; but, over the protest of the public, they postponed the election until the following day. They did not dare disregard the demand, and on Tuesday tried to save face by having their proposed candidate, who had been in town for a week ready to assume his new duties, withdraw his application, which Mr. Hinton proceeded to read with much gusto. I was unanimously re-elected. But the situation afterwards became tense. Mr. Hinton grew morose and bitter, and refused to cooperate with me in anything. Regardless of merit or results, I could always count him against me. Whenever he was not nodding in our meetings he was cynical and relentless, and Mr. Raynor, usually sided with him. They had decided to drive me out, and seemed always to try to put me on the spot. As the good of the schools was first, I was unwilling that they be made a political football because of personal feeling (for they had made it a personal matter). I therefore resigned. In the fall of 1913, I left the office after they had selected my successor. But with the consciousness that, regardless of whatever credit I might then or ultimately receive, much had been accomplished. The record of at least a part of my work may still be found in the old minute book in the County Superintendent's office. Some of it is also reflected in the reports of that period from the State Superintendent's office.
"There is a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will." Certain forces seemed to have been in operation, which were entirely beyond my influence or control. Again an intervening fate had forced me back to my original purpose. The opportunity for a desirable partnership came and I again resumed the practice of law. I was afterwards elected Judge of the County Recorders Court in Washington and assumed the office in December 1914. I was twice re-elected, but because of conflicting practice resigned before one of the terms had expired.
In 1914, my partner became interested in real estate, and organized a corporation. At first it was a negligible matter--a sort of hobby--but after the beginning of the World War, trade began to quicken and tobacco prices to rise. As the local real estate market became active and. its momentum began gradually to increase, he gave more and more of his time to his company. It became a matter of evolution. Naturally full of energy and fond of trading, he had never really cared for the law. By 1916 he found himself so engrossed in this fascinating game, with its promise of large returns, and quick turnover, he gradually relinquished his practice. Swept off his feet by crazy conditions, he finally abandoned his profession. All legal matters from his real estate office came to me.
The business first grew, and then increased by leaps and bounds. In no time the legal side reached such proportions, it was requiring much attention. Little by little, I was drawn from the general practice. The Company finally demanded full time and paid me for it. For several years I was thus employed. Sometimes matters came so fast other lawyers had to be called in to help me. Often upon my return to my office after a few hours necessary absence, I would find my desk covered with papers and memoranda--matters requiring immediate attention. I would be swamped for days at a time. Things moved so fast, the whole place sometimes seemed like a madhouse. But in important matters requiring careful attention, I refused to be rushed. Later, when the crisis suddenly came, much to my satisfaction, I found myself fully justified. From the fall of 1917 to the spring of 1920, the prices of tobacco and other farm products arose so rapidly, and farm incomes became so easy, the farmer forgot the value of money. When he wanted more land or became interested in a particular farm, cool judgment was out. Regardless of price or value, he wanted it then and wanted it quick, before someone else had snapped it up. Despite his easy and more than adequate income, he seldom paid in full. Credit was liberal and he thought he needed his cash--for other purposes--God knows what: Few were ultimately able, after the crisis came to meet even the interest payments and eventually he lost whatever money he had put into it. At the same time often whatever else he had, went too--all gone with the wind. The property usually found its way back to the original owner, in most cases, with a loss to him also, for sometimes, he had not received on it sufficient even to cover a reasonable rental and accumulated taxes. It was a mad, wild time, and even the most conservative were involved, and sometimes swept hopelessly into the maelstrom. Fortunate indeed was the person whose cool judgment or lack of nerve had kept him beyond the whirlpool.
The crash of prices at the opening of the 1920 tobacco markets left the community appalled, but becalmed. Men then took time to look around and think. Some, in despair, gave up, and are still out. Others quickly cleared away the debris, forgot the past, and resolved to let's begin over again. The sudden change did not leave me unscathed. The Company failed and became involved in an intricate and very unpleasant situation. There was nothing left to salvage. With no job and without clients or practice, I had not sufficient funds to meet current household expenses, and at first was forced to borrow for that purpose. Besides, sickness and a death in my family in the early part of 1920, had left me deeply in debt. Necessity scarcely left time for thought. Immediate needs must be provided. I secured a contract and rate book, and for a time sold life insurance. Thus, I was able to bridge the chasm. But I kept my office, and clients gradually came. Eventually I could devote my entire time to my profession. Slowly my practice grew and my income increased until I was able to meet expenses and reduce my financial obligations.
Dark clouds had passed. The future looked bright. My oldest son, Paul, now a lad of eighteen, seemed well on the road to recovery, and to a more or less normal life, after several years of absence from school and enforced rest in bed. He had suffered an attack of acute rheumatic fever, resulting in a crippled heart, and through a long period of anxious waiting and watching he had been my chief concern in life. Loyal doctors had stood by me, sympathetic friends had lent their aid, and now I was planning to put him in college. He had a fine mind, a most lovable personality, and was full of ambition, and rich in promise. But fate had decreed otherwise, and I had yet to face the real crisis in my life.
It came on the morning of Friday, May 19, 1933. One moment I had been in full command of all my bodily faculties; the next I was a helpless, hopeless invalid, totally disabled, paralyzed from my neck down. Six of us were on our way to Forest Hill College. We had stopped just beyond Walton at a highway station for drinks. I had been driving, but surrendered the wheel to one of my sons. We turned off the main highway and took the nearest cut to Forest Hill. Although a State highway, it was still a narrow dirt road, too high in the center, and sloping sharply to the sides. On either hand was a ditch and beyond it an embankment. Across it were close narrow corduroy-like waves, the result of constant scraping. To avoid some of this constant bumping, Enoch was driving slightly to the right, with the left wheels near the crest of the road. If human fault is responsible for that accident, it rests upon the Highway Commission, for no such precarious road condition should have been permitted. We were going at a moderate speed, around thirty miles. Suddenly the right wheels struck the sharp edges of a gut about six inches wide and the same depth, which had washed out across the right incline of the road. The road was hard. The unexpected bounce together with the sharp incline of the road caused the front to slide toward the ditch on the right. Like a flash I saw something was about to happen. Three of us were on the front seat. For an instant, I must have lost consciousness. What happened I do not know. When consciousness returned the car was still, resting on its four wheels, its front in the general direction we had been going, but on the left side of the road. That it had just come to rest I know, from the fact that, up to that time no one had moved or spoken. my head was slumped forward, my arms and legs limp, my whole body paralyzed. Unable to talk but little, for breathing was difficult, my mind still functioned with clearness and accuracy Next morning when I had a chance to look around and think, I realized that Paul had suffered some injury. In the excitement he had either not known it, or had refused to admit it. I sent him home by a friend.
For weeks, I lay in a hospital in another town, my neck broken, my head pulled back by some sort of machine, my life in the balance. In my despair, I prayed for death. Slowly, almost imperceptibly, some improvement came, but relentlessly I continued to long for death. Seven weeks later I was brought home to the local hospital, much improved, but still in a precarious condition. It was not until then that I learned of Paul's death. He had made a brave fight, but after two weeks had succumbed.
For four years, my life was but the shifting scene of various hospitals, attentive nurses, and faithful doctors. Strangers, most of them, yet all of them with ready sympathy, utmost patience and kindly encouragement. One by one, I can now recall them as they gave freely of their services. They were a good lot--God bless them everyone. No more faithful, unselfish class or profession ever came under my observation.
New friends came, too. One of them, I cannot soon forget. It was in a Baltimore Hospital. A chance acquaintance, one of my home friends had written her about me. Six months is a long time when one is confined almost all the while, to one bed in one place, away from home and friends, in a strange and distant city. Late one afternoon after visiting hours, but a short while before the evening meal, her first visit was short and but casual. She left her name, street address and phone number. She came again and again. She had her car and sometimes I was permitted to ride with her. Of course it was much trouble, far I had to be dressed and lifted into the seat of the car by the orderly. Nevertheless, for months her visits continued. She brought flowers, friends. For me she did more than break the monotony of hospital routine, she aroused new interest in life, and gave me something to look forward to each day.
Does one ever become so helpless or invalided, or so hopeless as not to be stirred by romantic impulses? I doubt it, for even in that very condition, I found myself slipping into youthful thoughts. She became, and still is, very dear to me. And harm has not been done, for my sense of the everlasting fitness of things in my knowledge of my physical condition, would preclude any thought of marriage. What could I offer or give for even the devotion of a mate? Yet the sweetness of that association cannot be set aside or forgotten.
Partings are always sad, but that parting with my boy at the hospital, on the morning after the accident, when I sent him away to bed, I can never forget, but time, the great healer, has benumbed my sense of the loss of him. Bedridden for two years, I finally was able to turn over in bed, and later to sit up. Now, almost six years after the accident, I am able to do most things for myself. Many of my bodily functions have partially returned, though none of them are perfect. Two operations have brought miraculous results. On crutches, now, I can get about the house, and go short distances outside. With my left hand I am writing this, for I lost the entire use of my right fend had to shift to the left.
As all of my resources are well nigh exhausted, my clientele long since gone, and my strength insufficient to handle and re-build a practice of a general nature, such as is necessary in a town of this size, I was forced to the necessity of seeking WPA work under the Federal Writers' Project. But as Emerson taught in his statement of that law, everything has its compensation. May we have whatever we want, if we will only pay the price. Well, it seems a dear price to have paid, but as I said before, I have always had that unsatisfied hankering after writing, the desire for the well-turned expression, the ability to set down on paper forceful and effective thoughts. It may have been the power of an inexorable fate again driving me on to the accomplishment of another of my long-cherished desires. Who knows?