There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Date of first writing:	January 10, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	Mrs. Florence Matthews
Address:	Vanceboro, N. C.
Occupation:	Farmer (housewife)
Name of writer:	Mary M. Phillips
Revisers:	New Bern, N. C.
	W. J. Sadler
	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 8,500
A DAY WITH SOPHIA BRAXTON
It is hard to believe that Sophia Braxton, a woman of about fifty years, runs a twelve-acre farm and at the same time does the necessary housework for a family of six. Her face is unwrinkled, although her hands are rough and work-worn. She is low and stout but she moves around easily and quickly. Her grayish hair is bobbed and held back from her face by two combs and her undimmed brown eyes are filled with mischief.
"Good morning," she said. "You're out mighty early or I'm late, one. I usually get through before this time but we slept late this morning, and Cora, my daughter, had to go to school without helping me."
By this time she had finished the steps. She gave a crocheted rag rug a few brisk shakes and put it down by the top step for a footmat.
"Come in," she said. "I reckon you can stand the dust now. Ever since we filled that hole in the yard with sand the house stays full of dust all the time."
We went in together. She opened the front door and then stopped to pick up some wood lying by the door. She entered the room and walked over to the heater. Opening the door with a corner of her apron, she put the wood on the fire.
"Now," she said, "that'll last a spell. You take off your hat and coat and make yourself comfortable. I've got to go wash my hands but I'll be right back."
Now was the time to look about the room. The dark oak floor was partially covered with a bright-colored linoleum square, the color of which blended with the light gray walls. The room was furnished with a radio, heater, writing desk, four chairs, sewing machine, bookcase, and a magazine rack containing a copy of Pictorial Review, copies of True Story, and a copy of Farmer's Wife, White ruffled curtains hung at the windows, and a few pictures and a calendar hung on the wall. Behind the heater lay a dog and a cat.
Sophia came back into the room.
"Have some of this fudge," she said, holding out a glass plate filled with candy. "My niece made it for me. My Sunday School class met here last night, and I wanted the candy to pass around after we finished with the business meeting. Our new preacher is sure doing a lot of good with the young people. He comes to all the meetings and is always doing something for somebody. Now we're trying to raise money for the orphanage. Well, while we're eating the candy I might as well keep on with my work, if you don't mind."
She walked over to the machine, opened a little yellow box, and took from it a pair of scissors, a piece of cardboard, and some scraps of bright-colored cloth.
"I'm making a bedquilt top," she explained. "This time of year we women don't have much to do, so we spend all our spare time on our sewing. We save the scraps and piece up bedquilt squares. My scraps were scarce this year, for Cora has got so she don't want to wear print dresses to school. She wants sweaters and skirts. She says all the high school girls wear them now. I even had to send to town this year to git some remnants to use with my scraps. Miss Eva Lovell, a dressmaker, promised me some scraps but I just never got to go git them.
"Did you ever piece up a quilt? Well, you cut a pattern out of pasteboard, then you cut pieces of light and dark cloth and sew them together into squares. When you have enough squares to cover a bed they are sewed into one piece. A lining is made the same size. I use outing because it's warmer. Dark linings don't git dirty as easy as light ones. After the lining is finished, four long wooden frames with nail holes in the ends are laid on the floor in the shape of a square. The lining is sewed to the frames and pulled tight, then the batting is laid down over the lining. A long time ago that was the hardest part for we had to take cotton like it was picked and card it with combs. It took a long time to git the lumps out and git the carded cotton smooth on the lining, but now you can buy the batting all in one piece. All you have to do is unfold it on the lining and then spread the top down, pinning it to keep it from slipping.
"A pattern is traced on the quilt with chalk or meal and it's ready for the women to come in and quilt. All the women that can sew with their fingers in the neighborhood come and help git the quilt out. They don't mind, for maybe next week they'll have one to git out. Anyway, it gives the women a chance to run their mouths. It generally takes about three evenings to finish a quilt. After the quilting's finished I take the quilt out of the frames and hem it with my fingers. That makes another piece of bed over that cost almost nothing.
Just as she finished speaking the front door opened and a frail-looking, middle-aged woman with grayish, sandy hair and fading blue eyes came into the room and asked Sophia to lend her some meal.
The two women left the room, but soon Sophia returned alone. She put some more wood on the fire and then sat down, seemingly lost in thought.
"It makes me sorry for Georgeanne," she said. "She's in a lot of trouble. Her husband's dead and it's hard to raise children without a man in the family. She's got two grown boys but that ain't the same. Her oldest girl, Hilda, got married and had four babies just as fast as she could. Her husband was shiftless and wouldn't keep a job. He claimed to be sick all the time.
"When Georgeanne's husband died about four years ago, Hilda and her family moved in for a little while. They've been there ever since. Rufus is doing better, though. He works steady now at a sawmill and pays his part of the bills. You never hear any complaint from him about feeling bad any more. For awhile they got along fine. Georgeanne had lights put in the house and bought a radio. One of her boys had a steady job and the other one worked on the farm. Both the girls worked out and made money to buy their clothes.
"The youngest girl, Julia, was very pretty. She got to running around with the wrong kind of boys and now she's going to have a baby. Georgeanne found it out not long ago and she's about crazy. She caught Julia taking some funny- looking pills. Julia cut up and cried but finally she told what was wrong. She had been going with Con Albright, and he gave her the pills when she told him something was wrong. Georgeanne took the pills to Con and asked him what he was going to do about the mess. He told her that he'd marry Julia but would have to wait two weeks until pay day. She told him that'd be all right, so she come on home and started fixing Julia's clothes. She went to New Bern and bought her a suitcase and some new dresses and shoes.
"On the day for the wedding Julia got ready to git married. She was all dressed, except putting on her hat, when a note come from Con saying that he had changed his mind and won't going to marry her. Well, Georgeanne went right downtown and called Con out to talk with him. He told her he'd thought things over and decided that he and Julia didn't love one another enough to get married. He said he was sorry for her and would give her money to help pay expenses. That made Georgeanne mad and she told him that she didn't want his money for she hadn't sold her girls out in white slavery. I don't reckon they know what to do now. Georgeanne just told me that she'd got a lawyer to see what could be done.
"All this gabbing ain't gitting my dinner done. Bill Joe, my son, will be home and nothing to eat. Come on, go in the kitchen with me while I put the collards in the pot."
We went through a small bedroom which was plainly furnished to get to the kitchen. The iron bed was covered with a gay patchwork quilt, and the linoleum was old but clean. A white curtain hung at the window. The only other furniture consisted of a green painted chair, a table, and a "whatnot" made of spools.
A door opened into the kitchen which was large and roomy. Two big windows, with white ruffled curtains, furnished plenty of light. There was a big green and ivory range in one corner, and there was a dining table covered with a figured oilcloth in the middle of the floor. A built in cabinet filled with dishes, and an old-fashioned washing machine stood in another corner. There was a shelf with a bucket of water, a tube of tooth paste, and several tooth brushes, above which hung a white towel. A cupboard filled with canned fruits was at one end of the kitchen, and a long table was at the other end.
Sophia walked over to the table and picked up a cold biscuit.
"Come," she said, "I'll go feed my young chickens while I'm waiting for the pot to boil. One of my hens stole a nest and come in last week with ten little biddies.
They'll be a lot of trouble in cold weather but I'll have early fryers. I don't have so many chickens but enough to give all the eggs we want for breakfast. Since we killed hogs the younguns don't care anything for eggs, so I sell 'em and buy snuff or coffee or something like that.
"He knows it's about time for dinner," Sophia said, referring to an old mule lazily walking about in the lot. "Bill Joe comes home about this time to feed up.
"Now, come over here by the smokehouse and you can see my hog. I call her 'Tootsie.' My son-in-law give her to me when she was born. She was a runt and he said he didn't have time to fool with her. Everybody laughed at me when I started to feed her on a bottle, but look at her now.
She's the nicest hog of the lot, I saved her for a brood sow and I think she'll have pigs about March, The other hog is one John, my husband, bought last week. He calls her 'Sam,'
"We raised more meat than we'll use. I sent it to New Bern to be cured at the ice house. It don't cost much and you don't have to worry about it spoiling and getting full of bugs."
While she was talking, a tall, slender boy about eighteen years of age came through the side gate and walked over to the pump by the kitchen door.
"That's my oldest son, Bill Joe. He does most of the work on the farm and he's mighty smart. He's been down by the creek today fixing a tobacco bed."
We went into the kitchen. Then she began to prepare the table. Flowered plates and cups and saucers were placed and silver knives and forks were added. Next came the food which consisted of sweet potatoes, home-made butter, biscuits, pickled pepper, pear preserves, dumplings, collards, backbone, hog jowl, and coffee.
Bill Joe came in and washed his hands, but had nothing to say for awhile.
"Come on, let's set down," Sophia said. "There's no use waiting for John. When he's at that store he don't even know when mealtime comes. The younguns don't come home for dinner. Their daddy gives them money to buy something at school."
"Did Harvey go back to work to-day?" Bill Joe asked as he sat down at the table.
"Yes, he carried his dinner with him," his mother replied.
For a few minutes there was silence. The food was goal, well prepared, and plentiful.
"Harvey's pitiful," Sophia suddenly said. "He's my oldest brother's baby and was just as smart and bright as any child you ever saw when he was little. He loved to go out home to stay with we younguns. We let him have anything he wanted and humored him to death. I remember that Liza, his mother, wouldn't let him have any grapes, We didn't think that they might hurt him, so we let him eat all he wanted. We told him they were 'tarbums' and then when he cried for them Liza couldn't fuss with us for giving them to him.
"He was about three years old when he was taken with a spell of meningitis. We all thought he was going to die for a long time. The doctor tended him day and night, and somebody had to set up with him all the time. After several weeks he took a change for the better but he couldn't walk a step. Liza worried about it all the time. She heard that people were getting healed at the church by prayer, so she carried Harvey to church one Sunday morning. She kneeled down at the altar and while the preacher was praying Harvey got out of her lap and took a few steps. He walked from then on, getting more strength every day. It won't long before we could tell that he didn't act right. He won't crazy but he was queer. He talked at random. We didn't know whether he could learn or not when he started to school, but he did. He learned to read and write in no time. He was too little to do any work--he still can't work; he just can't keep his mind on it--so he went to every session of school.
"Liza died when he was about seven years old. He went out home to live with us and his daddy went to Winterville to work. Will, that's his daddy, stayed up there several years. He fell in love with an old maid, Miss Annie Sauls, and married her. Will was a carpenter and made right good money. He come down and got Harvey and carried him up there to live.
"Everything got along all right at first. Then Miss Annie had a baby and Harvey was in the way. It won't long before she got him off to the feeble-minded school at Kinston. She made Will think that he'd fare better there and get a better education. Well, Harvey didn't stay there long before he run away. He worked out in the country for farmers.
"Will and Miss Annie finally moved back down here. Harvey come, too, but he didn't stay long. He went up around Black Jack to farm with some man and got married. His wife was a widow. She had a small boy and I reckon she just wanted to get married. She and Harvey got along all right for awhile. They had a little girl and seemed to be doing well. Then Lola, that's Harvey's wife, run him off. He went around in the neighborhood and stayed with first one and then another. Lola couldn't stand that so she had him put in jail. His daddy found it out and went and got him out. He stayed there until his daddy died.
"Lola knowed that Will had a little property, so she come down and got Harvey to go back home with her. He went and just as soon as he got his part of Willis money she run him off again. He beat around and got ragged and dirty, and then he come down here again. We all give him work and helped him git on his feet. He bought up some clothes, and first thing we knowed he had gone back to Lola. That went on for years.
"Last year Harvey come down here and told us that he was through with Lola. He helped with the tobacco and made a little money. Somebody helped him git on the WPA, and he's gitting along fine. He stays here with me and pays me a little board. I do his washing and ironing and patching. I made him buy a suit of clothes and some Sunday shoes. He goes to church and Sunday School every Sunday. I don't know what Lola is up to, but their girl, Lula Belle, is grown now and she comes to see Harvey real often. She brings her mammy with her, and she begs Harvey to go up there to see them. He says he's not going, but you can't tell what a man's going to do. He better stay away."
The meal was finished, and Bill Joe had left the table when a neatly dressed, small, slender man came in the room.
He walked over to Sophia and handed her a sack, saying, "Here's a Pepsi-Cola, I thought you'd want one after dinner."
"John," she said, "we've got company. Can't you speak?"
He barely looked at me but said, "Howdy", Then turning to his wife, he continued, "Sophia, I'm so damn mad I can't hardly see. Willie and Tom keep messing about that store lease and I'm ready to quit the whole damn mess."
He started eating his dinner while Sophia related the trouble.
"John's been clerking for Tom Horner in a little store and filling station combined," she began. "Mr. Horner had a lease on the place, but when Willie Paxton, John's son- in-law, bought the place he repaired it and went up on the rent. Mr. Horner refused to pay any more, so Willie carried the case to court and nothing has been settled."
John ate dinner quickly without even speaking. He went out through the back door and looked at the mule.
Sophia continued: "Don't pay any attention to John's cussing. I just can't make him quit. He worries me to death. I remember one time he and Hugh, my dead brother, were putting a top on the tobacco barn. The tar paper kept slipping and all of a sudden John squalled out, 'Hugh, turn the damn thing a-loose and let it go to hell a-winding.' Hugh just laughed and went on with his work."
Sophia talked and did the dishes at the same time. After she finished the dishes we went to the living room. Sophia took out her snuff box and brush and for a few minutes silence prevailed.
"In a way I've lived here all my life," she responded to a question. "Pappy, he was Thomas Carlton, used to own all the land from the road to the creek. The homeplace was up the lane. Pappy met Mammy, Ida Warren, at that time while he was out hunting one day. He fell in love with her and after courting awhile they got married. That was about eighty years ago. They come to Vanceboro to live where they lived in a one-roomed cabin out on the road until Willie, my oldest brother, was born.
"Pappy musta wanted a big family for he built a six-room house, with a dining room and kitchen a few yards away. He soon joined the house to the kitchen with a long narrow porch. He and Mammy went to work and started a garden.
Fruit trees were set out, and Mammy had a big flower garden by the back porch. She didn't get much time to do much outside work, for it kept her busy tending to the younguns.
A new one come along every year until they had thirteen. The day the last one walked Pappy went out to the store and told the men that Ida was mad for the baby was walking for the first time since they had been married. He meant that they'd never had a baby to walk before another one was born until this time. Folks don't have that many babies now.
It takes too much to raise one nowadays. I certainly am glad that I didn't have that many, but then I waited too long to git married to have many babies. Even at that, I had six.
"Folks are all the time talking about hard times. Well, I can't remember any but hard times. I can remember that Pappy had a blacksmith shop. He stayed busy shoeing horses for the neighbors. He got about seventy-five cents for that. We younguns have worked in the field many a day for twenty five cents, still we always had enough to eat and enough to wear. We raised most of cur food right on the farm. We had hogs, cows, and chickens, besides our vegetables and fruits. Even if there won't much money everything was cheap. We could trade eggs for snuff and other things we couldn't raise. In the wintertime we had to eat a lot of peas.
We planted them in the corn, and when they got dry we younguns would have to go in the field and pick them. We'd put them in sacks and beat them to get the hulls off, then when green vegetables got scarce we eat peas.
"All the cooking along then was done in the fireplace. The big iron pot hung on a crane and swung out to put in the foods. Biscuits was cooked in a griddle set down in the hot ashes. Hot coals were then put on the lid and the biscuits soon cooked. They was a lot better than the ones we cook nowadays.
"Me and Hattie was always up to something. Bessie Anderson cone out there at home one day and got us to go in the woods with her to get some sweet gum. We come to a ditch and she couldn't jump it, so she told us to go ahead and git the sweet gum but be sure not to put it in our mouths. We got the sweet gum in a snuff box lid, and when we got it full I said, 'Hattie, I'm going to dip this sweet gum in that ditch of muddy water just for meanness.' Hattie was scared of Bessie but I won't. I got down on the bank and dipped the box lid up and down in the muddiest place I could find. I shook all the water out and it was dry by the time we got to her. She chewed the gum and said it was the best she ever had. I never told her about the muddy water.
"Pappy was right well educated. He had a lot of books and he took all kinds of papers. Every night after supper he'd set by the fire and read us stories from the Bible and other books. Cur favorite stories was about 'Little Mr. Thimble Finger.' This story was in the Atlanta Constitution. It come once a week and we talked about it from one week to the other. He made us read out loud to him and every one of we younguns loved to read and go to school. They didn't have such schools then as we've got now. We went about three months a year. Everybody was in one room and one teacher had all the classes. Everybody studied the 'Blue Backed spelling book' and the dictionary and there won't no grades. When you finished one book you went in another class. Some of us were in the school most all the time.
"As the girls got older Mammy turned the housework over to us. We had weeks to do the work. Some of us had to do the cooking and others had to do the housework. Then we switched around.
"Lena, a sister, didn't stay home much. She nursed out in the neighborhood. One Friday when she come home she said, 'Sophia, you didn't get the wrinkles out of my clothes last week. I want you to do better from now on.' Well, next week it was time for me and Hattie to wash. I told Hattie what Lena had said and Hattie said, 'Let's starch her underwear as stiff as a board. That'll get the wrinkles out.' She made the starch and we starched Lena's things first. Her drawers, made out of homespun, were stiff enough to stand alone. She never said anything about them, but from then on she never brought any of her clothes home to be washed.
"Young people nowadays are too busy running around from one place to another to have a good time. When I was young there won't any cars and folks stayed home more. Why, we used to have a room full of boys and girls out to the house nearly every night. We'd set around the fire and tell stories, pop corn, roast peanuts, and laugh over most anything. I never cared much for boys. I reckon I was too much of a tomboy myself. Oh, I could laugh and talk but I didn't want any love-making.
"In the spring we had peanut poppings. All the young folks come to help shell the peanuts that were to be planted. It give them a chance to git together and nobody minded a blistered finger. After a barrel had been shelled we'd have a candy pulling. Everybody got sticky and all the pots and pans got messed up, but we didn't care. In the fall corn huskings got people together. Every time a red ear was shucked the finder could kiss anybody in the room. That was a lot of fun for there won't so much of this necking going on then.
"We all liked the log rollings. Everybody went. The men went out in the woods and cut down the trees and trimmed the branches for firewood; the women and younguns stayed to the house and cooked up a big supper. At dark the men would come in and set down to the table. The women eat last and waited on the men while they eat. After supper the fiddlers from all around the country would come and a square dance was held in the barn. Sometimes we danced all night and got home in time to change clothes and go in the kitchen to cook breakfast, and we didn't dare say anything about being sleepy.
"My husband won't born around here," Sophia said, changing the subject. "The first time I saw him he was with Mabel and Walter Pyatt. They come out to our house every Sunday evening to play croquet. Pappy had got us a set in New Bern. Our yard was big and sandy and made a good place to play. After that the yard was full every Sunday. The young married folks as well as the single ones would come to play.
"One Sunday evening Mabel and her husband drove up in the buggy. A good looking man with brown eyes and black, curly hair was with them. I thought he was the prettiest man I ever saw. All the other girls thought so, too, by the way they acted. Mabel went over to Mammy and introduced him as her cousin. He got to talking to me and first thing I knowed we was pardners. He was from Winterville and had come to see his kinfolks. He told me about his family. They were farmers, too, and they owned their farm and made a good living. He told me that his name was John and his parents was named Mary and Henry Braxton. He didn't take up any time with the other girls and by suppertime we was good friends. When the crowd started to leave, Mammy asked Mabel and Walter to stay for supper so John stayed, too. After supper we all went to church. He walked home with me and after that he went out home two or three nights a week.
"Pappy died that year. The boys got bossy and tried to run things. They started to making excuses to keep John from coming to the house. He had gone to work in his cousin's store. His cousin, Mac Paschal, had married my cousin, Ora, who was Willie's daughter. My single brothers raised the devil every time John would come out here. One night they hid by the big gate and when he started to open it they jumped out and give him a licking, I didn't know about it till the next day. He sent me a note and said that he was going away for awhile. He wrote to me but it was several years before he come back. He was in Dover working at a mill.
"All the time he was gone I kept company with Churchill Hargraves. He was a mighty nice boy but my folks was all too crazy over him. They wanted us to git married but I was too contrary. One Sunday we had all gone to preaching.
I went with Churchill. Just about the time the service started John walked in. I hadn't seen him in years but I knowed right then that I still loved him. I didn't hear much the preacher said that day. When the meeting was over John come over and spoke to all of us. He asked me if he could come out that evening. I told him 'yes' but I knowed that Churchill would be there.
"They all treated John mighty nice from then on. He started to work with Bonnie Merritt, a painter. They took a job by contract and he made right good money. He hadn't been back but a few weeks when we started to talk about gitting married. He come out to the house when he got ready.
"I went to work and got my wedding dress made. It was navy blue broadcloth. It was a suit with a white shirtwaist, a skirt, and a jacket that come to the bottom of the skirt.
Mammy never mentioned him to me. The day come that we had decided on, and I helped fix dinner just like I always did. After dinner was over I went upstairs and put on my wedding clothes.
My sister, Hattie, went to help for she was the only one that knowed about it. She watched for John and when he turned in the big gate I put on my hat and went downstairs. I told Hattie to tell Mammy where I'd gone just as soon as I left. John was driving Walter Pyatt's buggy, and I didn't want him to come in. I went in Mammy's room and told her that I was going to ride with John. She didn't say a word, so I went out and he helped me in the buggy and we drove off.
"Walter had already bought the license and we rode down the road about five miles to Mr. George Nolan's and got married. We went to Mabel's for the night. She had fixed a big supper and had invited a lot of our friands. Hattie and her husband was there. She told me that Mammy didn't say much about my marriage.
"She did have a tale to tell about Lena. Lena had been nursing out in the country and a widower, Old Man George Gaskell, had been bringing her home. We hadn't thought anything about it for we all thought Lena was too old to git married. Well, right after I left home Old Man George drove up. Lena had been setting by the window so she got up and went out to the buggy. Hattie peeped out, and when Old Man George got out of the buggy and they started around the house she followed. They went in the kitchen so she crawled under the kitchen and listened to what they said. They were making plans to git married. Hattie was full of the devil so she waited till Lena and Mr. Gaskell went back in the fireplace room. Then she walked in and told the whole crowd what she had heard. Lena cried and begged her to hush, but Hattie had told Lena that her turn would come to pay her back for a lot of things.
"Me and John stayed with Walter and Mabel about two weeks. John was painting the hotel and making good money. We paid board but I didn't like that kind of living. I was used to working.
"Lena got married in ten days after I did. She went right out to Mr. Gaskell's house where there was a whole house full of younguns. The funny thing was that Lena thought she was too old to have younguns, but she had two just as fast as she could.
"Right after she got married I got tired of boarding so I went out and rented me a house. John had enough money to buy what furniture we'd need, and I was gitting ready to go out and buy it when Mammy sent for me. I hadn't been home but I fixed up and went out there. Mammy acted mighty nice for awhile and then she told me that she wanted me to come back home to stay. Georgeanne was going to get married right after Christmas and she'd be there by herself. I told her I'd have to ask John. She said that'd be all right and we could come back after supper and tell her what we were going to do.
"When John come home I told him what she had said and asked him what to do. He left it up to me and I was ready to go back. I was used to her and the house and I got lonesome while John was at work. After supper me and John went out there and you would a thought that John was the son. The boys treated him fine. We stayed all night and the next day I went and packed up our clothes and got a boy to carry them home, John come in that night and acted Just like one of the family.
"He paid Mammy $2 a week board and I done the cooking for mine. He averaged about a dollar a day for his work but he always had money. He bought my snuff and our clothes and give me a little money of my own. He brought me candy or fruit every night and he always offered Mammy some first. She thought a lot of him.
"Our first baby come along the next August. It was a girl and he named it 'Mary' for his mother. Both his parents was dead by this time. Mammy thought the world of the baby. We lived out there for five years. Then Mammy died. She was seventy-two years old and she had raised a big family.
"We moved when Mammy died. When the will was read all the land was divided amongst we younguns. Georgeanne, the baby, got the homeplace, so me and John had to git out. Two of the boys, Hugh and Claud, had never got married and they were used to me and John, so when we moved they went, too. We moved out on the road and rented a house. The boys and John paid the rent and they all bought the groceries. John was clerking in a store then and I don't reckon he ever knowed how much money he made. He got his part of the food and rent, and any time he wanted any money he got it. Anyway, we always had some.
"I had had some more babies by this time and the house we lived in won't big enough. Hugh and John decided to build a house on Hugh's piece of land, Hugh had the logs cut and the lumber sawed. He was a halfway carpenter, so he helped build the house and John paid somebody to do the rest. This is the house they built. Hugh and Claud had to have a separate bedroom. Me and John had a room and then the other bedroom was for the younguns. That left a setting room and a kitchen. I never have liked the dull red color it's painted. That paint sure musta been cheap, for at least a third of the houses in town is painted the same color. If we ever do get any extra money I'm sure going to change its color.
"Claud got married about six years ago. He had courted one girl for seventeen years. Her mammy was crippled and had to be waited on like a baby. Lula told Claud that she wouldn't git married as long as her mammy lived. She had other sisters but Mrs. Morse depended on Lula, for she was the oldest. Claud had a good job clerking and made good money. He bought most of our extras like steak, fish, and things like that. He run around with a lot of others but he went to see Lula every Sunday. Well, Mrs. Morse died about six years ago and Lula and Claud got married in a few months. They stayed here with me until Claud could build him a house. Claud quit the store and went to farming. They seem to be mighty happy. I reckon they waited too late to have any younguns, but I know they both want some.
"Hugh died a few years back. He had a bad heart trouble and he seemed to know that he didn't have long to live, so he give me a deed to his land and his part of the house.
I miss Hugh right now; he was always around to help me with the chickens and the garden. I never had to go out and pick beans or git in the potatoes or things like that. He was here at night and kept me from gitting lonesome."
Sophia stood up and began to look about the room. She took off her apron and began to put on a sweater.
"How about walking down to the field with me?" she asked. "I want to see how Bill Joe is getting along with the tobacco bed. Here's a pair of my shoes you can wear, for I know you can't walk in them high heels."
A good dirt road led to the field belonging to her and her relatives. On each side of the road men were busy plowing and shrubbing ditch banks. The tobacco barns along the road were in good shape, and piles of wood were stacked by each barn.
Not far from Sophia's house an old, unpainted, two-story house stood in a grove of spreading oaks.
"That's the homeplace," she said. "I had some good times there but it don't seem like home any more.
"That's Miss Polly Early, used-to-be, coming across the field. She's married to my brother, Walter, now, and they have two grown girls but we are not too friendly. We all still call her 'Miss Early.'
"Her and her husband, Allen Early, moved down here from Greenville a long time ago. They bought a house on the lane. Allen was a jack-of-all-trades. He traded horses and done a little carpenter work and farmed a little. They had four girls, just as mean as the devil. Allen went to Greenville one day to sell tobacco. He was drunk and when he started home he fell off the train and got killed. Miss Early got a lot of money, more than he was worth, I reckon. She got the two oldest girls in the orphanage at Raleigh, but the other two stayed at home and got meaner than ever. Miss Early was a right good looking woman, tall and redheaded, and she soon started to having men company. Walter started to going there. Mammy fussed and the boys cussed but nothing could make him stop. He acted like somebody under a spell. Next thing we heard they was married, Mammy told him that he could go home whenever he wanted to but he needn't expect her to go there. She never went either, but she treated Miss Early all right.
"I'm glad Mammy died before things got any worse. Mary Jane and Melissa, the ones in the orphanage, got along all right as long as they stayed there. Mary Jane got out first and went to work in a tearoom. She got married in a few months and is doing fine. We never heard a word against her. She don't ever come down here now.
"Melissa went in training for a nurse, but she didn't stay long. She soon come home and brought a girl with her. They was both pretty, and seemed to drive all the boys in town crazy. A man from little Washington come over to see Melissa. They went off and when they come back they said they were married. They even slept together there for about a week.
"Miss Early saw the other girl crying, and the girl finally told her that Melissa was not married. She said Melissa had made her promise not to tell. Miss Early like to of beat the girl to death for that.
"Henry, another one of my brothers, heard about it and called the girl over to see him. She told him she was broke, that she had a respectable family in South Carolina, and that Melissa had promised to get her a job so she could get money enough to go home. Henry cusses and raises the devil, but he's kind-hearted. He went to the store and raised enough money to send her home. She sure did appreciate it.
"Melissa stayed around home, and soon you could tell something was wrong with her. She worked mighty hard, and her baby was so cute. After that she went to New York and worked as a governess. She came back for the baby, but Miss Early wouldn't let her have it. Now she is married to a nice man. He don't know about her, but she sends the little girl clothes and toys.
"Then Neta, the next oldest girl, got to running around, and it won't long before she was pregnant. She sued a boy and collected $100, then she had the nerve to say: 'I know it won't much but it beats setting on my bottom doing nothing.' Miss Polly was sure crazy about that baby.
"Neta was all right for about two years, then she had another one. That one was adopted, then she had another one. Now she claims to be married to a man in Florida.
She met him when she visited Queenie, the baby girl. Queenie was the nicest one, but she quit school to get married. They say that her baby is darker than it ought to be."
By the side of the creek bank, on a piece of new ground, Bill Joe and another boy were working. Trash was burning in one corner, and the two boys were digging up roots and throwing them on the fire.
"Making a tobacco bed is about the hardest work on the farm," Sophia explained. "We always try to put the bed on new ground so that the weeds won't grow faster than the plants. After the trash is burnt and raked off a frame about a foot high is built around the bed to hold the cloth off the plants. After the ground is broke up and plowed fertilizer is sowed over the bed. It takes a lot of fertilizer to make the plants grow fast. The tobacco seeds are so fine that they have to be mixed with dirt to be scattered over the bed. A heavy roller is then rolled over the bed to mash the seeds down, then the bed is ready for the cloth--a fine cloth that's fastened to the frame to keep out the cold and frost and help protect the bed from animals.
"When the bed is finished work is started somewhere else. All the ditchbanks have to be shrubbed and trash burnt. Then the plowing starts. All the land is broke up and made ready to be laid off in rows. We don't have many acres so it don't take us long to git our land ready for planting. We raise more corn than anything else and that's very little trouble. We can't raise but four acres of tobacco and we can't sell all we raise.
"The tobacco plants start to coming up about March. The weeds grow faster than the plants, so every week after the plants start growing we take the cloth off and pick the bed. It generally takes all day to get the weeds off the bed. The cloth has to be put back on at night to keep out the cold.
"In April the boys begin to lay off rows and sow fertilizer.
Then by time the land's ready the plants are big enough to set out. Some people use a transplanter to set the tobacoo, but we don't have much and it grows better set out by hand. The people on the land swap work so that we don't have to pay out much money. By working together everybody gets through quicker.
"It takes four people to set out tobacco. One person goes down the row and drops the plants about thirty inches apart. Another goes along and pushes the plant down with a wooden peg, then someone with a bucket of water and a dipper waters the plant and another person pushes dirt around the roots. With good weather the plants grow fast. Some die and have to be reset the next week.
"From then on the tobacoo has to be worked every week till it's grown. Then the suckers have to be broke out each week. The suckers are the little shoots that grow out by the leaves. They'd take the life away from the leaf unless they were pulled out. While the tobacco is growing, the corn is planted, the family garden started, and sweet potatoes set out.
"In July people begin putting in tobacco, Men in the fields pull the ripe tobacco off the stalks and pile it in trucks pulled by a horse. The truck load of tobacco is carried to the barn where the women and younguns git it ready to go in the barn. A stick about four feet long is placed on a rack. A looper stands by the rack with a ball of twine and gits ready to tie the tobacco on the stick. Two handers git on each side of the truck and bunch the tobacco, three or four leaves in a bunch, and hand it to the looper. She wraps it around the stick and loops the string so that it won't fall off. By the time one truck is emptied another one is there waiting. It takes about all day to loop a barn of tobacco.
"When the men come in from the field they go up on the tear poles and hang the sticks up in the barn. When the barn's filled a fire is made in the furnace so that the tobacco can git cured. It takes a week to cure a average barn of tobacco, When the barn gits cool the tobacco is carried to the house and packed down. Then the same thing has to be done all over again for about four weeks. It takes that long to get all the tobacco in from the field.
"We have a few weeks resting spell after we finish the tobacco. We visit around and take things easy. The sewing's done for the younguns. The fruits and vegetables have to be canned at odd chances.
"In August we start grading tobacco. The sorriest lot is sold first. The bright tobacco is picked from the other and kept in separate grades. Each barn has about four grades.
As soon as the market opens we have a barn ready to be sold. When the first barn is sold we start to paying bills. The fertilizer bill is the only one we have now that John clerks and makes money all the year. He gits $7 a week and we buy our food and pay light bills out of it. I sell eggs in the summer and can pay for right many things that way. Now, if any of us would git sick and have to run up a big doctor bill that'd have to go till fall. When we sell tobacco I generally buy what clothes we'll need till we sell again. We always have enough to buy a new dress or pair of shoes. My family has always paid bills. We can git credit anywhere in town but I don't want too much."
She stood up and started to walk away. A little boy about three years old came running up.
"Hello, grandmammy," he said. "Do come go to the house. Peapup's got three little puppies."
"All right, Pat," she said. "I'll go look at the puppies. You look mighty clean this evening."
"I ought to be clean," he replied. "Mama just took me out of the bath tub. We're fixing to go down town." He ran on ahead.
"That's my oldest daughter's baby," Sophia said. "She's got two more boys but they go to school. She lives in that white house on the slope. Pat named the dog 'Peapup' because she wet the floor so much when she was little."
Her daughter's house was neat and she was nicely dressed. After staying for a few minutes the daughter offered us a ride as we were leaving anyway.
"Mary has faired mighty well since she married Willie Paxton," Sophia said, after returning to her home. "She was in the ninth grade when she got married. I wanted her to finish high school but I reckon she gits along well enough. She was seventeen and Willie won't much older. He borrowed money to buy his license and started out living with his daddy. That didn't last long. He rented a farm and worked hard. He bought a truck on a credit and started hauling for people and made good, for there won't many trucks for hire. He bought a small place in the country and moved. In a few years he sold that and come back to town. He borrowed money from the government and bought the place he's got now. He had ten years to pay it back in but he paid more than half the first year. His house is nice. It has running water and a bathroom. I hope I live long enough to have one. Willie's health is bad now, and he can't work all the time like he used to.
"This is a bedspread for Floyd, my baby," Sophia explained, picking up some work. "I've already made one for the others. Don't you want to see them?"
She opened a door and there was another living room, well furnished with a new rug, an overstuffed mohair suite, a table with an electric lamp, and a small table holding several china novelties. Ecru net curtains hung at the windows.
Sophia, who had stopped to get a News and Observer off the floor, said:"It's a good thing I bought this suite last fall. Cora wanted it and I did, too, but John wanted me to wait till times got better. I've heard that all my life and times are just as hard. I went on and bought it any- way. John quarreled and raised cane. He said we'd be in the poorhouse before spring. We got along all right but if I hadn't got the things last year we wouldn't have it for we had a sorry crop this year."
She opened another door and entered another bedroom. The floor of this room also was covered with a rug. In it was a dresser, a rack filled with ties, an iron bed covered with crocheted spread, and a curtain which hung in one corner to form a wardrobe.
The other room contained two beds covered with crocheted spreads, a green-painted dresser, a rocking chair, and a trunk. Figured curtains hung at all the windows.
"My baby will be along in a little while. He'll come by the post office. He's in the sixth grade this year and I'm so glad that he likes school better. He always hated to go till this year. He'd get up in the morning and say that he was sick. I hated to make him go but he got sick so many times I had to break him. The next morning he told me he was sick I got the castor-oil bottle and made him take a dose. Then I made him go to bed and stay all day. He's not been sick since.
"Younguns has a better chance than I had. Cora is taking sewing and cooking this year. She likes to go to school and I do hope she'll finish high school, anyway. The rest all stopped. Bill Joe stopped in the seventh grade. I made him go awhile but you can't make 'em learn. Lillian quit in the ninth grade.
"The radio helps a lot in school. Floyd listens to the speeches and tells them in school. He can read the news- papers now and can tell what he reads. Right now everybody's talking politics. That's all I hear when John's home. Floyd was bad enough but John's worse.
"We've always been Democrats and I vote every time there's a election. I read the papers and pick out the best man and vote for him. We all vote. Since we can I think we ought to. We benefit by the elections so we might as well vote for a good man.
"John'll vote, but I can't git him to go to church. He used to fuss and rip when I went. He even went out and got drunk but now he don't say anything, Me and the younguns go to Sunday School every Sunday and to preaching when there is any. Maybe John'll go sometime. That new Methodist preacher is gitting a lot of folks to church that never went before. My people has always been Methodists."
The front door opened and a little boy came in with the mail. Included was a letter from Lillian.
"These are Lillian's babies," she said, pointing to a photograph enclosed in the letter. "The oldest one is not much of a baby now. He goes to school but he seems like a baby to me. The other two are twins, a boy and a girl.
"I've had trouble in my family, too. That's why I'm so sorry for Georgeanne. Lillian had to get married. I reckon everybody in town found out that she was pregnant before I did. She had stopped going with any boys and I never thought of such a thing. When I found it out and she told me the man's name I asked her if he knowed it. She said he didn't so that night I went to see him. I didn't tell her I was going, for she told me that she despised him and never wanted to see him again. He told me that he blamed Lillian for not telling him sooner and that he'd marry her at once, When I told her she had a fit. She cried and cut up a shine. It was three weeks before she let him come up there.
"One day she seemed in a different humor and sent for him. He come and I don't know what was said, but she told me they were going to git married the next day. They went to New Bern to git married and went straight to his home.
She stayed out there till it was time for the baby, then she come back here. The baby was born here and Tom, her husband, like to went crazy. Lillian said later that she out up more than necessary just to worry Tom. When she got able she went back out to his home. She stayed out there two years and I never heard a word of complaint.
"One evening she come up with Tom's brother. She told Mary that she won't going back but we all thought it was a joke till Earl come back for her. She went to the door and told him that she never intended to go back. That's all she ever said. She didn't bring a rag for her and the baby, so we went to work and made her some clothes. Mary brought some of her boy's clothes down here for the baby. That was in April. Lillian worked the whole spring and summer. Tom would write but she never answered the letters. She saved her money and in the fall she bought a new suit out-and-out.
"Just before Christmas Tom wrote and asked if he could buy the baby some things for Santa Claus. She wrote back and said that Thomas would git enough but he could buy what he pleased. Then he wanted to know; if he could take Christmas dinner with her. She didn't want him to but I got her to ask him to dinner. On Christmas Eve day his family come down and brought a suitcase full of things for Thomas' Christmas. They even brought a big red wagon. He had begged for one the whole fall but she couldn't buy it.
"He almost had a fit when he saw the things Christmas morning. Tom come up while he was looking at the Christmas tree. Tom sat down and cried and I felt sorry for him. Lillian didn't; she didn't even notice him. She did talk to him a little before the day was gone but she didn't go to ride with him.
"He come back one night the next week and they went to the show. When she come in she said that they were going back together, but they were going to live in a house to themselves. They went off the next day and bought furniture and rented a farm and house. She left with Thomas the next day and I sure did miss them. I know she didn't love Tom then but now I think she does. She wants to stay home more. They had twins the next year, and they're gitting along fine now. They go to church and Sunday School and carry the babies. His folks all think a sight of Lillian and folks say that if they have a favorite grandchild it is Thomas.
"Lillian and Tom own their own home and farm now.
They don't have much money but they make a good living."
The sun was setting and it was time to bid Sophia good-bye and leave her to enjoy the pictures of her grandchildren.