There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Copy of memoranda received June 18, 1973, from Mrs. Omar Barrow, to be added to her sketch "I Love my Home."
[Copy of cover Sheet p. 22, showing her notes]
I LOVE MY HOME
All names were changed by the writer before the story was sent to this office.
Clung to my clothing in an attempt to keep me with her.”
“Shortly after my stepmother's death my father's estate was settled. I had lost so much through Larry’s family that I had boasted to myself that what I received from this estate would be mine.
"'Larry wrote the checks and payed our bills, and it was only occasionally that I checked up on costs. The first time I did this after we started building. I noticed one check made payable to the same brother, and as I continued going through the returned checks I noticed another. We had gone over all of this talk many times before and if I said anything which Larry did not wish to near he always grabbed his but, jammed it on his head, and walked out. At these times he rarely came in until around two or three in the I LOVE MY HOME
All names were changed by the writer before the story was sent to this office.
Date of first writing:	April 1, 1939
Person interviewed:	Omar Darrow
Address:	Durham, N. C.
Occupations	WPA Worker
Writers	Omar Darrow
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 6000
I LOVE MY HOME
On the side of a dirt road, which is passable in good weather but muddy when it rains, there is a small log cabin. Not a sign of life is usually visible, but strangers often stop to view the quaint little hut. Many times there is no one at home, but occasionally Virginia Brown answers to the knocks of the inquiring people. She lives here with her young son from whom she has, because of financial strain, been separated for two years. The daughter with whom she lives works in the city and is away from home all day.
The living room of her home has only pine flooring covered with a dark brown-edged, imported rug. An overstuffed living room suite of mohair velour in brownish gray and mahogany-finished wicker chair which was purchased in the Southwest are in the room. Another chair harmonizes in color with the green 'curio' cabinet containing a collection of souvenirs. The collection consists of wood, feather painting, and soapweek baskets all from the West and Mexico.
The room on the right is a sitting room and bedroom combined and had a dark maroon davenette already made into a bed. The spread was a lavender pink which harmonized with the cretonne curtains that hung at the one window. A large radio cabinet with inserted shelves was filled with books of a rather <text not clear>.
"I just can't see the point in one clinging to only one class of reading matter," Virginia commented. "These books? Well, they are all good. You see, they are just different kinds of reading, and I never want to develop a dogmatic attitude concerning any particular class of literature. People think differently and act differently. The point with me is to try to adapt myself so that I may understand other points of view."
In this same room was an upright piano. Over the piano hung a diploma in music which Virginia received in 1921.
"I don't play very much now; only for my own amusement, or if I get rather low and blue. I once played very well but never so well as I wished to. I had to put too much time to teaching to give any to practice."
The sunroom door opens from this room. This is the room which Virginia uses. It has seven windows, and the walls are ceiled and painted ivory. There was a princess dresser, a bed with a heavy imported rose spread, a cedar chest, a trunk, a very small wardrobe case, and a linoleum rug in the room. There were no curtains, but the windows were shaded with ivory shades.
The kitchen is the same size of the living room. Its walls are of logs as are all of them with the exception of those in the sunroom. The floor was covered with a linoleum rug, and a large electric refrigerator stood beside the door leading to the back porch. There was also a white enameled utility cabinet, a white enameled porcelain table, and a white breakfast room suite to complete the furnishings. There is no running water in this house, but there is a well with a pump.
Virginia feels a great pride in her family. Her father was a descendant of an old family whose progenitor settled in Virginia in 1737. Her mother's family was equally as great, but people who know her well say that she is too much like her father to care anything for her mother's family. She has pride, both family and personal.
"I was reared in the country and feel grateful that I was," said Virginia proudly. “I do not care for city life; I feel crowded. I really like to handle the earth, and the flowers in summer offer me that opportunity. Although this little place belongs to my daughter, I have made it.
"When I was forced through financial strain to break up housekeeping I came to live with my daughter who, with her husband, had just bought the little house. It had just been finished, and there was nothing here but the house and garage. I fixed the yard, collected the plants and put them in, built up the walkways, and made the driveway. I enjoyed changing it from it's nativity into what it is.
"I was born the eleventh child of a family of twelve. I was the seventh daughter, although there were only seven of us children who lived to grow up.
"I never knew my mother, for she died when I was only a baby. She told my father that I would grow up and asked him to never let anyone impose on me. She said I would be a great woman some day. I've wondered about that statement. My father told me of this about the time I was married, saying it was the most sacred promise he ever made and the only one he had failed to keep.
"The first incident of my life that I recall was a visit with my 'nigger daddy,' who in my mother's lifetime was her gardener and man-about-the-house. I had ridden his back to the garden, and he was holding me over the balsam bushes, telling me to pick as many as I wished. I plucked a handful and then my world came to an end. The old housekeeper came to the garden and tried to drag me from his arms, but he held me tightly. There was an argument about whipping me, but I remember hearing him tell her that he would whip her if she touched me.
"I shall never forget the sound beating I had poured onto me the day my father took his second wife. I barely remember having seen my stepmother that day, but I did not like her. In later years I learned that it was not childish prejudice but a keen intuition which I still have and with which I realize I was born.
"The other children were so much older than I that I had no one to play with, and the only companionship I had was with my 'nigger daddy.'
"I looked on my father as being a great and mighty man who was busy, and even in those days when I looked at him I had a feeling that he had a great trouble of some sort on his mind. I rarely ever saw him; he was out at work mornings before I was awake, and I was in bed before his return. On Sundays I held his hand and walked to church with him. Many times I wished to talk to him, but I felt that he was too great a man to be bothered with a bad little girl, even though I were his own. When we returned from church I saw him at the dinner table, but his afternoons were filled in entertaining his friends or discussing the Bible with church people who frequently called on him.
"I was always a sort of odd link in our family. I never seemed to fit any place, and when I started sitting in class at school, although only four years old at the time, I liked the way the boys played. Their 'rough and tumble' ways appealed to me. It was good sportsmanship, and I noticed that each treated the other as though he had an equal right. Soon I was playing with the boys. I didn't care if my clothes got rumpled. The boys all liked to have me play with them, too. By the time I was six years old I raced the boys up trees. Usually I got to the top of mine first, then all the girls began calling me 'Tomboy.' I guess I merited the nickname, but I had rather be the good sport than the sissy the girls were.
"The first teacher I ever had in school is teaching now. She called on my stepmother for a visit and asked me if I would not like to sit in on class. I never thought that my stepmother would allow me to do it, but she did. I went right along in school. I never had but one lesson that was not passable, and that was at one time when our whole class was so thrilled at the beginning of Christmas holidays. To learn things has ever been my greatest desire.
"My stepmother had a favorite nephew who spent a lot of time with us. He was about three years older then me, and she never tired of boasting of him to every-one who came. This particular morning I had been unable to find my history book which I carried home the Friday before. My stepmother let me stay there searching for ten minutes after the bell rang, and then she went to a small closet, opened the door, and drew my history book from the topmost shelf. She didn't give it to me, instead, she walked to the front door and threw it just as far as she could. Then she told me that the next time I brought one of those things home with me I'd never see it again.
"This favorite nephew played a big part in my life since I, through him and my stepmother, began to study human nature. Even as young as I was then, I knew their minds before they acted.
"My father was a good man, but was a very busy man. He had two large farms which he superintended, and there was also a grocery, a feed store, and hardware store. Imagine how he felt when a neighbor told him of it. She treated me a little better then, although she never allowed me to carry a book home from school. I've never heard of one not wishing a child to advance in school before this.
"One Sunday this same summer for some reason I was seated on the front doorstep and was in one of my queer meditating moods. I noticed two young men strolling along the road before the house, and one of them started walking up the steps. He asked me for a drink of water, then he inquired about the people who lived next door. I was feeling free now. After a few words the man started to leave, then he came back and told me he was going to wait for me.
"I had malaria chills until I was thirteen and at least one or two each week that necessitated me staying home from school, but when the bell rang I always cried because I was not there.
"My life ran on pretty nearly in the same channel and with the same existing conditions for the next three years. I was rapidly advancing in my school work and was so advanced that I was in classes with really grown-up boys and girls who were not laggard, lazy, or ignorant.
"There was one boy in these classes who seemed to think me a sort of marvel. It was not long after I knew him that he began walking home with me afternoons, carrying my books. He was a nice boy, but my family didn’t think so. Even so young as I was--thirteen--I began seeing him on his way before we came in sight of my home. Soon he became suspicious and thought that I had been punished for going with the boys.
"In principle that was true; in reality, false. I had been severely scolded by my sisters, and they made me think that I had almost committed an unpardonable sin. One sister, whom I could never have loved, would stroll down the road so that she could watch to see if he did walk with me part of the way, and she made plenty of trouble for me when she saw that he did. I often asked him not to come with me. Finally he quit even starting along my way, instead, he began asking me what I was doing on week ends until I found myself planning to get some place to be with him. Such a kid as I was at that time, I fancied myself in love.
"At the park one night I was asked if I knew Larry Gray. I didn’t know him, but the fellow told me that he was coming over home. In about two weeks he came. I didn't know him when he came in, but he told me he was the same person who had asked me for a drink of water three years before.
"It was about this time that my sister told my father of my having seen Fred Brandon and skating with him. She had a way with him, and she changed his mind about Fred.
"I had a greater desire to please my father than for any one thing in the world. As hard to do as this was since I fancied myself to be in love, I quit seeing him entirely. There were two letters which I received that I returned, and that was hard. Although I was only a kid, I had a mind almost as grown as the grown-up youngsters.
"Larry Gray was a great lover of horses and dogs. He, at this time, had the most beautiful and most expensive saddle horse around. A very handsome man, he was admired by all the ladies. He looked stunning in riding breeches, white shirt, and derby hat. He knew that I was not old enough to go with the boys, but often he asked if he might take me such and such a place.
"Larry knew my father before he knew me. My father liked him very much as Larry's father was a close friend of his. One day Larry wanted to carry me some place, so instead of asking me he asked my father. That started my going about with him. I had never been to any parties until now.
"I was fourteen now and had just finished high school, and I had begun the study of piano. My father had spent an awful lot of money on my sisters in the same study, and none of them ever played anything much. When I told him a year or so before that I wanted to study he frankly, told me that he didn't want me to try to study. He said that he was afraid my studying might ruin my playing. I didn’t ask him again. I wanted to learn piano more than anything else, for I wanted to become a concert pianist. I intended doing it independently of my father's money.
"One of our neighbors had been getting tobacco bags from the factory to unravel. I asked the neighbor to let me have some of them to do. I got them and had $12 put aside to start on. My father gave us an allowance--a small one, of course. He was not rich but was able to give us such as we needed. He had us deposit it in the bank and pay our own bills. He taught me to make my own checks when I was nine years old. I also had a personal account at a store when I was that age. I could have payed for my piano lessons out of my allowance but felt that I shouldn't use my father's money since he didn’t want me to have lessons. I didn't tell him about saving my ‘bag money' until I had seen the music teacher and arranged to enter her class. I explained to him that I had reserved the $12 that I had made for this purpose. He must have been touched then, for he told me if I needed any help to let him know.
"I felt so happy to be having piano lessons, but it also brought it's sorrow, too. My stepmother soon began complaining about the 'tunk, tunk, tanking of that old piano.' I never tried to practice more than thirty minutes at a time and twice each day. Soon she only allowed me fifteen minutes each day. Everything I touched made for so much confusion that I began to wish I were some place else--anywhere just to be relieved of that eternal nagging.
"The time soon presented itself. Larry Gray asked me to marry him. I didn't want to, and I didn't jump right at his first question. I wanted to make a name for myself somehow, but I think the climax came from an incident which occurred one day right after dinner. My sister and I were washing the dinner dishes. We were laughing, and I suddenly found myself on the floor. My stepmother was beating me about the head and face with her fists. My sister interfered and with the two of us she had about all she could manage that time. As she stood there glaring at us I went mad. I grasped her tightly about both shoulders and slammed her backward against the wall. Her glasses fell off and broke, and she seemed tamed after she had been able to draw a deep breath. I told her that she had imposed on me for the last time.
"The next time Larry asked me to marry him I accepted and married the romantic young man who fondled my curls and told me: You're a pretty little girl; I'm going to wait for you.' I knew it was not the thing I should do, but I was tired of life as it now was. I often had wondered why God had created me with such an ambitious mind and had placed me in such restricted atmosphere to grow up.
"Larry treated me as though I were a small child. I felt very proud of him in one way, but there were many grown girls who were crazy about him. His friends said that he had a girl for every day in the week and three for Sunday until he started going out to my home. He had been a bachelor so long he could not get used to me it seemed. Often I would express an opinion to Larry about something, and there was no answer, only an enigmatic smile.
"Six weeks after we were married we took a house, and, with my new furniture, I was more contented than I had ever been. There was a very fine neighbor next door that was very sorry for me. Every time I wanted to try some new recipe I got her to advise me, and I soon learned.
"It didn't matter if it was May or December, I always had flowers blooming. I knew how to grow all kinds, for when I was a small child I often had a dozen carnations blooming at one time. Larry thought me a marvel with plants. He soon noticed that I enjoyed my home so much that he just left me with that and went and came as he wished.
"Larry was not a bad fellow, but he was certainly going to have his way regardless of who it effected unless it were his brothers. He had no objections to my doing the same thing, for he was very glad when my father gave me a new piano that I might continue studying. I think I spoiled Larry more about this than anything else, for I got some more tobacco bags and did them to pay for my lessons. This time I was going to the Conservatory of Music, which cost a lot more than a private teacher. But I managed to pay my own way. Our first child was born the following year, so I could not resume my work.
"My father gave us a new home right near his own. The city had grown out to his farm by now. I loved my home, and it was to the house, keeping it spotless, and to the garden and yard that I looked for all my pleasure outside of our baby. I remember that I scarcely let our little girl sleep until she was about six months, for I bathed and dressed her so much. Practically every time just before I gave her the bottle I gave her a bath. I finally learned better when people began telling me that she was not growing. She became sick, and my family physician had to take her in hand. She was soon well and husky, but I only bathed her once each day, after the day he gave me a sound lecture.
"In September our second girl was born. She was only four weeks old when my stepmother began taking the older one to her house for the night. At this time she had become much different in many ways and seemed to really want to do something for me. It ended with the older one living with my father and stepmother until she was ten years old.
"When this new baby was a few months old I went back to the Conservatory again to class. I had no time now for tobacco bags, but Larry was in the clothing business. One of my good neighbors had a nursemaid with her children and lived just across the street, and she cared for my baby while I was away.
Virginia hesitated. “Is it necessary to tell more? Today I am not of such a retroactive mind as I am at times, and I don't care to have to think much of the past. I will talk more Saturday, for on that day I have the house and the kitchen to myself and like to cook."
It was Saturday. Virginia's table was covered with a plain white damask cloth, and she had white paper napkins with green borders at each plate.
Virginia served most of her food piping hot from the top of the oven. Her dinner included roast chicken, boiled turnip greens with a huge piece of boiled fat back, coleslaw, sliced tomatoes, corn bread rolled into round sticks, hot crispy biscuits, coffee with cream, and jello fruit salad with old-fashioned pound cake.
After dinner Virginia's young son, who hopes to become an aeronautical engineer, washed the dishes and cared for the kitchen while she entertained her guests.
"I failed to show you the boy's bedroom!" she exclaimed.
The floor to this room was bare. A full-sized bed covered with a rayon silk spread was pulled from the middle wall. Between the back window and the wall stood a chifforobe. A table which has had an improvised shelf at the bottom and small drawers stood to the left of the bed. It held several books on aviation and a few such, books as Will Rogers, That's My Story and a complete Encyclopedia of Aviation.
"My son draws his own designs on a large piece of paper, gets his raw material, and builds his own models," Virginia explained. "He also can copy any plane he wishes. I am hoping that he makes a success of this model, for he has worked so patiently with it. His sister in New York is going to give him a trip in the summer to the World's Fair. I entertain a hope of this plane being entered in a model contest if one should come off there and I guess one will."
Back in the living room, Virginia placed another log on the fire.
"I will now try to continue with my story: As to material things, I think that each of us has a deep desire for at least one thing, and the more it is denied some of us the deeper the craving grows. Mine, it seems, has been, and is, to have a home that I might have such things about me as I like.
"Larry was seldom ever home unless it was for a short while on Sunday. He came in regularly about midnight. He enjoyed a show or a game of pool around at the hotel and seldom was home for dinner. I learned that I need not look to him for any pleasure, but I found happiness right in my home.
"I got a class of beginners in music and got along fine, although it was very hard on me with four children. I made, during this year, a friend whom I now think of as being the best friend I ever had.
"Shortly after the fifth child was born Larry came home one day and asked me if I wanted to sell our home. I was shocked, and he didn't wait for me to answer. He said he had already made a deal. I didn't know what to do. I began crying then; I didn't quarrel.
"Twenty years ago divorce brought scandal. People even separated and then were afraid of divorce. Larry knew how to make me sign that deed. He told me that I could sign it or he would leave me. I didn't think very clearly then or I might have said something, for my father had practically fed us all for a long time. And I certainly was buying all the children's clothes with money that I received from flowers which I sold.
"I asked him why it was so necessary to sell our home, and he told me that one of his brothers had gotten himself in a mess with a woman and that he didn't want the balance of the family to know anything about it. But the prospective buyer was another brother of his. I wondered if this brother could buy our home if none of the brothers were able to help the one out of trouble.
"Larry seemed to think it nice that we had four weeks to stay in our home after it was sold. If the price had been sufficient giving it up would not have been so serious, but I learned that the price was just a bit more than half the price my father refused two weeks before giving it to us.
"It seemed there was no place to go. No houses to rent, and we ended up in a country shack surrounded by Negroes. There was not a door in the house that could be locked, and Larry could not realize the misery that these conditions brought me. I cried day after day, and I was ashamed for my acquaintances to know that I lived in such a place. Had it been a necessity of worthiness, I think I would have felt differently. The house was so little that I could not even keep my furniture; instead, it went to a second-hand dealer for only a few dollars.
"Larry continued staying out nights. He was a great sportsman and liked hunting more than anything else. His business could wait; he had to hunt or fish. Often he was out of town several days at a time.
"We had managed to have two cows, and I cared for them. I also had a piano class of ten or twelve students, and I raised a few chickens. I sold all of the surplus milk and butter, and that little money helped. I wanted so much to finish piano, but it seemed hopeless.
"One afternoon I was at my father's. A musical director on Broadway was there, and inquired if I was still studying piano. Then he suggested my taking an analytical course by means of correspondence from a northern university. Soon I was taking this course which was very thorough. It took me almost two years to get my diploma, and then I taught in public schools.
"Larry, a few months after having sold our home, lost his business, and there were eight months in which he did nothing but hunt wild game and spend the remainder of his time in the poolrooms about town. With the proceeds of my teaching, the excess milk and butter, a few chickens, and surplus eggs, we lived very well. I had, however, remade my clothing until I had found it embarrasing to go out to teach in a newly remade dress. My father often bought food for us and often bought the children clothes.
"Larry had been offered a job and had refused it. I asked him why he did not accept, and his answer somehow rings in my ears even now: 'I have never had a boss, and that isn't the half of it; I never will.' This friend must have known how he felt, for finally he was accepted under those conditions. It was only a few months that he worked, for his health failed so that he was constantly in the hospital. He showed a willingness to work and was always taken back when he became able.
”I was teaching all the while. It was four miles to the school at which I taught. I walked each day after having looked after everything. I also had to cook breakfast and dress four children for school.
"I had to walk through a very dark read of about a mile and half, but it was only a narrow dirt road and seldom used. My mind never was on the danger, for I was all the time concerned about my children at home and no locks on the doors. Larry's brothers would go to the hospital and never offer to help me. One of them did bring me back one night after midnight. He seemed to feel it to be an act of charity which it was.
"After these confinements to the hospital Larry grew more thoughtful of home and his family. Then he went in business with several of his brothers. He had no money, but his popularity was an asset to the company. This time it was the automobile business.
"It was not long after this that my father was stricken with pneumonia and died. My stepmother refused to leave the home and insisted that Larry and I go live with her. I protested strongly, but finally we moved.
"Five years before this my stepmother had had an operation for cancerous growths. She was well at the time of my father's death, but within two weeks she was stricken. She was not in bed all of that time; she was in a rolling chair alternately. It was very hard on me, and teaching was impossible. I was tied securely, and I had no help at all until her physician took up the matter with the executors who were two of my sisters' husbands. They had refused me any compensation except three rooms of the house. They did allow me $20 a month for her room and board.
"At times during that nine months which she lived she was a raving maniac. Her physician demanded that I have added help. For three months of this time I never went to bed but just laid across it. I was occasionally relieved by a kind neighbor or Larry. My baby was sorely neglected and so were the other children. I was supplied with a cook which I fed, and at night I still was unrelieved.
"Each night as I sat beside the bed I relived those miserable days of my childhood. My stepmother, amid her suffering, often wept and begged forgiveness of me. One night there was a severe storm, and my stepmother summed up all of her strength and came from the bed with one long leap, begging forgiveness for her ill-treatment of me when I was a child. The next day she was moved to a hospital and when I visited her she clung to my clothing in an attempt to keep me with her."
There was a brief period of silence, then she continued: ”I was still thinking that I was in love with Fred Brandon, but I rarely ever saw him. I was awfully glad of that, for I felt very strangely when I came face to face with him. Larry always said that he had never ceased to be in love with me. At the school one day he walked right up and told me that he was thinking of getting married. He did get married. I don't know just why I felt so hurt about it, but I certainly did.
"Shortly after my stepmother's death my father's estate was settled. I had lost so much through Larry's family that I had boasted to myself that what I received from this estate would be mine.
"Larry wrote the checks and payed our bills, and it was only occasionally that I checked up on costs. The first time I did this after we started building I noticed one check made payable to the same brother, and as I continued going through the returned checks I noticed another. We had gone over all of this talk many times before and if I said anything which Larry did not wish to hear he always grabbed his hat, jammed it on his head, and walked out. At these times he rarely came in until around two or three in the morning. I knew that it did no good, so I submitted to the situation after one or two of such incidents.
"We lived in our new home about six months when Larry's health became much worse and his confinements at the hospital more frequent. He worked when he was able, in fact, he seemed to have grown to like Work. The day on which the business of himself and brothers went bankrupt he took his bed from which he never arose.
"I found myself around $6,000 in debt, without a home, and encumbered with furniture for twelve rooms which had as well been given away, for the would-be purchasers never paid me the small prices which I asked.
"After those seven weeks of staying at Larry’s bedside and the shock of again losing my home and realizing the predicament in which I was placed, I went down with a nervous breakdown. I drove myself through this period that my children might escape an orphanage. I was just so tired of all the hazards through which I had gone.
"The necessity for cash on which to live and rear my children drove me to seek some work. I applied at the office of a daily newspaper for a job; I got it. I also taught private class in piano.
"Often, after I finished teaching at night, I sewed until sometimes as late as two-thirty in the morning, for the children had to be kept in school. They were dressed as well as those of anyone else. I sent my laundry out to be damp washed, and the two girls were large enough to iron in the afternoons when they returned from school.
"On Sundays I was too worn out to go to church. I was a member of the Baptist Church. Soon after I went to work the church people began complaining of my nonattendance. One member came to me and begged me to quit work. After all, I had kept to myself the fact that I was reduced to poverty. Then they began whispering things of me.
"There were eight years of this struggle. I had retained a small piece of land that somehow had not been included in our business landslide, and I had gotten so tired of my home town and my struggles here that I planned a way to leave. I applied for a position in a small music school in the extreme Southwest. Immediately I had a reply accepting me as a graduate instructor, and I sold the little piece of land that happened to be a city lot. I had about twelve endowment policies on my children and they had been in force long enough to have a good cash value. I took the cash value on these endowments and got protective policies, for the endowments were too expensive. I bought a new car with the money received, with the exception of $85.
"I got all of the children in the car, shipping most of the luggage, and started for the Southwest. I loved it and still want to be there. I should be were it not that one of the children was so unhappy that she cried all the way out there, all the time I stayed, and until I promised her that we would return. I had gone out to make my home, but as I had to change my mind I decided that I would make it a sightseeing tour.
"We went on down into the interior of Mexico where we saw a volcano, the cliff dwellings of the ancient Aztecs and other interesting sights, and back into the United States Where we visited the oldest Spanish mission in America. Then we wait out through the entire West.
"I always wished to help my children to find themselves and wanted to help them accomplish what they desired. I noticed that my boys were extremely mechanical in mind. I knew that I had no money with which to help them in college, so I felt that this extended trip would be educational to them.
"Two of them had finished school, and they had gone to work helping with the family expense. The oldest boy was working after school, delivering groceries for a nearby store. My daughter married her senior year in high school.
"In the meantime, I had met a man who was a reproduction of an ideal that had ever been deep in my mind. We seemed to be equally attracted to the other. I had been disillusioned about this thing called love, but my mind changed when I saw him. He was tall and lean, dark and cultured. He had a number of degrees, was once on a great football team, and was a finished musician who practiced law and organized his orchestra for short road bookings alternately. We went together only a short while, and within a week of the time I met him he had visited me at my home. Then he had to leave. He did not remain away long. Then he refused to return North until we were married, but after a short and secret honeymoon I returned home.
“I had not worked any place for some little time prior to my marriage. Instead, I had rented a very large house, sublet rooms, kept house, and done the cooking for my family. Three of the children were working and paying board. I was at this time attending classes and doing a bit of free lance writing, also contributing a page each month to a publication.
"Martin and I announced our marriage about two months later and lived together at first one place and another for several months. He wanted to establish himself in the South, but he was forced to return North. I was so unsuspecting that I had not dreamed of what the future might bring, and we were so much in love that it seemed impossible that anything could go wrong with our marriage. He was much older than I, but I refused to be disturbed over that thought.
"I did not think so seriously about his strenous efforts to establish himself in the South until I was faced with the problem of the other woman. I knew then. He told me that he had known her for years and admitted that he had tried to keep out of her reach, but she found him. I studied the situation and decided that since she had such a hold on him that she would bring much misery into the lives of us both, so we were divorced.
"My children in this time had begun getting married and thinking of going to themselves, but as they married they brought the new member of the family home to me. But the time came when they wanted to be to themselves. At this time there was no work that I could get, and I knew that somehow I could find a way to live. I felt that the children should start their own homes.
"I kept house here for my daughter and her husband until her husband was stricken with tuberculosis, then I felt that they could not support me. My daughter had a young baby and was not working either, so I was forced to get out in search of something.
"I am writing again, and I am able to have my youngest child with me for the first time in three years. I feel grateful that I have him again, for I have spent sleepless nights wondering just how we could ever come together.
”I am a Presbyterian in faith, although I was once a Baptist. If I vote at all I try to study the candidate and consider the office for which he is running regardless of politics. It seems that our country's liberty and safety depends altogether on conscious thinking by conscientious people. I was born in a Democratic home but have voted a few Republican tickets.
"I try to make myself contented with my present condition, but I know all the while that I am one person who could never find any sort of contentment without a home of material things. That has always been my greatest desire.”
