	I DON'T I NOW HAT'S THE MATTER
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Horns by
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
and
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
June 14, 1939
 
 
May 31, 1939
Edward J. Bacon (Negro)
160 Berry Street
Athens, Georgia
Brickmason
S.B.H.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S THE MATTER
Fred Ham's reddish brown cottage in the Lickskillet community might readily be identified as the home of a craftsman skilled in the use of brick and mortar. The paved walk that traverses the narrow space between the cement-floored veranda and the street is flanked by small brick-bordered flower beds. No steps are needed to mount the veranda, for its elevation is barely sufficient to prevent water from collecting on the floor.
A radio, going at full blast, drowned the sound of my vigorous knocking on the door, but somehow I attracted the attention of a man - a mulatto - who was reading a newspaper as he lounged in a chair just inside the screen. There was the inflection of inquiry in his voice as he said "Yes, mam?" I attempted to explain the purpose of my visit, but my voice could not compete with the rumble of a passing train. "Come on inside, Miss," the man said. "Maybe we can hear better in here 'specially after I turn this radio down a little. My name's Fred Ham," he added by way of introduction.
The chair proffered me was one of a mahogany suite consisting of a divan, two rocking chairs, a straight chair, and a library table. The worn imitation leather upholstery was supplemented by extra cushions with gay covers of coarse red net, which reminded me of orange sacks. The matching tapestry covers on the library and radio tables harmonized with the window drapes. Dingy scrim curtains, indelibly soot-marked by train smoke, contrasted with the immaculate silvery wallpaper, showing a dainty design of pink roses. A kerosene lamp sat on the library table, and green glass ashtrays at convenient places about the roam were overflowing with cigarette stubs and ashes. Bright red roses trailed in a gay pattern on the woolen rug.
While the deafening noise of the train made conversation difficult, Fred pulled a sack of Bull Durham from his pocket, rolled a cigarette, lit it, took several puffs, and flipped the ashes on the tin apron of the small heater. The train had passed out of earshot when he glanced at the clock on the mantel, and began, "Well, Miss, if it don't take me too long I don't mind talking awhile, but I've got to go to town 'round 4 o'clock to see a man 'bout a job he promised me.
"I don't know what's the matter. It seems like I can't find work to do no more like I used to. White men don't give colored men no more work to do these days, and as much building as they have going on in this town it just don't seem right. It's mighty strange that they'll take white men from out of town rather than hire a colored man that's a citizen of this place, owns property, pays taxes right here, and spends his earnings in the local stores like I do. Those out-of-town white men are apt to send their earnings back to their home towns and not spend much here. It's a puzzle to me why colored workmen are treated like that.
"If you want my story, you no doubt want it to start at the beginning. Well, I was born right here in Athens, on Strong Street, but it's been a long time since I lived over in that part of town. My schooldays were spent in East Athens, on West Broad Street, and at Knox Institute - just about all around town. I can remember when there wasn't but two public schools in all of Athena. The one for white children was on the corner of Washington and Jackson streets, and the one for colored children was Knox Institute.
"In my childhood days we had a place to go in swimming up the Oconee River about a mile from town. We called it the 'kid hole,' and every boy within a radius of ten blocks swam in that place. I've seen 'most a hundred boys, both colored and white, swimming together in that place at one time. Bathing suits hadn't been heard of then. We just stripped off our clothes and dove in. When little boys that hadn't learned how to swim thought they were old enough to follow us to the swimming hole some of us would get a little distance out in the water and others on the bank would pitch the new boys in. It would scare them 'most to death and the way they would frail their arms and legs around in the water trying to keep from drowning was a mighty good swimming lesson. They didn't know we were looking out for 'em.
"When I was old enough and large enough to work out, the head janitor at Old College on the university campus hired me at two-fifty a week. How'd I spend that first money I earned? I spent it on myself - all of it. They didn't have water piped all over that building like they do now, and part of my work was to carry water from the faucet in the basement and distribute it in the pitchers and buckets in 24 rooms. I did a lot of shoeshining for the college boys in that dormitory too.
"The biggest kick I got out of life in those days was running after the fire engines that were pulled by colored men. They had white fire companies and colored fire companies, and they even had their separate engine houses. I didn't bother after the white folks' engines. One day when a fire broke out and a crowd of us lit out to see the excitement, a little colored boy got in the way of one of the trucks and was knocked down. His head was badly crushed and one of his ears was cut off. That taught us a lesson about getting in front of fire engines.
"I was 17 years old when I entered Tuskegee Institute with my mind fully made up to learn all I could about working with iron. I meant to be a blacksmith, and I wanted to be as good one as that college could turn out. When I was convinced that field was over crowded I chose the brickmason trade instead. It's a good thing I took that course, for the blacksmith business has gone down steadily since automobiles have been taking the place of horses. However, if a man's a good welder he can still get some work to do, but a jack-leg ain't able to earn much at any trade. You've got to be good if you're to get a chance to earn much these days. I didn't graduate at Tuskegee, for I was only there three years. At different times while I was there President McKinley and Mr. George Foster Peabody visited the school.
"I was working my way through school, and at the time I was there they were tearing down old buildings and putting up new ones. Until I got to where I could use a trowel myself, I waited on the other boys that had already gotten more training. My first work was laying brick, and the whole time I was there my earnings were from work on the buildings on Tuskegee campus.
"It was while I was a student at Tuskegee that I really learned to play baseball. I had always liked it, but I found there was a whole lot more class to college baseball than to the scrub games I had been used to playing in vacant lots or just anywhere a bunch of boys could get together with room enough. Once when the Tuskegee team was playing Atlanta University I got my collar bone broken. When I come back home I was captain of the Athens Red Socks team, and we were considered the best in the South. We played all over Georgia, Alabama, and South Carolina. I haven't forgotten the game we played at Acworth, Georgia, once, and the Acworth team had hired a white pitcher from some big baseball league. Well, we beat 'em, and did we feel like we were big stuffi For a fact, we won every game we played that year but two. We played four games in Chattanooga, losing two and winning two. Wherever the Red Socks went to play ball the white people were mighty nice to the members of the team and turned out in good crowds to the games. When I was playing baseball I weighed a hundred and sixty-two pounds; now I just weigh a hundred and forty-two pounds.
"I'm so fond of football that till this good day I go to every game, hard as times are with me. The largest crowd I ever saw in Athens was when Yale played Georgia to dedicate the new stadium at Sanford Field. I paid two-fifty for my ticket and for some reason tickets were not taken up at the gate; all we had to do was show we had one. I kept mine for a souvenir.
"When I left Tuskegee, I went out to work for myself, and since that time I've done bricklaying in five different States. Most of my work has been done in Georgia, South Carolina, and West Virginia. Building the power house at wheeling when I was working for the Foundation Construction Company was the largest job I was ever on. On that job I was paid a dollar and a quarter an hour, and that amounted to $55 a week. When that power plant was getting near on to being finished I saw a workman - he was just a common laborer - fall a hundred and fifty feet. Everybody thought he'd die when he was sent to the hospital, but in three days he was back on the job. What saved him was the fact that he fell on a mortar board that was covered thick with fresh-made-up mortar. If he'd fallen on a pile of brick instead of landing on that soft mortar there mightn't have been any use in taking him to a hospital.
"The Georgia Power Company paid me $70 a week for my work on the power plant at Tugalo. I used to get plenty of work to do, and that's one reason why it's so hard for me to understand why I can't get it anymore. One of the leading white contractors in this town started out about the same time as me and he used to give me lots of work, but in the last few years he claims his foremen refuse to work colored men. It seems like this attitude toward colored workmen has developed since the government took over public building work. Down at Macon they have let the colored men work on PWA jobs, but not in Athens. I think Mr. Roosevelt is the best President we ever had. He had the money put down here for us, and he don't know that we colored folks sure ain't allowed to get the benefit of it. I'll just bet he don't.
"One time, when I was making $25 a week, building a stable for Dr. Jago on the lower end of Clayton Street, a scaffold broke and the brick and mortar fell on us. While we were all terribly bruised up, we were thankful that no bones were broken.
"Not long after that, I was called out on a fifty-five- dollar-a-week job at Barnett Shoals by an Athens construction company that had a contract to build some seventy-five or a hundred houses for mill hands to live in. They were all plain little four- room houses owned by the mill. My job was to build the pillars after the frame work had been set up. One day when I was bending over to put up a corner pillar, some careless person at the far side of the little house pulled a brace and the house gave way and fell on my back. It took a hundred or more men to lift the corner of that house off of me. When they did get me out I was drawn almost double, and I was in the hospital nine long weeks. They kept me packed in ice all that time. They would have kept me in the hospital longer, but I begged so hard to be taken home to my family that they finally gave their consent. After that I had to pay our family physician for any medical attention I got, and my expenses while I was laid up took all I'd saved. The insurance the construction had on its workmen took care of the ninety-dollar-hospital bill that was run up during the nine weeks I was there, but the company didn't pay me a cent for the time lost; they wouldn't even give me part time, although they knew that I was hurt in their employ and that the accident was not caused by any fault of mine. After I got up and about they never would take me back on the job, and I've been going down hill ever since. I'm sure that that accident is the cause of my feeling bad all the time now. Sometimes when I sit down I can't hardly get up again.
"I never was foreman of but one construction job, and that was when we built the Ford Motor Plant at Cordele, Georgia. They paid me a dollar an hour. When the building was completed and inspected the owners and contractors all told me how pleased they were with the work I had directed for 'em.
"During the World War I was employed to work on construction of warehouses for ammunition to be stored in. The building was going on about twelve miles north of Charleston at a suburb known as North Charleston, on Cooper River. There were about thirty-five thousand people working there. As fast as the laborers could get a little bit of space cleared up in the swamp, they started putting up a building on the clearing. That's the only time I ever worked under military regulations. Soldiers guarded every move we made. We weren't allowed to have lights in our camps at night and if we wanted to go out at night or any other time we had to have a pass to come and go on. We were searched when we went out and again when we came back in. The rules were extremely strict, and we knew better than to tell anything about those warehouses and our work to outsiders.
"There's where I was when the Armistice was signed. That was one terrible time with all the noise of the bells ringing, people hollering like mad, whistles blowing, folks running like they were crazy - all laughing and crying at the same time. It was hours before it got around to everybody just what all the commotion was about. When we learned for sure what it was, we were all the gladder and happier. While I was working on the ammunition warehouses they paid me $80 a week, and every week I sent $40 home to my family. One thing sure, no matter what came or went, whenever I was working out of town I always kept enough money with me to pay my fare back home to Athens. If a man told me I couldn't go home, I always told him I certainly could, whenever I wanted to.
"The reason I left Charleston was that my family had the flu's. Some of those buildings never were completed. While we were in Charleston I saw all sorts of people die by the hundreds. Nassau laborers died there in droves. At the express office I saw their coffin boxes piled to the celling, waiting to be shipped back home for burial. I was told the flu's like to have wiped out those Nassua laborers, but they might have died of some other cause; I don't know. One thing I do know; I wouldn't give one American laborer for a hundred of 'em. They didn't have a bit of sense. Why, some of 'em even claimed they'd never seen a frost till they landed in Charleston.
"Yes, mam, I've worked for some mighty fine people. The Athens construction concern that built the silk mill in Elberton paid me a dollar an hour in addition to my room and board while we were working on that building, and when that job was finished that same contractor put me to work here in Athens on a building he was putting up on Clayton Street. That building caved in, killing two workmen. I was bruised a little, but not serious. Understand me now, that cave-in was not the fault of the contractor. His work never gave way till the ground way down under the building caved in, and that was what caused the destruction. The contractor couldn't help it.
"Those days and times, I averaged about four hundred dollars a year. The last bit of work that I was on that was enough to be called a Job paid me $4 for an 8-hour day. The bricklayers on those PWA Jobs are getting $10 a day now. I finished up my last job last Monday, and, as I told you when you first got here, I've got an appointment at 4 o'clock to see a man about work. I sure hope to get it.
"I never made a regular practice of taking my family with me when I was going from place to place to work for the reason they were better off at home than moving about so much. And then too, you know a man can live where he wouldn't have his wife and daughter go sometimes. I made it a rule to send at least $40 a week home to my wife every week I was away, and she saved what she didn't have to spend on herself and the children. Before I got hurt, we had quite a nice little sum of money saved up, but it ain't that way any more. I can't hardly buy bread for us any more.
"'Souse me, Miss, I've got to get me a match," Fred said as he limped from the room. He is a restless person and seems to be a little deaf. Every so often he puts his hand to his ear as he listens. Fred's hair and mustache are black. His straight hair grows high on his forehead and he is getting bald in a wide streak over the top of his head. He wore brown trousers, a blue shirt, and gray cotton socks. A strap of his suspender, removed from one shoulder, dangled at his hip. He returned to the room, lit another cigarette, and rocked to and fro. The newspaper fluttering on his lap as he rocked attracted a white kitten. Fred stopped rocking. "Go 'way, little kitten," he said. "Don't you tear my paper." The kitten moved on to another piece of the same issue of the paper that was on the floor. "Now, little kitten, you just let all of my paper alone," Fred urged in an indulgent tone. "It's about all I can do to buy a paper, and here you come tearing it up." As he stooped down to assemble his paper, a large police dog came bounding through the gaping hole in the screen door and the cat suddenly had business elsewhere. In the street the voice of the iceman sounded and the huge dog catapulted himself through the hole in the screen with a series of vicious barks, as though the call of "I-C-E-M-A-N, I-C-B-M-A-N, here's your I-C-E-M-A-N," indicated danger.
Fred went to the door and addressed the vendor of ice. "Say, fellow, I can hear you without all that noise. Bring me a nickel's worth of ice, and don't wait too long about it. This is a pretty time of the day to be delivering ice.
The iceman ignored the last remark. "Look here, Mr. Ham,' he said, "you knows you wants more'n a nickel's worth of ice. It melts mighty fast on a hot day like this."
"A nickel's the last cent I've got, and you ought to be glad to get that much," Fred grumbled.
"All right, I'll bring you a nickel's worth, but you oughta buy more," nagged the iceman.
"Stop that shouting and arguing. This is a respectable neighborhood," Fred snapped. "Bring the ice, if you're going to, but be quick and quiet about it." The iceman obeyed promptly, but seemed to take savage delight in lugging the dripping ice through the front door and he apparently overlooked no opportunity to create untidiness and disorder.
"Miss, you see it's like this; when a fellow once got all the good paying work he could do, really made big money, and then had to come down like this it sure hurts. Why, I've owned three automobiles at different times, but I ain't got one now. When it come to a show down I decided I'd rather own my home than a car.
"I've been married twice, and there's one daughter and three sons in our family. I don't believe in bringing more children in the world than you can have a resonable prospect of being able to raise and educate right. Both my wives and me were reared up here and went through the Athens' schools at the same time, and those two girls were the best of friends. My first wife's child - my daughter -was about three years old when I married the second time. If I was as good a man as the two women I married I wouldn't be in the fix I'm in today. Both of my wives were the finest the women.
"During my first wife's lifetime she never worked out for no other family, for she didn't have to do it. I was making plenty to support her, and the only work she did was her own housework. Susie here - my second wife - has been taking in washing for the same white family for the last nine years, and that dollar a week she gets for it comes in mighty handy when I'm out of work. A dollar's worth of flour or meal will keep you from going hungry a long time when you're out hunting for a job.
"Our oldest son is at home with us now, and he's right dependent on me in a way. When I work, he works; and when I'm at home out of work, he's in the same fix. That's because of his affliction. He's deaf because of an injury he received when a car ran over him as he was on his way home from Sunday School when he was just a small child. His eyes were crossed for a long time after that accident, but when we got the proper fit of glasses for him they got all right again. That boy has sure cost me a sight of money for medical care since that accident. There was one operation after another for several years.
"Like my daughter, our second boy stopped school in his senior year in high school. That was because both of 'em married so young. That boy makes eight-fifty a week as a messenger for the Georgia Power Company. He has a baby boy about six months old." While Fred was telling me about his grandson, a young mulatto woman entered the room. She wore a soiled cotton-lace dress that had once been white, and a net was carefully fastened over her straight black hair. Fred said, "This is my son's wife." When I acknowledged the introduction, she did not look toward me or in any way indicate that she was aware of my presence. She grunted something to her father-in-law and disappeared through a door at the rear of the room. Soon she returned, took her seat on the divan, and addressing Fred said: "The baby's still asleep. I do hope he doesn't wake up before I can get my clothes on the line. Fred smiled, but otherwise ignored her as he continued: "My daughter has four little boys but none of 'em are big enough to help her much. She washes for the students at the chapter house where her husband works. I don't have any idea what either one of 'em earns, but they seem to be getting on very well. They live up the street just a little way from here.
"My youngest boy finished high school here and is now attending the state School at Savannah. Just like his daddy, he's taking up the brickmason trade. While he was in high school here he made two-fifty a week working in the tailoring department of a men's clothing store, and what's more like his daddy was at his age, he didn't turn over a cent of his money to his parents. He spent it all on himself, just like I did with the first money I earned when I was assistant to the janitor at Old College. Now, I have to pay twelve- fifty a month to keep him in school. At first he was given enough work for him to earn his schooling, but now all that's done away with, and I have to pay his tuition and other expenses.
"I tell you, Miss, it sure keeps me jumping. My children don't help me; I have to help them, but I've proved how I believe in education because I've sacrificed and tried hard to see that my children had, at least, high school education. I want 'em to have all the education they can get, for the more training a person has, the easier it is to get work. Who wants an ignorant person working for 'em these days?"
The daughter-in-law went out muttering about getting the clothes on the line, but she had been gone only a few minutes when a baby began to cry somewhere in the rear of the house. The woman hurried back in the house and soon passed through the room where we sat. In her arms she carried her infant, and it was as light in color as was its mother. Fred said a few affectionate words to the child. "It's so hot at our house," the woman said, "that I have to bring him over here to find a place cool enough for him to sleep." Her remarks did not seem to be addressed to anyone in particular, so I made no reply. "Babies are a lot of trouble," Fred said with a smile when the mother and child had gone, "and now-a-days when they grow up they don't try to make up to their parents for all the trouble they've been. They just keep on looking to their parents for help and support. I hope none of these young folks of mine will have more than two children, for they couldn't do the right thing by any more. I think two children are enough for any couple to undertake to raise. A boy and a girl are all the children needed in one home in these times, for a couple can't take proper care of more.
"I have a beautiful vegetable garden that I want you to see before you go. I also raise my meat and. keep a cow, but my meat won't last much longer now, for whenever any of my children want a piece of meat to cook they come to me for it. The two hogs I killed last year weighed four hundred pounds apiece, and they cost me lots of money buying feed for 'em.
"You know, I've been thinking lots lately about all the insurance I used to carry when times were better. Why, when I was working steady and making top wages, I carried five insurances and belonged to the K.C. order too. Now, I've had to drop all but two of those insurances, but I still keep up my K.C. dues. If I had all the money now that I've paid out on the insurances that I've had to drop I'd be on easy street.
"I calls myself owning two houses; this four-room house that we live in, the two-room house next door where my married son lives, and the vacant lot next to that. Taxes are so high and hard to raise money for, that sometimes I think I'll just let the tax man sell my property and give me what's left after he takes out for past- due taxes. If ever I do get out of debt I don't intend to let myself get into this sort of fix again.
"When there's some big election for bonds or something else special and a certain amount of votes are needed to carry it, people make a beaten path to our door trying to get us to vote their way, but if we do like they want us to, what good does it do us? It don't do colored folks no good a t'all. Do you see that rough street out there? There ain't been no work of any kind done on it in two years. We can vote in the Presidential elections, but just to tell you the plain truth, I don't pay no attention any more to those things for there's nothing the colored folks can do to make things any different. The white people are going to run things like they want to anyway. Would you believe it if I told you city water is not provided for this thickly settled section of Lickskillet? A man on the hill paid $40 to have a water pipe run into his house, and I paid him $10 to let me tap it. Now, all the colored folks below here comes to my house to get their water. They are supposed to pay me 25¢ a month, but sometimes they don't pay me a cent. Oh, well, it's all right how the white folks run things. They always have run things in the South, and they always will. They've been considerate enough of the colored folks in the past, but for the last few years they haven't let us have any work to do for 'em. If I had ever voted against 'em I would think that might be the matter, but I never voted in my life and don't expect to. I just don't know what's the matter.
"This used to be a respectable section of town. Distinguished people have been reared out here, but since the city put that old incinerator and the abattoir down here, decent people have to go away from here to get a breath of pure air. However, we ain't bothered with the scents like the people up on the hill, for we are below the smokestack. Yet they'll send a man to your house as often as once every week to inspect sanitary conditions while they are raising such a bad smell in the neighborhood you can't hardly stay on your own premises. As far as I know, there are no gamblers or bootleggers living in our neighborhood, nor have we ever been bothered with much of that. I guess the bad scents are too much for their business.
"Did you ever hear how Lickskillet got its name? Well, I was told that years ago a mighty peculiar man lived in this section. He lived all alone and never associated with his neighbors. He did his own housework, and his only cooking vessel was a skillet. Instead of washing the skillet, he always just licked it clean. Folks seeing him lick his skillet gave that name to this part of town, so they say, and the name has stuck throughout many years. Another story about the origin of this name is that a man give his wife such a licking with the skillet that it caused her death. To me the first story seems more logical."
At this point the daughter-in-law brought the baby and sat it in Fred's lap, saying: "Do you mind holding him long enough for me to finish hanging out the clothes?" Fred jostled the child on his knee. "Now, Miss," he said, "I'm sure I've told you about all I can remember about my experiences. No doubt there are many things I've forgotten, and I'm sorry I can't remember better. It's like this; since I can't get regular work anymore it makes me awful nervous to sit still long at a time, and my mind ain't as active as it used to be. I guess I worry too much.
"Oh, hadn't I told you i'm a Methodist? Well, I guess I joined that church because my parents were of that denomination. You see they were slaves owned by the Bishop family, and the Bishops were Methodists. They took their slaves to their own church. Did you ever hear of a colored man named Matt Davis that used to be postmaster here? Well, he and his wife belonged to the same family, but he wasn't any relative of mine. No, mam! I never did understand just why he ever got as high as he did, for he never went to school a day in his life. I suppose his white folks taught him what he knew, for there wasn't any schools for colored folks in slavery time.
"Speaking of my religion again, I joined the church where I'd been going to Sunday School when I was around sixteen or seventeen. and while I can't preach you no aermon, I do go to church and pay my dues. Sure enough now, I believe I've told you about all I know that could be of interest. Let me give this baby to my deaf son to hold so I can show you our garden before you go."
I followed him through a bedroom to the kitchen. In the bedroom I saw a golden oak suite, several chairs, some trunks and a large woolen rug. There was an atmosphere of long deferred cleaning and habitual disorder about this room, but one noticeable feature was that no pictures, calendars, or other of the customary wall decorations were to be seen. The pink flowered wall paper was clean- looking and bright, no matter how dingy the furnishings of the rooms might be.
In the kitchen, the ceiling was smoked almost black. Soiled pots and pans were strewn over the wood-burning stove and the table was laden with unwashed dishes and cutlery. While Fred seemed embarrassed when he realized that he had led me through the house and its untidiness seem to mortify him, he failed to close the door when he went into another bedroom to change his house slippers for shoes suitable for walking in the garden. This second bedroom was much like the other part of the house. A fresh coverlid would have helped the appearance of the battered iron bed. A general litter of various small articles was scattered over the dresser, tables, and about the room. The deaf boy, the baby in his arms, was rocking to and fro in a chair by the window. I did not enter this room but observed it in a swift glance from the further side of the kitchen. To my surbe prise, a plank seemed to be missing from the kitchen floor, and on the ground under the house I could see buckets and boxes, and chickens were walking around pecking in the coarse grit that had probably been scattered there for them.
Fred soon reappeared, wearing street shoes, and led me out on the back porch where his wife, Susie, was feeding the chickens.
"Oh, what a nice lot of chickens you have!" I exclaimed. "And so many of them are frying size."
"Yessum, I'm proud of my chickens," Susie declared. "I had lots more of 'em, but the old river rats have eaten so many of 'em. Some of them rats are big as cats.
"Why don't you catch the rats?" I inquired.
"Me catch them rats!" she exclaimed. "Lawsy, Miss, they'll fight you!"
Fred opened the gate to the poultry wire fence that enclosed the flourishing garden. "It surely does take lots of feed for those chickens," he grumbled. "If we didn't raise our own corn I don't know what we'd use for money to buy chicken feed with. Now, just look, Miss! Ain't my garden pretty. It stays like this just as long as I have time to work it. It provides us plenty of vegetables to cook with our little home-raised meat for dinner, and we have home- raised grits, eggs, and meat for breakfast. I think that's good enough for anybody." I looked at the rows of cabbages, tomatoes, and squashes, and cucumbers. Beyond them was a patch of knee-high com, and a wide space in which sweet potato plants were growing. "Miss, do you see all this land planted in something to eat? It used to be I could afford to hire it plowed up in the spring, but now I don't have money to pay out for anything like that, so I just have to dig it up and plant it myself, and keep it hoed out. There's not a soul to help me hit a lick in it, but there's plenty of 'em to help me eat what comes out of my garden. Notice my young corn down there by the river. It'll be coming on while we're eating on this.
"I'm a man that has always paddled my own canoe, and what nobody will help me with, I do by myself." He turned around and led me toward the street. "See these peach trees," he said. "Well, the old woman puts up enough fruit from them trees to last us from one bearing season to the next." We had reached the sidewalk when he asked:
"Do you like flowers?"
"Yes," I answered, "I've never thought a home was complete without growing flowers around."
"Do you have any plants that you could give us," he begged.
"I'm sorry, Fred," I had to answer, "but I live in an upstairs apartment, and my few little flowers grow in porch boxes, but if I can get you some from my friends I'll let you know."
"Thank you, Miss," he said. "I'll be mighty glad to get 'em. Just let me know where to go after 'em. I hope you'll find what I've told you to be worth the trouble you took to come way down here and listen to me. I'm sorry I had to be in a sort of hurry to keep that 4-o'clock appointment, for if I hadn't had that on my mind, maybe I could have remembered more things to tell you about. Anyway, I've enjoyed going over my experiences with you. From what my mother told me of her white folks you remind me of 'em."
"That's kind of you, Fred," I told him. I thanked him for his story and left.
As I crossed the railroad track in front of his house I glanced back. He was still standing where I had left him in the walkway between his two houses, his hands in his pockets and a faraway look on his face.