SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: JASON C. NYE
Date of First Writing January 7, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed  Charles L, Sligh (white)
Fictitious Name Jason C. Nye
Street Address  1707 Heyward Street
Place Columbia, S. C.
Occupation  Florist
Name of Writer  S. M. Soruggs
Name of Reviser State Office
Jason C. Nye shouted a cordial "Come in," when I called at his floral store in the Wright's Hotel building on Main Street. lie ms busy inspecting an array of beautiful and costly-looking funeral designs. With the words, "I'll be with you in a moment or two." he waved me to a seat.
While waiting. I watched his handsome figure moving back and forth. as he critically eyed the designs) a bit over six feet in height, he looked, and weighing well over two hundred. He was wearing a newly creased suit of gray - the coat dark, the trousers of lighter hue with narrow stripes - with a tie striped in red and white. His eyes, big and brown, were expressive of the brisk energy with which he moved and of the cheery tone of his voice. Crowning his profile was a bushy mass of fart graying hair.
His inspection finished end his assistant instructed as to the shipment of the designs to some distant town, he come over and took a seat opposite me. "Your superb fora and elegance of dress," I told him, "would make as think you are an Englishman, were it not for your energised American manner. And the red carnation in your lapel, is it a habit or just a special circumstance?"
"A habit," he answered. "I've worn some such bouquet every day since I began floral business. My wife jokes as about it, saying it's my way of showing to customers that I practice what I preach. It is more than that. I love flowers and what they express in life."
Then the purpose of my visit was explained. "Life story," he repeated. "Oh, well, why not? But nine has been the life of a plodder. Nothing exciting or spectacular to make a story of. Nothing dark end sinister. My relations with sheriffs and policeman have always been the friendliest. It's just the life of a country boy who came to town and built for himself a small business.
"My parents, long ago passed over the river, were Dickens Sutton Nye and Hattie Hooks Nye. I was born on my father's plantation in Newberry County, South Carolina, on Ney 17, 1884. There I spent my childhood and early youth. In the autum and winter I attended the old field school, and in the spring and summer I worked on the fans, hoeing cotton, corn, potatoes and other plants on our plantation at that time. One night think that a family living on a good farm and working it intensively would have all the heart could wish for, but it was not always the case an our plantation. There were lean years, some very lean.
"Sometimes our cotton crop was cut by lack of rain just when the plants must have moisture. At other times there would be so much rain that the plants would go to bush instead of boll. This cotton was our means of getting sufficient money to pay taxes, buy clothes and other necessities to wear and eat. It's failure also meant the lack of money to pay debts, no matter how pressing. And other crops, such as corn and potatoes, frequently failed because of weather conditions. One example may be given. The summer before we quit farming, there was a great wind and hail storm. Our corn was just beginning to tassel. After the storm passed, father and I want to see how the crop had stood it. The sight was sickening. Much of the corn had been broken down, and the rest, though still rooted and whole, was lying as flat as a pancake.
"Sorrowfully we viewed the ruins of the crop that had looked so fine and promising. Nothing could be done about it that late. Toil, money, and hopes were gone with the wind and hail. That fall we made only about fifty percent of a crop. The Irish potatoes, too, were short, due to hordes of ladybugs on the vines. In fact, every crop that year was out by drought or bugs. Our watermelons were short. We wore a blue family as winter began to approach. Debts wore pressing us for payment, and we had nothing to sell that would bring the amounts we needed. The old saying of, 'Let the other fellow do the worrying,' isn't a bright joke to the man who wishes to treat his fellow man in the same spirit as he would have his fellow man treat him.
"The situation I am describing was our experience in 1898. And lean years were a common affliction to farmers in Newberry County. Weather conditions are one of the gambles the farmer baa to take any year. The disasters of 1898, though among the worst, were typical of frequent occurrences.
"That winter I heard my parents seriously discuss the subject of quitting the farm. One night as we were seated around a roaring wood fire, Father said, 'Mamma, I have been thinking of leaving the farm and engaging in something that is less uncertain about making a living.'
"Mamma replied, without stopping her knitting! 'But, Papa, there is a hazard in most everything. I'm reminded of it by experience I had when I was a little girl. We had a water mill, and ground corn and wheat for the community. We could hear the water falling over the embankment from the house. One day after about eighty-two hours of rain, Mother told me to go down under the hill and see if the mill was all right. I did. The mill wasn't there, and it excited me so I ran all the way home and shouted; "Mother, it's all gone but the dam."'
"To this Father rejoined: 'But Mother, I'm not aiming to engage in the milling business. A well conducted grocery store in a populous community ought to support our family, and I think I know a locality in Columbia where the trade ought to be brisk. My plan would be to trust in God, but all others must pay cash, or the goods would remain on the shelf.'
" 'That plan sounds safe enough, but I wonder if we can sell the farm for enough to pay debts and get settled at it in the capital city,' said Mother. Well, the Nye farm was for sale from that night's counsel around the old home fire.
"There was one man in that district who owned great forests of valuable timber and many across of land, and he always seemed to have money to buy what he wanted, whether crops were lean or fat. He heard the Nye farm was for sale, and one day he rode over and took dinner at our house. Afterward, as he and father sat smoking, he said: 'What's this I hear about you quitting farming and going to practice law or something.' Father replied. 'I am ready to sell one of the best plantations in Newberry County, but there need be no comedy about it.'
"The dickering on price commenced then and lasted until nightfall. fore he left, the visitor put up a sum of money as a forfeit for the contract to be drawn up and closed at the courthouse next day. The price try father received for the farm was far less than it could be bought for today, but it was considered a fair trade then.
"Soon the packing and loading of household effects began. The sale of hogs, cattle, and other things was carried on at the same time. And pretty early in 1399 we were in Columbia, searching for a house to live in and a building to sell groceries in. I think we remained at a boarding house only two weeks before we began the game of living in a big town and doing where competition in all commercial lines was brisk.
"But father was pretty long-headed, and he was determined to succeed. The store soon began to pay, and it kept paying. That is, we got our food, or a large share, from it; and the cash sales generally brought sufficient funds to pay for the goods we retailed, and a slight surplus for our clothing and other necessary needs.
"In the Columbia set-up, the throe big, oversized boys and their two sisters had plenty of good, wholesome food, but we had practically no pending money, like most of our boy acquaintances had. One reason was that it took more and better clothes for us children in Columbia it would have required on the plantation. We boys all helped father at the store, and picked up small change, when we got the chance, by running errands for people or doing other odd jobs. The grocery store, with plenty of competition, just wouldn't support our family in any sort of luxury. The struggle we experienced on the plantation, and in Columbia later, may have been a blessing in disguise. For we became more appreciative of money, and less disposed to spend it foolishly.
"My two brothers are doing pretty well. Toole is manager of the Studebaker Automobile Agency in Columbia. Our kid brother, J.E. Nye, is an engineer of the South Carolina State Highway Department. My two sisters are both happily married. They are Mrs. H. C. Tate, of Hendersonville, North Carolina, and Mrs. P. A. Hodges, of Columbia. My own business brings an income of about $2,500 a year. My wife has income-producing property. We have no dependent children. So we both pay State and Federal income taxes.
"We sometimes talk about our youthful days in Columbia. Only the other day my brother, Toole, was telling me about how I acted in 1904, when I was twenty years old and began my first job at the Stork greenhouses in Columbia. I began work there for fifty cents a day. The duties of the job included keeping the heat at a certain temperature in the winter end giving the right amount of moisture to certain expensive flowers. All told, I think I earned my fifty cents a day, even when I began.
"It takes years of physical and mental labor to gain sufficient knowledge of flowers to make any sort of success in the florist business. The flower is a characteristic feature of the highest group of the plant kingdom. Flowers of commerce are produced from flower buds, just as leaf shoots arise from leaf buds. These two kinds of buds have a resemblance to each other as regards the arrangement and the development of their parts. Flower buds, like leaf buds, are produced in the axial leaves, which are called bracts. This is what I mean by the statement that it is no easy job to acquire proficient knowledge of the florist business.
"For eight years I studied, experimented, and worked at the Stork greenhouses. Even then, I knew little about flower culture. The constant bending of one's back in this work, however, makes one feel at night like he had put in a day's work. My wages increased at Stork's as my efficiency progressed, but I never did make money there as one would do today. I was proud of my three dollars that I earned the first week at Storks. Over the years there, I carried away from the work an other Saturday nights several times more than three dollars, but I never got the same thrill from the start, at least that was my experience. The idea came to me about 1911 that a man should own his own business, if he would play safe, even if it is nothing but a peanut stand.
"So I quit at Stork's and began to look about for something I could make a living at. I had heard father declare many times that a shoemaker should stick to his last. I had given eight years to flower culture, and I decided to go into that business in a snail way. I had no money to speak of. I was fond of the girls, and a great deal of my wages faded along that trail. One day I met a friend, and I explained what was on my mind. He loaned me twenty dollars to aid me in starting.
"I started in business in a cubbyhole space in Thomas's Drug Store, for which I paid him three dollars a week rental. The Thomas Drug Store was in the sixteen hundred block of Main Street in 1912. The success I had pleased me. I soon paid my friend his twenty dollars. Sales were such that I lived, and my business increased until the cubbyhole space at Thomas's Drug Store was too small for me. I then rented a larger space at the Miot Drug Store at 1430 Main Street. In a year or two the business quarters at Miots become inadequate, and I leased these quarters in the Wright Hotel. Orders for flowers came from hotels, hospitals, funerals, and weddings. My sales were brisk. This normal demand for flowers increased tremendously in 1917, soon after troops began to mobilize at the Jackson Training Camp. By the spring of 1918, when there were from 40,000 to 50,000 men and officers at Camp Jackson, the influenza epidemic was taking a huge toll. The demand for flowers frequently was so great that all the florists in this community exhausted their supplies daily. Prices of everything were very high, and I made money rapidly.
"You ask if this florist business is dull and brisk by spells. Off hand, I would say it is not. It is one of the few industries that goes right along regardless of economic conditions. The reason is that deaths, marriages, and hospitals function right along, whether business is good or bad. Many designs, sometimes costly ones, are ordered for patients at the three hospitals in Columbia. Couples who get married do not count the cost; and when death knocks at the door, even if the family is a humble one, flowers are in demand. The florists kaleidoscope discloses a regularity of sales unknown in some other businesses.
"Married! yes. But not until late in life, 1925. It took ma a long time to learn a trade, and a longer time to win a wife. Between the ages of 15 to 40, I often fell in love with a pair of pretty eyes, a classy form, or a charming manner. But I never pressed a case to a climax, until I met Miss Eva Greishabar, a pretty girl of German parentage. She captivated me completely. And what a courtship we had for some years! I thought I knew a good deal about women, but I didn't. I don't know enough about them yet to hurt me.
"Miss Greishaber and I fought it out for several years before she surrendered. She and I would attend theaters and dine together. We would attend church, or we might go to picnics, but she appeared to be willing to let it go at that. One January day, Eva came to my store and we talked and laughed awhile. As she got ready to go, she said she had come to buy a half dozen rosebuds. I always told her she could take her choice of things here, without pay.
"I fixed up a beautiful and costly bouquet and presented it to her. She departed with a smile, and it must have been two hours afterwards, when I was working at the desk, that I discovered a folded ten-dollar bill. I told her about it, and she only laughed. Then she said, 'You are so careless, I wonder why you don't go broke.' The money obviously was hers, but she wouldn't take it. She know the value of roses in January as well as I did.
"It was shortly after that event, when I made up my mind to either win Eva as a wife or lose her. I thought of several plans that might work. but finally discarded all but the sympathy route. So I dolled up in my best togs and skipped around to Eva's house. She greeted me with enthusiasm, as usual. After we took seats in the parlor, I began to tell her what a dismal failure I was. Along that path, I said: 'I'm ashamed of myself, I've decided to go out to Texas and carve a fortune there. If I fail to get the chance out there, I can still walk to the bridge and jump, saying as I'm falling. "Here goes nothing."'
"Eva had listened with sympathetic eyes and a sardonic smile. As I finished my foolish talk she said: 'Jason you are ill. I'm afraid. What sort of a fortune do you expect to gain in Texas by talking like a sick parrot and acting like a monkey? For years I have passed up chances of marriage with other young men and stuck to you alone. Now you are threatening to walk out on me. You know you are the only boy I have ever loved, and so what ----'
"The scene has been hazy to me since, but I am told I grabbed Eva in my arms and poured out my heart to her in love. The very next day, August 17, 1925, we were married. We bought a pretty home at 1707 Heyward Street, Columbia, and we still reside at that address. We have continued to be pals, just like we were in the gay days before our marriage.
"None of the Nye children, who struggled on the plantation and in Columbia, are wealthy, but we all have work which assures us a living and reasonable happiness. And the sacrificial rows of stumps we stumbled through during our earlier years hardened our nerves and possibly made us fit for the duties we now perform.
"I am a member of the National Florist Association, and through this organization the business code is ironed out so that we serve each other about as efficiently as the international postal system does. For example, someone in London, England, or Winnepeg, Canada, or Seattle, Washington, wishes to send a floral design to some one in Columbia. They notify me in code, and the order is filled here by me. I have had that sort of business from these cities during the year 1938.
"I purchase my flowers and plants instead of going to a greater expense of producing them. The Shandon Greenhouse is a local wholesale floral concern. It furnishes me most of my supply. But in case I desire a special design that the local wholesaler does not have, I get it from a similar concern in Florida, New York, or Montreal. Express service generally answers, but if the speed emergency is greater, it comes by air service.
"My wife and I are members of Ebenazor Lutheran Church in Columbia. We were members there when we were married. If we should be absent from services for two consecutive Sundays, the chances are the Rev. Dr. P. D. Brown would come out to the house to see which one of us was ill.
"For many years I have been a member of Elks Lodge (B.P.O.E.) in Columbia. The social benefits I get from this fraternal order are very pleasing to me. I also am a member of Richland Lodge, No, 59 A.F.M., of Scottish Rite bodies in Columbia and of Omar Shrine Temple at Charleston.
"So my life has run through a little more than a half century - even and uneventful, but with the pleasure of knowing I have the good will and respect of neighbors and associates. And I look to the future with confidence and faith. Browning expressed the view in words something like the following: 'God is in the Heavens; all's well with the world.'"
