HONKYTONK HOSTESS
Her over-rouged face brightened, when I insisted that she drink the highest-priced, beer in the house, and spun a quarter across the booth for her to put in the nickelodeon. The give and take of dancing long hours with drunks had battered her shoes, but her hair was fixed carefully, and her fingernails were blood red, tipped with jet. Her eyes, puzzled by my worn suit, sparkled at the label of the expensive bottle in which I had poured my dollar-a-pint whiskey.
"No, we don't drink whiskey till after midnight --- no profit in it to the joint, you know," and she laughed --- her voice was a little husky. "I like whiskey better; it don't make you fat, nor give you a beer-belly ---
"How'd I start working in honkytonks? Like most of the girls, I guess. My folks lived in a small town, where it was awful dull, and everybody knew everything you did, and added on to that when they talked about it. I liked the night life, and thought honkytonks were fun, so when I left home --- I was sixteen --- I got a job in one here in North Little Rock.
"Boy, were they ever tough then! One night, f'r instance, a salesman from Ohio came in when Red Donahue and that tough Jacksonville bunch was in the joint. Red walked up to him and for no reason at all said, 'I don't like you' and knocked the salesman back through the door and begin stomping him. Ferguson --- ha owned the place --- broke the stock out of a shotgun over Red's head, and Red's gang jumped in. Johnny Harrison leapt through a window when the bouncer started shooting. Women were screaming, and people were throwing bottles, and the bouncer was shooting at a man behind a car who was shooting back. Ferguson threw me over in a corner and told me to lay on the floor till it was over, and I did. It never did even get in the papers, but the salesman come out the next day and tried to find his glasses --- they cost twenty-five dollars, he said --- and he found 'em, but they were busted all to smash. I was flat scared that night.
I went with just first one, then another. Every night a cuter boy came along, but mostly I went with an automobile salesman. He had slick black hair and kept his shoes shined, but he wore cheap suits and they were always ragged around the bottoms. We had lots of fun, though. That was before I started drinking, but he would drink and when I'd get off from work at two or three in the morning, he'd let me drive --- they let him bring a car off the lot, you know --- and we'd go tearing down the highway eighty miles an hour. We never had a wreck.
"I got to wanting a change so I went to work at a bigger honky-tonk --- it was on the highway and they didn't have no shooting except one night when Chalie got mad at a drunk who drove into the porch and knocked down the bannister. Charlie shot holes in his tires and made him drive off, the tires just athumping.
"I liked Charlie's place better --- more people came out there, and we didn't go to work till five in the evening, and another girl and I had a cute cabin (Charlie had some tourist cabins right back of the hall). The work was just the same, carry beer back to the booths, hustle nickels for the beetle organ, and dance with the customers. Charlie wouldn't hire the girls out, but if anybody wanted, to buy one off he could, for a dollar a night. But if a girl didn't want to go with anybody she didn't have to. Most of the girls would, though. You got a party and plenty to drink and you didn't have to work and you got the same salary ---- and some of the fellows give you good tips for going with them.
"Boots, the girl I had the cabin with, had been down in Texas, and she knew some people there, so we hitch-hiked there the next summer. The man that took us across the state line made us get out and walk, because then he said they couldn't get him for violating the Mann act. Boots said making a girl get out and walk sounded like a man act --- she was always saying something cute like that ---- and he laughed and said he was sorry, but we'd just have to do it.
"We got a job in a big cafe in Kilgore as curb hops. We got a good salary and plenty tips, too. They got more money in Texas than in Arkansas. They got more money anywheres than in Arkansas. I sure liked to hop cars; there was always good-looking boys driving up to talk to, and some of them would ask me for a date right in front of their girls, and would they be burned up! I was really pretty then and had a nice form --- I had just started drinking.
"I met a real good-looking boy with blond, curly hair. He sure was cute. He drove them transports --- you know, that carry five or six new cars, some of them on top of the others! Well, he wanted to marry me, but I wasn't ready to get married, so I kept putting him off. He made about thirty-five dollars a week, and he finally got me to quit work and take a little apartment with him. I picked it out and it sure was cute, all done up in pink with even the bathroom fixtures pinkish. He said it looked sissy but since he wouldn't be home but four hours ever two days I'd be the one to live in it, and I could have what I wanted. His run kept him out of town that much.
"After a while I got restless and got to stepping out the nights he wasn't in. One night he slipped in and caught me out with a man named Migliore, who run a gambling joint. He said if I couldn't do no better than to date a Wop the first time his back was turned I could go to hell.
"Boots said we couldn't go there --- there wasn't any truck lines to it but we'd go back to the next best place, North Little Rock. I didn't care, I was tired of him anyways.
"We went down to the Triangle Lines and asked a driver we knew to fix it so somebody going to Little Rock would pick us up on the highway --- it was against the rules to ride anybody --- and he said there was a truck going out at two in the morning and for us to be at the Owl Lunch Counter by then. We packed --- I kinda hated to leave that cute little apartment --- and the fella picked us up all right, and we laughed and sang all the way to Texarkana.
"We stopped at a lunch stand there for a cup of coffee and Boots said, 'By God, that's Ed's truck over there!' Ed was a boy she used to go with, and we went out and looked in it, and sure enough there was Ed, sound asleep. Truck drivers has to drive such long hours that they lots of times just pull up behind a filling station or lunch counter and go to sleep. I've known 'em to drive all night long with their heads out the window so the wind would keep them awake. But I know a boy that took some of the Stay-Awake tablets they take, and he went to sleep and run off in the ditch and killed a girl who was with him, and the company fired him.
"Anyways Ed was glad to see us, and he wanted us to go to Monroe, Louisiana with him. We never had been there so we went. The place where we worked had a big club room, and they wouldn't let stags go into the dance hall, so that way they got lots of play on the crap table. We made good, too; eight dollars a week and tips and ten cents on ever coke highball that somebody bought us. A coke highball is a glass with lots of coke and the least bit of whiskey in it --- just enough go's they could smell it. They served drinks right over the bar in Louisiana --- not like it is in Arkansas where you have to buy a pint and take it back to a booth --- so they made lots more money, and then they didn't have to hide the crap table, and they got lots more players. Somebody that liked you would let you play his money, and I've lost as much as a hundred and fifty dollars for some big lumber man in one night. Bill said that was what smart honkytonk girls was for, to lead the suckers in to the tables.
"Boots married a drag-line operator on one of the big levee jobs, and I got pretty lonesome, so I come back up here. Seems like all the girls I started out with are getting married --- Marie married a service station boy, but they separated. Thelma married a truck driver and they had the cutest little baby --- they are separated now, and Thelma got a divorce and went back to her folks at Mountain Home.
"Do we drink too much? All the time --- I get drunk nearly every night; you've got to, to put up with these drunks, and then you get pretty tired working from the evening till all hours in the morning. Lotsa Saturday nights we don't get closed till after daylight Sunday morning. Week nights though we usually close about two or three o'clock, and then us girls dance with each other till they get through checking up, and then we all go to town for something to eat. Sure we put our own nickels in the machine to dance by. Well, I guess it does sound funny, having to dance with drunks all night and then spend what we make to dance some more with each other when we get through. Sometimes a date waits for us to close and then we go to some other joint and dance till they close --- what's funny about that? When we got dates we usually eat steaks, but by ourselves we eat chili at the curb market cafe.
"No, no honkytonk girl ever saves anything. You wear out a pair of hose a night, almost, dancing this way. And it's fifty nine cents at the cheapest for any kind of decent hose. Then there's your cleaning bill, and getting your hair fixed, and new clothes sometimes. Days when no good spenders come out you have to buy your own cigarettes --- yeah, I smoke over a package a day --- and sometimes Joe comes out broke, and I buy liquor and chasers. I don't mind buying liquor for Joe.
"Twilight used to have a fish here in Little Rock. He'd buy her two new dresses ever week, and give her as much as fifteen dollars a week, and lots of times more, but she was crazy about a jelly bean that worked in men's clothes at the Victory Department Store. Me and Boots need to have the darndest time keeping them out of trouble. When Victor --- he was the jelly bean --- would come out to the place and Twilight was off in a tourist camp with her fish --- he run a logging camp somewhere --- we'd lie for her and say she'd went to Conway to see her mother. He'd give us the eye then and want one of us to go with him. I never went, because Twilight and me was good friends, but Boots went with him sometimes. Twilight and her fish would get mad at each other all the time and he'd say he wasn't never coming back, but he would. She could do the fish any old way and get by with it, but Victor could get drunk and beat her black and blue and she'd put up with that. Her fish was married. He had a quiet, sad-looking wife and two pretty baby girls. He had 'em in the truck one time when he come to town. Twilight finally broke him, but Victor quit her too. She's working now in a joint out on the Hot Springs Pike.
"Who's too old to work in these joints? Well, some men want pig- meat --- pig-meat is what they call Innocent fifteen or sixteen-year- old girls --- but the law is hot on 'em for workin' that kind right now, and then they ain't got any sense. Let some jelly bean come in and they set in a booth all night with him, even if he couldn't spend over a dollar if he broke hisself; but let some man with money come in and just because he's fat and can't dance they don't go near him unless he hollers for beer.
"When one of them fat older men comes in I fasten right on him. They put money in the beetle organ a dollar a whack. I bet I put more money in the machine than Sue and Loraine put together. (Loraine was a pink-cheeked sixteen-year-old with baby-blue eyes).
"You can spot the spenders by watching where the Bud and Schlitz goes --- we get twenty cents a bottle for them at night, you know. Another thing: when they give you a handful of nickels for the machine it's all right to put some of them in your pocket, and Maury won't say nothing as long as you keep the machine going. We run sixty dollars in the machine plenty of weeks, and that's lots of money to get at a nickel a pop. Maury said that the week I was sick the machine fell off nearly eight dollars, and that's good enough for me. Both them quail breasts could quit and the machine wouldn't drop over five. You know what a quail breast is --- that's just another word for pig-meat.
"I'm going with a boy named Joe now; he's a mechanic in his Dad's garage --- you know Gregory's Garage --- and some day he'll own it. He wants me to marry him, says it don't matter what I've done in the past. But I don't know --- his folks would have a hissy.
"Still I'd be a good wife. I know both sides and I know what men want. And after I got old and ugly I'd not scream Mm out if he quail-breasted around a little bit. I don't think Joe would do that, though; he's quiet and steady. We'd have to move away from here --- you know how people would talk --- they'd say he married a honkytohk girl, and they ain't no better'n we are. I know plenty women married to railroad men that come out here every night their husband goes out on a run. Think they won't meet anybody they know, and think we don't notice --- a lot they've got to talk about.
"If I just knew Joe wouldn't be sorry later he married me --- or if his folks wasn't against it --- Don't you want another chaser? Thanks, I could drink anothern. Maury! A bottle of Bud and a coke!."