Bootlegger
Interviewer: Della Yoe
Revised by: Lipscomb
and Aswell.
December 19, 1938.
CLARA GARBER
Clara Garber moved quietly about the well-kept kitchen putting dishes in the cabinet and leftovers from the meal in the electric refrigerator. A meticulous housekeeper, she runs her five room bungalow as efficiently as she does her bootlegging business. As she passed the wheel chair in which her 24-year-old paralytic son huddled, his twisted face working and his dull eyes following her movements, she patted him on the shoulder.
"Sonny Boy here was stricken with the infantile paralysis when he was only two year old. He can't read and nobody but me can understand what he says. But his mammy knows what he says and can always give him what he wants."
A tall lean man wearing faded overalls and a checked cap came slouching through the kitchen from the front of the house. He paused a moment in the back door and stared at her. Then he sidled out into the night without saying anything.
"That's shin Badgett, my ex- husband," nodded Clara as she hung a clean dish cloth on the rack. "But he ain't Sonny Boy's daddy. I been married twice. Sonny's by my first husband. I divorced Shin about five year ago, but I didn't get shed of him. He's just sort of stayed around ever since. I feel sorry for him. He was wounded by a machine gun in the. World War, and the government give him $28 a month until 1933 and then they cut him off. He ain't been able to get a job since. TVA give him a job once but their doctors said he had high blood and a bad heart and wouldn't let him work.
"Shin's afeard of the tuberculosis, but that don't keep him from drinking. I have to take care of him, ain't nobody else going to do it. But when he gets on one of them sprees it lasts for two or three weeks and I just make him go live in that shotgun house I rent for $2 a week. I carry him food and don't let him suffer none. I make him stay right there until he sobers up. I don't live with him, I just take care of him.
A gabbling jumble of sounds come from the wheel chair, "Just a minute, honey," said Mrs. Garber. She went to the kitchen cabinet for a glass, filled it with water and handed it to sonny Boy who drank, it with loud gulps.
"I've tried to get help for Sonny Boy," she sighed, "even wrote to the white House about sending him to warm Springs. Got an answer from President Roosevelt, too. He said I would have to take it up through the authorities here. I didn't do that, I didn't know just how to go about it, and the doctor at the general Hospital had told me that even warm springs couldn't do any thins for sonny Boy."
She took the empty glass from the crippled boy who grinned and chuckled and blew bubbles from the corners of his mouth. Mrs. Graber wiped the glass with the dish cloth and put it back in the cabinet. She glanced at the boy, shook her head, then sat down.
"Yes," she said, "this is a hard mean business, this bootlegging business is, but it's the only way I know to make a living. We've never been on relief, and I'd just about die before I would ask for government help. And I tell you I don't feel it's a disgrace because I sell liquor for a living. I've saved a little money since I divorced Shin. Fact is, I' se got a car, all my furniture is paid for, and I have a few hundred dollars in the bank. Just you name any other business I could go into and still stay in my home where I can take care of my boy? If I could make a lot of money in another business, it would take all my time away from home and then who'd look after him? I can't hire anybody except a trained nurse would take care of him in the right way. They tell me those nurses get $8 a day and their meals. I couldn't afford that. It would break me."
Clara rocked in her chair, and laughing in a tired way, "I'm a religious woman," she said, "but never go to church. I like to hear the hymns sung on the radio and that embroidery on the wall I made when I was a young girl. Made the one that says "God Bless our Home" and "The Lord is my shepherd." There's other pictures of Jesus in the bed rooms. I don't sell whiskey on Sunday. I take that day for rest and recreation. I get so sick and tired of the trouble some of the drunks make during the week that I just close up and get away in the car on Sundays. Shin drives and we take my boy along. The air and sunshine does him good. Oh, I just love it to get out in the country! We usually go to see one of my sisters on their farms. These Sunday trips cost six or seven dollars, but they're worth it."
Shin Badgett slid in the back door. He turned the key in the heavy padlock and slumped in a chair near the stove. Seldom moving he sat with his heels resting on the lower round, his eyes roving over the kitchen floor.
"Clara's a good business woman," he said. "She ain't never been caught yet, even if she is raided about six times a year. She's quicker than the policemen. They never get a thing on her."
"That's because me and the law understand each other." Clara laughed. "I never have paid off for any protection. It's the law's job to catch me with the evidence and my job to keep them from finding any liquor in my house."
"All the same, you pay some man $25 to bond you out of jail if you do get caught," Shin said.
"That's no difference--he pays me interest on my money as long as I don't get caught," Clara retorted.
She turned from Shin and pointed down the hall toward the front and motioned toward back door, the only two entrances to her house.
"I always tell my customers to come to the back door. Now, new customers have to be introduced by old customers. They always learn on the first visit that they have to go to the back door through the alley."
The back door was equipped with a heavy padlock and. a half inch bolt. The front door opened from a porch and is protected by a padlock and a heavy iron grating, in addition to the usual lock. Two minutes, at least, would be required to break through either door with ax and crowbar.
"By the time anybody could get in, all the evidence would be out of sight," said Shin, lighting his pipe. "Clara's smart and always opens the door for them."
"That's the best way," replied Clara, getting to her feet. She picked up a pitcher from the kitchen sink. "I never have on hand more than enough to fill this pitcher. I order it over the telephone and the first thing I do when the liquor comes is to open the tops of the fruit jars it's delivered in and pour all the whiskey into the pitcher.
"I always keep the pitcher on the shelf over the sink. When my supply runs down to about half a pint I order another gallon. It comes in two half gallon fruit jars. The wholesale man usually gets here in ten minutes after I call, unless the law is sitting on him tight--you know an officer watching his stash, the place he hides his lot of liquor. It takes only a few seconds to empty the pitcher into the sink and only a few more seconds for the liquor to run down the drain pipe, and less than no time to rinse out the sink with water from the hydrant. I've done it all in less than twenty seconds, long before the law can break through the doors. I can get rid of the liquor even quicker by pouring it into the commode in the bathroom and flushing it. But most of the time an officer can see me go to the bathroom with the pitcher. He can't see me here at the sink from the back door."
Shin locked his hands behind his head, stretched his long legs in front of him, and shook his head in admiration. "By the time Clara gets rid of the liquor I'm at the door ready to open it, and when they come in all they can find is the smell of the liquor."
Clara said, "What if they do smell the liquor? What can they do about it? They've got to find liquor to make a case against us, and it would take more than an hour to dig up the pipes even if they do know the stuff has been run down them. What officer would be fool enough to go to that trouble? Bootleggers have to learn how to beat the law by experience. We used to rinse out the fruit jars and thought we were safe. But we forgot about the screw-tops. While the jars is being hauled on the trucks the liquor sloshes against the lids and a little leaks into the little place between the glass lining and the top. Rinsing the jars don't get rid of the liquor hiding under that lining." Clara laughed heartily as she stood with folded arms in front of the sink and recalled episodes in her experience.
"I remember several raids where they broke them glass lids and collected the few drops of liquor into a drinking glass. When they'd got together a teaspoonful they had enough to make a case against the bootlegger. Anyhow they did make the case and the bootlegger had to make bond or go to jail. But law me, I don't take no such chances. I make the wholesale delivery man take the jars off with him as soon as the liquor is poured into the pitcher. He ain't minding that because fruit jars cost money."
Sonny Boy now caught his mother's attention by snatching at her arm as she passed by him. He made a throaty mumbling sound. Clara took a bottle of milk from the refrigerator, poured a glass, and handed it to Sonny Boy who drank it, smacking his lips, and cooed happily. Clara stood by his side ready to take the glass when he had finished.
"It's my business," she continued, "to keep away from the law. They can't prove a sale on me. No matter how mean a drinking man is he never tells the officers where he buys his liquor. Why I don't know, but I know they won't. The officers long ago quit trying to prove a sale on bootleggers. Well. I've got this custom of not telling as my first protection. All I have to worry about is not to let the law find any liquor in my house. That's easy. I been raided, but they ain't never found any liquor because I'm quicker than they are."
Shin drew up his long legs, cleared his throat and said, Clara's a good business woman, all right. She knows how to deal with drunks, and they don't none of them ever get by her. Not even me." His laugh was dry.
"That's because I've got rules and the customer knows they've got to go by them," Clara said. "When ten o'clock at night comes, I darken the house and disconnect the electric bells. I sell no more liquor until six o'clock the next morning. Of course Saturday night I stay open until 12 o'clock. Then I'm careful how much liquor I sell to a man. If he wants more than a single drink and wants to carry away a half- pint or a pint, he has to furnish his own bottle. I don't furnish bottles. My profit is small and bottles cost money, and bottles is evidence against you. I take no chances. I never let a man in when he's already drunk, if I know it before he comes in."
Taking the glass from Sonny boy, she placed it on the sink and rolled his chair nearer the window. "I have all kinds of customers," she said. "Men on Relief, working men, white collar men, and some of the highest class. Never would sell anybody else if I could get enough trade from the gentlemen. They bring their bottles, get them filled, and leave as quick as they can. It's the rough class that gives me trouble. They get half drunk somewheres else. Then they come here to get a nickle or a dime drink. I make more money on the nickle and dime trade than I do on the half-pint and pint trade. That's because I cut the size of the drink down to where I make three times as much on a sale instead of just doubling my money. But the drink trade is a sight more trouble."
Shin remarked, "They don't many give you no trouble to speak of. You can manage any man ever comes to this house even if the drunks do get by sometimes."
"That's right," she said complacently. "I've never had much real trouble with drunks. Sometimes a half- drunk fool will get by me. He pulls himself together when he is talking at the door. He can do this easy in cold weather, then when he gets a nickle or dime drink in him and gets warm he goes wild and begins asking questions--the same one over and over. That's a good sign he's plumb drunk. Sometimes they want to fight each other, but not one has ever looked like he wanted to fight me. It sure takes patience to handle them and it's a job to get them out of the house. All of them is different and has to be handled different. Some I order around and they mind like children. Others I have to pet and humor. Sometimes after they've spent all their money they won't go until I give them a free drink. I'm always glad to do that just to get shed of them."
"They are usually the ones that's no good. They run up a bill and when they get paid off they begin buying from some other bootlegger. I get rid of customers that I don't like by letting them run up a bill to twenty-five or thirty-five cents. He'll disappear and not come back for six months. He never says a word about the old bill. I don't let many have credit, but some pay their liquor bill just the same as they do their grocery bill or funeral expenses."
"Why don't you ever say anything about the women who come here?" said shin. He got up and drifted toward the front of the house. Watching him, Clara went on talking. "Yes, about a tenth of my customers is women. They're mighty near as bad as the men to buy their drinks even if they can't buy coal nor groceries. Some of them, men and women both, come in here and give up their last dime, a few pennies, and even a street car token.
"Me, I don't know why people drink. I never have and don't even like the smell of it. What they get out of it is beyond me. I sure wouldn't have nothing to do with it, but bootlegging is a sure way of making a living even if it ain't the most comfortable way. I've been in it ever since Shin got too old and worn out to work. Nine years now, I ain't never been caught nor been arrested. I pay two dollars a gallon and sell it for 50¢ a pint. A gallon brings four dollars, double what I pay for it, and more when I sell it by the drink. My business ain't big. I sell around two and a half gallons a day and make $5. Takes that to live these days. On Saturdays I usually sell five gallons, about double the amount I sell on other weekdays. As I said, I don't sell on Sunday. Because everybody needs one rest day."