LIFE HISTORY 5200 words
(Date of gathering of material) 4May, 7 May, 15 May, 16 May, 1939 & 18 May.
(Name of writer) - Jeanne deLavigne Scott, 532 St. Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Name and address of person written about) - Eugene Reuben Mumford, 2519 Alvar St., New Orleans, Louisiana. (Colored)
(Profession of person written about) - Fruit and vegetable vendor in French Market.
URANUS AND I AREPRETTY GOOD FRIENDS ...
Eugene Mumford ------ his middle name is Reuben --- is a mulatto. We in Louisiana call people of his complexion "bright" negroes. In the Old French Market, where he works, his manners are perfect --- gentle, deferential, quiet, selecting the reddest tomatoes and the whitest celery and the biggest peaches for the customers he has been serving so long. If he happens not to be around, and you ask for him, at once a hue and cry is set up by the noisy Italians who swarm about the old Market today. "Yaller!" they shriek. "Yaller! Somebody wants ya!” And Bugene appears like magic, silent-footed, soft-spoken, efficient.
He lives almost at the end of the carline. You walk down the road, passing great leafy willows and thick chinaberry trees, and frogs croaking in the distant swamp. Finally you came to a snug cottage, nestling behind a chinaberry tree and a high picket fence innocent of paint. There are cows here and there, back from the road, each wearing a bell. Chickens scratch among the fine white shells. The cottage steps are high, and on the screened porch a shaggy yellow-and-white dog wiggles and wags in competition with an energetic black puppy.
Inside, a radio bellows and thunders… Eugene’s pretty, half-grown daughter is costatically enjoying a baseball game. Her gyrations rival those of the pitcher. Her eyes sparkle and dance, and her small brown fists boat an excited tattoo as she listens. Major Bowes is nowhere. Amos and Andy lack everything. Fibber McGee is out of the picture. Joe DiMaggio, Carl Hubbell, Wes Ferrell, Charley Gehringer, Jimmy Foxx, Mel Ott --- they are the boys of whom Mercedes dreams and in whose hot defense she would fight an army! The living-room is comfortable and well-arranged. The rug is rolled up for summer, and lies slumbering, bent double, in front of the mantel. There is a davenport along one wall, besides numerous chairs and rockers. Pongee curtains are gathered over the glass in the triple front doors. There are other rooms farther back. Eugene is home from the Market, where he works from seven to seven --- seven days a week. He sits resting, in clean white crash slacks, after his day's work, and tells his story ……
I was born in Brookhaven, Mississippi, on February seventh, 1879. My father was Isaac Mumford and my mother was Esther Crump Mumford. I had six brothers and six sisters --- there were thirteen of us, in all. Now all there is left are five of the boys, besides me, and only one of the girls --- that's Lucille.
When I was a little boy my father was janitor of a college in Brookhaven. I remember one time, when I was very small, I and my little sister were visitin’ at my aunt's house. My uncle was a carpenter. There was an old black Granny stoppin’ with my aunt and uncle at the time. My aunt gave us a quarter and sent us down the road to a little store to buy somethin' or other for her. Right by the little store they were alterin' a buildin', and my uncle was workin' there. In front of the place was a pile of sand and buildin' material, and we got to playin' in the sand. When we started into the store, we discovered we didn't have any quarter. So we went to my uncle, who was workin’ on the repair job, and told him my aunt had told us that he would give us two bits to buy whatever we were after. He did so.
When we got home and told the truth, my aunt began to scold. This old Granny sittin’ there made my aunt stop chasin' me and my sister. She said she'd help us find the quarter ---that she could do it. But it would have to be done that night, by the light of the moon. So when the moon came up, about ten o'clock, she took us kids and went --- but she made us lead her just the way we had gone, and made us do just all the things we had done on the way there, with her watchin' us.
She led us to one place in the sand pile, made us turn about takin' double handsful of sand and put it in a little pile near the big pile. After we'd got quite a little pile dug out, handful by handful, she told us to go through the little pile. We both started scratchin' through the little pile, and right there was our quarter that we'd lost.
The first real work I did was when, I judge, I was about nine years of age. I started to work in a restaurant in New Orleans. I’d come here with the family when I was about six. I got ten dollars a month, helpin’ around the kitchen as a flunkey. I was there about three or four years, in summer --- except when I was goin’ to school, at Straight University, the first place I went to school. I got no further than the Third Grade … but I've learned a good deal out in the world.
When I was a little boy, my father was great for gardenin’. When he got his ground prepared, he'd go out in the moonlight and plant mustard-seed. Many’s the time I’ve gone out with him --- the moon high and bright --- yes, ma'am. He said the seeds wouldn't grow unless the moon shone on them when they were bein’ put in the ground.
When I got to be a boy about sixteen, I got out in the world for myself. First I went to Chicago. My first job there was a porter in a barber-shop. I used to get about three dollars a week cleanin’ the shop. I could have what I made on the side shinin’ shoes, and so on, and it was about twelve dollars a week. Then I left Chicago about the year 1901, and I went West. I went to Waterloo, lowa, and fulfilled the same position there that I did in Chicago --- the work of porter in a barber-shop. Things wasn’t so very good in Waterloo, and I didn't stay there very long.
Let's see… the next place was Omaha, Nebraska. I was still workin’ as portor. I think I stayed in Omaha about nine months. When I left there, I went to Denver, Colorado, and I was shinin’ shoes. Leavin’ Denver, I went to Pendleton, Oregon, Durin’ my time there, I was janitor in a woolen mill belongin’ to E.Y. Judd. I stayed there over a year. Then to Portland. As I had accumulated quite a little change, I didn't do anythin' there, but I only stayed about four days.
Then I went to San Francisco. Durin’ that time things were gettin' a little better, and I was stock man in the Rosenthal Shoe Company. I stayed there quite a while. I left there about a month just before the earthquake. We did have a quake one night, though, while I was there. I was asleep, and it happened just a few minutes of twelve. Even the windowpanes were crackin' and breakin', and the buildin's were swayin’. It was quite an excitement, although it didn't last over thirty seconds.
Then I pulled up from Frisco. I was alone all this time, just gettin’ 'round. I came back to Salt Lake City, Utah. The Mormons are very religious. I didn't work for a Mormon, though. Durin’ that time they were pavin' the streets, and I got a job turnin' concrete on a board with a shovel. I got two-and-a-half a day at that. I stayed there until we completed the job.
I liked California best, because I found a very intelligent class of people there. One Easter Sunday mornin' there I went to church --- it was a Catholic Church down on Grand avenue. The service was beautiful, and I'll never forget it. I never did attend church much. I went for curiosity more than anythin’ else.
Then I came back to Denver again, but I didn't stay there. When I was a waiter in a restaurant in Elco, Nevada, the proprietor used to have a good many wise ideas. He used to say, "Eugene, remember this: when a man comes in here dressed in overalls, feed his stomach. But when he comes in flashy, feed his eyes. Always judge your man." That was good advice. And it’s good herein the Market, too, sellin’ fruits and stuff. ‘Specially the ladies.
I stopped in a little town about thirty miles west of Kansas City, and worked in a stone quarry about three weeks* for two dollars a day. It was blastin' rocks with dynamite, and it sure was hard work. The summer sun was hot in the quarry. Judgin’ from the feel, it must have been above ninety all the time. Then I went to St. Louis, and went to work as a porter again in a barber-shop. I must have been about thirty then. I got about twelve dollars a week. I stayed in St. Louis about two years, as near as I can recollect.
Then I returned to New Orleans, and went to work in the American Sugar Refinery. I was truckin’ sugar. And then I got married and started a family. I just happened to see the girl, and her name was Pearl Julien. I was satisfied the minute I saw her, and I didn't want to go any farther.
We had five boys and one little girl. After I had worked and accumulated a little money, I began to be a huckster, with my own mule and wagon. We lived on South Derbigny street then, and we were happier than most folks, I guess. We had four rooms, and the little folks started to school. I made about twenty-one dollars a week. Pearl was more religious than I was, and went to the Catholic church. The children were all baptised --- Leon Alcee, Everett Eugene, Cyril Orville, Arnold Isaac, Marion Emile, and the baby, Mercedes. She's only got the one name, bein' a girl. Pearl died about 1925.
I did the best I could. I could always come home about three in the afternoon and do the cookin’, and so on. We batched it like that until about 1932, and then we moved out here with my brother and his wife. It was real home, too. About 1935 I went to work in the French Market, in one of the fruit and vegetable stalls. That was the old market, where everything was crowded and piled up like, but it was more like home. Wewas kind of all together --- sloppy and comfortable, I guess. But you could keep it clean and neat if you had a mind to. Our stall was right in the middle, and we had a lot better things than we have now. The rents were lower, and we had more stuff and we sold more, too. Now it's all new, with fresh paint, and there ain’t the romance there used to be --- that's what the customers say. To me, there never was much romance to turnips and apples and parsley. But it was the place, and the way it was run. It isn't old any more. That was the romance, I guess.
You know, the old colored people do some funny things, and they're wise, too. You can't explain it --- there ain't no explainin' it. It just is. An old colored women came to the Market the other day, and she wanted a banana stalk --- you know, the stalk the bananas grow on. She didn't want any bananas --- just the bare stalk. I asked her what in the world she wanted it for --- it seemed a funny thing to be askin' for. Well, she said she lives out in Gentilly, and she had some chickins, and one old hen had a lot of little biddies. The hen began to have lice, and the little biddies had lice, and the rest of her chickins got all covered with them. Twelve of the little biddies even died. Finally the old woman went to a seed and chickin store on Dumaine street, and got a remedy for lice. She used it faithfully, just as the seed man had said, but it didn't do any good. The chickins were still covered with lice, and so were the nests and the hen-house.
Then she talked with another old colored women that she knew, who lived in Milneburg. This old woman told her not to worry --- just to hang a banana stalk in the chickin-house, and all the lice would leave. She did; and sure enough, every louse in the place clean left. There wasn't any real reason --- they just up and left. Not a louse on any chickin, or in the nests or the whole chickin-house.
Well, I suspect maybe the stars must have had somethin' to do with it, but of course I don't know. The stars rule most everythin’ in a powerful way. Now, the old woman's hens had begun to have lice again, and here she was after a banana stalk --- and I didn't have any. But I told her to wait a while. I poked through the Italians' stalls, and brought her a whole armful that were just going to be thrown away. I thought if any old body could get rid of chick in lice that way, and had the gumption to come clear from Gentilly after ‘em, they ought to get ‘em. She went off happy, totin' the stalks. And she invited me to come and see the miracle of a banana stalk hangin' in a hen-house chasin' away lice.
I never have voted. I never did take any interest in politics, somehow. I never paid any attention to politics at all until Huey Long began to come up. And I never did go to church. I do play policy once a week, though.
One of my boys graduated from Xavier University; and the others (except Marion, who died) graduated from the Public School. The two younger ones have my ideas ------ they look into the deep things and want to be knowin’ why. But the two older ones know far too much to bother with such things. You see, I have to sort of have one set of ideas and reasons when I'm home with my family. But I have another set of thoughts when I'm thinkin' things out by myself, or talkin' with my two younger boys. You wouldn't want a sweeter mathematician than one of those boys is --- he can just figger anythin'.
Personally, I'm very well satisfied with life. Of course, if things were better, I'd be better satisfied. I got through the Depression all right. It doesn't do to complain about things --- anybody'd better just keep goin’ and make the best of it. As far as the Depression is concerned, the colored man has always had a hard time. If a man has a large salary and it's cut off, it makes a big difference. But the colored man hasn't. So he gets along about the same as usual.
I traveled around to see and hear and learn, and I did. I saw a lot of people, and heard a lot of different views. I've always been a reader --- not the light, flimsy things. I like deep subjects--- all the blood and thunder ain't worth much. I like the books of Doctor Dorsey --- The Story of Civilization and Why We Behave Like Human Beings. I've got them both. Whenever I can, I read the Reader’s Digest and Magazine Digest and Asia and Living Age, and things like that. I like Shakespeare, too, and Rider Haggard's She. That was a wonderful book, and I read it years ago, and it's still wonderful to me.
I like research work in science better than anything I know. When it comes to navigatin’ the heavens, I like that the best --- although I've never owned any kind of a telescope, nor even a good pair of opera glasses. I really believe the stars have an effect on mankind. I really believe that each and every individual here on this planet is visited by a vibration. There are different planetary influences. Sometimes the stars are in harmony, and sometimes they're not. I've been interested in the stars from my childhood --- it's always been a natural inclination with me.
I do feel that it is a positive fact that the stars do foretell things. It's just a matter of the individual bein’ able to recognize conditions. I feel that certain stars guide certain people. As for me, I think Uranus and I are pretty good friends. Certain stars influence certain people in certain seasons. I believe the stars have an influence over the whole earth. When my family is around I say that God Almighty would have a pretty hard time managin' the whole world without somethin' to help Him --- and that help is the stars, I'm certain.
Of course, when I'm talkin’ to folks that are educated good and broad, I branch out a little into other notions. For example: when the heavenly bodies keep holdin' each other in place, do you mean to tell me that there ain't some force in a planet or star that doesn't get its hooks into a man? Watch men, and you'll soon make up your mind that some force is holdin' themback or shovin’ ‘em forward. I believe that force is from the universe ------ from the stars. I believe the position of stars do foretell world events, too, if one is able to interpret them.
My grandmother used to prophesy. Everythin' she ever prophesied, about me or anybody I've known anythin' about, has always come true. She's been dead a good many years now. She made many prophecies about my life, and every one of them has come true so far. There are some that it isn't time for yet, and I can't tell them to anybody; but I know they’ll come true. It isn't time yet for them all to work out, so I’m not saying anythin’ about them.
I just don't argue with noman about what he believes. He may be right about it. Even my four boys. They've had as good schoolin' as I could give them. A good deal better than I ever got. Why, when they come to me with some big question, I just listen. It may be far too fast for me. I may have some idea about it. But I just listen. And when they get through, I say, “Boy, you're huntin’ somethin'. You may finally come home with an empty bag; but your bag's empty now, ain't it? Just keep on huntin'."
A man's always runnin' around tryin' to find somethin' to believe… somethin's that to his own advantage. Then he sets out to prove it. Just like old Buddha --- sat around and sat around, thinkin' what a raw deal mankind was gettin'. Then after some years of dopin’ it out, he came out of his hole and told it to the world. And, at that, I don't know but what he made as many safe hits as a lot of other fellows who've had their turn at bat. So there you are.
Now, you take my grandmother. She was a smart old woman. The family thought she was nuts, but she wasn't --- she was just smart. The older I got, the smarter I know she was. I never said much when I was small, and Granny and I were great friends. I remember one time, while we were still livin' in Brookhaven. I expect I was about five, at the time. My father was considered quite prosperous in those days. He wasn't, but most of the colored people around there didn't have nothin' at all much. We had a good big house, with a wide hall runnin' right through the middle, from front to back. And we had a lot of cows and pigs --- so many pigs that they'd run wild down the ravine back of the house, because there wasn't room in the lot.
Well, there was a colored band in Brookhaven, and my father played the tuba --- a big brass bass horn. It made a terrible racket, and it used to git ants on Granny. They 'specially enjoyed playin’ a piece called "Ocean Wave" --- I can whistle it yet. The tuba sure made a lot of noise in that piece, and they played it when-ever they got the chance. A colored family by the name of Jackson lived way back of us, past the ravine and up on a side-hill. One night the band was practicin’ at the Jacksons’, and my father was bustin’ away on his tuba. Granny and I was sittin’ on our front porch, in some rockin' chairs covered with sheepskins that we'd cured ourselves --- the wool still oh 'em, like they do.
Well, it was pretty dark, and the band was goin' full tilt, and then they started playin' that "Ocean Wave." It was too much for Granny, and she began to groan. "Come on, sonny," she says, "we’ll fix 'em this time!" So she takes me by the hand and we went out to the stable. It was a big stable, and I was pretty small end I held on tight. When we got out into the barnyard where the cows were, Granny reached down and picked up a piece of dry cow-manure. She closed her hand on it and crumbled it up quick, she was so mad at that "Ocean Wave." She kept sayin’ somethin', but I don't know what it was. Then she says to me, "Now you watch!" She was laughin' low like, and she was still holdin’ the manure in her hand.
We looked over at the Jacksons' house, and you never saw so many shootin' stars in all your life. They were flyin' round that house like fire-balls --- a regular rain of 'em. It kept up for quite a little while, and we could see the band men rushin’ around, scared to death. Well, Granny and me went back and sat down on the porch in our rockin’ chairs, just like we'd been. My father and the rest of the band came runnin’ down the hill and into our yard, callin’ to Granny, askin’ her if she'd seen the shootin' stars. She told me to pretend like I was sound asleep, and so did she. The band just couldn't wake us up. They kept talkin’ about those stars, and how they’d thought the house was afire, and how maybe the end of the world was comin’ and this was a sign and all. Jackson seemed to think maybe it was a sign on him. I never saw my father so excited about anythin’. Well, after a little they went on, and my father came in. There was nothin' ever said by Granny about what she did, and I never told. But it killed off the "Ocean wave." I sure used to get a kick out of that old woman.
I remember another time … Granny didn't take any stock in religion. She believed in the stars, and she could manage 'em, too. She used to make a lot of fun of christenin's. But when my brother Isaac was a baby --- he's the one we live with now --- my folks got the idea that he ought to be baptized. So it was all arranged that the christenin' was to take place at our house in the forenoon, and right after that there was to be a big dinner for the whole party. The dinin'-room wasn't big enough, so the table was run out into the back of the wide hall. Granny was busy makin' the ambrosia --- that was fixed with all sorts of fruits, oranges and pineapples and peaches and berries and cherries and I don't know what all. There was goin' to be wine and cake, too, and sweet potatoes and most everythin’. And there was goin’ to be smothered chiokin --- we had lots of chickins on the place.
Well, there was a good deal of talk before hand about the smothered chickin, this way and that way, to make it extry good, and everybody's mouth was fairly waterin’. Granny give a sort of a grin, and she said that when the occasion was such an important one, and the christenin' so grand and all, that she'd take charge of smotherin’ the chickin’.
Well, the day came and everythin' was most ready. The big table was set. The ambrosia was made. All the folks were there, minister and all, and little Isaac got christened. Granny was out in the back yard, where the wooden washtubs were. Some of the folks came hurryin' out, and told her it was time for dinner, and asked her where was the smothered chickin she had agreed to fix. She looked kind o’ pleased; and then she reached down under one of those up-dumped wooden washtubs and pulled out a big live rooster. "Why!" she said, like she was mighty surprised, "Ain't you smothered yet, you no-'count chickin? Folkses, I put him under that there tub this mornin' in plenty of time, and I figgered he'd sure be smothered good by now --- but he ain't even dead yet --- tehe! Well, you-all will Just have to wait till I git him done good, that’s all there is to it!"
And they did wait, the whole christenin’ party, till Granny killed and picked and cooked that chickin and a few more along with it. She smothered 'em, too, just as she'd promised. But she'd had her joke on 'em, and she kept sort o’ laughin’ all the time the chickin's was cookin', and every little while she'd wink at me on the sly. She knew a lot, that old woman--- a lot more then I'll ever know, and about things deeper than I'll ever get to.
Of course, so far as I'm concerned myself, there are a lot of things I don't know. I couldn't even make a wild guess about them. The other fellow can think what he pleases about religion and philosophy and science and politics. But just in my own heart, it kind of suits me to believe that everythin’ in the universe is very much the same as it has always been. It's changed some, of course, and it's always changin’. But then, we're pretty smell ourselves.
I'm comin’ to believe that there's not much in the whole universe but some kind of electricity, or magnetism or chemistry. You can call this force the cosmic ray. I like that word, "cosmic ray" --- it just suits me. Or maybe it's the electron, or the ion or the atom or themolecule. Make it little and quick. But it's there, and I believe it's always been there. What we see is the same old electricity or chemistry that's always been hoppin’ around in some form or other. But, as I said, I don't never argue with no man about anythin'. He might be right about it.
And I don't talk such things around home, either. It would shock my little daughter. Ah … there's as sweet a little dancer as you ever saw!
It's hard to sift out the most important thing in my life. I'd have to think of it --- there have been so many. But I might want to do some of the things over again, if I had the chance …Maybe life wouldn't be such a puzzle then.
