Date of writing:	December 20, 1938
Name of interviewed:	Callie Hines (white)
Address:	Snow Hill, N. C.
Occupation:		Widow
Name of writer:	Christine Taylor
Name of reviser:	Frank H. McDonald
CALLIE HINES
About four miles from Snow Hill there is atwo-room house which looks as though it has been abandoned. No trees grow near it; the only sign of foliage is weedswhich grow on each side of the house. The first thing thatcatches the eye is a small room about six by six feet whichjuts out in front. Its doors are gone; the floor boardshave fallen apart; the under-pinning is made of loose bricksand stumps, and it seems about to collapse. In this room arepieces of tin, stovewood and a little corn.
There are no windows in the front of the house, only two doors. The steps have fallen down, and someonehas fashioned crude ones by placing boards over bricks. Near the doors there are many holes in the floor. Long agothere was a porch but now it has fallen away, leaving only afew planks sticking out.
The only sign that anyone lived there was chickenswhich roamed in and out the small room, and neighbors' pigs, which wandered through the yard. The yard was clean except foran old tub, a chair and a few corncobs. After blowing my hornseveral times, I was about to drive away when a boy of aboutthirteen appeared from the back yard. Close behind came agirl of about nine, but when she saw me she ducked. When theboy came to the car I asked for his mother. He said she hadstarted across the field for some pine knots, but he wouldcall her.
Within a few minutes Callie Hines appeared aroundthe corner. She was a rather drab figure in her old-fashionedstaved bonnet, her faded print dress, her old coat which was really a man's overall coat, and her worn-out shoes. Sheappeared tired and careworn, but smiled when she saw me.
She came to the car and after talking a few minutes, glanced into the back seat, saw some clothes I had broughtalong and remarked, "Um, you all must be gonna help somebodythis Christmas."
"Callie, they're for you," I told her.
In response, she yelled, "Grace, come here andsee what the lady has brought you." Then she and the littlegirl got in the car and held the clothes up to see if theyfitted Grace.
"I'm shore happy over these clothes," she said."I'm always thankful for anything people can do for me. Don'tget a chance to sew much now and what I do sew has to be donewith my fingers."
"Some of them aren't so good." I told her. "They aresame old clothes my little girl has outgrown and I had storedin a trunk."
"Oh, they'll be all right," she replied, "'causeanything is good enough around here. I hope I'll soon beable to get me a stove that won't smoke. I try to keepwhat little clothes we have clean, but it's a hard job, withme having to tote water from Mrs. Briley's or go down thereto wash. Then ironing with the flatiron nearly breaks medown on account of my high blood pressure. It's not as highas it was last year when it got to 175.
"The worst feelings I ever had was last year when I worked in Snow Hill. I was living at another place then, and had to cook for my children, walk five miles and be onthe job by eight o'clock. Then I had to stand on somethinghigh to do the work. I just felt like I was going backwards. Mrs. Smith was so afraid I would fall and hurt myself sheadvised me to stop work andapply for aid to dependentchildren, which I done. So I ain't felt as bad since. Won'tyou all come on and go in? It ain't so awfully clean 'cause I didn't have time to clean nothing 'cept the kitchen thismorning."
The house had only two rooms, which contained twobeds, four chairs, a table, a stove and a few other necessities. It was fairly clean.
"I was raised poor and have always lived poor,"Callie continued, "but I've paid my honest debts and kept mycredit and intend to keep on doing it if I don't have nothing. Some folks is always making debts and never paying them, but Idon't intend to be one of thatkind.
"The first time I ever laid eyes on Mr. Hines," Callie said, "was the time I met him·while I was visitingone of our neighbors by the name of Mrs. Ernest Chase when Iwas twenty. That was in Greene County, but, he was raised in Wilson County. My people were raised at the forks of the Neuse River in Greene County but moved to Wilson. I wasraised there. Later we moved back to Greene County. I hada very quiet childhood since my daddy was a farmer. I didn'tgo off much 'cept to church and. singing, so I didn't knowmany people.
"After we was married on July 27, 1913, my husbanddidn't know how to farm, so he rented himself out as a daylaborer and was paid by the month. The next year he tried farming but we didn't do so well. I'm telling you I had ahard time with my husband. Sometimes he made enough to giveme $25 in the fall to buy a few clothes for the children, buthe never give me anything in the spring 'cept one time when hegive me $5. I was shore surprised. I was pretty mad one fallwhen he didn't give me but $15 and give his mammy his part outof a bale of cotton. I never had no trouble 'bout him drinking. He never got drunk over four or five times while we was married. He throwed all his money away trading dogs and guns. Heseemed to want to trade a gun or dog all the time.
"My husband died five years ago of heart dropsy. He was sick off and on for about a year but was never rightin bed long at a time. Sometimes you'd hear him hassling forhis breath. Death come on him all of a sudden. He was gettingoff a counter down at the store when he fell dead. Since hedied I've had a harder time in some ways and some ways I ain't. I had as hard time then as now 'cept having to go in someplaces. You know, I didn't even know how to go a-trading. If I'd been many a one I wouldn't have gone straight. I'vehad a-plenty of dead troubles which God did, such as myhusband dying and my baby who died three years ago in myarms. I've had a-plenty of living troubles which could'vebeen prevented. I tell you I've had something to go upagainst.
"There's five of us in all but only three of ushere. Grace is nine, Wayland's thirteen and my oldest boy John, who is twenty-four, is his own man and helps me alittle but not much. Used to when he'd come in late atnight he wouldn't call for his daddy, he'd call for meevery time. But right after his daddy died he left homeand ain't stayed home a whole week since. That's thehardest thing I've had to bear but still I can't forsakehim, and I've always prayed that sometime he'd came backto me. He told some people I tried to run him off but Ididn't. I said to him not long ago, 'Son, the only thing I have against you is the way you talk to and about me.' But still I don't feel like he'd let me get down in bed andsuffer.
"Iain't neverknowed what it was to have a good time; I ain'tknowed what it was to enjoy life. For five years after my husband died I didn't buy a piece of new clothto make a dress; 'course some people give me old clothes, but every time I got a little money I had to buy new shoes for the children.
"I was living in one of Mr. Hart's houses when Zebdied. All I could hear was I had to get out 'cause he wantedthe house, but I didn't have anywhere I could move to. Hedidn't put me out but moved another family in the same house, which only had three rooms. Mr. Ham had three children and I hadmy three. I tell you, I just lived in torment. Jim Ham wasalways getting drunk.
"I had a bedroom and Mary had a bedroom. We usedthe same kitchen. She'd cook for her family, then I'd goin the same kitchen and cook our meals. Some nights aneighbor whose husband was on the road would come overwith her five children and make pallets and sleep on them. She was afraid to stay home. There was as many as ten of ussleeping in one room many a-night. We didn't have to pay anyrent, but we did have to buy our wood.
"We moved to this house three weeks ago. You knowthis house wouldn't be so bad if it had some windows, a goodhearth, the back half of the house covered right, and atoilet. We are going to have to pay $4 rent a month which includesour wood. The sad part of it is we might have to move awayfrom here any time. The man who lived here before us stillhas his stove in the other room and says he's coming back. Lord only knows where we'll go. We had such a time gettinghere.
"Lester is sixteen. He worked from January to August, getting his board, room and washing and ironing and$10 a month. I got half of that but had to clothe him outof it. Now, he's quit and has been picking up odd jobs. I ain't made no money since I quit my job 'cept $13 I madeworking in tobacco. Miss Suggs (Welfare agent) was askingme the other day 'bout how much it would take a month for meto live, and I told her 'bout $25. 'Course, I get a fewthings such as flour, raisins and prunes and sometimes asmuch as four pounds of butter, but I have to turn in and useit 'cause I don't have no way of keeping it. Sometimes I useit to make biscuits. I get this from the Welfare. Then I get $11 from the aid for dependent children.
"You know, I certainly have been blessed in nothaving to have the doctor to the children or me 'cept whenmy blood pressure was high. We don't have no money fordoctors' bills and it would hit us mighty hard for any ofus to be sick. My Grace needed glasses last year so theschool helped her get them.
"School is a fine thing and I'm anxious for thesetwo here to finish high school at least."
The boy spoke up then and said, "I don't think Iwant to finish, I don't see no need." The little girl, whois in the third grade, said she'd be glad when school startedagain because she liked to go and wanted to finish.
"You know, I always wanted to go but when I wasjust in the fourth grade my mother died and I had to stayhome and help work," Callie interposed. "I had just gotstarted good, up to where you carry numbers. I had a man teacherand if I could've gone on I would've learned a lot. I'm veryanxious for them to finish but I have my doubts. I reallydidn't see so much need of it till two years ago when I could've got a job if I'd had a high school education. Instead I have to go around looking like a old tramp. I know one thingand that is how to vote and I vote a straight-out Democraticticket every time.
"I certainly do wish there was a church nearby sowe could go. Where we lived at the other place I went almostevery Sunday. I joined the Primitive Baptist at eighteen andwent as long as we was close enough to walk, but we live sofar away now, and besides, we ain't got the clothes I'd like to wearto church. Members of' the church knew my condition and takemy excuse for not going."
Callie likes to talk and she got off on the subjectof Mr. and Mrs. Bunn, who live a short distance away.
"You know, when they got married they lied abouttheir ages to make people think they was young. Now Mrs. Bunn can't get her old age pension 'cause it's wrote onthe certificate. Let me tell you, I don't tell no storyabout my age.
"We don't have many amusements out here. Waylandjust goes to Tom's and plays football and marbles. Gracestays home mostly since there's no girls her age 'round here. The children get a chance to see a picture once in awhile atschool, but you know I ain't never seen a picture show. Seemslike I don't ever feel like spending that money; I alwaysfeel like I need it for something else. I 'scribed to the Progressive Farmer four weeks ago but we ain't had our firstpaper yet. Maybe it's 'cause we had to move. Last night wewent up to Mrs. Grey's. There was a fellow there who talkedand sung so foolish till I got up and come home."
"Are you expecting a very big Christmas, Callie?"I asked her.
Her face lighted up as she answered, "You know, last Christmas Eve a man left a box on our porch full of Christmas stuff--candy, fruit, a doll and some cloth for mea dress. I saw the man as he was leaving; he wore glasses. I have tried my best to find out who brought it, 'cause Ijust wish theyknowed how happy it made me feel."
When I told her as I was leaving how prettily Snow Hill was decorated, and that a group would gatherarounda Christmas tree on Wednesday evening at six-thirtyand sing songs, she said, "Iain't never seen the lightsat Christmas time but once, but I'm shore gonna try toget over there that night."
