Neeley "The Widow" Williams						Jack Kytle,
2 m. from Fayetteville, Ala.					Editorial departments
RIVER WINDOW: PORTRAIT OF POVERTY
The Coosa River curves around Fayetteville like a yellow horseshoe. The backwater from Lay Dam is nearing its head at this point--the bottom is sandy--and huge drum and catfish splash in the deep water. Some fishermen catch them and sell them at a fair profit in Sylacauga, twelve miles to the north. But the woman who is called "The Widow" has been watching them caught for years, without making an effort to catch some of them for herself. She lives with her brood of children in filth and poverty. She begs for what she eats and wears. Her lips are always heavy with snuff. Indeed, the grim companions, Ignorance and Hopelessness, walk heavily at her side.
She has a son, Ranny, who could catch some of the drum and catfish if he tried. He could trade them for meat and flour and lard--yes, even for snuff--but he is a stoop-shouldered, plodding youth who has managed to shift into his twenties without work. And he figures that having shifted this far, he can shift on out to the end.
Neeley, ''The Widow", Williams is a gaunt, slovenly woman. Her gray and tattered cotton dress falls to her bare ankles. Her hands are large and brown, but they are not calloused from toil. In age, she could be anywhere between forty and sixty; her face is expressionless, deeply lined, and drooping. Only her eyes seem alive. They are always narrowed and calculating, as if appraising every person she meets for the gift of a nickel or dime.
She lives with her children in a weathered, pine-board shanty of two rooms; and it is a hovel without cleanliness. In the center of one room sits a wood stove that throws out sufficient soot to keep the faces of both the widow and her brood darkly stained. The stain seems permanent, leaving the impression that none of them ever bathed.
The other room contains two straw-mattressed bunks made of rough pine lumber, and a pallet or so piled carelessly upon the floor. There are no chairs, only nail kegs that have been provided by the community store. There is not even a mirror, which is indeed a blessing; for certainly, no member of the family would care to look upon his, or her, reflected face.
If the people in Fayetteville and Talladega Springs were not kind, the widow and her children could never survive a winter. They are kept fairly warm by old coats and shoes provided by residents in those towns, but even when the cold winds are whipping through the wide cracks in the shanty, the boy Ranny sometimes finds it difficult to gather up the abundant pine wood, which is free to everyone. He much prefers to sit upon one of the nail kegs, elbows on knees, chinless face cupped in bony hands.
Members of this family eat when they manage to gather up enough odds and ends to make a meal. There was a day when Ranny, fired by some unexplained ambition which never returned, seined a large number of carp and bream from a nearby slough. That night every member of the family gorged until they were deathly sick the next day. On another occasion they heard of a hog that was almost dead from some malady; they talked a neighboring farmer into giving it to them, promising not to slaughter it until the malady was cured. They slaughtered the hog that very afternoon, and feasted on the meat for days.
The Widow is known in every hovel where rough, cursing, whisky-soaked derelicts gather on the Coosa. They are done with her now, but they still draw out her past with language that is evil and often nauseating. They are the ones who once kept her supplied with sowbelly, molasses, grease, and snuff.
"That purtiest young'un, hit's mine!"
"Well, God knows I ought'er have one amongst 'em!"
They laugh hoarsely, contemptuously. A woman is paying now in her fading years with bitter poverty and chronic disease, but they are through with her.
On a crisp day in September I talked up from the river along the brush-covered path that leads to her rotting doorsteps. Three bare-legged, begrimed children were playing about the yard. All were in rags, and the smallest of them was wearing only an old jacket. He was stark naked from the waist down.
They all stopped playing as I approached, drawing off into a group to watch me intently. I asked, "Where is your mother?"
No one answered, but the oldest of the group, a girl of about twelve, dashed to the front steps and began yelling, "Ma!--Ma!--Hyar's a man!" The smallest child seemed to take the yelling as a cue, for he began piping in a thin voice, "Dod-dammit-dod-dammit--dod-dammit;" over and over again. He could not have been more than four years old.
I walked on across the weed-grown yard to the steps, to face the gaunt woman who stood framed in the doorway. She looked at me unsmiling, and then she said, "I hain't seen you fer a long time; whar you bin?"
I explained that I was working in Birmingham, and she nodded without interest. She asked at last, "What you wantin' 'round hyar? I don't never sell none now."
After explaining that I was not hunting whisky, I told her, "Neeley, I've come up here to visit a little; I want to sit and talk with you for awhile."
Her eyes mirrored a question, but she did not speak. She slouched to the steps and sat down.
By this time, the ragged children in the yard were clustered about me, staring wide-eyed. One of them demanded, "Gimme a nickel," and then the others took up the chorus. The widow was not slow in joining her brood. She drawled, "Yuh mought give th' young'un somethin' t' git me some 'backer (She calls snuff tobacco), fer I could tawk better then."
I handed the oldest child fifteen cents, and then sat down on the bottom step, I asked, "Where are your other children? There were a couple of girls here the last time I saw you; about fourteen and sixteen."
Her face hardened.
"Damned county men tuk 'em off," she whined, "Tuk 'em t' Birmingham--said I wuzn't fitten t' raise 'em."
"Do you know where they are in Birmingham?," I questioned.
"'Formatory, they tol' me."
(I learned later from residents of the community that one of the girls will finish high school next year. But the other, whose mental condition is bad, has made little progress.)
"Let me see," said, "You have six children in all."
 "Naw, yo're wrong; I had anuther 'un when I lived a piece down the river, but hit died. Hit was fer th' best, fer hit was blind an' scrawny."
"Are the county men going to let you keep the rest of your children?"
"Damned ef I know--don't guess so -- they'll come snoopin' aroun' someday an' take 'em off my hands."
"Well, at any rate," I ventured, "you wouldn't have to take care of them then."
She glanced at me sharply. "I kin look atter 'em." she drawled, "We'll git along."
(Residents of the community had told me how well she looked after the two oldest daughters. She had made plans for them to follow in her early footsteps. A drunken riverman boasted that he could buy either of them for keeps if he had five dollars).
"Neeley," I asked, "how many times have you been married?"
She smiled for the first time--a slow, mirthless smile.
"I ain't complainin' 'bout not gettin' notice from th' men," she whined, "I had 'em runnin' atter me right an' left when I wuz young. I had lots of 'em, but I never lived with but two. One was a Baxley an' the other was a Williams."
"Are they dead?," I interrupted.
"Baxley is dead; t' other 'un, I don't know whar he went."
"Whose children are these?," I asked, nodding toward the two who remained in the yard (the other had one to the community store two miles away with the fifteen cents).
She only looked at me through narrowed eyes. She was still smiling, but she did not answer the question.
"What you askin' all these things fer?," she demanded.
I said, "Maybe I want to write about you in a book."
"Better not put my name in a. damned book," she bristled, and the smile was gone.
The boy Ranny walked aimlessly from, the house, nodded at me, and slouched down the path toward the river.
"Ranny fishing name?," I asked.
"Jes' huntin' some bust-head," she explained. "He stayed drunk fer a week -- lyin' up hyar in bed. Now he's out, an' I hope he don't find no more; but he will. He allus does."
"Maybe he could find a job somewhere and give you some help," I ventured.
She laughed hoarsely. "Hell," she cursed, "he'd run like a black snake of you offered him a job."
We were silent for a moment, watching a sand lizard flash across the yard. Then I asked her, "Neeley, have you always lived on this river."
"I was borned hyar," she replied, "an' I've bin livin' up an' down hit all my life. It's got to whar I couldn't stan' not hearin' it."
"Have you ever seen a picture show?"
"Don't want t' see one."
"What about a radio--ever hear one play?"
"I heer'd one playin' in a store one t over at Talladega Springs, but hit warn't purty. I like a banjer or a gittar."
The conversation was interrupted by the sooty-faced child who had been to the store. She ran into the yard clutching a bag of candy in one begrimed band. She handed her mother a box of snuff with the other, an, the widow lost no time in dumping a plentiful supply into her lower lip.
"Makes me feel fiester than a swig of nigger liquor," she commented.
I rose from the steps, watching her as she raised her fingers to her mouth and spat through them far out into the yard. I said, "I'm glad to have seen you, Neeley; maybe I'll get back up this way before long."
She said, "Ef yuh see Ranny down thar, yuh mought give 'im a dime. I guess he does need a slug purty bad."
I did not see Ranny as I walked down the river path. I saw only the decay and wreckage of life that I bed contacted briefly here.
9/21/38
S.B.J.
