Archie Davidson
(Name changed to Sam Harrison)
Whaleyville, Virginia
The house, a hundred yards off the county road, was an amazing collection of wings and additions. The central portion, a single-story, two room shack, was of substantial construction. On each side on the back, rooms had been added with a mind to utility rather than uniformity; pieced together planks, rough- hewn slabs, and packing box boards had effectively, if unsystematically, sealed the four separate additions from the elements. A single huge chimney of slab and clay separated the solid portion of the dwelling from its fragile, two –room right wing. On looking through the door of the annex, I verified what I had suspected---there was no space for a door between the house proper and its wing on that side.
The sound of creaking bed springs told me that the room was occupied. I stood in the open doorway, trying to adjust my eyes to the gloom of the windowless interior, after the brilliant sunlight.
"Is that you, Sam?" inquired a weary voice from the darkness. It was a woman' s voice
I explained, that I sought Mr Sam Harrison--her husband, I assumed.
"He's down to the creek," she answered in a forced. voice, as though in pain
"Are you sick?" I inquired. "Is there anything I can do?"
"No Nothing. Just a slight spell I git now an' then. I'll be all right."
She told me to go to the kitchen and tell Lucy to call her father. I found Lucy, a tired-looking girl of sixteen, peeling bird-egg size potatoes. She pointed out the path to the creek.
I found Sam Harrison at the water' s edge repairing a shaky hand bridge, which crossed the muddy stream. He was past fifty, I decided, and. he had the deliberate and almost fumbling manner of a man twenty years older Life had. not been easy, his appearance suggested. Prematurely gray, with furrows seaming his hollow cheeks and his forehead, he gave the impression of having been mentally as well as physically worn, His eyes, dull and watery, scanned me without expression; his voice, low and unhurried, greeted me without enthusiasm.
I apologized for disturbing him at the time and offered to wait until he had finished. He laid his tools aside, wiped his brow with a ragged sleeve, and murmured that he would do no more that day. When I explained that I wished to talk with him about farming and his experiences as a farmer, he straightened up swept the desolate- looking wasteland with his gaze, and began speaking.
"This here ain' t my land. Sometimes I'm sorry and sometimes I'm glad. Farmin' ain' t what it used to be. These is hard times They say it' s better over in the tobacco country. I was brung up over near Danville, and I' ve raised plenty of good tobacco on my granddad' s place. Sometimes I wisht I'd never left. I'd go back, I think sometime, 'ceptin' you got to have money and land to raise tobacco, same as anything else. I can't move from here, now, anyway. I got three girls in school in town, and my wife don't want' em changed. Its sort a hard keepin' ‘ em in school, but me and 'Tildy never had much school in', and we want' em to have the advantages we never had. I have six of them, all girls. Sometimes, I git to Wishin' that one was a boy' cause for a farmer it' s mighty hard not to have any boys. But they'se all good children, and they helps out all they can. If' I had my own place I reckon they would give me more help than they do, but Mr. Johnson don' t like to see girls in the field, lessen peanuts is ripenin' during a good market. Then he don't mind if the whole fam'ly goes to pickin'.
Mr Johnson owns all this land. I've been sharin' for him nearly six years now. He's the best man in these parts to share crop for. But times is been gittin' worse ever since I started in here. First year I came to this place I cropped nearly four hundred dollars as my share. Ain' t been no season like that since. Last year the whole crop wasn' t worth no more'n five hundred, Mr. Johnson said, My share was two hundred and six dollars. That Lacked 47 of payin' Mr. Johnson wher go wel him. Haven't been outa debt to him now for four years. He don' t mind carryin' me, though. All I got to do is go to his store in town and sign for whatever I want when I need something. He keeps most everything in the store, even tonics and medicines I try not to run up a bill during the winter, but you know how it is with a man who's got a ailin' wife and six growin' girls to look after. Last winter my Lucy --- she's next to the oldest one---she got pneumonia and I had to it the doctor from town. His bill was $14. 00 and the medicine was $4. 75. The public health nurse come out and looked after her regular, and when Lucy got well, the nurse say she wouldn't let her go out till she had new shoes Mr. Johnson give her a pair and wouldn' t let me sign for them.
"This public health service that the government runs is a great thing for a farmer. I just don't know what we'd of' done if it hadn't been for Nurse Roberts. She been comin' out here every week or two for three years and she say she ain' t supposed to take no pay. It worries me sometime,'cause I like to pay for what I git, even though it ain' t much I can pay.' Tildy, my Wife, has got chronic rheumatism, and soon as the cold weather comes, it knocks her right out. She always try not to show it when a spell has come on, drags herself' round the house gittin' the children ready for school and fixin' my breakfast, but the nurse always seems to know' Tildy was took down bad yesterday and even though it ain' t cold yet, I'm figurin' that Nurse Roberts gonna know and come out here in a day or two.
"'Tildy don't need no doctor,' cause the nurse always know what she needs. She told me private one day that it was the climate that got in' Tildy' s joints, and as long as she stay here she gonna ache in damp weather. Seem like it' always damp. I can't do nothin' 'bout the weather, and it looks like I can' t do nothin' ‘bout movin'‘ long as I stays in debt to Mr. Johnson. It ain' t his fault, though,' cause he does everything he can to help me out. Last winter whilst Lucy was sick he let me help out in his store and paid me two dollars a week. That was a big help, I tell you I'm hopin' he's gonna use me again this winter' cause crops been so poor, but I hope it ain't sickness that makes me need to work for cash. I kinda hate to see this "winter come along.
"Mr Johnson says that the store is all that keeps him goin'. He says that the day of the small farmer is past. Got to farm by machine in order to show a profit, and he says you can't do nothin' lessen you got a thousand acres or so.
"I reckon you might like to hear 'bout the farm I was buyin',' bout eight years ago. Seventeen and a quarter acres it was, 'cross the railroad, with good top soil and timber. It belonged to a White man named Simpson, who dropped dead in the field one day, while he was hoein' sweet potatoes I was new here then and had 'bout a hundred dollars, so his widder sold me the farm for $20 00 a acre, $345, 00 with $75.00 paid cash down. Her son, Henry Simpson the undertaker, fixed up a note at the bank for me for $310.00, payable in three years; the 'greement was that I got all the land 'ceptin' a single acre that the house stood on. You see, the old lady still lived there Well, the first season I made out pretty good and paid up $110.00 on the note,$10.00 more than I was s'posed to pay. Things was lookin' good. I done fixed up the barn for a house for my wife and children" and I was hirin' a mule from a neighbor. The next spring I planted five acres in peanuts, two more'n I planted the season before. Durin' the summer it looked like I got a better crop, too, than the first one. That was, till the rains come Don't know whether you was in these parts in'33 or not; but if you was, you must a'bout the big flood Rained. for three days straight, and the water backed up in all the streams cross the banks onto the lowlands. You see, all this land round here is below sea level, and it's all right' long as don' t no flood come. But when the creek overflows, the water runs down in the lowlands and lays there till it dries up. Durin' that time most all of my peanuts lied under a foot of water. when the water dried up there wasn't more'n half a crop that wasn't rotted and washed out wasn' t$30..worth of peanuts in the field.
"I went to Mr. Henry and explained the situation and asked him to postpone the note. First he said he would do it, but later on he came and told me there was nothin' he could do,' cause the bank had the note. I went to the bank, but they say there was nothin' they could do " and that I still had thirty days grace to pay the money. Every other farmer was in the same fix as I was, and I couldn' t git no money to pay. One day Mr. Henry come to me and tell me that he didn't me want the sheriff to put me off, so he would buy the place back and give back $25.00 of the money I had paid for it Said too that I could stay on in the barn for a year and work shares for him. Well, it seemed like at the time there wasn' t anything else to do. I signed the farm over to him and went ahead workin' on shares' stead of all for myself. Before the next crop was in Mr. Henry come out and told me I' d have to move,' cause the county done bought the place. From him and was gonna run a new road through right where the barn was. I moved over here on Mr Johnson' s place, then. After I' d moved Mr Johnson told me. that Mr Henry knew' bout the road all the time and that' s why he made the bank take up my note. he said that Mr. Henry sold a strip of that farm to the county for a thousand dollars.
"But I ain't no one to cry over spilt milk. I'm gettin' old now, and I don't reckon I'm ever gonna git a place of my own. Couldn't do much with it if I had one, I don't reckon. but I ain't so bad off as I might make it seem. All the farmers in these parts is havin' hard times, those that share crop and those that's got their own places. Seems like whenever the crops is good, the prices is down; and whenever the crops is poorly, the prices go up Fertilize eats up most of the profits from a farm these days Used to be a time when a load of good rich manure was all your land needed, but now you got to feed it chemicals before you can grow a. crop worth sellin'. One of these government agents who came through here told Mr. Johnson that this soil wasn' t nothin' but dirt, not even fitten' to,  row alfalfa.
"I ain't got no complaint 'bout the way Mr. Johnson treats me, though. Now and then he sends down clothes and shoes that his children has outgrown. My wife picks up odd jobs, cookin', sewin', and cannin' now and then, whenever she is able. Mabel, my eldest child, had a job last spring after school mindin' the baby for a white lady. She made a. dollar a week. She's hopin' to git it back this winter.
"Even if I ain' t got no home of my own for my girls, we all gits along tol'able well They're good girls, without none of those city ways that young folks take style in nowdays. We all go to church. I'm a deacon in the Baptist Church, and all the girls go to Sunday School.
"Sometimes I wish that I could s git a job in the city so's I could do better by my girls Last month I heard they was taking on men in the lumber yard in Suffolk. I went right over there, but the man said they had all the men they needed. Someone told me that the government paid relief to people who wasn't able to find steady work, but I don't reckon I need charity yet awhile. All I want to do is hang on here till my girls is full grown and gits homes and families of their own. The only thing is, I hope don't none of them marry farmers But soon as they git fixed, I figure that me and' Tildy can git along somehow."
ARCHIE DAVIDSON -- Va.--
Tenant farmer -- wife sickly -- six children -- three in school -- wants children to enjoy advantages denied parents-- landlord doesn't like to see his girls in field – unless peanuts is ripening during a good market --would like to move to tobacco country -- but has been in debt to landlord for past four years -- county health nurse has been big aid --nurse says wife needs change of climate for change of health-unscrupulous trader gets farm he had half paid for –never expects to own land -- land is worn out --deacon in church -will bang on till girls are married and have families.
COMMENT --This story has excellent material. As it now stands it is rather short. Suggest expansion principally along lines of earlier work history t with word or two about his parents. (( A little revision on first and second page can be done in this office.))
