Athens, Georgia
157 First Street
Mr. J.H. Emerick (white)
Mr. L.L. Emerick (white)
Miss Grace McCune, writer
Mrs. Sarha H. Hall and
Mrs. Leila Harris, revisers
THE FISHEHMEN
Mr. H.J. Richards and his son, Lee, had promised to relate their adventures as fishermen, if I would come to their home at a given hour. The rain was coming down in torrents as I started out to keep the appointment. The taxi crossed the river, left the paved road and turned a sharp curve that led up a steep hill. It seemed to me that every time the car progressed one foot, it slipped back two, and there were times when I was sure we would soon land in the river at the bottom. But the driver only laughed and said, "We'll make it. I've already pulled this hill several times today."
He was right. He did make it, after several attempts, and I drew a breath of relief as we reached our destination. Mr. Richards, and Lee, were checking over their fishing equipment under a long shed in the back yard. I had never known before that their trade necessitated the use of so many different gadgets. In widespread array under the shed were countless lines, corks, poles, baskets, traps, and things that I was unable to identify. The baskets that were carried along to receive the fish were not creels to these fishermen. They were simply fish baskets. Their equipment included no item more interesting to me than the camp stove, which they explained was made of the steel rims of wagon wheels. Its frame was about eighteen inches high and each of the many crosspieces were placed to form a rack for a specific utensil. A clever device held the coffeepot so steadily that there was no danger of its turning over. They assured me that with a good fire under their home-made stove, camp cooking presented no problems.
Picking up an enormous coffeepot that was blackened from use over many fires, Mr. Richards said:
"This old coffeepot has been with us on so many fishing trips that its just like an old friend. I wouldn’t know how to get along on a trip without it. Fishermen like their coffee and plenty of it. We always try to be as comfortable in camp as possible, and after all these years I think I have learned to live in camp with as little inconvenience as anyone else can. We have a good tent, and just look at these nice camp cots! With our good warn blankets we sleep mighty well on those cots. Why, we even take plenty of dishes along. Of course they are mostly tin and aluminum cups and plates, for they can be hauled around without danger of breaking.
"Did you come out here in all this rain just to hear us talk about fishing?" inquired my host. "How would you like to go fishing with us today?"
"No, thank you," was my answer to the second question after affirming the first. "Fishing is one thing that I don’t like to do because I just can’t be still long enough to catch a fish," I told them, "and camping out makes me restless and uneasy."
"Now, tell the truth,” my host teased, "did you ever really try either one?"
"Only one time, and that was with my dad," I said, "and I didn’t enjoy the trip a "bit."
"I don’t see why," he insisted. "Your dad enjoyed a good fishing trip as much as anyone I ever knew. I can’t see why it wouldn't be good sport for anyone."
"Well," I admitted, "maybe you are not as much afraid of snakes as I am."
This brought a hearty laugh from each of the fishermen and Lee remarked, "Just like a woman."
A few weeks before this visit, Mrs. Richards had given me a story of the mill village. She heard us laughing and came out to the shed.
"What are they doing to you?" she wanted to know. "They must be showing you the fishing worms."
"Why, she'd be scared of 'em," laughed Lee, "she has already admitted she's afraid of snakes. Imagine that!"
"Talking about women," Mr. Richards began, "just look at this new fish basket of mine with all the bottom cut out."
"Yes, and I did it," admitted his wife. "He left the basket in the chickenyard and one of hens got in it to lay and she couldn't get out.
I tried and tried to get her out but couldn't, so I just cut the bottom out."
"Just listen to her," spluttered Mr. Richards. "My fish basket is worth two or three old hens."
"But just loot here!" answered Mrs. Richards, "The hen's still alive and laying, and you can out another bottom in your basket and it'll be good as new. Nothing lost all the way around."
"Why don't all three of you come on in the house to the fire?" she continued, and turning to me she laughingly said, "Tell him he's too old to be out in the rain and cold."
I was afraid to say anything in response to that. Mr. Richards really did not look old to me he and his son were dressed alike, in overalls and high top boots and there did not seem to be very much difference in their ages if appearance was to be the basis of judgment. He is a tall and very erect man, apparently about fifty years old. "Don't mind Mammy," he said, "She's just reminding me that I was seventy-five yesterday."
Sure that they were teasing, I laughed. "It's a fact," he grinned. "Yesterday was my birthday, and I really am that old, but I don't feel my age. At least, not today! Come on. Let's go in the house. I want you to eat a piece of my birthday cake. In fact I had two cakes. My daughter brought me one, and, of course, Mammy cooked one for me. But, you know, neither one of 'em put any candles on 'em. I guess they just hated to remind me too much of my age.
"It was a nice birthday, for we were all here at home together. I even got to eat one of Mammy's hens for dinner. I'd like to think it was the one that got in my new fish basket, but of course she wouldn't have killed that one for anything."
As we started in the house, I remembered my last visit here, and the delicious dinner I had enjoyed with this family, and now I regretted the sandwich I had hastily swallowed, instead of my usual lunch, before leaving town. We went in the house through the kitchen door and as the tempting aroma from the stove reached my nostrils, I knew I would never be able to resist an insistent invitation to remain for the noon meal.
A bright fire in the grate warmed the bedroom where we sat. Lee turned on the radio to get the news broadcast, and for a few moments quiet prevailed as we listened to the account of a tornado in the southern part of the State.
"One day last week it seemed like we were about to be blown away," Mr. Richards said, and anticipating the "Where?" that I was about to utter, he continued, "No, we wasn't anywhere around here. As the Negroes say, 'hit was way down in Greene County.'
"Surely you didn't go that far in a boat?" I managed to edge in my question.
"You evidently don't know your old Oconee River, or me, either, very well," he answered. "Why I've been as far as Milledgeville, Georgia, in my boats many times."
"How do you manage about the dams?" I asked, and immediately I regretted the question for both men laughed as they replied in unison, "Go over them."
Mr. Richards explained. "We carry our boat on a truck to a point just below the factory dam to put it in the water, and after you pass the cemetery bridge there is no snore trouble with dams. But speaking of the old factory dam, have you ever been around it?"
I acknowledged that I had never been around the dam. "Then you should," he continued, "and see those old pot holes, as they call them. Some of those old holes are all of eighteen inches deep and have been hollowed out in solid rock. They are supposed to have been made by Indians for cooking in. I've been seeing 'em there ever since I was a little child, just large enough to follow my daddy around. I guess it was from my daddy that I got my love of fishing and hunting."
Mrs. Richards came to the door. "Come and eat dinner now," she said, "and then you can talk all the evening."
My insistence that I had already had lunch was not accepted. "Why, you were here before eleven o'clock and now it's one. I know you are hungry," protested Mrs. Richards. "Besides when we all get down to talking this afternoon you'll wish you had eaten with us. Anyway, Grandpa wants you to have some of his cake." The dinner with its accompanying slices of birthday cake was delicious. When I was enjoying the well-cooked chicken, I did not give a thought to whether or not it was the one that had ruined the fish basket.
When we had reassembled around the bedroom fire I inquired about their recent fishing trip in Greene County.
"Well," Mr. Richards sold, "We started out on the eleventh day of January and it was the seventeenth of February when we got back home. We hadn't inteneded staying that long, but we got caught by high waters and couldn't make the trip back in our boat until the river was at more normal height. I don't think I ever saw any harder rain, and the wind was terrible. There were several times when I thought our tent would go in spite of all we could do. It would have blown away if we had been up on a hill, for trees were just torn up by their roots. Being down near the swamp land, the thick growth of trees around our camp protected us I guess. I'm still wondering why some of those trees around us didn't blow over on our tent.
"No, we didn't have any luck on this trip. Usually we put out our traps on creeks and rivers to catch minks and muskrats, but the streams were so swift and high that we couldn't put out many traps, and in all that time --- more than a month --- we only got about four minks and a few muskrats. We caught enough fish to eat, and varied our meals with squirrels and rabbits. Oh, we always have plenty to eat! The hardest thing was to get enough dry wood to keep our campfires going, and we sure needed a good big one to keep us dry and warm on that trip, not to mention how necessary it was for cooking. But you know there's always a way to go ahead if you just try hard enough, and we came through it all right in spite of the bad weather. I'll have to admit, I don’t like to be out on camping trips when the weather is that bad.
"Fishing ain't what it used to be. I've seen the time when I could make good money at fishing and hunting. It was no trouble at all to sell all the fish and game we could bring in. Automobiles have changed all that, just as they've changed a good many other things, even to the railroads. Yes, mam, automobiles have done plenty to cripple the business of the railroad, as well as to make it hard for a local fisherman to make a living at that work."
"Just how have automobiles affected fishing?" I asked.
"Well, 'most everyone, or at least the majority of the people own one of the things and they can just hop in 'em and without any trouble go out and spend a day fishing and hunting, and in that way they can bring in their own fish and game, or could until they destroyed so much of the fish and game that now they are getting right scarce. You know it doesn't take you long to go a good many miles over these good roads in a car. I can remember the days when it would have been next thing to impossible to get near a riverbank with a wagon end team, unless you counted the few places where there might be a bridge. But now, you can ride up to the banks of the rivers most anywhere you want to in your automobile. And just look at the freight trucks as well as passenger busses on the highway. Some of those trucks are hauling fish from Florida and the Georgia coast, and many a passenger on those busses is headed toward some place he expects to get lots of fun fishing.
"No, there ain't any profit much in fishing any more. We have to take out a fishing license in every county where we want to fish and a hunting license too if we want to do any hunting and trapping. Worst of all they won't let us sell game any more. And the way that folks have been fishing around here has exhausted the supply in the river until I actually believe this county has less fish than any other county in Georgia."
My next question was one that usually brings some lively words from fishermen, but these men probably knew well enough that I had no knowledge of the sport, and when I asked, "What do you use for bait?" there was none of the excitement that usually prevails around hunting blubs when such a question is brought up.
"Well, that is according to how you fish, and what kind of fish you are after mostly," Mr. Richards began. "Just the common old fish bait worm is especially good for pole fishing as a general rule. Of course, some fishermen like those kind of bait that you buy. I mean those odd little flies and other artificial bait. I'd rather get my own bait, and there are plenty of different kinds that I like to use. One is the catawba worm, or catalpa, as some spells if now. It used to be just plain old catawba, and the only place I ever was able to get them was off of catawba trees.
Did you ever see any catawba trees?"
"Yes," I replied, "I saw them in North Carolina, but I did not know there were many in Georgia."
"Why, I've got some catawbas right out in my back yard," he said. "But you are right, there are more in North Carolina, and they tell me the Catawba River in North Carolina was given that name because there are so many of these trees along its bank. I put out my trees especially to get the worms for fishing. Plain, common old grubworms make good fish bait tool Ground puppies are good, but hard to get."
I had not the remotest idea of what ground puppies were, and I was afraid to ask, as they had already had too many laughs at my expense. My expression must have shown my curiosity for Mr. Richards asked:
"Did you ever see any ground puppies?"
I hesitated end then meekly admitted, "I don't know whether I ever saw any or not, for I don't know what they are."
They were all having a grand time over my ignorance, "but I had started out to learn something about fishing, as a local business, and so I took it like a good sport and laughed with them.
"Didn't you ever go to school?" Lee asked.
"Yes," I replied, "and I think I've owned at least one dog of almost every breed, but I guess I just didn't ever own a ground puppy."
As I had expected, this brought a yell from them, and I realized I had managed to guess "wrong" again, so I achieved a sickly grin, and meekly begged to be told just what a ground puppy was it was a few seconds before their laughter subsided enough for the old gentleman to hold his sides and steady his voice enough to tell me that a ground puppy is a species of worm.
"Don't let them get the best of you," said Mrs. Richards after she had joined her husband and son in their glee at my expense.
"I'm not, at least I'm trying not to," I readied, "but they seem to be doing it just the same. If a ground puppy is a worm, I want to know what kind of worm it is."
"It's really more like a lizard than a worm," Mr. Richards said. "We find them under old rotten logs on the riverbanks, but the swamps ore the best places to hunt for them. There are many different kinds of ground puppies. The ones we get around here are mostly a dark blue in color and are just about three inches long. But down in Greene County most of them are striped, dark blue and white, and I believe are just a little larger than the ones that grow around here. One puppy makes shout two good bait. They have slime on them much like snails. Another variety of these ground puppies is found in dryer places and is a dark reddish color. I don't like to fool with 'em as they are so hard to find. I don't know where they got the name of ground puppies, but that's all I ever heard them called.
"A few years ago when fish were more plentiful we really could catch them in basket traps. When we fish with baskets, that means baiting the basket and putting it in the water, tied to something on the bank to keep it from floating away. It's against the law now to operate the old fish basket trap. The best bait I ever put in those old baskets was spoiled cheese, and I learned that after using baits of many different kinds. Cooked muskrat is a good bait, and most any kind of raw meat does very well. Grasshoppers make fine bait for hook and line fishing with a pole, but it sure takes a long time to catch enough grasshoppers to do much fishing with, and it is only the live grasshopper that is especially good.
"Did you ever see anyone run a trotline?" Mr. Richards asked, and added, "By that, I mean did you ever see anyone operate a trotline?"
Remembering little about the one and only fishing trip I had ever made, I was uncertain about what reply to make, but as they were expecting me to say something, I asked if it was a strong line extended across a stream to which the fishing lines were attached, and for once it seemed that I was at least partly right.
"Well, you do know a little, don't you?" my host laughed. "When we are running trotlines we put them out and bait them at night and as a rule don't go back to them until the next morning."
"How long have you been fishing?" I wanted to know.
"Well, now let me think," he solemnly said. "I've been fishing ever since I have been big enough to follow around after my daddy. He was a great fisherman. I've fished in all the streams in this county, as well as in the nearby counties. I've fished up and down this old Oconee River until I know it like a book. Like in every other undertaking, I've had bad luck and good luck in fishing. Many's the time I’ve gone to look at my trotlines in the morning and found all my hooks gone.
"You'll find some interesting things on the banks of the old Oconee. In one place there's a very large Indian mound. It has been there so long that large trees are growing on it. I heard a few days ago that the government is going to open it and see what is in it."
"What kind of fish do you catch around here?" I asked.
"Well, catfish, minnows, and perch mostly, not to sneak of the suckers, and now and then you find some right nice bass in the fresh water lakes. The largest fish I ever caught around here was a blue cat that weighed twenty-one pounds.
"As long as you don't do any fishing, I'll tell you this; fish are just like women. When they get excited and scared they are apt to do anything. Why, I've even had then jump in the boat."
"Is that just a fish story?" I asked, "or is it an actual fact?" "I believe you're learning," he grinned, "but I have really had that to happen, but I admit, not often it was on one of our fishing trips out near Little Rock, Arkansas, that I landed the largest fish I ever caught, and this is no yarn either, it's the truth; that fish weighed near-a little over seventy-five pounds. Was I excited? Now, I really believe that you don't know anything about fishing, for anyone that has ever fished would know that it is the ambition of a fisherman to catch a big fish, and I don’t know which was the most excited, the fish, me, or my little dog."
As he mentioned "dog," the small yellow and brown dog lying at his feet raised her head to look at him. He reached down and patted its head saying: "No, it wasn't this one. That one is dead, but you can laugh if you want to, for it was just a little shaggy poodle, but she was one good sport. Even if she was little, she would follow me wherever I went. Lots of times I’ve had to carry her because she was too small to keep up with me. About the only time I ever saw her scared was one day when a big fish I had hooked and was trying to pull in leaped out of the water and landed on top of her while she was sound asleep on my old coat in the bottom of our boat. Poor little thing! She gave a yelp end jumped overboard." He laughed heartily, and continued, "You know, I thought I never would be able to coaz her to swim back to the boat, although I knew how bad the pitiful little thing did hate to get wet. Finally I got her back, wrapped her up in my coat, and we quit fishing for the day.
"How I did love to seine! You've see the long nets that were used for that, I know. Crowds of us would go on big fish fries and we would pull in the seines with enough fish for all. They would be so fresh and good caught that way just in time to cook them for dinner. I never did much fishing with gill nets, or floating nets, as some called ’em. Its against the law to use seines and gill nets now, even in the open fishing season.
"July and August are the best times for fishing around here and that is when I just can't stay away from camp. My greatest pleasure is fishing on a camping trip. I love the water and am happiest when I’m in a little boat on the river.
"We have only two children: my son here, and a daughter, and they are 'most as bad about fishing as I am. Lee will be just like me. In fact, he is now. When he is not working at his trade as a house painter, you'll find him off somewhere on the river fishing or hunting. My daughter is a good fisherman and can handle a boat like a man, and that son of hers --- my only grandson in all my five grandchildren --- loves fishing. I started taking him along on fishing trips when he was very small."
"Is your trapping very profitable?" I asked.
"Sometimes, yes," he replied, "but many varieties of game have become too scarce to have much commercial importance. We still ship a good many fox pelts. In fact foxes are really getting bad and something is going to have to done about that or the country will soon be overrun with them.
Coons and 'possums are still plentiful. Did you ever go hunting?" he inquired.
"Once," I replied, "bud it was only a rabbit hunt and I didn't catch anything."
"Did you expect to catch 'em or kill 'em?" he retorted.
"My "brother killed several that day," I replied.
"Yes,” he said, ”I knew your brother. We used to go on fishing trips together. He was a good sport, always ready to do his part, in work or play.
"My daddy was a member of one of the old volunteer fire companies, and it was from him that I inherited my love for fishing and hunting, and I followed him in service with the fire companies too. I belonged to the 'Dirty Dozen," that was what they called the Bloomfield Hose and Reel Company No. 4. There were several different companies, all trying to outdo the other, but it was good-natured competition, end we had some great times. I still have a medal given my father in 1873 for his good service with his company.
"Back in those days there were two big cisterns for rain water on the main street, and it took two men to handle each of the old hand pumps that sent the water through the hose to the fire. Some of the Negro fire companies did good work in those days of the volunteer units. I stayed on with the fire fighters for about three years after they were organized into a paid department, and then I gave it up and went on a fishing trip.
"And I also worked at the waterworks plant here for years. Yes, you're right, I've been on the police force too. That was when policemen walked. There were nineteen men on the force at that time and the only two horses we had were for the use of our captain and chief. I well remember when they bought the first automobile for the police department. We were all supposed to learn how to run it, but do you know, I've never learned to this good day how to run an automobile and I don't guess I ever will. I could start it all right, but when it came to turning around, or backing, I was out of luck. I wasn't the only one like that. There were several of the boys on the force then that never learned to run that automobile.
"I just couldn't stay on the force long, for it's just not in me to work when I can't yet out and go when I want to, and I can't stay off the old river long at a time, even if I'm not making much at my fishing. However, we have all this land here, and in season we sell the vegetables that we raise. We have two cows, and we raise our own hogs, and plenty of chickens. In fact, it's almost like being out in the country, and that's what I like, for I'd rather have the peace and contentment that comes from independence than riches any day.
"Every summer we camp for weeks at a time, spending most of the time fishing, and how we do enjoy it. Oh, yes, we usually attract a crowd. We always have company over the week-ends. They come out on Saturday nights after they get off from work, and if we’re not too far out, they stay over until Monday morning. When our camp is too far away for that, they have to leave us Sunday night.
"We always prepare in advance for a big crowd Saturday night. That's where our fish baskets come in handy for we can keep fish alive in them for days at a time. There are times when most all campers --- even good campers --- get tired of fish and want other things to eat. It's no trouble at all to get plenty of fruits, vegetables, chickens, eggs, butter, and milk from the farmers for they come peddling their produce at our camps."
Lee came back to the room. "You are going to have to spend the night with us," he announced.
"Why?" I asked.
"Because it's raining so hard you will not be able to get off this hill tonight."
"What time is it?" I asked, and was surprised to learn that it was past five o'clock. "Well, I can get a taxi," I began.
"Want to bet on that? asked Lee.
Mr. Richards said, "Those taxi drivers don't like to try this hill after it really gets wet, and lots of water has fallen since you got here this morning."
I tried for an hour but neither of the taxi companies would send a car up the hill for me, and it was a long distance to the bus line. However, I decided to try to walk it, and anyway I didn't much like the idea of riding down that hill after my experience in ascending it earlier in the day. I made ready to go, and thanked them for their hospitality and the fishing lore.
"How about coming back and going fishing with us this summer?" asked Mr. Richards. "Lee and I'll teach you to fish, and we'll show you all the different sorts of bait and how to handle 'em, and we especially promise to show you some ground puppies." I smiled but made no promise.
"Wait just a few minutes," insisted Lee, as I started down the front steps. Until that instant, I don't believe any of them had believed that I would actually venture out into the downpour and attempt the walk to the bus line. Lee continued, "I see a car that belongs to one of my friends out at our store, and if it is him, I'll ask him to give you a ride into town."
Lee quickly returned. "That was my friend," he said, "And he'll be glad to have you ride to town with him. He said tell you he's ready to go whenever you are."
"Good-bye!" they called as I entered the car. "Don't forget you're going fishing with us this summer!" I thanked then, and settled back in the car thinking of what a hilarious time they would have trying to teach me to fish, in case I should get reckless enough to undertake another fishing trip.
The Fisherman	Ga,	Excellent
Island fisherman and trapper - effect of automobiles had on this type fishing-discussing fishing - changes in fishing - trapping - past occupational experience - fish fries for customers.
Names of persons but not places changed.
