COPY
Robert E. Maynard
May 30, 1939
Paris, Tennessee
Two and one half miles from Springville, Tennessee, you turn off a deserted road, through gullies, etc. and come to a shack sitting high up on a hill, it is a sight for soil erosion work, and the only way to reach there is horseback or fly. or else walk, climbing hills until you are utterly exhausted.
You come to a high dry almost deserted hill and out in an open field, with only a few bushes around for shade trees are the family of Wm. A. Maynard. The house is a small room with a leanto or kitchen on the side. No doorstep, one small window with a shutter over it to pen back and let in the light, one door, and a rough floor of strips and holes throughout. The kitchen has a dirt floor and is just a few strips or palings tacked up to form a sort of room or pig sty. The upper part of the wall is open in the kitchen in places large enough to throw a barrell through easily. The roof has gaping holes reaching easily skyward and is easily seen in spots forming a sieve almost like a wheat screen as there are so many holes in it. The roof in the house proper or official living and bedroom has a board or shingle roof of such a stage of deterioration there might not be a roof as far as keeping out the elements are concerned. Rain, snow and wind have free rein herein. Truly it is a sight seldom seen where people might live, horses have more protection in barns than this place has also.
Inside the room are two old discarded rough, iron bedsteads, and one old dilapidated cot, the sheets made of bedsacking are brown with dirt and filth. One old homemade table with a small portable victrola on it covered with a once white scarf, no sign of a book or paper to be seen anyplace is evident. One old broken chair was there with the seat wired together. A few old packing boxes were used for seats.
In the kitchen was a box of dirty fruitcans, a few old blue dirty dishes of thick pottery and broken chips on them as well. The stove was an old stepstove that had been in water and was rusty with the eyes gaping, rusted stove pipe joints, it was a pitiful sight and a fire hazard, A few old rusty pans and broken cooking ut ensils hanging on the wall was the remnants of the kitchen furnishings with the exception of a packing box with slats knocked out which was used for a table.
The mother of this family is named Mary Dehart Maynard, she came from Benton County, and is 39 years of age. She had on a crude looking outfit, shoes belonging to some man wired together to hold them on and mismated, both for the same foot. The frock was a series of them, some torn one place and some another all held on by the grace of God it seemed and not the shred of cloth they contained, but all seemed to make a fair covering nevertheless. An old shirt ragged and showing glory when she bent forward finished her attire with the exception of an old man's felt hat on her straggling light brown hair with streaks of dirt showing in it, as if it had not been shampooed since her birth.
The husband Wm. A. is 42 years of age, with a shaggy beard, needing a shave badly, an old pipe in his mouth, an old cap on, hair needing cut, straggling in his eyes and a slouchy dirty pair of overalls and ragged shirt, worn out shoes finished his attire, he is a weak looking sickly type of man and shiftless looking indeed.
The boy Robert had an old ragged pair of overalls on, a ragged shirt, hair creeping all over his head and in his eyes, delicate, illiterate looking indeed, age almost 20 now who has just completed a term in the CCC and very anxious to get in again. He was sick and his mother said he had the glanders she rekined.
The next oldest child James Capliner, called Cap for short, is about the size of Robert, lazy looking age 17 and wants to get in CCC. He had on an old Woolen CCC shirt and blue overalls, an old felt hat and worn shoes as well.
The girl Annie Myrtle 15 years of age, is a peculiar specimen, she is fat, redheaded hanging in her eyes, freckled faced, barefooted with mottles all over her feet and legs, her torn skirt and old shirt hid part of her filthy dirty skin, she looked to be in the 4th or 5th month of pregnancy. She kept her head down and peered up with a downcast look, of shame or sulleness.
A boy Jessie Vernon age 11, Hildon Eugene 9, Charles Mozelle 7 and David Junior most 4 completed the family. The little boys with the exception of the baby were in dirty ragged overalls and barefooted, dirty, it would take a barrell of water to get each one clean Indeed, flies swarming around over them. The baby boy had on an old dress without any pants and when we entered was lying on the bed alseep with the flies completely swarming over him. His rear looked black with flies and at first took it to be dirt but when they began to spread like a swarm of bees on his awakening we saw it was a mixture of both.
They had a little truck patch, a few plants of beans, a few stalks of corn and none of them were working but just lounging around. The yard was full of flies swarming as thick as bugs do after a light at night. There was a foul odor about the place and all of them that much lyle soap indded would be needed to erase.
This leanto or side of it rather held an old style shelf which was made into a chicken nest or series of them and shaded with tree branches of sassafras to protect them from the sun, 4 or 5 old hens were on them and did not stir midst the excitement, they were too weak.
A poor old horse so weak it could hardly stand to graze with the sides sticking out, and old ground slide with the little weak cat lying underneath was a completion of the picture.
The part hound and part German police dog was a finis to the picture and his sides were so poor the ribs could be counted easily, he was so very weak he could hardly walk, but ran rabbits for his very existence.
"We been living here bout two months now, comed here in March, moved to Springville last December from Lake County, an got a place most as bad as this not fer back over here and they made us move out in March. My man he found this old place didn't nobody live at an he found it belonged to an old nigger woman Mary Tharpe at Paris so he went to town and rented it from her for $3.00 a month. We had planned for Robert to stay in Camp then though. Now he got out in April and I jest don't know how we can pay the rent. It's sech a depressed time for us too. He jest ain't able to work none, been sick with the glanders I rekin for a few days and he's sorta weak too. Never wuz a healthy boy nohow. I wuz a Dehart and comed from Benton county, we've lived frum piller to post ever since we been together. Havin chillun don't hurt me nar bit nohow. I'm soon gonna have another un, never did have a Doctor jest some old granny woman and if I can't git that, then jest do the very best I kin is all. Myrtle she helped me with the lastun. Is good enuff. I'm mighty feared she is in that way by Cap her brother thar but she won't tell me none. They all has to sleep together, not enuff beds for us all. Sorta has to divide up, for all 9 of us. We was in the flood, you see, and we lost everthing we had in Lake County had to be carried out in a skiff. we never did git nothin back only what we picked up from what folks give us jest anything we can git fer clothes or anything else to git back is all.
'"We shore needs help and that bad. We aim to try to make a crop on this 35 acres here, pore as it is, to try to git enough stuff to raise an feed us on next winter to keep us from being lean, I don't mind having chillun and think it's the thing for a woman to do. I can't read nor write an none of ray chillun can neither but Robert sorta can spell his name a little with what you tahgt him is all* He can't read neither." The mother looked almost asleep all the while she was talking, and enjoyed having her picture made. She picked up the globes as they finished with them of the flesh and said she'd put them in the house for pretties, the first she ever seen."
Mr. Maynard, "I wisht Cap thar he could git in CCC, He is a big healthy husky feller and needs it. we need all he can make too, all of us does, Robert thar was always too lazy to live most. He's jest sickly. We been use to the mosquitoes whar we comed from, and lots of things like that, sorta a funny place to live too, Bedbugs too. Flies don't bother us none we air use to em and never had no screens in my life either. Now I was raised up the river town here from Danville, back in the swamps and never did have no schoolin. Don't worry me none, I don't keer whether my chillun go to school or not. Never did have no edication myself an I git by, I may send 'em this next year 'gin the law makes me is the only way though, I never did make 'em go, Could if'n they wanted to. I don't keer, I need help now an powerful bad, tryin to keep us alive now sorta. jest don't feel like workin much though, I always have moved around, first in Henry County, then Benton, Lake County to pick cotton but Couldn't make a thing out of it though, Sorta funny it is, too, Well, thar is jest one thing about it, we done the very best we could too.
I jest don't keer for nothing, We never go to Church don't rekin the chillun ever saw inside of one, I ain't a Christian and don't care a bit if I never see in one either. If the old Devil gits me he can have me. We could a washed up for an hour or two had we knowed you was a comin, has to carry all the water we use from an old muddy spring, and the water shore ain't no good neither. And we is savin'. jest washes our faces once in awhile. It tastes awful too if you air ust to good water. Wisht you could git Cap thar in the CCC. We live good off what they make in thar and I don't have to work none neither then atall.
"We ain't none of us ever rid in a airplane and we ain't agoin to less it was free, and guess we'd be skeered to death. We never git in cars neither, Afeard of them too."
A string in a corner held a lot of old rags, clothes of the family, and as the mother was seated to make her picture she reached over and pulled the cloth back from over the victrola to show it also in the picture, the only time she smiled. It seemed a source of pride to her indeed to see that also.
They are truly a shiftless lot, not seeming to care for anything and not ashamed of how and where they live either. Never have owned a home, just farmers or renters is all, and don't want any better than they have just so they have enough to eat.
"Sometimes the dog runs rabbits up we take em way fum It and kill em to cook ever time we can git it, right fillin too," said the mother.
Myrtle quit in first grade at school, Cap in 2nd an Robert in 2nd. The father and mother were never in a schoolroom. The other children either. Is it sorta like a show, they want to know.
"When we wuz at Phillipy whar we lived down thar a pickin' cotton we libed with a Mr. Earhart. He owned the plantation whar we lived an lived with a nigger woman. Had two chillun by her. She run the store case he couldn't read nor write. Well he died here a little while ago and we found out lots about them too. jest as soon as he died the woman took up with another white man an is alivin with him an still a runnin the store, ol man Earhart left her with a plenty a money an farmin land too," said the mother.
The copy of the interview while Maynard was in Camp (See "Weary Willie" in These Are Our Lives) gives the life of the family while in Lake County as he described it, but the looks of the family here belies the facts of their cleanliness, but evidently he thot they were and possibly in his eyes they were.
