January 12, 1939
George A. Twiddy (white) senior partner of Twiddy& White
410 South Poindexter St.
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Merchant
W. O. Saunders, writer
"BUSINESS IS A PLEASURE"
It was a gloomy morning and I found him seated at his desk in the back of his store studying some old ledger accounts. At first he wasn't inclined to talk. At last:
"Well, suppose you drop around the house some night, where we won't be interrupted by customers dropping in. Come in tomorrow and I'll try to tell you what night will be most convenient."
I dropped in next day. His partner was up front on the lookout for trade. Instead of naming an evening hour for me to interview him, he motioned me to a chair, pulled his own chair over and opened up. What he gave me was more a history, of his times than of his, personal life. It is hardly possible to disassociate the two, so I give you his story just as he gave it to me. Pull your own chair over and listen in:-
"It was the year of the total eclipse of the sun - 1900 Ithink was - when I went to work of C. H. Robinson's Fair Store. I worked mornings and afternoons before and afterschool, and the full day on Saturdays. I was 16 years old. My pay was $ l. 50 a week.
"My principal job was cleaning spittoons. Spittoons were important fixtures in all stores in those days. It seemedto me that most men chewed tobacco and many women dippedsnuff and were not ashamed of it. Many of our women customersused those spittoons freely.
"Shopping was different in those days. There were no automobiles. The farmer took a day off to come to town. Hewould leave home around daybreak, spend the greater part ofthe day in town, leaving town after noon and getting homearound sundown. He didn't come to town often and his shoppinglist contained many items. Often as not he brought hiswife with him. Stools were provided at regular intervals infront of the counters for the convenience of patrons. Andbetween stools were oversize spittoons. We didn't callthem cuspidors. There were 22 spittoons in Robinson's Fair Store, including thespittoons in the office.
"In front of every store were hitching posts for the convenience of our rural customers. It was not unusual for a farmer to drive up with his horse and buggy, or horse and cart, at 9 o'clock in the morning and leave his horse tieduntil he had finished his business in town at 3 or 4 o'clockthat afternoon. At noon he would put a bundle of fodderand eight ears of corn down for his nag, give her more reinand let her feed. The horse droppings were prolific and as soon as I showed up at the store in the afternoon, if Ididn't think of it first, Mr. Robinson would suggest that Ishould clean up after the horses.
"The streets were not paved. In places they were kneedeep in mud in winter. In dry weather every passing vehiclestirred up clouds of dust. The merchants in our block hadcombined to build a water tank in the neighborhood from which ran a one-inch iron pipe providing spigots on everystore front. With a 50 ft. length of garden hose we sprinkledthe street twice a day and kept down much of the dust. Partof my job was sprinkling the street in front of the store."Stores were lighted with kerosene oil lamps with brightmetal reflectors. Most stores opened early mornings and closed at 9 o'clock at night. It was part of my job too tokeep the lamp chimneys cleaned and polished.
"I was employed at Robinson's less than two years when Sawyer & Jones hardware store just across the street offeredme $1.50 a week. Their offer appealed to be because theyhad fewer spittoons to clean and fewer hitching posts, whichmeant less chambermaid work for fewer horses.
"A handy method of cleaning spittoons was to take themdown to the public dock on the street where there was plentyof river water to wash them out with. One day a neighboringmerchant, who had fewer spittoons to clean, said he wouldgive me ten cents a day to clean his spittoons. My employerswere willing for me to take on the extra work. Boy! I feltrich. I had so much money coming in that I bought a bicycle.
"My next job was with Jones, Raper& Co., dealers in dry goods, clothing, notions, hats, boots and shoes. I was gettingalong. It wasn't long before I was offered a better jobwith Owens Shoe Co. I left Owens Shoe Co. in 1907 to gowith O. F. Gilbert, trading as R. J. Mitchell, at that timethe largest and busiest department store in town. I was afull fledged shoe salesman then. I was with Mitchell's forseven years, until 1914, when I engaged with my partner inthe present business which we have carried on ever since.
"I've seen a lot of changes in merchandising and socialcustoms in my 39 years of mercantile experience.
"Thirty or forty years ago most women made their own dresses and under garments, or employed neighborhood dressmakers. Most boys clothing and mens trousers were home made. Yard goods, including pants cloth, were in great demand. Woman's ready made coats and dresses were in little demandand the men's custom made clothing business was still feelitsway. Silk hosiery was a luxury, sheer silk and chiffon hosiery unknown. There was no such thing as a woman's custom made hat. A woman bought a frame, so much velvet, so manyyards of ribbon, certain feathers or flowers, and a millinerdesigned her hat to her individual notions. The array ofsuch fanciful headwear in a church auditorium on a Sundaymorning was a sight to behold.
"Hour-glass corsets, bustles and bust forms were theheight of fashion. Women even padded their coiffures with rolls of hair called 'rats'. They wore skirts that trailedthe ground and a man had to wait for a rainy day to get aglimpse of a feminine ankle. A man never knew what sort offigure he was courting in those days. But once matrimonyadmitted him to the privacy of his lady's boudoir, what akick he got out of seeing the lady go through the ritual of disrobing! There were no bathrooms or dressing rooms inthe average home to which milady might retire for thisintimate business.
"It took countless buttons, hooks and eyes and pins toput a woman together in those days. Even their hats wereheld on their heads with long stilletto-like steel or brasspins. The other day I was on an automobile ride, with fivewomen in the car and I wanted a pin. There wasn't a pinamong the five of them. The modern miss releases a snap, shrugs her shoulders and drops her clothes with the non-chalanceof a moulting hen giving herself a shake and droppinga feather.
"A lot of water has gone under the bridge since I firstwent behind a counter. The merchant used to get his goodsin wooden packing cases. The wooden packing case is almosta thing of the past. Almost everything today comes in papercartons. Where we used to wrestle with a heavy nail puller, we now use a pen knife. It isn't safe for a small merchant to buy in heavy packingcase quantities any more, on account of the changingstyles. Take shoes for instance; the traveling salesmenused to come twice a year with their sample lines. Webought our fall and winter shoes in the spring, our springand summer shoes in the fall. We can't do that any more. The manufacturers are developing new styles every few weeks. No one can tell what the trade will demand in shoes three orsix months from now. The shoe salesman drops in now everysixty days. The same with woman's hats, coats and dresses.
"Even men's shoes are subject to ever changing styles. A man's shoe that may be the rage today, may be obsoleteanother season. And yet I well remember when the prestigeof a store was gauged by the quality of the brogan shoesit sold. Remember those brogans? Made of thick cowhide;stiff cowhide uppers, devoid of linings; heavy cowhide soles, not sewed on but pegged with wooden pegs. Brasstops on the toes, iron rims imbedded in the heels. Guaranteedto wear a year in barnyard manure. That was the typeof shoe rural people and the working class people in towngenerally wore 30 or 40 years ago. Today we have no callsfor brogans and, to tell you the truth, I wouldn't knowwhere to buy them.
"It seems to me that the old brogan shoe was a prettygood symbol of those days, when life was hard compared withwhat it is today. Forty years ago - certainly fifty years ago - there wasn't a bathtub in the whole town, no pipedwater in any home. The telephone and the electric lighthad not arrived. Automobiles were unthinkable, and whenthey began to appear early in the century they were regarded as another rich man's toy.
"Why, I remember the sensation caused by the first barrelof gasoline that was brought to town. George W. Twiddy, who ran a small grocery and fruit store, bought a peanutroaster to be heated by gasoline. He had to order hisgasoline from Baltimore. When his barrel of gasoline arrived, he had it carted up from the steamboat wharf andplaced back of his store. News of the arrival of that gasolinespread like wildfire. Gasoline was thought of as a highly inflammable, explosive and dangerous article. What was Mr. Twiddy thinking of, to bring a barrel of that deadlystuff to town and set it down right in the heart of the business section? Did he want to blow the whole town up?
"The town council was hurriedly called into special session. The mayor and councilmen, with white, tense facestook immediate action. An ordinance, effective pronto, wasenacted prohibiting the storage of gasoline in greater thanone-gallon quantities in the city limits. Mr. Twiddy wasordered to remove that barrel of gasoline to the outskirtsof town, where he built a shelter over it and drew out agallon at a time as needed for his peanut roaster.
"Only as far back as 1914 merchandising was relatively easy. Many men with good characters and little capital hadestablished grocery stores and made money in the grocerybusiness. With little capital, but with good credit and someyears of experience, we started our little dry goods, clothingand shoe store and made money from the start.
"First the telephone, then the automobile and, more lately, mounting taxes have played their part in revolutionizingbusiness. The advent of the telephone ushered in an era of buying "on approval." It was so easy for a woman to call up Mitchell's, for instance, and ask for several pair ofshoes to be sent up for 'approval.' The goods would beobligingly sent up and perhaps several days would elapse before he lady made her selection. All the time the goodswere out of stock. A lot of book-keeping was involved. Mitchell's with a turnover of less than $75,000 a year, employedthree book- keepers. Our merchants organized about 1916 and put an end to that expensive trade practice.
"Imperceptibly at first, but rapidly enough, the automobilerevolutionized all business. Sales became smaller andmore frequent. The farmer who used to come to town once amonth or once, in three or six months with a list of suppliesto last him until his next trip, now runs in any day in theweek and buys a pair of shoes, a suit of overalls or a plow line and is on his way. The stools in front of the countershave gone with the spittoons. Nobody has time to sit andshop any more. Spitting is tabu. But, remember, grandmaused snuff, daughter sucks a cigarette.
"But the automobile has otherwise effected all business. It has increased the temp and the cost of living. Withthe fixed charges of his automobile, higher rents, highertaxes and other advances of modern living, the masses seemto find it increasingly difficult to meet all of their obligations Darn few people seem to be able to adjust theirdesire for things to their ability to pay for things. Wehave thousands of dollars in bad accounts on our books thatare forever uncollectable. All credit lines have had to be tightened. We send a bill collector out once or twice aweek now, instead of the first of the month only. "I never let my automobile embarrass me financially. Ihave owned one car in 15 years and it is still giving me good service me model T Ford, 1924 model.
"I bought it on May 3, 1924, I waited until May 3rd becausetax listing time is up May 1st. I let the dealerslist it for taxes before I bought it.
"For several years now I haven't felt able to buy a newcar, and that old buggy takes me where I want to go andbrings me back. She looks ancient but there's a lot of ' getup and go ' in her yet.
"Another thing, I've got a boy coming on; he's presidentof his high school class, popular with the younger set andif I had a new car it would take a lot of gas for him. He never asks me to lend him the old bus; he would be ashamedto be caught in it. His daddy aint.
"Again, the automobile has made the larger stores andbar bargain days of larger city stores available to the average man or woman who formerly had to buy at home or resort to mail order catalog. Every day we see cars full of people passing us by to go to Norfolk or Richmond to buy. Oftenas not they could do as well at home, but they enjoy theexcitement of travel and the contacts with the larger city life. But down the line, the smaller country merchant isseeing car loads of his old customers going by his door, heading for ours.
"The chain stores have complicated things for the independentmerchant too. Their specialization in cheap, flashymerchandise, attractively displayed and carrying easy-to-readprice tags gets the business. We independents have tohand it to the chains! They usually have more attractive stores, know how to dress their windows, make shopping so easy, and have so systematized their business that they canget by with the dumbest, cheapest help on earth. We independentshave to depend much on · personal relationships and know our customers. Once we forget a man's name or neglectto inquire about the health of his family, the condition ofhis crops, or about his hobby, we are in a way to lose his business. Our customers are interested in us and love tocome our way because we are interested in them.
"Yes sir, it's the personal contact that counts. When you don't see me around the store, you know I'm out drummingup business. I make the rounds of our manufacturing establishmentsonce a month, regularly. I'll go out to Kramer'smill on a fair day at lunch time when the hands are gatheredunder one of the sheds for the lunch. I pass among themshowing a suit of overalls that we sell for a dollar and a pair of workshoes that we sell for a dollar and a half; givethem each a pair of shoe laces and a piece of advertisingmatter. They know where to come the next time they need work clothes or shoes.
"In one of our machine shops the other day a workmandropped a hammer on his foot and was laid up for several days. That gave me an idea; I am taking a pair of shoes with metal toe caps - something new on the market, designed to protect a workman's foot in just such accidents - over to thatmachine shop and leaving them for the men to examine attheir leisure. I'm going to get the jump on other dealers with that line of shoes."
I had noticed a beaver hat and a funny little low-crown Yiddish derby on a shelf in the back of the store. I askedhim to tell me about those hats.
"That beaver was given me by a man who was once prominent in politics in our town. It was good as new and I guess he thought I might find a purchaser for it. But I had another idea. Whenever there is one of these womanless weddingsthat schools and churches get up as a money making stunt, that hat goes out to help outfit the groom, and everybodyknows it was loaned by us. When a certain Postmaster Generalbought himself a new car some years back because his old carwas too low for his silk hat, I put that stovepipe on myhead, climbed into my model T and rode allover town. Hadeverybody laughing about me and the Postmaster General. That was good advertising.
"Now, about that Yiddish derby: My boy used it in a Yiddish part in a school play. That gave me an idea. I brought it down to the store and it has been making salesfor us ever since. I work it like this. My partner getshold of a tough customer and isn't selling him. The customerwas out of sorts when he came in. I get down the Yiddishderby, take off my coat, snap a pair of red arm bands overmy shirt sleeves, tuck a red bandana in my belt, prance upto the customer. Nine times out of ten it gets a laugh, putsthe customer in a good humor. My partner backs off and aftera little bit I bring the customer around to the merchandise he was interested in, and sell him.
"I guess my brother Pat was right. Someone once ask my father why I was so talkative and Pat so quiet like? Father couldn't answer but Pat spoke up and said: 'They used aphonograph needle to vaccinate him when he first went to school.'" And then, in a serious vein, he returned to thesubject of business 'generally. He said:
"No, we are not making easy money any more. Our overheadis steadily increasing. Taxes are higher and higher. We are not complaining about the interference of governmentin business; it doesn't effect us little fellows like itdoes the big ones; where the government hits us below thebelt is in doling out overalls, work shirts, bedding andcountless other commodities to thousands of so-called relief cases who shouldn't be on relief at all. We personallyknow a number of working people who are practically living out of WPA Commodity Stores to the loss of merchantswho are expected to pay the consequent tax bill.
"The sales tax? That doesn't bother us; we rather likeit. The public doesn't' like it, so we never mention it; wejust tack it on to the price of the merchandise. Sometimeswe have to mark a 25 cent item up to 27-cents, because to mark it 26-cents, just a cent more to cover sales tax, would be a little too obvious. A nationally advertisedarticle that the manufacturer puts a retail price of $1.00 on, and which we formerly sold at 90 cents, we now mark downto 97 cents only, making four cents more on the article thanwe made before the sales tax was inflicted on us. If thepublic only knew what the sales tax is actually costing them, they would howl!
"No, we are not making what you might call good moneyany more; we are not doing the volume of business we usedto do; we used to employ two clerks when we could have gotalong with one. The NRA drove us into that economy. Theonly clerk hire we indulge in now is a clerk to help takecare of the extra trade on Saturdays. My partner and I takecare of the trade now.
"And, say! speaking of the automobile; when I saw what it was doing to our business I put it to work for me. When I built my home, the small bungalow type of home had notcome into style. We built a large roomy house with roomsto spare. We put a sign
TOURISTS WELCOME
out in front of our house a few years ago, and now it's turningin a nice little revenue every week. It means a littlemore housework for the wife, but I help out at night, actingas night clerk, and get down stairs in time to start breakfastin the morning. A dollar twenty-five for a room and 40 cents for a breakfast isn't to be sneezed at.
"You hear a lot of belliakin from little business men these day; you're not getting a squawk out, of me; I trim my sails to the winds as they blow, and when they don't blowfor a spell I put out my oars. I once dreamed of getting alot of money ahead and living on Easy Street. I don't haveany such dreams any more; I just take life as I find it, live within my means, find my social life in my church and Sunday School, and with the old friends who stick by us yearin and year out. You see, business isn't just business withus as it is with the chain stores, it's a pleasure. And notone of the least of the pleasures is doing business today is in the general improvement in the quality of the merchandise one sells. Whether it's the pinch of competition, improvementin manufacturing and processing techniques, or an awakeningof conscience, I don't know; but I do move that merchandisegenerally is more dependable and more fairly priced to themerchant than it ever was in the earlier years of my businessexperience. One of the pleasures of doing business todayis the increasing high regard that manufacturers andjobbers generally seem to have for the integrity of theirproducts; it is as if they had discovered that honesty isnot only the best policy, but the only policy insuring permanentsuccess for either an individual or an institution."
