The following miscellaneous South Carolina materials are not life histories. However, they were filed with the life histories and are therefore included here. They may have originally been filed with the life histories because they seemed to be related materials. The goal of the life history program was to obtain a sense of what life was like for anonymous Southerners -- history viewed from an individual perspective. The following materials focusing on folklore, historical legends, and racial minorities, share some of the same aims. Furthermore, the life history was never a strict format closely adhered to by the interviewers. Some materials submitted as life histories are more descriptions of communities, or the recounting of folklore and local legend, than the story of a particular individual. For these reasons the following South Carolina materials are included in the project.
Folklore
Project #-1655
Phoebe Faucette
Han pton County
MEMOIRS OF MY FATHER AND BYGONE DAYS
As Told by: Wm. A. Lawton.
On one occasion, three of my younger brothers brought to the house a large hornet's nest to ask what it was. They had never seen one before this one was spied in the top of a tree, and immediately their interest was aroused. The nest was about nine inches in diameter, and fifteen inches long. It was made of a material similar to that of a wasp's nest, and had one large hole in the bottom. It was securely fastened with a sort of glue on the upper end to a small limb from which it hung. It was winter, and of course there were no hornets in it. Later, the boys and I, with my father, were near the place from which they got it. They carried us into the swamp and showed us the tree from which they had gotten it. We found that one of the boys had climed a small black gum tree at least 60 feet to its first limb, and had crawled out on that limb to a point where the limb seemed too small to hold his weight and from there had broken the smaller limb that held the hornets' neat. Our father was shocked. And I still remember his remark, "What a mercy it was that the boys found the nest in the winter instead of the summer when it was filled with hornets. Had it happened in summer those hornets would have stung that boy and caused him to fall to the ground, which with the stings of the hornets would have killed him." You know if anyone disturbs a hornets' nest they will all get on him and follow him for a mile or more.
A bunch of us boys were together one day in the woods, when we noticed an old rotten pine tree, that had broken off until it was only about 20 feet high. It was filled with woodpecker holes, and we saw a way of adding a woodpecker's egg to our already large collection of birds' eggs. We had a humming bird's egg. The little nest I had found was no larger than an inch and a quarter in diameter on the inside. It was lined with a very soft downy substance which we identified as sycamore balls. The two eggs were pure white, three sixteenths of an inch in diameter and about one-half an inch long. The shells were so thin that we broke one of them in blowing it, and had to blow the other one. Ma did not object to our getting the eggs if we took only one, for she said that left the nest intact, and would not seriously interfere with the brood. I suppose we had from thirty to fifty eggs. The largest one was a goose-egg. We also had an alligator's egg, a crane's egg, a marsh-hen's eggs, and a quinea's egg, and a turkey's egg. Of course we had a mocking-bird's, a thrasher's, a logger-head's, a blue-bird's, a jay-bird's, a bee-bird's, a lark's, a sparrow's, a turtle-dove's and a mourning-dove's, an oriole's, a red-bird's, a rain-crow's, a bull-bat's (or a night-hawk), a crow's, a hawk's and a buzzard's. And now we were to get a woodpecker's. We delegated Maner to climb the tree since he was the best climber.
"But how do you know that there will be any nest or eggs after I get up there?" Maner wanted to know.
"Oh," we said, "you got to climb up and see if you want to find out for sure. But with all these woodpecker holes there's obliged to be a nest around here somewhere, and they always make their nests in old hollow trees. Just go on up and see."
So Maner climbed up the pine. There wasn't a limb or branch for him to catch a hold of, but he skinned up and looked over into the top.
"Boys", he called down to us, "I can't see a thing inside. Its all as dark as pitch."
"Oh, go on and get the eggs," we impatiently called back.
"I'm not going to put my hand into something I can't see into," he called back.
"Oh, go on," we urged. The crowd of us ware all circled around the foot of the tree with our heads up, watching every movement.
Maner's hand started in, and instantly, to our surprise and horror, the biggest old black snake you ever saw jumped out of the hole and over Maner's shoulder, and on toward the ground. Simultaneous with the snake's descent. Maner, 20 feet above at the top of the tree, had let go both hands and both feet, and was falling along with the snake to the ground. At first the glimpse of that descending snake into our up-turned faces, we boys were gone. Each took his own direction, and fled. We could hear the thud as they hit the ground, then we could heaf Manor running after us, crying to the top of his voice. His feelings were hart new as well, and he screamed after us.
"It's the last time I'll ever climb a tree for you boys, he said. "You always give me the hardest job anyway."
We later learned that fortunately Maner and the snake did not hit the ground at the game spot, although they had hit at- the same time.
That old snake had evidently just beat us to those eggs.
Another time when an old snake got the best of us was once when we went into a pine woods, about a mile from home, to haul pine needles to the stable for bedding. Pa would often send us in the wagon. If we didn't get enough, we had to go back for more. The pine needles were thick in this woods, three or four inches deep. The woods have all been cleared up long ago and it is a field now, but it was then a beautiful growth of young pines, with a smooth bed of thick pine needles unobstructed by undergrowth, We had stepped our mules and wagons, and had started to fork in the pine straw when out from the pins needles came a huge black snake. It could easily be seen on top of the level bed of straw coming quickly toward us. We sprang back, and, expecting to see it turn and run away, We were thinking of how we could kill it. But instead of running from us, as snakes usually do, it continued to run toward us. We ran off a little way and looked back to see where it had gone. There it was right behind, racing after us. With one accord, we decided this was no snake to fool with, so we let out in a run in dead earnest then, straight for the edge of the woods. After we had run a long way and were breathless, and thinking we had outrun the snake, we paused to look back again. But there it was - not so far behind, wriggling from side to side at a rapid rate.
"Make for the canal, boys," I called out as we started on again. We've got to jump that canal and lose him there." At the edge of the woods there was a very deep ditch, known as the canal, that separated the woods from the field that extended up as far a the barn.
"If we can just reach that canal."
The ditch was deep and wide, but we jumped it. In the field on the other side, we drew a deep breath and turned to see what would become of the snake. There it was running right up to the edge of the canal, then disappeared from sight. But in a moment's time, there came its old head poking up on this side of the canal. It had not been at all baffled at the ditch as we had thought, but had simply run down one side and up the other. This time we didn't stop running until we got home.
Once an old negro woman, we were told, had a hen laying in a hollow log, The hen stayed in the log several days, and the old woman sent her little girl up into the log to bring out the eggs.
In a little while, the child backed out, calling, "Mama, de hen pick me."
The mother scolded her and made her go back.
Again, she backed out, crying, "Mama, de hen pick me."
This time the old woman broke a switch and cut the child on the feet, making her go back the third time. This time, the child did not come out again. After calling and receiving no answer from her child, the old woman sought help. After waiting and no response was received to the repeated calls, it was decided to cut the log open. The child and the hen were both found, dead, and a huge rattlesnake was coiled up on the nest.
Our mother had a faithful old cook who lived in a house in the backyard, named Mum Rirah. Although there was always a plenty of stove wood, provided, she had a habit of going down into a nearby woodland every afternoon, and getting dried twigs. She'd take her large fanner, which was an old-time homemade flat basket, made of broom straw and white oak strips, and fill it with twigs, to burn in with the other wood,' in the stove, the next day.
About the middle of one afternoon, one of the children saw her going as usual with her basket towards the woods. But as night came on, Mum Rirah was missed about the yard. Inquiry was made of her, it proved that the last time she was seen was when she went to the woods. The boy who had seen her go, went now to look for her, down a cotton alley, in the direction that she had gone. Near the wood's edge he saw her kneeling down in the field.
As he approached nearer and called to her, she answered, "Come heah! I got a mad dog down heah, and he bit me!"
She had her two hands around the dog's neck, and her knee on its body, and was holding it, for fear it would get up and bite her again. The dog was dead, and was almost stiff, she had been holding it so long. Her brain seemed to have become petrified with fear, and it was hard to make her believe that the dog was dead and that she could turn it loose. This was before the time of the Pasteur treatments, and the poor old woman died from the effects of that bite. She was one of the best servants my mother ever had, and her death was a great loss to the family. She lived for sometime after the bite, but wag always sick. She would keep saying that someone had conjured her and set poison in her path. Before she died, she lost her mind entirely, although she never became harmful or dangerous to those around her.
Flander McSein, was bought in slavery time by my grandfather, a ragged orphan negro boy. My grandfather had him nicely washed and dressed, and took good care of him, and he never left the home place, but for one year, the rest of his life. Through the turn of events, the old home place got out of the family for a few years, and was afterwards bought by my father. Soon after moving on the place, my father, having noticed a farm implement, known as the crow-bar, asked Flander who it belonged to.
The old negro answered, "It goes with de place, sir. It has always been heah ever since I been heah."
My father then asked if there was anything else that "goes with the place".
Flanders replied, "Nothin' else 'cept me, sir. Just me and dat cross-bar is all dat been heah ever since I come heah."
Flander was always a very faithful, dependable, old negro, and when he died, although my father's children had all grown up and scattered all about, they put up a tombstone at his grave.
Another instance of "poison in me path" was with cally Boggy. Cally was a strong, hard working negro man, but he conceived the idea that someone had put poison in his path. He commenced going down in health and strength, until finally he was confined to his bed. Doctors that were called in failed to restore him.
One day when my father was visiting him at his house, he said, "Marsa Tommy, I hear 'bout a witch doctor that lives way down de road 'bout fifty miles from here, dat dey say kin cure me." If I could just get to see him, I believe I'd get well."
To satisfy the negro, my father had one of the men put a mattress in a wagon, and feed enough for the mules and for the two men. They started out on the long hot trip, which my -father felt would be of no avail. He was just sending them for the old negro's sake.
Oh his return, Cally said, "Marsa Tommy, dat doctor take one hand and hold it over me eyes, and rub me face. Then, he open me shirt and he rub me stomach. He keep rubbing from me stomach up to me face.
He rub and he keep rubbing "til all at once, he hollow out, "I got it!"
"And wid dat, he pull out de biggest snake out of my stomach. I could just feel it coming out. And he yet hold one hand over me eyes, and he tell me, 'Keep your eyes shut now, for if you see it, it'll go back in there again! And wid dat de doctor turn 'round wid his back toward me, and carry off de snake."
In spite of his long ride, Cally seemed better the next day, and in a short while he was completely recovered and back at work as before.
Source: Wm. A. Lawton, Lena, S. C.
