In an otherwise identical version the following handwritten comment appears on the top of page 12614: "Excellent MW."
James Hilary Greer
Paris, Tennessee
November 10, 1938
N. G. T.
YOU'VE GOT TO LIVE WITH POST HOLES
Across the road from the old house Mister Jimmy, bent double and moving fast, was dodging from tree to tree. "Go in, go in, go in, daughter!" he shouted shrilly.
He darted behind a large hickory. In a moment he peeked around the bole. "Make yourself at home, too!" he said. With a jerk, his head disappeared. Then he slowly poked it out again to watch as I mounted the steps to the front porch.
"That's right, daughter -- go right in!" he called. His head disappeared again.
I opened the front door and crossed the threshold. The house looked as if it hadn't been lived in for years. In the dimness of the cobwebbed hall I could see heaps of rags and trash and pieces of splintered furniture scattered helter-skelter. There was a subdued hum of flies and a strong smell of tainted meat.
On the front porch now I could hear Mister Jimmy's stealthy footsteps. I knew better than to turn and face him. He would have run off into the woods.
Suddenly, with a scrambling rush, he came through the doorway. Leaping to one side and flattening himself against the wall, he ducked his head and looked at me over the tops of his cracked spectacles. "I've been looking for you, daughter." His voice was faint and dusty-like the crackling of old paper.
Slowly he extended his hand. In its wrinkled dirty palm were three hickory nuts and a pecan.
"What are they for, Mister Jimmy?"
He dropped the nuts in my band. His arms flew up and wrapped around his face, leaving a slit through which bright eyes peered. "They's for your lunch, daughter," he said. "Man cannot live without eating, daughter. Take them and welcome. Why, I could give you a dozen and never miss them -- plenty more over there."
Dropping his arms and whirling about, he went hopping down the hall. He kept glancing back over his shoulder and beckoning. "Come, daughter, come. I want to show ye the house. Here I am still old Jimmy Greer, still of the same family as ever. Still single much and alone."
He stopped short, tiptoed, and stretched his neck like a rooster about to crow. "My mammy died the other day, or year or sometime and so I'm here lounging around alone."
Mister Jimmy broke off and leaped behind the burlap drape that partitioned off the far end of the hall. He peeped around its edge and winked. His high thin laughter echoed through the hall.
"Oh yes," he said, "I know! I know why you come, daughter. Yes indeed, indeed, indeed! It's worth seeing, too. You must see it to appreciate it. Nobody nearer than Carolina or Detroit can tell you about it."
I stopped before the drape when Mister Jimmy pulled his head out of sight. "What do you mean?" I asked.
His head came out and he winked two or three times. "You know's well as I do, daughter. Everybody knows about my post holes. All the world envies me because of my post holes -- got more than anybody anywhere. Keep collecting them, too. I know post holes, all about them, too. Daughter, you've got to live with post holes to know them like I do!"
He held the drape back and motioned with his head. "Enter, enter, enter, daughter. Make yourself at home. This is my hospitality. What some calls a kitchen, for I do my cooking here."
Stepping carefully over papers, bottles, chair rounds, books, and boxes, I found a place to stand. There was an old monkey heater on which stood a bashed-in pot. On a sagging table were broken dishes, scraps of moldy bologna rind, hunks of bread, a pile of sweet potatoes, some withered cabbages, a gnawed onion, and a side of bacon.
"You're welcome to anything here, daughter!" said Mister Jimmy with a low bow. "Eat to you bust or come here and bring your friends and cook your hospitality for them. Anytime, anytime, anytime at all, daughter."
He gave me a sly look. "But none will see my post holes but you, for it is a great favor to view them and all are not worthy."
His head dropped between his shoulders, he crouched, and dashed past the drape at a bent-kneed run. "Come, daughter, and see the house! It's my father's house. In my father's house is many mansions. Some day I'll find them. I look for them now when I'm not watching out for my post holes."
The rooms were so stacked with rubbish that it was almost impossible to pass through. Bottles rolled under my feet, boxes slid, and pieces of broken furniture had to be climbed. As nimble as a squirrel, Mister Jimmy stayed well ahead.
"Look at anything you want to," he called back to me, "but don't touch anything unless you put it back in the same place. It might get lost and wouldn't be exactly where I could find. it."
Mister Jimmy was out in the hall again. I heard him scurrying up the stairs. When I reached the hall I saw him squatting on the landing. He jumped up and leaned over the bunisters. "Did ye know," he said, "that they Say, that people say that family has a streak of mental strain?"
Laughing, he turned and ran the rest of the way to the second story.
Upstairs in a room actually stacked knee deep in rubbish, Mister Jimmy dragged out a chair from the bottom of a heap and offered it to me.
"Sit careful, daughter, sit careful! This chair's centuries old. No money could buy it from me ever."
He reached under the heap again and brought out a large old box camera over which he squinted and grimaced.
"Get there by the window, my daughter, my daughter, and let me see you. I will take your picture and show you how it works. The profeel is grand. Everything works upside down. The world'd work better upside down, too."
He held the camera at various angles, peeping over it at me. "Well, well, well, daughter, and well!" he said. "I use to be a photographer. I made pictures and groups all over the country and elsewhere and so on. That was after I quit teaching school and so forth and so on. I could get the best profeels you or anybody else ever saw. Every profeel was turned just so. always upside down and that made it just correct and exacting in my diversified opinion which is not up to date maybe.
"But it's my opinion just the same, daughter, daughter!" Mr. Jimmy stamped his foot with such force that some of the rotted plaster broke loose from the ceiling and showered down in a cloud of white dust.
Mr. Jimmy held a finger to his lips and tiptoed softly toward the door. "Oh, oh, oh, daughter," he said in a loud whisper. "we've disturbed the sweet repose of this room. Let's steal away."
I was more than willing to follow him downstairs. We picked through the hall to the room that had once served the Greers as a parlor.
Mister Jimmy offered me a three-legged chair with a broken back in the midst of the indescribable junk heap which covered the floor. He threw himself on a. filthy pallet in one corner. He lay face down on the ragged quilts.
"Daughter," he said in a muffled voice, "do you wonder, oh do you, do you, why I don't have this place cleaned up, or what some people call cleaned up?"
"Wouldn't you find it easier to live here?" I suggested.
He shook his head violently. "No, no, no, no, no! I prefer it just like it is! I can concentrate better with things just like they is and been all these years, for this is how my mammy left them for me. They's nothing like home to please anybody, daughter."
He rolled over and. sat up 'facing the wall and folding his hands over the top of his head. His body swayed as he talked.
"I live here in all weather and I make my living or don't make it just like I want to or don't want to. Do you know where I get my something to eat? Heh? Why, I go into Paris and go around in garbage barrels, at least some people calls them garbage barrels, and I get things for my own use. I search along the road and find a tomato growing or maybe a. hundred tomatoes. Who do they belong to? I don't know -- maybe to anybody or nobody or everything. I also find potatoes and onions. I bring them to Paris and delve among the niggers, the sons of Ham, and sell them or Swap them or eat them myself.
"The most thing I like, though, daughter, daughter, is stopping. Yes, stopping in people's houses and telling them the word about my post holes."
He crawled off the pallet and dug into a heap of rubbish, bringing to light a bit of rusty iron pipe. He blew dust from it and handled it gently.
"Most women, by that I mean women, is not interested in post holes. But you're different. Let me tell you about my post holes. All the world knows they's the finest anywhere on land or sea. This thing here is a post hole. I had it wrapped up in iron so's I can keep it from harm. I'm going to bring it to your house at midnight some night. I'm going to leave it and let you see it good and stay with it a while and learn its habits, daughter, daughter, oh daughter!
"Why nobody knows how old it is or where I found it. Everybody wants to know. I ain't telling a soul. My secret. Nobody but me knows where I got it. Maybe it came from Carolina or Detroit. Possibly it did."
Mister Jimmy laughed and hugged himself. "Whee! I know but I ain't telling!"
The iron pipe dropped with a crash and Mister Jimmy sped out of the room. I heard him circling through the house and could mark his progress by the sounds of rolling bottles and smashing wood. He popped into the parlor from the hall, panting and waving another piece of pipe. This he laid at my feet, then retreated to his corner.
"That's another of my best post holes, daughter. See it, see it, see! Looks just exactly and much like a round piece of iron. But you and me know what it is. daughter. A post hole millions in gold could never touch. I won't tell you, even you, no not even you, daughter, where I got it, but I got it. I wouldn't take fifty dollars for it, cash or credit or love. Don't need money that bad, daughter. I can have my post holes to look at and forget it's time to eat.
"I never eat any more these days." Mister Jimmy confided. "I let eating go by. I can get busy looking at old books -- upside down, for they make more sense that way -- and going over old things. Let the time pass, forget to eat. I seldom sleep either. Just lounge about. Day and night is all the same to me. I just let the time pass. I don't live for days or weeks or months. Live just by the hour and minute.
"Ay, ee, i, o, oo -- they's the vowel sounds. One of the things a school teacher or a good one must know. Five sounds, no more no less, no matter how you count them."
Mister Jimmy slid under the quilts and curled up in a ball. For a few moments he said nothing. He lay under the quilts clucking his tongue. Then he pulled the cover back from one eye and looked out.
"The most thing I do, daughter, is think it all over and remember my family. My sister is in Western State Hospital at Bolivar. I get up articles of clothes to take to her. One piece of this, one of that, three of another, two of another -- any number you can name. I put them over in the woods and the birds take them to her. The birds do my bidding, did ye know it, oh my daughter?
"Yes and my mammy was sick a mighty long time before she died. Nobody can deny it. I was here and I know. And my Sister Lela has had these nervous spells for years now and she had them for years when she lived here with me. We just lived to get through the hours. When night come, we just hoped to get through that night. not thinking of the next day just hoping for the night to pass off safely for all of us. I'm the only Greer that never had those nervous spells. I drew wisdom from my post holes. They taught me the secrets of the world. My Sister Lela is now at Western State Hospital.
"Once in life we had a lovely home here, but now it's gone to wrack and ruin. Nothing much left. We did really get together enough money to put a metal roof on it finally so it wouldn't leak so. I've gathered this stuff of mine up from everywhere, far and near. Papers, old books and toys that belonged to us children. The house is just like it was left when my mammy died and they carried my sister away.
I'm here all alone and I don't want it bothered. Don't mind my personal, personal friendly friends coming in my house. But I want nothing displaced. Just put it back exactly where you left it for it wouldn't do to move it around. Some day when I get around to it and can find time, I'm going to throw everything out of this house and get it where I can see it on the ground and then look through all of it and see what I've got here left. Spiders and cobwebs is my housemates. I much prefer them to people.
"You can't remember when I taught school. I was much too old for you, but I did for a long period of years at Manlyville for a long time. Well, all over the county, in fact. Many many years did I slave and teach until my sisters began having their nervous spells and had to be sent back and forth to Western State. My mother she took to her bed. Then it behooved me to exhort and care for them. For many years I devoted my life to them. I'm the only boy left. Brother Stanley is still living. I'd forgotten that though. So there's two of us living, two sisters still alive. One stayed in Western State for a long time. No. daughter, they's three alive. One is back from there now, and I have one sister the doctors said would never go because she married such an old man that it would be impossible to go crazy now living with him as long as she had herself."
Mister Jimmy sat up and hugged his knees. "Well," he said, "life changes. I've done lots of things. I use to be a photographer and made pictures and groups all over the country of schools and so on. After I quit teaching school I farmed a lot and share cropped and so on such as raising sweet potato plants to sell and all crops whatever. Now I just peddle a little here and a little there. Oh well, it's not the body sustenance we need. Forget you've eaten and you won't get to thinking of food. We can do with very little food you know.
"My greatest joy in life is looking at old things. When I seat myself poring over them I forget the hours that pass and think of olden days, and live in the men that was here before. Me, me, life is too short for me, so I must cram what hours they is, day and night together, to make them come just as they should to me ever as well as for all of us."
He vaulted to his feet and hopped to my side. He snatched up a tin bucket, opened it, and sat down. "Daughter, do you know what?" he said, lowering his dusty voice. "I wish everybody could see my post holes. They's worth much, all people by all means should see them and know their history. They's priceless and worth much more than anything in any museum any place now, if anybody know about it. But you're the only one I'll ever let see them. You, you, you, my daughter and daughter!
"One of my sisters has a desire to be an old maid. She is now in Western State. Another sister has a big family and she is not subject to nervousness now. Another sister of mine has two children that is now in Western State. She was there for a time herself.
"Mentality nervous spells seems adapted to our particular family, though we have all plenty of brains, I believe. They's not any time for leisure in my family. We just live each moment. Sister is away and I'm here all alone. I just walk around and carouse about. Some days I get started at four o'clock a.m. Never know where I'll be and the only way to find me at home is by appointment. I never open my doors to people unless I recognize their voices. Don't care for visitors and never allow them unless by special invitation from myself at all."
Mister Jimmy pounded his feet on the floor. "Oh, life is just happiness for me! I'm perfectly content as is. Too many people is wanting things! If I have anything here to eat I do. If not, I forget about it till I find or get something anyway.
"Daughter, did you know people should live for the spiritual side of life rather than otherwise? Christ is the pattern to take and follow, not here on earth. They's nothing worthwhile here for us without being a true Christian. So am I that some people calls Jimmy Greer. I shall wear a crown up Yonder. Take my post holes, too. It's my reward, to take my post holes.
"The country today, my daughter, is going to wrack and ruin. Just mainly because of morals, too. As far as the world is concerned today, they's nothing much but bad morals left. People don't stay at home and make happiness and peace and content. They ramble and live too fast. Life should mean living just for that hour, not in days or Weeks, just how to get through that hour alone is all. Some day politics won't be any more to play a part in people's lives. It don't affect mine the least bit at all. Never care which way the wind blows. I can always find something to do. My time is never vacant.
"My father reared a big family of children to do and become men and women. He educated us all and it's sad that he had mental nervous children as he's had in his children. One of my brothers, Brother Charlie, was a preacher. He married and buried many, many men and women in the days before the younger children ever arrived in the world. They knew nothing of anything to do or see about ever. Oh daughter, my daughter, mine daughter, that's the way the Greers went.
"Me, I don't need money. I have all I need and don't worry whether I ever have a meal or not. My thoughts are higher than food. So should life be.
"My pleasure," said Mister Jimmy, "is in walking around town. I've got no car, no stock, and better still no means of transportation but these two feet. I can even walk to Camden without trouble at all. Someday you'll see what it is and why the things seem so slow in every respect. I can cover more ground and territory than anybody with a car. I very seldom stay home. They's nothing here for me. I take a notion any hour. I just start. When anybody makes an appointment I give them leeway and if they's not there, then I leave. Don't wait on anybody at all, at all, at all."
Mister Jimmy began rubbing his eyes. His voice quivered. "My hopes is over, also my ambitions. I've no outlook for a future. I'd just like to tell you some language and actions of my brother Elder W. Charlie Greer who most of the people in Henry County knew or know of, also in other counties far and wide. Brother Charlie did die many, many years ago. But those is things that's my secrets. Many, many people would much like to know what he said, but no and no! Nobody can find that out ever! Among his language is many beautiful gems --but, daughter, don't you try to make me tell.
"They comes a time to all of us when we remember as distinctly as yesterday about death, and so on. My mind is as though Brother Charlie died only yesterday and that he'll be there with us just when he wants us to meet him on the other side, and when he wants us or as he wants us we come.
"Someday the people of the present day will wake up and wonder what they have done with their years, stuffing food and chasing around instead of living each hour for itself. Oh well, life is fitting for all of us, each self for its own career. Nobody is interested in me, my life or future, but I've forgotten more than most people remember in your days, young people.
All at once Mister Jimmy was on his feet. He began shuffling his feet excitedly and tugging at my arm. "Daughter, my daughter, you must now go now. Don't you hear the house whispering? It's getting restless. The old Greer house gets restless when they's strangers here."
I hurried out on the porch with Mister Jimmy hopping beside of me. He banged the door as soon as I was outside. Then he cracked it open. I saw his lips, nose, and one shining eye.
"Please come back again and let me tell you some more about my post holes," he said. "I never tire talking of them. Guess you're not interested, but it's worth your knowing about them. I bet even a man from Washington, D. C., might come down here to see them, if he knew I had it. Don't you?"
The door slammed. I could hear bottles rolling and chairs tumbling as Mister Jimmy ran through the old house.
You've Got To Live With Post Holes
Story of an idiot; pixilated; more than slightly tooked. Features — story eloquently draws our attention to the crowed conditions of state mental hospitals.