Henry Bayamore (Colored)
39 Suda Street.
Montgomery, Ale.
By Adelaide Rogers
511 South Hull St.
Montgomery, Alabama	.
“GAB’UL, CHUME DAT HARP!”
Uncle Henry, Boyamore, who lives at 39 Suda Street, Montgomery, Alabama, says he has been fo’casting so long he can’t exactly, remember when he began telling fortunes as a business.
A tall dark Hegro, with gray woolly hair and bushy white eyebrows that drape themselves above his large, direct, and singularly honest eyes. Uncle Henry admits rather sheepishly that he is going on seventy five years old. He says he almost worried himself to death in his early life, trying to farm on shares, and trying to please white folks.
Now, instead of white folks working him, he works white folks.
“Yeasum,” Uncle Henry insisted respectfully but with twinkling eyes. “I got more white customers what wants to see into de future, den cullud ones.
“Most of my cullud customers wants to cunjure somebody. Dey comes to me on account I’se de man fur dat. But de white folks petronisin’ Uncle Henry is anxious to know about money… how kin dey keep what dey … or git a holt to somebody else’s. Or if t’ain’t money dey’s inquirin’ about its property… Is dey gwiner inherit dat house dey craves, or is ole Aunt Lucy gwiner up an’ leave it to somebody else -- after all !
“’Look Uncle Henry,’ dey ‘low, ‘peer in yo’ glass an’ see kin you spy out what she’s intendin’ fur to do wid all dat money. It’s a shame fur hit to go to somebody else after my visits an’ ‘tentions to de ole lady. T’ain’t right, Uncle. Dere ought to be some way I kin fence off de others. An’ if dey is sich a way -- an’ you p’ints it out to me. -- I might give you five dollars.”
Uncle Henry paused to exit a chuckle. “’Five dollars?” I says. “Why Chile, it ain’t a gein’ to cost a cent under ten dollars fur me to see who yo’ Aunt Lucy is gwiner leave her money, an’ diamonis an’ houses to. No’m, not a cent under ten dollars. My eyes is gittin’ ole lak de res’ of me. It ain’t he’p ‘em none, neiver, strainin’ to see den dim shapes in my crystal goblet, or my sperit glass. So if you can’t ‘fode ten dollars, fur a lil supernat’chal info’mation, de property jus’ hafta go to somebody else.’ Dat usually gets ‘em, “he added craftily, “an’ dey’ll more ‘en likely come back to hand over de cash.
“One lady useter come to see me all de time, tryin’ to find out when her husband aim fur to die. ‘Don’t you worry yo’ se’f, hile’. I says finally, ‘Dat man ain’t studin’ ‘bout dyin’. He’ll live a long time. I kin see him hyah twenty years fum now.’
“well sir, she bust out cryin’. ‘Oh Uncle Henry she sob. ‘I needs de insu’ance. I needs it bad. Can’t you do no better’n dat? I thought she since I been givin him dem heart draps you could see him failin’. Look orgin Uncle, Hebbe you kin notice him weakenin’. ‘I look orgin, a long steady gase. Den I says.’ No’m, I still sees him goin’ strong twenty years fun now. Only you ain’t wid him. He’s ma’ied to somebody else. Young an’frisky as a colt. But you mus’n feel bad over dat. He thinks a lot of you. I sees him goin’ to de cemetery mos’ ev’y week. ‘Deed I do.’
“Wid dat she scraams an’ says I’s er imp’tant ole debbil, an’ dat she ‘blige to repo’te me fur sassin’ her. ‘No’m, you ain’t’, I ‘low. ‘You’se goin’ home dis ebenin’, an’ you ain’t goin’ to feel good. You is goin’ to stay in bed, a few days. You ain’t well now. An’ by tomorrow you can’t keep nuffin on yo’ stummick. You’ll stay in bed a spell an’ you won’t never be up to more’. An’ she wahnt. No’m, she went to bed wid a nervous sickness, I heard, an’ was down three munts. Den she tue’ de flu an’ pass right out. I read dat in de papers. I wasn’t sorry neiver. Repe’te me indeed! Huh! Heart draps fur to git dat insu’ance! He’s a good mean too. I meets him on de street sometime. He’s a heap better off wid de second wife. Only he don’t go to de cemetery regular at all. I jus’ tole dat to make her feel good. But Law! ‘Stead of cheerin’ her up hit went an’ kilt her. Wimmin is cu’is dat way, Mighty cu’is. Dey ain’t got to common sense in day feelin’s. Not a speck.
“Ole maids what never had a beau -- an’ never will -- comes an’ ax me can’t I see a man in dey life. Dey say, ‘Uncle Henry, I’s mighty lonesome. I want you to see fur me. I wants you to do de bes’ you kin fur me’. Yessum dey does. Dey sho does. So I looks in mah glass, but nuffin shows up ‘cept a misty cloud effect perduced bu dey troubled thoughts. Insomuch as dat ain’t what dey wants, dey’s pow’ful disappointed. But I’s helpless Miss. I’s helpless. ‘Cause you know if dey can’t see no man settin’ in dey parior or on dey front po’ch, how is I gwiner find one in a glass or water? But wimmens don’t think about lil things lak dat. Dey wants Uncle Henry to see all de things fur dem -- in a crystal globlet what dey carries in dey minds. An’ cose dat ain’t possible. No’m, it sho ain’t. I kin see heaps er things in mah glasses, but I can’t glimpse no beaux fur dem sisters whats pushin’ on to fifty. Dey ain’t much lef’ fur dem ‘cept to learn how to read. Dat’s a good peaceful diversion. I tole some of ‘em dat. But dey say dey kin already read anyhow. An’ ax me how come I talks sich imp’tent ole nigger foolishness to white ladies.
“I ‘low I don’t know no better way to talk. So dey hafta s’cuse it. Den dey laff an’ goes home an’ sends some friends fur to git dey fortunes tole. Dey comes in droves at times, an’ den again I hardly has a one. As a rule, dou’, I averages about a hund’ed dollars a munt fum soofsayin’ alone. Dat’s not countin’ what I makes on mah powders. Yessum, I sells conjures, an’ good luck powders too. Mos’ of my powder business is wid cullud people. Dey is great on powders. Especially dat Get-Away Powder what come fun Nemphis. Dey ‘low dey can’t do widout dat. Some lak do Charm-You Powder too. An’ de Young Blush Powder what I gits in new Orleans is mighty pop’lar. De widows buys me out er dat fas’ as I stock up on hit. Widows is wile about Young Blush. But dey loves sumpin else better. Dey’s only one thing a widow will go widout her sumpin-teet to buy, an’ dat’s Adan an’ Eve Root, Yessum, er widow is gwiner have dat Adan an’ Eve root if she hafta go to jail fur hit. Water runs down hill… grass grows up’ards … an’ widows is gwiner be widows.
“I ain’t never got along so good wid widows. Dat’s how come I ain’t a preacher. I started out fur to be a preacher once. An’ while I was sot to preach I read de Bible. I see in de Bible Whar hit say fur Ninisters to keep deype’f unspotted fun de worl’. Den hit say to visit de widows. Yessum, hit say bofe er dem things. But if you is ever been noquainted wid any widows you knows a preacher can’t visit ‘em an’ keep his-se’f unspotted. Hit can’t be did. So I give up de preachin’, an’ went back to farmin’ on shares an’ to singin’ all day while I hoed out de cotton rows in de fields.
“Mistis, is you ever heard darkies singin’ while dey picks cotton, or chops out de Johnson grass, or drives pilin’ along a wharf, or a railroad tracks. Ain’t it de mournfulness sound you ever is heard? Yessum, hit’s de echo of all sorrow livin’ or dead dat walks de earf. White folks fall over each other goin’ to hear de Jubilee Singers Swing Low in dey Sweet Chariots. But I never listens no mo’ to daricles sing. I’se done wade over Jordan an’ I’s had enough.
“De ben’ one er dem spiritual hymns Is Nobody Knows de Trouble I’s Seen. Dat’s mah favorite I reckon. Hit’s mah good luck oong too. You know ev’ybody has a good luck song an’ a bad luck song. If you sings yo’ bad luck song, you gwiner sink lower an’ lower. While de swing of yo’ good luck song will sorter insinerate itse’f into all you does, an’ gradually promots you into prospe’ty.
“Yessum, I was singin’ Nobody Knows one day, an’ pilin’ cross ties on a flat car, when a passel er Gipsies pass in one er den ole fashum vans. Dey, stop to watch us work, an’ after a while de Chief he say to me. ‘Come over here Black man. I got some talk fur you.’ Cose I wanted to hear what kind of talk hit was dat could make a white man call a nigger away fun his work. So I tole de boys to knock off fur a hour. Bein’ de fo’man I could do dat you know. Don I wont up to de Gipay van. Hit was plumb full er chillum, dmags, an’ half starved, thievish lookin’ mens an’ vimmins dat lef’ de van an’ spill out on de grass when dey see me draw near.
“’All right Boss man,’ I say to do Chief, ‘what kind er talk you got fur me? “Pears lak you are sellin’ sumpin or you wouldn’t be so friendly wid cullud folks. Lemme see some samples of what you got.
“Sho nuff dey was sellin’ all kinds er lil trinkets, an’ medicines to heal ev’ything fum ole age to to malaria-fluense. Dey was tellin’ fortunes too. An’ dat’s what kotch me. Yessum, dey tole mine. Hit come pretty straight too. An’ dey only charge me fo’bits. Dey charge de others six bits dough on account of day wasn’t so important as me.
“De gipsy Chief an’ I talk as one head to another, an’ while as dispose de topics of de times. I notice dat his lef’ foot was swole, an’ mighty red. He say hit was de remains of a ole lockjaw attack, an’ dat he didn’t hope fur to git no better. Well, I tole him how to heal up dat ‘fected foot. Yessum, I give him direct-ions how to mix an brew Jimeon root, Pennyroyal leaves, sage, an’ foxgiove, an’ to seek his foot in dat till hits well ergin. I tole him hit couldn’t fail, ‘cause hit never had. An’ he was sho thankful. No’m he didn’t pay me nothin’ -- sactly, but he taught me how to tell fortunes. An’ I’s been independent ever since.
“I quit loadin’ cross-ties, an’ move to Montgomery, whar I open a lil Shop as Herbdoctor.. Fortune-teller, an’ Cunjure-man. I soon stop foolin’ wid herbs dou’. Dey wahn’t nuff money in dat fur me. Niggers won’t pay half dollar fur no herb medicine. But dey’ll spen’ five or ten dollars fur to git somebody cunjured. Dey’ll go on payin’ too, munt after munt, yer after yer fur to keep dat spell fasten on some po’ pusson what dey hates. I has cunjure cases dat’s been runnin’ fifteen year or no’, an’ dey ain’t out yit. In fac’ a good cunjure case never is Out as long as de engager am got de money to pay. I has a nice lil income out of de palsy, rheumatic pains, chills an’ fever, coughin’ fits, an’ sudden misery what I sends on folks to pacify dey enemies. Besides all dat, I charge fifty cents a week to keep de sickness on ‘em after hit’s once ketch holt.
“No’m, I don’t look at hit dat way. Dis is mah perfession. Hit ain’t no mo wrong den a lawyer acceptin’ money to keep a crook or a murderer fum bein’ ‘lectecuted: or a doctor curin’ some mean ole debbil dat ought to die anyhow. I’s done some hawm I reckon. But I’se done some good too. I’se done a heap er good in fac’ or dey wouldn’t be gittin’ ready fur me up in Heaben.
“Dey’s makin’ a place fur me on Golden Row in Heabon. Yessun, I’s done got de word, An’ I’s fixin mah affairs so’s I kin slip right out an’ not trouble nobody but de angles. I’s been a widderer twenty yers. But I’se got two daughters in de country. I done lef one or dem mah fo’ pos’ bed, an’ de pink silk cover you sees on it now, an’ mah guilts over dar in de clawset. She gits de rockin’ chers too. An’ mah picture dat I had enlarge las’ Ap’ul. I gwiner leave her some ins’uance too. An’ a nice carpet, an’ all mah cookin’ pots an’ pans, an’ all de money I got in de bank. Hit ‘pears so Christian lak fur a man to leave property to his daughter instend or willin’ it to some fas’ piece-or a wuffless widow. So I an leavin what I got to mah oldest an’ bes’ daughter.
“To mah other daughter I’s willin’ de hat-rack you sees out yonder in de hall, as a reminder she ain’t never hang her hat in mah house since she went outer hit wid dat no-count gamblin’ nigger fun Wilcox county. I’se had a fancy motto painted to leave her too: ‘bout de serpent’s toof an’ de thankless chile. Dat’s sho gwiner rile her temper. Sorter wish I could be aroun’ fur to watch her rah an’ pitch. Mebbe I’ll see hit anybow. Dey might has front seats in Heaben fur dem what wants to gaze down on dey relatives while de wills dey lef’ is road out to ‘em.
“But I ‘spec when all dat is takin’ place I’ll be flyin’ ‘roun, testin’ mah bran’ new wings to make sho dey didn’t fit me out a size dats way too small fur me. I’s a big man an’ I needs a big pair er wings. I wants ev’ything big aroun’ me in Heaven. Dis lil fo’ room stucco house seem big to me when I fust come into hit. Now hits too small. I wants a big house in Heaben. I’m sho to have it too or dey wouldn’ be workin’ droves er angles day an’ night buildin’ mah house. Dey’s gittin’ mah herp ready too. Jus’ t’other day I hear ole Mr. Peter de boss man say, ‘Gab’ul, chune dat harp fur Uncle Henry. S’posen he comes sudden lak, an’ his harp ain’t ready? Lawd hep us! Y’all triflin’ critters wish den you had step mo’ lively. Y’all will ‘tend to yo’ business mo’ prompt I’se thinkin’, when Henry’s hyah to keep his eye on de back alleys er Heaben. I can’t watch ev’ybody all de time, an’ y’all jus’ natchelly takes advantages.
“’In case I’se busy doin’ sumpin else when Henry bus de bell, lemme know at once, ‘Mr Peter say, ‘So’s I can meet mah frien’ at de gate. An’ you Notifias, ‘he says to a super Angel-Flunky, ‘see to hit dat you ‘nounces Uncle Henry correct when he enters de po’tals. You clap yo’ han’s fur ‘tention, an’ you say, “M’lord … Mr. Peter an’ Paul … ladies an’ gent’mun of de Heabenly, hosts, I presents Uncle Henry Baysmo’ of Montgomery Alabama. Receive him as nice as you know how.. An’ do what you kin to make him feel at home. He’s a great an’ good man. Den you Sanctifies, what’s got to approve de motion, you say, “Amen to dat!” An’ de measure am carried, makin’ Uncle Henry a full fledge citizen of de Celestial township known to lg’nant mortals as de Heabenly Home.
“No’m, I don’t have no particular regret at leavin dis wicked ole sin-soaked worl’.” Uncle Henry’s glance fell condescendingly on the three apparently, well to-do, well educated, well meaning white ladies whose future he had discerned for them through the tall glass of clear water he kept on a table near a window curtained in crisp, pink organdy draperies.
He knew they, regarded him as a foolish, meandering old Negro, paid to say so much- and no more. He knew they would laugh at him when went away. He had no more doubt of that than of their return. For sooner or later, all of Uncle Henry’s clients come back, bringing a friend or two along for company. All are there obviously to find out something. One is concerned about her health. Another fears financial losses. Others have enemies who are working against them. Can Uncle Henry see a dark- or a light women- stirring up mischief in any quarter? Uncle Henry can. He always sees something. And the information he produces is often uncannily correct. Occasionally a wild sensation is created by some announcement from the unaffectedly maive seer. But generally the seanees are uneventful in character. Sometimes those waiting in the meagerly furnished hall that serves as a reception room will hear suppressed tittering in the sanotum beyond. When this happens, Uncle Henry is intensely pleased. There is no effort on his part to amuse. But he would rather his clients left in a good humor then in a mood of depression.
Invariably affable, and ever ready to reply to questions concerning Other individuals, Henry is particularly adept eveding any query designed to reveal certain past activities of his own. The first inquiry he will feign to misunderstand. When the interrogations persist, he undergoes a complete loss of memory; cannot recall just where he came from, or what the exact circumstances were that attended his leaving. Some there are among his own race who say that years ago Henry was in trouble-big trouble-in Texas. They clain he run away Texas-for reasons wisely kept to himself; and that his name is not Henry, Baysmore, but Henry white. They say too, that Henry’s best and oldest daughter is a vagary of his imagination. (It is so Christian like for a man to leave property to his daughter.)
Henry’s friends and neighbors also maintain that his dislike of windows is due to his having married a young woman who had had two previous husbands. She left Henry, they assert, and is living with another men in Dallas county. It is she- they say- who will come in to Henry’s money when he dies. Those have seen the widow-in-uniting, picture her as a fairly young, “small-built”, neat, yellow woman., with a good disposition, and some book learning. They say she didn’t got along with Henry because she couldn’t stand “dat mumbo-jumbo conjure stuff.”
According to Henry’s clain however, there is no truth in the story. He says his enemies wanted to fix up a “scandiculous” tale him, so they “ma’ied him off to a window. “Follow is ‘bliged to have entertainment. “he avers. “AN’ fishin’ in somebody’s trouble-pond gives ‘em no’ recreation at less outlay, don anything else day kin do. Tongue waggin’ is de cheapest an’ mos’ usefulness apo’te day is. Hit lets off de excess steam dat moon folks totes aroun’ inside.
With around psychological reason Uncle Henry believe every one should have something to be proud of- and something to look forward to, just as he is anticipating his residence in the big house of blue and white marble that is being prepared for him on Golden Row in Heaven.
“Whenever day sees a good men on earf gittin’ ready to jine ‘em above, ole Mr. Peter he say, ‘Jacob, men’ dat ladder. I wants hit done today. Hlijah, you take des bears back whar day b’longs. Don’t you I came see ‘em in hyah no mo!. Hoses fetch yo! book. You ain’t got not time to was’s hittin’ dat rock, or readin’ commandmints. Us got to pull a lil pep into dis reception committee. Solomon, spruse up yp’ wisecracks. Devid, whar dem gals you run across at de night club? ‘Phone ‘em to git ready fur to meet uncle Henry. Grown-boy, step up den alterations! Henry’ll be hyah mos’ any minute now… Ga’bul chune dat harp. ‘Fears to me hit done bust a string. How Den’l, you look see if Henry ain’t on de way.
“ Yes Lawd, I’s comin’.”
