August 7, 1939
Mrs. Chris Pappas ( Greek Mother )
101 East 4th St.
Charlotte, N. C.
Dudley W. Crawford, Writer
No Names Changed
"MY GREEK HUSBAND"
Mrs. Chris Pappas, whose husband owns the Sanitary Grill at 101 East Fourth Street, Charlotte, N.C., was formerly Miss Gussie Williams. She is a graduate of Queens-Chicora College, Charlotte, and the Richmond School of nursing, Richmond, Virginia. She gave up the practice of her profession after two years for the love of a Greek soldier in the American Army. Her story is told in the following words:
"I was reared on a large farm near Charlotte, finished high school in the country and entered college here at the age of eighteen. I received a Bachelor of Science degree and immediately entered a school of nursing; finishing the course in the summer of 1918.
"I returned to Charlotte for the practice of my profession and believe I would have made a successful nurse if I had not met Chris? pappas. He was stationed at the army camp near the city and happened to drop in at the boarding house where I lived. From the minute I was introduced to him, I knew I would never want to nurse any more, unless it was Chris or his children. However, at intervals, after he was ordered over seas, I had romantic dream of going with the army to France, finding Chris sick or wounded on the battlefield, and all that sort of "stuff ", but I was too practical to even try to get in the army.
"Soon after he went to France the terrible Influnza epidemic broke out; every available nurse and doctor proved in-adequate to cope with the situation, and love dreams were forced into the background. But for the long hours on duty I would have suffered many heartaches during the time my lover was at the front. Things soon got back to normal, the war was over, but I continued to suffer because "my man" had to remain for some time with the army of occupation.
"Finally the happy day of his return: I journeyed to Hoboken to meet him, and when I saw him walk down the gangplank I was positive he was the handsomest man in the whole United States Army. We were married immediatley and returned to Charlotte, Instead of a wedding trip we spent the first week of our married life opening a restaurant, and I am sure no girl ever had a more glorious honeymoon than I did those first few weeks in that little cafe on Tryon street.
"No, I do not think my husband is so very exceptional; but the characteristic of the Greek to pay homage to his wife, his tendency to place her on a pedestal; giving her his complete Confidence and love, somehow fitted into my old-fashioned Southern ideas, which I doubtless formed by reading a Certain type of Southern love stories during my girlhood.
"Yes, you might say that my husband is above the average among the Greek immigrants in this section in that he has a fine family background, is well educated in both Greek and American schools and is broadminded about almost everything But my observation of the Greeks as a people leads me to believe that the matter of filial devotion is one of their most outstanding traits Owing to his excellent education, his wide experience with many types of people, both in America and other countries, he is more generous and tolerant than the average Greek There must have been times when he had ample reasons to be provoked at some of my American peculiarities; but owing to his extreme kindness and generosity, I have never detected the slightest irritation He has often called my attention to them, but never at a time or place where it would be embarassing to me You have perhaps noticed that he has a wonderful command of the English language, and he often lauge at some of my Clumsy expressions.
"While I did not deon it necessary to do so, I spent eighteon months in Greece in order to learn more about the Greek people. My husband' s relatives and all the. prominent people of the city seemed to vis with each other in an effort to entertain me At times I felt as If I was some visiting celebrity. Owing to the fact that I spoke very little Greek, so much attention was at times embarrassing. However, the Greeks have a keen sense of humor and they derived a lot of pleasure from my clunsy conversations.
"I placed my children, age ten and five, in the Greek public school, and they became very efficient in the language during our visit in fact, the younger one almost forgot her English. That visit enabled me to more fully understand and appreciate the Greek race I was in the homes of all classes and found that most of their outstanding traits are commendeble. Among their most noticable traits, even among the wealthy, is their desire to do something useful I visited in the home of one wealthy family where three of the girls were dentists and two of the boys were physioinna. In the homes of the less well-to-do I found the girls engaged in all sorts of handicraft They make the moot gorgeous rugs, draperies and carpets; delicate laces and embroideries, and do exquisite china-painting, Many of these articles are offered for sale at the regular Monday morning bazaar, held in the public square.
"As for the Greeks here in Charlotte I find there are two KJtaat SHX types. Most of the older people try to retain all the customs and practices of the old country, especially in the matter of restraints thrown about their children. The younger people feet under these restraints, and some of the boys refuse to submit to them. This intolerance among the older people is, of course, due to ignorance and lack of the proper outlook upon the future, just as it is throughout the world. My husband and I both agree that since we are first of all Americans, we must necessarily conform to American customs.
"While many Greek boys ignore their parent's wishes in certain matters, all of the girls seem to remain strictly Greek. There is no record here of a Greek girl marrying an American, but several Greeks have married American girls. The American youngsters try to be friendly and cordial toward the Greek boys and girls, but find them so hesitant and reluctant • about accepting advances, they soon give up the effort and put them down as clannish, selfish or " peculiar." This is particularily true of the girls. They are clearly more susceptable to their mother's influence than are the boys. From my observation, I would state that most of the boys from the well-to- do Greek families are thoroughly " Americanized."
"There is what you might call a " minor " trait of the Greeks, and one that you have perhas noticed, since my husband has refused to give you his life history. That is, they have a sort of Inferiority complex. They are overly sensitive, too modest, and often ill at ease among the Upper class Americans, They shy away from any sort of ballaboo or publicity. Knowing my husband as you do, you will agree that he would be a welcome member of any civic or social club; yet he does not belong to any except the Greek socities. The local newspaper is planning to devote a special section of a Sunday issue of their paper to the Greeks, and have asked him to let them carry his picture and a short story about his business, but he refuses to consider it. Personally, I consider such matter perfectly legitimate publicity. It is certainly something the average American would be glad to get, even though it in not deserved.
"Yes, my children are growing up as Americans. My oldest is a boy of seventeen lie won several honors while in high school and for the past two summers has been a counsellor at a boy's camp My second child is a girl of twelve, and the baby is alos a girl of ten years old, No, the rearing og the children is not left entirely to me; we go along together in this particular just as we do in business We have taught them to love and honor their Greek ancestory, but at the same time teach them that their first allegiance is to America"
