Original Names	Changed Names
Dr. Ross	Edward Rountree
Dr. Plummer	Dr. Carpenter
Yonkers	Histon
New Rochelle	Old Port
Raleigh	Walterbury
Camdan	Cambell
Philadelphia	Philistine
Temple	Watauga
University of Pa.	University of Sylverster
Wilberforce	Georgeton
Villa Nova	St. Mary's
Ohio State	State College in Midwest
Meharry	Southern Medical College
City Hospital, St. Louis, Mo.	Municipal State School
Va. State College	Southern State School
Dr. Irvin Abell	Dr. Edmond Dell
Date Of first Writing	July 14, 1939
Person interviewed:	Dr. Ross (Negro)
Address:	10 worthst., Raleigh
Occupation:	Physician
Name Of Writer:	Nancy T. Robison
No. Of Words:	2,500
YOUNG DR. EDWARD ROUNTREE
YOUNG DR. EDWARD ROUNTREE
"Keep that ice bag on your side, and take your medicine regularly. I'll be back tomorrow. If you need me before then, call me," said Edward Rountree, arrayed in a summer suit of white and smiling happily. He was leaving the house of his first patient. He had long awaited this moment-----the time when he could be of service to his people and to impart the knowledge he'd gained through years of toil, study, and research.
From a child he'd wanted to practice medicine, as had his grandfather, father, and uncle. He'd even donned his father's hat, weather-beaten and worn, carried his bag and played doctor among his young companions and two sisters.
His dream was not accomplished overnight, but it was ever present as he worked toward that goal.
"I was born a Catholic, in New York State in 1910. During my early school days, my father, who came from North Carolina, was trying to find a suitable location to settle down and establish himself"; said young Doctor Rountree, "so my grammar school training was done in four different places, Hinston, Old Port, Walterbury and Campbell. I finished the eighth grade in Campbell and started to high school there. In my third year, Father moved back to Hinston. My junior year's work was done there. Then I went to Philistine and finisned high school.
"While in Philistine, I became interested in Watauga University. So, the following fall, I entered there.
"Watauga is a lovely school. Of course it is an inter-racial institution. Unlike some universities, it has no rolling campus and grassy slopes. The different departments are housed there, and there are also dormitories; but the school is in the heart of the city and a stranger would not know that it was a school at all. Very few students live there. Most of them live with their families or room and board in the city.
"Among other things, Watauga is noted for its sports. Foremost among these is football. One of the men trying out for the team was a Negro. He made it. Nov, even though Watauga is in the North, there were prejudices to be found among the student body. They positively didn't want a Negro on their team. Since they could do nothing about it, they became as insulting and annoying toward him as they possibly could.
"I remember one day we attended chapel. There were nine of us who ran around together. One of this number was the football player. We entered the chapel and sat together. Just behind us sat a group of white boys who were envious of my companion's good fortune. To be mean, one boy pushed his knee against the seat ahead, thus constantly shaking the Negro boy. He asked him to stop. Still it continued. Finally, my friend asked me to move over, I did so, thinking that he wanted to change his seat. When I'd moved, he turned in his seat and gave his annoyer a right uppercut. The blow landed on his nose, tearing it a-loose. Chapel was over for all of us. We had a race riot right then and there.
"After about fifteen minutes, we were all subdued. The executive committee met; and as a result, the nine of us and thirteen white fellows were ousted.
"Immediately I made application to the University of Sylvester. I was refused. Then I applied and was accepted at Georgeton University. Watauga would not transfer my credits, so I had to start at the very beginning again.
"After staying there for two years, I changed to St. Mary's, a Catholic college. It was there that I completed my college work and received the Bachelor of Science degree. At the end of the next year, I had earned the Master of Science degree from a state college in the midwest. To take care of my expenses, I served as houseman and chauffeur for a family. They gave me room, board and $70 a month. From there I went to a university in the far West to do some advanced work.
"It was then that I remembered that the University of Sylvester refused to let me grace its famous halls. I decided to file my application, primarily to see if I could get in now. They did accept me. So I studied there for awhile.
"Every since grammar school days, I've had some type of summer job. I always liked to have some spending money of my own. I remember my first job came right after the war. I was a shoeshine boy. Most of my customers were soldiers that frequented the neighborhood beer garden. They paid and tipped me well. As fast as I'd do a job, I'd go straight to the confectionery store. Honestly, I ate so much candy and cake that even today, I don't like either. My next job was a mechanic's helper. Instead of investing my earnings in candy and cake as I did on my first job, I decided to buy clothes. With my money, I was able to buy my school clothes and have a little spending change.
"The summer after I left the University of Sylvester, I worked as a waiter on the railroad. Besides my compensation, it offered a chance to see many parts of the country that I hadn't seen, to meet a variety of people, and to have a different type of contact to any that I'd ever had.
"In the fall of 1932, I went to a Southern Medical College. From the very beginning, I found the study of medicine as fascinating as the beautiful, ivy-covered buildings and the cultured atmosphere one finds on the campus of such a school.
"During my senior year at the medical school, I met Brenda Terrence, a charming and attractive young lady, who was studying at a nearby school on her Master's degree. We were friends from the start. I saw much of her during the remainder of the year. Then I graduated and was sent to interne at a municipal hospital in a large midwestern city. Brenda went to a southern state college to teach. Even though we couldn't see each other often, we corresponded regularly, and were married August 22, 1938. I continued my internship a third year as resident surgeon.
"Even while interning, a doctor has some trying and difficult cases. I remember one night, I'd just dressed to leave for my evening off, the first that I'd had in three weeks, when I heard a loud speaker.
" 'Calling Dr. Rountree, calling Dr. Rountree, report to operating room at once.
"Now I had to rush back into my uniform, though tired, sleepy and hungry, with no food in sight and rest completely out of the question. My evening was completely ruined, because a man's girl friend became angry with him and bit his ear off. I mean completely off. We patched him up as well as possible. He lived, but with only one year.
"On another occasion, a man was brought in almost dead from a stab wound in his heart and the loss of blood. The sacs around his heart had been severed. We operated. After much difficulty in finding his type of blood, we gave him a blood transfusion. He lived.
"Delivery of children by untrained midwives often proves disastrous to the mother and child. Besides not always knowing just what to do, they are also careless and unsanitar at times. During the spring of my last year at the hospital, we received a case that is a good example of incompetent workmanship. Two midwives had attempted to deliver a baby. It was a breech case the feet came out first. In attempting to complete the delivery, they pulled on the little body and caused the head to separate. Then they rushed the patient to the hospital, to us. Had we had the case in the beginning, the delivery would have been successful and with much less pain. Now we had to extract the head by manual labor and mutilation. Of course the patient was terribly torn and had to be patched up, but she lived.
"Two or three weeks later, I left the hospital to star on cases for myself. I've always wanted to be a physician in a large town or small city. Now, after many years, my preparation is complete. My dream is realized. I am now ready to serve humanity.
"As copartner to my uncle, Dr. Carpenter, I have met many folk and had a few patients or my own, as well as treating some of his, too. However, in time, I want to build up my own clientele. Now I am at the beginning of my career. So far, I don't even have a salary standard.
"What do I think of socialized medicine? I don't like socialized medicine because everything would be too much like a dictatorship. People would lose much of their freedom, and doctors would not give individual thought to cases as they would in private practice. I think that Dr. Edmond Dell voiced the opinion of most of the physicians, as he certainly did for me, when he made th following statement in the November 27, 1938, issue of the New York Mirror: 'The American Medical Association has not opposed insurance against the costs of sickness, of disability, of unemployment, of old age or death. It does oppose any interference by any outside agency-----commercial, governmental, or otherwise-----into the relationship between doctor and patient which is fundamental in good medical care.' These insurances will put medical attention in the reach of all who need.
"While I don't approve of socialized medicine, I am in harmony with the present administration because it has opened many jobs and created others to directly help humanity and to save the country from chaos. The problem that puzzles me is, just how will the country get out of debt without putting the people back in the same circumstances by taxation and by raising the cost of living?
"Personally, I have no party affiliations. I am always for the best man, regardless to what side he is on. The man for the people is the man that I vote for.
"I have only been married for eleven months; but someday I hope to build a little home and raise a family. I only want two or three. There are three of us, two girls and myself. Since every child is entitled to the proper training and education, and since the better the child's training is, the more fit he or she is for citizenship. I feel that two or three at the most is enough because the average family is not able to properly educate more than two. Two or three prepared citizens are much more useful in a community, state, or country, than a dozen undesirable ones. This country has too many of the diseased, ignorant and half-starved people now. To encourage reproduction means to encourage a continuance of this. The thing we want to stress is birth control; particularly among the lower classes. So many people think that birth control is terrible; that it is sinful. That is not true. It is sometimes healthful and wise. The masses of people cannot see it that way. Education must make them understand.
"The educational system is improving each year; thus enabling more people to qualify for good citizenship. That is one thing that the Negro has long been desirous of. I also look forward to the day when we will have economic equality and less prejudices. The country has made rapid progress since the Negro was emancipated; and I feel that in time, these conditions will be better too. When this time does come, America will be a better place in which to live."