"...MAYBE WE'LL SAVE A LITTLE MONEY"
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athena
John N. Booth
Field Supervisor of
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
July 25, 1939
February 8, 1939
July 11, 1939
Mr. Pete Nicholas Chivilis (Greek)
Mrs. Pete Nicholas Chivilis(American)
121½ East Clayton Street
Athens, Georgia
Candy Kitchen Proprietor
S.B.H.
".....MAYBE WE'LL SAVE A LITTLE MONET"
Paul Demetrius’ wife was presiding over their small lunch stand while her husband made candy in the kitchen. The long glass-enclosed display case facing the street contained a meager supply of peanut brittle and caramel candy, and the shelves back of the counter held rows of bottled beer and wine. Fastened to the opposite wall were benches and tables of the breakfast nook type. Each table was well-screened by the high-backed benches, affording privacy for the diners. A large circulating heater in the center of the room seemed sufficient for warming the small establishment.
When I explained to Mrs. Demetrius that I wanted to record her husband’s life story, her eyebrows lifted ominously. "My husband’s life story!" she exclaimed.
"Oh, I’d like to have one from each of you," I hastily amended.
"Good, let me tell you mine first," she said, with evident relish. "Of course mine won't be as interesting as Paul's for he was born in the old country, but I’m an American girl - born and reared right here in Georgia.
"Before I begin, come here. Sit on this high stool and rest your book on the counter. Then I can talk and wait on customers at the same time. You know Paul and I have to hustle for our living and I can’t afford to let people come in and not see ’em soon enough to give quick service.
"I lived on the Jackson County farm where I was born until I was 5 years old, then we moved to Carl, Georgia, where my parents continued to farm. There were just the three of us children - my two brothers and me.
"Soon after I started to school the Baptists built Perry-Rainey Institute at Auburn, Georgia, and as we lived about halfway between Carl and Auburn, I was sent there until I reached the ninth grade. The school changed hands at that time, and I quit. Those buildings are now used by a WPA sewing room, I understand.
”I lived the usual life of a village child, helping my brothers and father cultivate cotton and corn, setting out sweet potato sprouts, cabbage and tomato plants, and picking cotton. I've picked cotton many a long September day and thought nothing about it. We children loved to go riding on the farm horses and often raced each other to see who could go a certain distance in the shortest time. The worst whipping I ever got from my father was when I had galloped a horse until he got overheated and then let him drink too much water. That horse was awful sick and ne came very near dying.
"My father was a tenant farmer. We moved to Hull, Georgia in 1916 and lived there one year. Hull is 6 miles north of Athens.
While we lived there the United States entered the war, and my youngest brother enlisted. In due time he went to France.
"We moved to Athens in 1917, and since daddy didn't have a regular job he just picked up whatever he could find to do. I took a business course, and after finishing it I started to work as cashier for an insurance company at $40 a month. It took all I made to help my family with the living expenses and to buy my own clothes. A year later I succeeded in getting a job at $50 a month with a credit clothing company, and I was working there in 1921 when I married Paul Demetrius.
"Paul was the handsomest man I had ever seen then. He wasn't stout like he is now, and he had the most beautiful teeth, hair, and eyes. However, we all fade as the years go by and you couldn't expect him to look now like he did 18 years ago. He is 54 years old now.
"We made all the candies we sold, and at times we were producing as many as twenty-five different kinds of candies. We also sold sandwiches, milk, soft drinks, cigars, cigarettes, and smoking tobaccos. We catered to the student trade and I want to say right now that we’ve always appreciated the trade those boys and girls have given us. They are our friends. We've made lots of money, and we’ve spent lots of it too. So as the years rolled along and the depression crept up on us we found ourselves in much the same position as the proverbial grasshopper. However, with the patronage of our good customers we've weathered the storm very well.
"Candy making is a hard, hot job, but there’s money in it, for people will always have a sweet tooth. We’ve been able through our occupation to provide for our family of seven. The ages of our five children range from 8 to 16 years. Our oldest girl graduated from high school in June. Since she started in grammar school at the age of 6, you can see she didn't miss a grade. We expect to give each of our children college training and it's going to be provided with money made on sales of our candies and other refreshments."
While Mrs. Demetrius talked, her husband waited on customers, and made quick trips back to the kitchen to see after the candy. "Our supply of candy has run low again," she confided, "and Paul is trying to get a quantity of it made up that will hold out for awhile. We sell wine at 10 cents a glassful. By the bottle the prices differ, depending on the kinds people ask for. Wine prices range from 50 cents for a half-pint to $3 a quart. We sell beer by the bottle only, but we do provide a glass for the customer to drink it from."
I noticed that one woman had made three different trips to the place, each time ordering a glass of wine. She was nicely dressed, and had large brown eyes and curly black hair. From her accent I surmised that she was of foreign nationality, probably Greek. When she had left after her third glass of wine, Mrs. Demetrius informed me: "That woman drinks at least a quart of sherry a day. I often wonder why she doesn't buy it by the bottle. It would be cheaper for her. I told her that one day, and she said she would rather dress and come downtown for it, as she didn't like to sit at home and drink by herself."
Several customers came in and Mr. and Mrs. Demetrius were both busy for a time. Mrs. Demetrius is of medium height and weight. Her hair was combed straight back from her face and coiled low on the back of her head. Her blue and red costume worn with tan slippers and hose added harmonizing notes of color to the surroundings.
In heavily-accented English Mr. Demetrius asked -what I wished to know about him. It was necessary for his wife to interpret his question, and to relieve any embarrassment he might feel, I apologized to him for my inability to understand Greek. "That's all right," he told me, making an effort to speak better English. "I can't understand you no better'n you can me. Well, 45 or 50 years ago, things were much different than they are now." At this point he and his wife indulged in a stiff argument over the accuracy of his statement.
"You can just bet they're different," Mrs. Demetrius insisted. "The Greeks have a way of living to the extreme."
"What you mean extreme?" her husband shouted. "There ain't no difference only Greece is so much older'n this country."
"Just the same Greeks are extreme in everything they do," she retorted."They know no middle ground."
"You don't know what you're saying," he insisted, "You ain't got a point to prove it by."
"All right, take garlic for instance," she answered. "You Greeks can't eat a thing without garlic smeared all over it as well as cooked in it. I get so tired of smelling it and cooking with it I feel like at tines I can't stand it no longer."
"Sit down!" he said derisively, "Trying to prove a point by garlic! Why garlic is a Greek's life! That point was considered hundreds of years ago end it was the idea that to eat garlic would make a man healthy, strong, and wise."
“It makes you smell strong all right," she emphasized, "that’s one thing sure."
“Oh, shut up about that, and talk to this lady about your ownself while I wait on the trade," he ordered.
Soon he returned. "My wife thinks she knows ever’thing about Greece and Grecians," he stated belligerently, adding slyly, "but she ain't never been over there."
"No matter if I haven’t been there," she snapped, "I’ve been living among ’em for 18 years. When I go to ride with you and your friends, you folks jabber so I always come back with a headache. And, as for the jabber you don’t know yourselves what it’s all about."
"You don’t have to go next time," he angrily told her. "Suppose you just stay home so you won’t be sick. You told your story to the lady, now let me tell mine."
"Go ahead," she sneered, "nobody's trying to stop you."
"Well, to begin with, I was born in 1885 on a farm just outside the little village of Arvanlokeraseer, Greece. We called the place Tripoli, which means ’in the land of the cherry trees." Our home was about 28 miles from Sparta. During my childhood I played around with other little boys and helped my father and mother on the farm and in the vineyard.
"My parents wanted me to finish school. But, no! I didn’t want to go to school no more after I finished what would be the fifth grade over here. Every morning I would hide out - What you call it? Play hookey? - and my mother thought I’d gone on to school like a good little boy. We were taught on the same principle of education now used in America. We learned about America as the rich and beautiful land. Every Greek looks on America as their shining angel, and it's the height of their ambition to come to this country.
"Living conditions in Greece are quite different from most of the other countries. For instance, there are no bread lines. Every-body must work there for there is no form of government-paid relief in Greece. of course, we have some awful poor people in Greece, just like here, but they have to work for what they live on, and they do all work. Fanning is the principal occupation. They make lots of wine and olive oil. Some of the finest olive oil on the market comes from Greece. Greeks are by their wine like Germans are about beer. Wine is of the same importance at meals in Greece as coffee and tea in America. It almost takes the place of coffee and tea in the old country. Water is no good for drinking in Greece? No. Milk is served warm, freshly milked from the goats, and cheese made from goat milk is produced in great quantities for home use. No farm is complete without its sheep and goats.
"All our clothes were made at home when I was a child. Every family had as many sheep as they could afford, and most of the clothes were of wool. The wool was sheared, spun, and woven into cloth right there on the farm. I have two blankets that I brought over here with me. I helped my mother weave them when I was a boy, and even now the colors are just as fresh and bright as they were the day we made them. We didn't have no commercial dyes. My mother made her's out of mulberries and other things.
"There are no wood houses in Greece. They are of marble, stone, or perhaps of stucco, and most of them have tile roofs. There are no porches built on to the houses there, but they do have open courts on the side of the house where the sun doesn't strike. In my boyhood, food that had to be boiled was cooked in our open fireplace, and the baking was done in stone ovens of various shapes and sizes.
"I used to sit end dream of coming to the great and rich country of America, and I promised myself that just as soon as I was old enough to make the trip I would come. My mother would often say, 'What are you thinking about, my boy?'
"’Nothing, mother, nothing,' I'd say.
"'Oh, yes, you are! I can guess,' she'd say, with a touch of sadness in her voice, 'America! America! Is it not enough that one of my sons is in America?' Still I dreamed on and saved what money I could. When I reached the age of seventeen I wrote to my brother who had already gone to America, and asked him to send me money for the trip. What he sent, added to what I'd saved was not enough for the expense of first class passage, so I came in the steerage. I left Ellis Island and went straight to Ohio, where my brother was. I worked in his cafe for my room and food, and a little spending money - not much.
"After working 11 months for my brother in America, I went back to Greece to join the army and fight for the old country. That was in 1912 when Greece was allied with Bulgaria, Serbia, and Montenegro against Turkey. Our country won that war, and after 3 years in Athens, Greece, I got my discharge from the army and came back to America. In the meantime my brother had become dissatisfied in America and had sold his cafe and gone hack to Greece. He had made quite a bit of money here, and time and again he had sent money to his wife and children in Greece begging them to come to America, but they would not leave the old country, and so he left here and went back to his family. They are now living in the old home place where we were born and raised.
"When I came back from the old country I opened a barroom, in Ohio and did very well until I had to close that business out because of the prohibition law that was passed about that time. I came on to Athens, Georgia, and got a job in a fruit store. I didn’t get much, pay to start, at least you Americans would have considered it as near nothing, particularly in view of how high wages had been during the war. Some say that Greeks can live on what Americans would starve on. Me, I saved over half of what little I made working for that fruit stand man."
An inebriated man entered the store. "Paul, I’m a sick man," he shouted. "I want a drink."
"You know, I have nothing but beer and light wine," Mr. Demetrius informed him.
"You know damn well I don’t want any of that," the maninsisted. "I need liquor that’s strong and straight."
"Well, you’ll just have to look for it some other place," the proprietor stated firmly. "You ought to know it by this time. You’ve been here often enough."
I thought it best to take my departure at this time, but when I returned a few days later to complete the story I found that something had evidently put a quietus on the consultant."Not today .... Come back another time .... Some other time,” were the excuses I met on several visits. I was' not surprised to hear the rumor that his place of business had been raided the day following my first visit.
One morning several months later I saw Mr. Demetrius standing behind his display case facing the street. He was in a happy humor when I stopped and asked for an appointment to complete his story. "Sure! Sure! Be glad to,” he said, and told me the day and hour that would be convenient for him to talk to me again. He is low in stature and is very stout. No matter how cold the day he never wears a coat. He barely parts his lips but does not move them as he talks, and it is hard to understand what he says.
When I arrived at the appointed time his eldest daughter was sitting in Mr. Demetrius' accustomed place at the front of the store. Someone was playing the piano. I asked for Mr. and Mrs. Demetrius, and the daughter told a younger child to call them. The playing ceased, and Mrs. Demetrius made her appearance, and in lieu of greeting asked, "You want to see Paul?"
"I'd like to see both of you if it's convenient," I told her.
He came promptly and soon we were seated around one of the tables near the rear of the room.
"Where did we leave off?" he asked, but without waiting for me to reply continued: "Oh, yes, we were talking about when I first came to this town and was working at the fruit stand. At that time there won’t as many Greeks in this country as there is now. Back in Greece, before you left to come here, you would get a list of their names on a paper that told where every Greek in America was located. I referred to that list and saw the name of a man I’d known in the old country that the paper said was in Athens, Georgia, so I came right on here when the prohibition law forced me out of the liquor business in Ohio. There are so few things our people can get to do in America. They usually work in fruit stores, cafes, or candy kitchens.
"I hadn’t been in Athens long when I was drafted to fight in France in the world War. ’They asked me which I’d rather do; fight with the American forces, or go back to Greece and fight with them. I told ’em quick: ’I fought for Greece when I was a citizen of Greece; now I will fight for America.’ They gave me my uniform, and the day before I was to leave for the front the Armistice was signed.
’’Soon after the war ended Sam Soupis talked me into buying his candy kitchen on another street here. He had made lots of money, and I was told at one time he was worth all of $50,000. I don’t know if that’s so. When he told me how much he was going to charge me for his equipment, I thought about it for a long time before I could make up my mind to pay him that much money. I had never made a piece of candy in my life before. Sam showed me the methods to be followed in making the different kinds of candies, and I finally took the place over. Soon Sam left for the old country.
”After I bought the place, I put in cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, sandwiches, milk, and soft drinks. Business was mighty good until 1229 when the depression came on me, then ever’thing went on the slump. I thought maybe one reason I was getting no business much was that I was on a side street, so I tried moving up here on the busiest street in town. That was in 1929 I moved, and I've been here ever since. My other place was much bigger and cost me $150 a month for rent. At first I paid $130 a month for this little place, but as times got harder'n harder the landlord agreed to cut the rent to $100 a month.
"When I first got that store from Sam, a man come in and liked to have got me in bad trouble. He come in my kitchen and bought several kinds of candy. He went out and poisoned it. Yes, he did? I was told that he sent it to some of his relatives way off up in northern New Jersey. One day a man come in my place and demanded to inspect my stock of candy. He was a federal man that had been sent down here to investigate the poisoning. When he found the poisoned candy was the same kind as what was made in my kitchen, he still never had nothing on me, for he traced the poison in the candy to the man that bought the candy from me." Mrs. Demetrius interrupted him. "Paul, let me finish the story of the poisoned candy. It’s such an effort for you to put it into English," she suggested.
"What makes you think I can't talk without your help?" he indignantly retorted.
"Well, then go on and spit it out and stop stalling around about it,” his wife snapped back at him.
"Don't talk so much, woman. Get on out there and wait on that customer," he told her. She obeyed.
"No, we have no sherry," she told the customer. Mr. Demetrius called her back to our table and instructed her, "Just you fill the glass out of another bottle and he won’t know no difference. They don't know wines no better’n you know how to sell. How can I make money and you all time telling trade we no got?” She returned to the customer and. he accepted the substitute for sherry. If he knew the difference, he made no complaint.
As the next customer sipped his beer he asked Mrs. Demetrius for some gin, saying, "I was told I could buy some here.”
She indignantly replied, "Well, whoever told you that didn't know what they were talking about. You might try at the Blank Hotel. Maybe they'd fix you up."
"That's too far to walk," he protested.
"Well, you might as well go on over there for you won't find I anything like that in our store. We stay well within the law." The youth sulkily paid for his beer and left.
Mrs. Demetrius came back to our table and demanded, "Well, did you finish telling the lady about the poisoned candy?"
"No," her husband replied, "You said you was going to tell her, so go ahead."
"All right," she responded, "we later learned that the reason he put the poison in the candy he sent to his relatives was to get them out of the way. If he could do that he would be the sole heir to their property. They said one or two of the children died, and the man was sent to prison for life."
Mr. Demetrius felt that it was now his turn to talk. "You know I told you Sam went back to the old country with his money after I bought my candy kitchen from him. Well, ne soon spent it all, and back to America he come again to make more money. He settled in Atlanta and opened another candy kitchen. He accumulated quite a lots of money again and went back to Greece. I never heard of him no more.
"When I first moved in this building it was during prohibition times and I couldn’t sell all the things I wanted to. I made and sold lots of ice cream in those days. Yes, I did, I made all that ice cream myself, and it was good ice cream. Most of my regular customers that bought candy from me bought my ice cream too. Then Mr. Roosevelt legalized the sale of beer and wine, so I stopped piddling along with ice cream. Folks that are good beer and wine customers ain’t so hot about ice cream. I made a good profit on my beer and wine until the present governor got in office. He’s got such a heavy tax on my business that I can’t make ' much. In summer we sell more beer than wine, but in winter it’s just the reverse." He asked his wife for the figures on sales of beer and wine, and seemed indignant when she said she did not keep a separate record on these two commodities. "We do all right,” he boasted. ”We sell enough to pay our store bills and to feed and clothe our family and to save some too.
"The lowly peppermint stick "s among the most interesting of our candies to make,” he explained. "That’s mostly because of the odd way we put the stripes on. First, we boil sugar and water together at a very high temperature. When it is done it’s poured out on a marble slab. Soon as it’s cool enough to handle, a small portion is colored red and mint flavoring is added to the balance, which is pulled over a big iron hook until it is creamy white in color. Then we piece it in a large pillow-shaped hunk on the steam table. We then turn our attention to the portion we have colored red. We cut it into strips and carefully place these red strips on the flat side of the pillow-shaped hunk. Our next step in candy-making is to pull it into long ribbons the size of the stick we want. We then whack it off in the proper lengths and begin to roll it. Properly rolled the red strips become stripes in perfect shape and design. Combining sugar and water and boiling it is the primary step in candy-making. With this basic recipe many candies can be made by addition of nuts, fruits, and various flavors. There is more money to be made in candy than anything else we sell, if we could just turn it over fast enough. Sales of cheap candy in dime stores have just about wrecked the candy-kitchen business.
“No, no car now. We have owned several cars. However, we have never owned our own home. I used to buy a new car ever' year. In that way I could keep a better looking car all the time and get a better trade-in price. Houses are too expensive to keep up, and the taxes will break you. I'd rather rent and save the difference. But my wife, she wants a home."
"I surely do want a home," his wife said. "I'm tired of moving from house to house and ruining our furniture. Besides, living downtown over the store this way is no way to rear children. They run wild in the streets for lack of a yard to play in.'
"Well," he retorted, 'You ought to be glad you're living and able to move.'
"That's just the way you talk,' she replied. "You never give your family’s comfort and welfare a thought. Money's all you think of. If you had our interests at heart you wouldn't have us living over the store for the children to come in contact with all the kinds of people that come and go here."
"Hush," he commended, "You don't know what you say. You ought to remember we couldn't pay house rent no longer and had to move down here to save rent money. You won't live in no cheap house. If we can't pay from 40 to 50 dollars a month you won't live in it. When we had money I didn't make you and the children live over the store. Now that the money's gone we got to economize and get back on our feet. We just have to save some money. We want to educate our five children, and it's going to take money for that. What else could we do but move down here? You ain't forgot how it was that we decided to move down here."
I expressed a desire to see the apartment and the kitchen where they make the candy. He was surprised at this request and gave me a hard look. His wife hastened to say, "No, we’d better not go up to the apartment. Paul doesn't approve. There's only four rooms, and the kitchen's so small it's a problem to cook and eat in it. We do try to have good wholesome food, but we pay no special attention to diet unless some member of the family gets sick. It's a wonder Paul don't die from over eating."
"How do you think I can live and do all the hard work I have to do if I don't eat. A big man like me eating like a bird! No. "Greeks are ordinarily very religious, and nearly all of them here belong to the same church - the Greek Orthodox Church," Mr. Demetrius explained. "The main difference in our faith and the Baptist denomination is that our babies are christened. Then when they are 8 or 9 years old they join the church and become regular members. My wife and children go to the Baptist Church. Me? No, I not know all the preacher say. Me? I believe in big families. Was I taught that in America? No.
"Greece was ruled by a good king and queen when I left there. I like kings, just like you Americans like the idea of presidents. We know nothing else over there but our king and queen and you know nothing but to have a president. Now that I live in America it's very good for me to like the president. I do like him lots, for he’s a good man. Oh, no, no, I don’t vote. Maybe I ought to, but, no.
"No, I won’t never go back to Greece no more. It takes too much money, and besides my wife? No, she no want to go but children? Yes, my oldest daughter says when she finishes college, gets good job, save money, she is going. That’ll be all right, if she can do it. I hope the rest of the children can do it too. But my wife and me? No. I’d like to go all right, but, no. I stay right here and sell my beer and wine, make and sell candies, raise my family, and maybe save a little money.”
