"TIME FOR MILKING"
By four o'clock in the morning, lights flicker through the windows of the Graham Dairy farmhouse. Sarah Graham calls to her son Dale, "Wake up son, it's time to begin milking." Francis, his slender, bright-haired younger sister is called. She puts on slacks and a sweather, and thison a fresh white apron as she goes. Out of the blackness emerges the stout figure of Ben, the hired helper. Doors and windows of the cattle stalls and of the bottling and refrigerating rooms presently show bright against the darkness. Cows stir and rise sleepily as Ben washes their well-filled udders. There is the swish of milk in pails, the clink of bottles and the rattling of cases. Smoke dimly visible rises from the kitchen flue as Sarah goes about getting breakfast. The day's work has begun.
By six o'clock the milk from 23 cows has been cooled and sealed by Francis in bottles boiled and sterilized by her mother the afternoon before. The milk drawn from the cows the afternoon before, bottled and kept in the refrigerator, isalso ready to be loaded on the truck. From the kitchen come the odors of hot coffee and fried county sausage. Thefamily eat breakfast while Ben loads the truck. When thatis finished Dale takes his place at the driver's wheel andstarts out on his morning rounds. It will be mid-afternoon before he returns from the town 15 miles away, where from door to door he delivers milk to his customers.
Around seven o'clock Ben waters the cows, drives themto pasture, and cleans out the stalls. Then he may goto work on the half-completed brick silo or to paintingon the new tin roofs of the weather-beaten barns and cowshed. Meanwhile, Sarah and Francis put the house in order, usually with the help of one of Sarah's married daughterswho is visiting at the time. At four-thirty in the afternoonmilking, sterilization of bottles, bottling, andrefrigeration will begin. And so it goes -- seven daysa week.
"Some mornings I oversleep," Sarah said when she gaveme an interview. "Why, yesterday I didn't wake up untilfour-thirty in the morning. We had to hustle to catch up." She generally goes to bed around seven o'clock.
Sarah Graham who is fifty-nine has run the dairy farmof 73 acres since her husband's death eight years ago. Her round face is deeply seamed. Though her thoughtsappear to move rapidly, her speech is husky and halting. "I have been a heart patient for 17 years," she explained cheerfully.
"After my husband's death, my older children helped me,"she said, "but nowthey are all married and have homes andfamilies of their own, all except Dale who is Just 21 and Francis who is younger. As soon as Dale establishes himselfhere and gets married, I'm going to leave the farm, livein town, do as I wish, read books and rest. I think I haveearned a rest."
Sarah's husband, Daniel, was born in England, she says, and came to this country when he was about 15 years old. Their four sons and eight daughters are all tall and blond. Sarah herself is short and dark. She was married to Daniel Graham at 14. He was eight years older. Two of the fifteenchildren she bore him died in infancy, and another child died after she was grown. "I don't approve of early marriages,"she said earnestly. "I told my daughters I hoped none ofthem would marry before they were 18."
The Graham family, since the marriage of Sarah and Daniel, has been connected with dairies or with dairyfarming. Shortly after their marriage, her husband boughthis stepfather's dairy in the suburbs of the county seat. He made no success of it. After he had resold it, he worked around numerous dairies and dairy farms as driver, milker, general helper, and finally as manager. Later he leftthe county to take the management of a large dairy farm ata State-owned sanitarium in the eastern part of the state. He and his family lived there for six years. In 1924 hereturned to the county and bought the farm now operated byhis wife and youngest son.
Sarah, although she has lived the greater part of herlife in the mountains, was born, she says, "in the low country at Woodward near Wilmington." Her father was acarpenter, but her grandparents were farmers.
"I used to visit my grandparents when I was a child," Sarah said, "and I remember much that I saw there. When I took charge of this farm eight years ago at my husband'sdeath, it helped me to remember how my grandfather didthings. When we began planting, I remembered how mygrandfather planted grain. As my boys got the ground ready, I followed them sowing the rye as I had seen him do it. I didn't miss many swathes. After the grain came up, theboys laughed at me and said the field looked like a checkerboard, but I didn't see them resowing it.
"When we had to cut up a hog," she continued, "I rememberedhow it was done on grandfather's farm. I had my sonstake the hog, after it was killed and scalded, and hang it on that tree up there," pointing through the window, "andthen I showed them how to cut it up.
"I didn't try to branch out on new projects when I tookcharge of the farm, but I made a living out of it for myselfand for the children, and paid up most of my husband's debts."
Sarah, along with other dairy farmers, lost money bythe coming of Bang's disease among the cows. "Since Stateinspection began five years ago," she said, "I have had 60 cows condemnedby the inspectors. The State paid me $20 to $25 apiece, but it was hard to replace them. There werefew cows left for sale in the county, and there was alwaysdanger of buying cow's already infected, until the Statetook over the inspection of privately owned cattle. Many of the small farmers resented this State inspection. Whatthey did with their own cattle was their own affair, they thought. But it seems to me very important that cows beinspected. All my children were raised on the bottle, and I know the value of clean wholesome milk. In replacingthe cows we lost we had to buy where we could, so our herdis mixed. But Dale hopes in time to keep only Jersys and Holsteins."
Sarah explains, too, how that the expense of equipmentbears heavily on the retail milk dealer. It cost severalhundred dollars to put in the apparatus for bottling milk. The bottles themselves are expensive, for each must be stamped with the name of the farm-owner. It is not unusual to buy$75 worth of bottles at one time, as they are broken or lost. The caps for the bottles must be stamped, too, with the nameof the owner, and although they are cheap they must be boughtin large quantities.
Sarah's refrigerating plant cost $1000. "I never wouldhave gotten such an expensive one myself," she said. "A $400 refrigerator would have been large enough for a farm of thissize.
"Two years ago I sold the farm to Dan Benton, a dairy farmer of some experience. He was to pay me $15,000. Forfirst payment he swapped me his home and a lot and a few acres of land. He valued it at $3,000.
"But he started out on too large a scale. He put in the $1,000 refrigerating plant. He bought a new milk truck and a new pump, when the old one would have done for severalyears. At the end of the year, he found he couldn't makeit. In the meantime Dale couldn't find anything suitable to work at, so I agreed to buy the farm back.
"I made a mistake when I agreed to assume all the debtson the farm. It seemed like for a while I'd learn of a newone every day. The new pump, truck, and refrigerator had allbeen bought on credit, so Dale and I are paying for them."
"But since Mr. Benton had not paid for them, couldn'tyou have had them taken back?" I asked her.
"Yes, but we needed the refrigeration, and by the timethe equipment was torn out and cheaper machinery installed, it would have cost nearly as much.
"We plan to apply for a Federal loan of $3,500. There isalso a debt of $1,600 that Daniel borrowed from a land companyin Raleigh a year orso before he died. If we can getthe Federal loan, I think we can payoff all indebtednessand have money left to buy several heifers. After alldebts are paid, Dale should clear around a hundred and fifty dollars a month. It would not be so hard to pay off the Federal loan.
"I could lend Dale the money myself." She went on toexplain that she owns three cottages in the county seat, bought with her husband's and daughter's life insurance. The three pieces of property have a market value of between $6,000 and $8,000 she thought. "By selling part of mytown property, I could raise enough to establish Dale, andlet him pay me by degrees. But I think it's better to putthe responsibility squarely on him."
Dale, when he can afford to do so, intends to installequipment for making concrete blocks, and so replace thewooden stalls and other frame buildings with ones made ofconcrete, like those on the neighboring dairy farms.
The Grahams, like other dairy farmers in this section, pay the hired helper $1 a day. The general custom is tofurnish the worker with a house, firewood, and all the milkhe can use. Work hours are from four-thirty a.m. untildark, every day of the week, except a part of Sunday.
"There's always something to be done on a farm," says Sarah. "A new-born calf has to be cared for; a sick cowhas to be treated; the hogs have to be fed -- we keep afew to eat the slops; the stalls have to be cleaned daily, except in winter when they are bedded in straw, then the straw must be changed often. We try to raise as much foodfor the stock as possible. Since our farming land is limited, we put it all into corn and lespedeza. We find it cheaper tobuy food for the table than to raise it at the expense ofcorn or clover for the cows.
"With so much to be done," she observed, "I find it bestto give each person his own tasks and hold him to them. Francis, for example, among other duties, attends to bottling themilk. I look after the washing and sterilizing the bottles. I keep the easy jobs for myself," she laughed, "on account ofthis heart trouble. Even when my grandchildren come to seeme, I give each his task. I have tried to make all my childrenindependent -- sometimes I think I made them too much so. But Dale depends upon me too much, I am trying to lead him toface his own problems and to make his own decisions."
Sarah's oldest son, Harry, is a foreman on a Federalbuilding project in Virginia. "He makes $75 a week," she says proudly. "He never finished high school; so he found ithard at first to read the blue prints. But his wife is welleducated, so she taught Harry what he needed to know about his work."
Jim, another son, works in an automobile tire retreading plant in town at $20 a week. He and his family live in aneat white cottage not far from his mother's farm. Edmundlives in town and makes $20 a week working for a news company. Two of Mrs. Graham's daughters were educated in a State collegefor teachers. One taught for several years prior to hermarriage. The other college graduate could not find a Teaching position, and is now married. Sarah thinks that in both cases theeducation given to the mothers will be good for their children, so the effort she spent to send them to college willnot be wholly lost.
"The chief recreation of the family is going to church and to the B. Y. P. U., I guess," she said in answer to a question. She considers the movies clean and educational and encouragesher children to go.
At this time of the year, the two-story rambling white Graham farmhouse, with its moss-green roof, seems to risefrom a group of reddening maples, and the whole set in aframe of grassy, dome-shaped hills, overtopped by dark, pine-clad mountains. Though old-fashioned, the farmhouse seemsquite comfortable. A grassy lawn, fringed with forsythia, leads to a deep front piazza. The parlor occupies the frontof the house. Its red carpet, green cushioned wicker furniture, and large-figured lace curtains are protected from thelight by drawn shades. It has an immense open fireplace, andon the walls are a few family portraits. The living room, which is well lighted, contains furniture that is simple butcomfortable, and the room has a cosy appearance.
Sarah Graham, seated in a rocking-chair, resting fromher morning tasks, expresses herself as being well satisfied. "All I want now," she says, "is to see Dale established on the farm. Then I want to rest."
