September 15, 1939
Charlotte Greek Study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
HOLT TRINITY
( Greek Orthodox Church, Charlotte, N.C.)
rented a hall on E. Trade St. After a few months at this location they moved to a hall on W. Trade St., where they remained for sometime, finally returning to the Chamber of Commerce.
Although services had been held regularly for three years it was not until 1922 that the church was completely organized with a membership of 35
In 1927, with the congregation steadily increasing and the need of a Church building of their own becoming a real necessity, a Church property at 1427 So. Boulevard was purchased from the Westminster Presbyterian Church at a cost of $32,500.
Since then, in consequence of additions and improvements, the value of the property has increased to $50,000, and now has an indebtedness of only $4000. The congregation plans to build in the near future an addition for the Sunday School.
A mixed choir of 20 voices furnish music for the services on Sunday.
The first resident Priest was Rev. Polycarpos Krithinakis who served the congregation for three years. The present Priest in charge is Rev. Chrysostomos Papalambrou who came to Charlotte recently from New York City where he had served for 16 years.
The Church contributes to the support of the Greek Theological Seminary located at Pomphret, Conn., where after completing 4 years of study, students graduate and then continue their studies for four additional years at either Athens, Greece or Constantinople, Turkey.
It is interesting to note the length of time required to prepare a Greek Priest for his Ministry, and it is also noteworthy to accredit the sincerity of purpose which has brought the Greek congregation of this Charlotte Church into such eminence and respect among the other denominations of the city.
Prior to 1919 there were comparatively few Greek people in Charlotte, but those few were, as all people of their race, imbued with a depth of religious fervor and sincere longing for religious expression.
Accordingly in 1919 in co-operation with St. Peters Episcopal Church, this small group of ten men and women met in St. Peters Parish House to hold their first service.
In the comparatively few years that most of them had resided in Charlotte, it had not been easy to establish themselves successfully in the business and civic life around them, and it was difficult now to support their church as they desired. But, despite financial limitations and discouragements, they labored on together in an effort to organize a church body.
In a few months after their first informal meetings the attendance increased and they were compelled to secure larger quarters, so they moved to the Chamber of Commerce building.
At this time, having no regular Priest, their congregation was supplied from Charleston, S. C, Columbia, S. C., and other cities, when a Priest was available; lay-readers conducted the other services.
Soon after regular services got under way they
