Life story of Mrs. Georgia Rice
144 W. Cypress St.
Elizabeth City, N. C.
"I DIDN'T RAISE MY CHILDREN TO WANT MEAT"
By - W. O. Saunders
Elizabeth City, N. C.
To take the place of a shortshort, under the same title, previously submitted.
"I Didn't Raise My Children to Want Meat"
You will find Hannah domiciled in a one storey frame houseon a fair Negro residential street. The little house consistsof three rooms with a lean-to kitchen. There is a toilet in theback yard. It used to be just a common garden variety of groundprivy until the town voted compulsory sewerage.
There is no bathroom in the house, but there is a sink and awater spigot in the kitchen, but the old pitcher pump located on thekitchen porch is still in use.
"My pump water is better for washing," says Hannah, "and I likespump water better'n this here city water; tastes sweeter."
The house is sadly in need of paint, and the roof leaks in spotsin stormy weather. The foundations are of wooden blocks that havesettled, causing the floors to warp and let in wintry drafts. Thereis a living room and two bed rooms. Hannah and her elder daughterused to occupy the master bad room,-if it could be dignified by thattitle-, two younger daughters, in their teen ages occupying the secondbed room. The boy, Roosevelt, who graduates from the could data normal thisyear sleeps on a cot in the living room and keeps his personal effectsin the room occupied by the younger girls. All the family makes itstoilet in the kitchen. The house is heated by one wood-burning sheetiron heater in the living room. The bed rooms get no little warmthfrom this heater when their doors are left open. Cooking is done onan oil stove. In the back yard is a big iron pot in which clothesto be washed are boiled. There is perhaps so much as a quarter ofan acre in the back yard, most of which Hannah uses for a garden, growing collards, potatoes, turnips, onions and tomatoes. There isa sage bush and a pepper plant in a corner of the garden.
The elder daughter, Eulala, who finished high school twoyears ago is now cashier at the Negro moving picture house, earningsix dollars a week, most of which she spends on herself. She contributesfifty cents a week of the $2.00 a week rent, for the privilegeof claiming the master bedroom for her very own. Hannah now sleepsin the adjoining room with the smaller girls, Emma, age 16 and Lenora, age 14. Eulala has installed electric lights, which thefamily must burn sparingly. Eulala pays the light bill and, occasionally, contributes a chicken or a roast to the Sunday dinner. She has dolled up her bedroom and bought a suite of parlor furniture, an Axminster rug and a floor lamp for the living room - on the installmentplan.
Roosevelt, the boy used to sleep on the couch in the living room, but Eulala put her foot down on his sleeping on the settee of herparlor suite. He sleeps on a pallet on the living room floor now, and likes it fine.
"Never was enough leg room on that old sofa, any way," he says.
The extent of Eulala's contribution to the expenses of thefamily end here, except for the small change that her brother andtwo smaller sisters can wheedle out of her from time to time. Ittakes all of Eulala's income to live up to her position. A lady whofaces the public from a theatre box office must look to her coiffuresand her facials, and dress in good taste.
Roosevelt, the boy wants to be a doctor, but can't make amedical school and is going to teach school when he graduates fromthe Colored State Normal this summer. He has worked regularly duringhis summer vacations, but has never been able to get anythingahead after clothing himself. And when he earns money he contributesfifty cents to a dollar a week to household expenses; which, his mother will tell you, just about pays back the little sums hehas borrowed of her the weeks he was in school and not working.
For fourteen years now Hannah has raised and kept her broodtogether, keeping them all in school. There was a sixth in herfamily, another boy; but she doesn't know what became of him. Hewas forever in trouble.
"That boy would even steal from his mama," she says ruefully.
"I was born in Bertie County," says Hannah; "my father movedto Baltimore when I was a child. I growed up in Baltimore and gotmarried young. My first husband was a longshoreman. He made rightgood money and we lived all right then. But he died, papa got sickand we all moved back to North Carolina. Been living in Elizabeth City ever since.
"Yes suh, had two children by my first husband. Married apainter when we came to Elizabeth City. He made $26 a week when hewas working, but painters don't get work all the time. His work wasscarce in winter, and the gnats knocked him out 0' many a week'swork in the fall of the year when they'd get so thick they'd spoila job for him. Folks don't like to have their houses painted whengnats are flying thick and sticking to the paint as fast as you slapit on the weather boardin'.
"My husband died fo'teen year ago. He had'ahnsurance" to bury him, but didn't leave a cent in the house.
"He was sick a long time befo' he died, but the Good Lord tookcare of us somehow."
"Just how did the Good Lord take care of you?" I asked Hannah. I had read of fields of manna provided for the Isralitesin their trek out of Egypt, and of the ravens feeding the prophet Elijah. I was familiar, too, with the legend of Jesus feeding thefive thousand with two loaves and five fishes. But all that was inthe long ago. I was anxious for Hannah to be specific.
"He took care of us all right," said Hannah. "He just put itinto the hearts of everybody to help us. Colored folks know whatsickness means. They can't get trusted · for medicine; the doctorwants his pay when he comes; storekeepers won't trust the bestcolored man on earth when he ain'tworkin'. Colored folks know allthat, and you don't have to belong to no lodge for colored folks tohelp when you're in trouble.
"Everybody visits you when you're sick and everybody that comes to the house leaves a nickel, a dime or a quarter 'fore he leaves. White doctors and these health nurses the 'ahnsurance' companies send have a powerful lot to say about colored folks crowdin'around their sick 'uns', but when you're flat 0' your back and your wages cut off, its mighty good to have everybody comin' in andleaving a little somethin' to help you out."
Here was an insight into the folkways of Negroes that was allnew to me. If this isn't applied Christianity, I can find no othername for it.
Don't think that this life story of this industrious, religious-minded colored woman was obtained in a single interview. Coloredfolk, as a rule, are reticent about their personal affairs, in thepresence of white folks. They observe the ways of white folks, listen to their conversations, know their white folk intimately;but little insight into their own lives do they reveal to the whitefolk by whom they are employed. Maybe some of us would be shockedif we could look into the mind of a colored servant and get his orher candid opinion of us. I have gotten the story of Hannah piece-meal. Once I found Hannah more voluble than usual. I had observedthat she ate little meat. On one occasion I had given her a smallcake of souse (it may be hogshead cheese to you). She told me thenext day that it was the best souse she had eaten in years. "Mychildren thought it was fine," she said.
The following Saturday, as I was on my way to our local farmmarket, I suggested to Hannah that maybe I should bring her moresouse.
"No sir, we've still got some of that left that you fetched melast week," she replied.
"For goodness sake," I exclaimed; "There was only two pounds ofit; if I am not mistaken you have five children at home; and you tellme you all like souse; I don't understand how you have any left overs from a mere two pounds after a week," I said.
we don't eat much meat," she said; "I never raised my childrento eat meat."
And being in a talkative mood that morning, Hannah gave me someenlightening inside information" about the dietary habits of a typical Negro family.
"when my husband died leaving me with six young children, I had to scratch my head to take care of 'em. None of the children werelarge enough to work, except help in the fields when there werepeas and beans to pick and potatoes to grub, or cotton to pick. Most of the year I cooked out and took in a couple of washings.
"When we all went in the field in the summer or late in the fallfor cotton pick' we sometimes made as high as $13.00 a week. Wealways saved money ahead for winter, because it takes a lot of woodand a lot of clothes to keep warm in winter.
"We never had any money to spend for meat. I gave my childrenrice, grits, oatmeal, beans and greens. We used a little piece ofpork to season greens when we had 'em, and we used the same piece ofpork to cook with the beans next time we had them. I always managedsoemhow to have a little garden, but never could do much with chickens-toomany colored folks like chicken; try to raise chickens and assoon as they get big enough to fry they just natchally begin todisappear.
"Herrings have always been cheap and we eat corned herrings'bout once a week, sometimes oftener than that; and the childrenwould catch a mess of catfish and perch at least once a week fromspring to late fall. We all like fish. But most of the time we justeat rice, grits, oatmeal, beans and greens. The thing my childrenlike the best of anything in the world is hot corn cakes and molassesfor breakfast. That's what they usually eat for breakfast.
"Somethin' else they likes is cracklin bread with enoughcracklins in it to keep it from stickin' to the griddle."
Never having raised her children to want meat, may have somethingto do with the excellent health of Hannah and her children. Thefamily has had no setbacks from sickness in many years, except for common colds. Their shoes are not always in good repair and thereis never more than one pair of rubbers or galoshes in the familyat anyone time. There are rainy seasons in which none of thefamily has the protection of an umbrella. But remember they livein a drafty house with a leaking roof, and not a wool blanket onany bed.
Hannah is black, comely and fifty, with flashing white teeththat are all the more consipcuous for her ebony skin. She wouldmake an excellent wife for almost any man of her race. I asked herwhy she didn't marry again.
"I may get married when my children get grown up," she said,"but all the papas I've seen since the last one died don't looklike they'd care much about my children. I loves my children and I've done fairly well by 'em, and I wouldn't want to bring a manin the family that wouldn't have no patience with 'em. 'Sides that, there aint much dependence in men these days. To begin with, theydon't make much when they work, and you never know when you'regettin' one who won't spend most he makes on whiskey and other women. It's perfectly scandalous the way most of the older ones are crazyabout young girls."
I have an idea that Hannah will marry again when her childrenare, all, grown and making their own way in the world. But rightnow I suspect ' that all her dreams are centered in her boy Roosevelt. He will graduate at the Colored State Normal this summer and will beeligible for a position as teacher. He is an intelligent, steady, sober, dependable chap, courteous, personable and cheerful. Hannahwould like nothing better than to slave to the end of her days forthat boy, helping to make a home for him as long as she lives andwould be content to share the most humble place in the home hewill ultimately establish for himself.
