"Yes, I remember the old wire hoop she wore to bulge out the skirt. Later, the hoop was discarded and bustles became the rage and fashion. This looked like a head rest, but was tied on too far down the back to do the woman's head any good, I think.
"One of the great diversions in my young manhood was horseback riding with girls. You couldn't carry the getting-up, mount block along with you into the woods, when you were in quest of wild strawberries, whortle berries or wild flowers; so, when the quest was over, the great problem was not one of depression but one of elevation of the girl to her seat upon the horse. It never happened to me, off course, but sometimes a nervous boy would find difficulty im finding the proper foot of the young lady in the labyrinth of furbelows, petticoats, balmorals and riding skirts. Then he must have a good play of the wrist muscles to allow for any eccentricity of <text not clear> ankle; for it night turn under excitement of the movement, slip out of the boy's hand, and by force of gravity descend to the ground. Now there is a law in physics that when a downward pressure of this kind is removed and the upward pressure is not instantly withdrawn, the resultant effect might be one of personal confusion and embarrassment.
"Yes, I recall the corset. The smaller a woman's waist, in those days, the more attractive she was. It ought to have been condemned and outlawed. I have often seen a girl or woman faint at a dance or picnic; due, in my judgment, to tight lacing.
"How about the Sabbath day observance now and in my young days? Well, I was brought up a strict Sabbatarian. We got up, went to family prayers in the dining room, ate breakfast without the usual levity and talk about personal affairs, had our boots and shoes blacked, dressed, and the whole family attended church. Nothing but sacred music was played or sung in the house that day, not even our favorites.
"While I like baseball, I shudder every time I read of a game being played on Sunday, Visualizing the gate money, betting, coca-cola stands, peanut venders, loud speakers, and so forth.
"I told my wife, who is just 80 years old, that if she ever played golf with Miss Hemphill and expected me to witness her triumph, she must pull it off some other day Besides Sunday.
"Woman suffrage? I thought once that was the panacea for all our ills and woes, but, alas, I see very little change, except the women have become a little more masculine and the men a little lazier. Some of the byproducts are high school girls smoking cigarets on school busses, and Mrs. Smith attending a rally at the Jefferson Hotel, which required Mr. Smith (I suppose) to remain at home and attend to the baby.
"In some homes in those good old days, we were allowed to dance the quadrille and the Virginia reel, but in most homes, under the saintly power of the preacher, it was prohibited. There was no round dancing in our section in my youth. Indeed, we boys were so unsophisticated, in our neck of the woods, had one of us got his arms around one of the twenty-two girls I spoke of, he would have stalled like a mule or carried her bodily to the Methodist parsonage and got married through shame and remorse.
"What did we do for entertainment at the other houses where dancing was forbidden? O, we played 'Thimble,' told fortunes, played 'Old Maid,' 'Little Sallie Walker,' and 'Heavy, Heavy, Hangs Over Head.'
"I know very little about the military government in South Carolina. And I have no knowledge of the Ku Klux Klan. When I became a man, I put away childish things, joined the Greenbriar Club, in 1876, wore the red shirt of those days, and obeyed the orders of Major Woodward, the leader. Where he got them we never know nor asked any questions, but the Major presented the club, in July 1876, with three hundred muskets and plenty of ammunition to fire them. Each member took a musket and some powder and balls and a box of caps home with him.
"One night I was at the Methodist parsonage when a courier, Tom Smith, came and notified me to come with my shooting iron to McKinstry's Hill, where the Greenbriar Club was to be assembled. I got my horse and musket and met them. We were led to a schoolhouse by Major Woodward. When we arrived, it was estimated that there were 5,000 Negroes outside and inside the schoolhouse. A bright mulatto from Connecticut, I. B. Smith, was speaking. Major Woodward pushed thru the crowd into the Schoolhouse and I squeezed in behind him. Some discourteous reference to the Major was made by the speaker. The Major advanced and knocked Smith down and broke up the meeting.
"That winter our Greenbriar Club went to Columbia. Fairfield had two Negro members in the Republican Mackey House of Representatives, John Gibson and Dan Byrd. John Gibson lived ten miles from Winnsboro; Dan Byrd in my section, Mossy Dale. We got John and Dan to leave the Mackey House and come over to the Wallace House of Representatives. We contributed that much to the strengthening of the Wallace House and to the undermining of the Mackey House.
"Dan lived to an old age and was a privileged character among the white people of Fairfield. After John's term expired in the legislature, he opened up a shoe repair shop in Columbia, S. C., where he enjoyed a large patronage from white people who knew his history."
