Approximately 4000 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE: JOHN KELLY EDWARDS
Date of First Writing	December 6, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	John Kelly Edwards(Negro)
Fictitious Name	none
Street Address	565 Horseshoe Street
Place	Spartanburg, S. C.
Occupation	Retired
Name of Writer	E. Fronde Kennedy
Name of Reviser	State Office
It was a dull dreary day on which an old Negro man flashed like a ray of sunshine into a dull dreary office, with the explanation, "I'm looking for Mr. Mathewes."
"He is not here today. Is there a message?"
"Well, ma'am, he was saying to me that a lady up here wanted me to tell her some things about whut used to be, and how the old courthouse I holp tear down looked, an' one thing 'n another."
His black face beamed with good-will and good humour. His eyes sparkled with shrewdness and alertness. He was made comfortable, and his answers to the questions asked him about old buildings and localities were duly recorded. Then he was drawn into talk of his own affairs and his life.
John Kelly Edwards was born near historic old Salem Presbyterian church in Union County in 1868, and from early childhood was sent to school and taken to church by his parents. He laments that he never got much schooling, only about to the sixth grade level. Some of his teachers were good and from them he learned fast; but he had some whom he was himself able to help with the work of the school.
His first teacher, a negro named Elijah Reed, was the worst of them. John once missed three words in spelling, and Lige Reed whipped him so hard with a hickory switch as to raise great welts. Soon afterwards this teacher died, and John says he just laughed. When the other children asked him if he were not ashamed to laugh, he said, "No, I'm glad he dead, and I aint afraid to say so."
John started to school when he was five years old. His daddy sent him along with the other children to get him out of the way at home. The school began at eight o'clock in the morning and let out at sun-down. John's daddy told his teacher to let him nap when he felt like it, and he did that very thing. He had been going to school two years before he began to learn to read. The school house was of logs and had a very large rock fireplace that nearly filled one end of it. School took up in January and ran three months; then it stopped for farming time. When crops were "laid by" in July, school began again and continued two months, through August into September; and then it let out for cotton-picking.
John feels that he owes a great deal to the fact that he got a good teacher about the time he was a big boy. This teacher, named Jim Lindsay, went to Claflin University, and then later to Tuskegee Institute, and is today pastor of the biggest A.M.E. Church in Chicago. John married this man's first cousin. John's wife's brother, E. C. Dogan, "is a right smart man," too, and invited John's oldest daughter to go to Norfolk and live with him to get an education. She did this, and then got herself a job with some Northern white people-"mighty fine people". She started the other children going North, and finally all of John's children settled in New York and Philadelphia and Cincinnati.
When John was a very small boy, he went with his mother to the white folks' Salem Church, and sat in the gallery built for the Negroes. To get into it they went up some outside stairs; but when communion time came, they went downstairs and took the sacrament just like the white folks did. John chuckles as he recalls that there were not in those days "sanitary arrangements", as he designates them, for the administration of the sacrament; the big silver goblets were passed from hand to hand, and every communicant sipped the wine before passing on the cup to whoever was next him. The white people communed first, going up to the tables in relays, and John can recall how the ladies would go up "with their trains just a swishin' as they walked."
"The Reverend Dickson" preached two times a month, two sermons a day. There was always dinner on the grounds between services; but the Negroes who lived on their own places did not provide any for themselves because they "could count on the big white folks to have enough for everybody and to invite them to eat with their people. These dinners were of the best, too; everything you could think of that was good to eat and could be fixed to carry in a basket."
After a while the Negroes drew out of the white folks' church, and then John's family began to go to "Nigger Salem across the river from white Salem." Here John heard for the first time a Negro preacher, and he told his mother he did not like it very much. The white people's church was a pretty white-painted frame building, but the Negroes had one made of logs. The preacher was named Baker Russell, and he "wuz a old way-back slavery-time preacher, and began every sermon with the same song." John complied willingly with the request that he render this song, which was a sort of chant, with weird minor cadences, containing many repetitions of the two words, Hallelujah and Amen. Every Sunday, according to John, the old preacher would rise in the pulpit and sing this song, and then shout out, "That was the song I heard when I was converted!" Then he would proceed with his sermon, and at its conclusion always sing another song, in which the congregation would join, and then the people would sometimes begin shouting.
John joined the Methodist church in his early youth, and he has always been a Methodist at heart, but he says that after he had learned to read the bible for himself, he knew it was not right not to be "emerged", and he talked to his pastor about it. But his pastor said it was contrary to the discipline of the A.M.E. (African Methodist Episcopal) church for him to be "emerged". He was never satisfied about it, however, and eventually - though after many years of worry - he found a way to satisfy his conscience and his preference at the same time. In his own words: "I pulled a right sharp trick on them. The Baptists had a little struggling chapel which I knowed was not likely to endure long, near me. Reverend Tanner of the white folks' Southside Church preached in it. I had once been janitor at Southside for four years, and I liked the Reverend, and so I joined at the little chapel and he emerged me.
"When my brethern of the A.M.E. church learned of my course, they were right smartly put out, and they notified me they had preferred charges against me and was going to church me. But I pulled it on them that I had been living in North Carolina six years and had transferred my membership there and had never brought it back. But, I told them, I would be very glad to get it and come back, if they would drop the matter of these charges. I had been emerged now and I was satisfied to go back, for I was always a Methodist in my feelin's. They was real glad to meet me on this proposition, for I was right useful to them; I had some property."
"Were you ever a preacher yourself?"
"Only local. I have done some preaching in emergencies, and like that; but I am only an ordained deacon, and I cannot administer sacraments or marry or bury the dead."
"Would you like to be a preacher? Do you enjoy preaching?" John's face lighted up with a genuine emotion, as he replied, in such a tone of sincerity and earnestness as to touch a hearer: "I have done but little of it, but is was the purest joy I have ever experienced. My schooling never went past the sixth grade," he continued wistfully.
Quite evidently, John is one of the pillars of his church, the history of which is very familiar and dear to him. He feels pride in the fact that his membership is in the largest A.M.E. church- it is always by the letters that he refers to it- in Spartanburg. Its size and prosperity he accounts for in two ways: "The white folks holp with it," amd the Spartan Mills paid a good price for the original site, enabling the congregation to rebuild a better church elsewhere.
The old man believes that the Love Feasts which are held on Friday nights before First Sundays are the most valuable of his church activities. All are required to make confessions of sin and wrong-doing and to shake hands with all against whom they may have any grudges or ill-feeling. Those who refuse to shake hands and be reconciled with others are allowed only the bread and not the wine at the Sunday's Communion. Three stewards are appointed to bring together privately those at outs with each other and require of them a discussion of their differences. They usually have success in effecting reconciliations and adjustments; but sometimes, according to John, " They gits a rough house at Quarterly Meetings when reports are made. Aint no use gittin' mad," he chuckles, "for old Presidin' Elder he rap 'em down in short order." But John loves to see all the members provided with their little glasses in accordance with the new "sanitary arrangements", and sipping from each others' glasses and shaking hands with each other in true brotherly love.
While he was still very young, John married and went to farming; but he soon gave this up and moved to town, largely because his wife was no good to him on a farm. She would not plow or hoe. What connection there might have been between this stand of hers and the fact that she bore twelve children was not brought out in the discussion. John is emphatically a gentleman of the old school, who knows what it is proper to discuss with a white lady. He has a decided personal dignity, which discourages prying and probing into his affairs, although, at the same time, it does not inhibit him from making, voluntarily, some surprising reflections.
In town John soon proved himself a superior sort, and for many years he held excellent jobs. For eight years he fired the engines at the Crescent Knitting Mill, and was paid at the rate of $3.25 a day for a six-day week. After that he held a similar job for four years at the Beaumont Cotton Mills, near his home. A white friend of his started a power plant in Tryon, North Carolina, and asked him to go there and work. This he did, and lived there for six years. Then he came back to Spartanburg where he owned several pieces of property and had many ties. Incidentally, he had acquired a home of his own to live in, in Tryon. For some time he filled in with all sorts of odd jobs. Nowadays he does nothing, as he himself puts it, "but rabbit-hunt and fish, and eat and sleep". His white friends say that he is kept busier than many white men collecting his rents and watching the property he owns.
Concerning his children he is not talkative, except about his oldest daughter, Alsie Penola. He and his wife had twelve children, of whom eight are still living. One daughter and two sons died young, and another daughter "lived only to have one child". The children have but ten children all together. All of his children, he says, have done well except his baby boy, who has not been successful; but he goes into no particulars about this son.
He did tell an entertaining story of how he named one of his children: "I worked six years for Mr. Carroll Rogers in Tryon, N.C., firing. I thought a lot of Mr. Carroll - fact is, I named my boy born in North Carolina partly for him. I wanted him to be N. C. for the State, and I wanted to call him for Mr. Carroll, and so there was my C. Hit were a Sunday he were bawn, and the Sunday School lesson that day was on Nathan, so there was my N all fixed. So I called the child Nathan Carroll Edwards."
Of his oldest daughter, Penola, John speaks at length: " She now lives near Philadelphia with some fine white folks, who are crazy about her and her husband. She has been with the same people ever since she went up there as a girl, except the two or three years she come back home to nurse her mother after her health failed. Her husband was the chauffeur, and when he see that she was not going to leave her mother, he could not bear the separation, and so he followed her down here. They bought them a little six-acre farm near Zion Hill. They done real well, and they own two lots of land on the Howard Gap Road, and two lots on Cummings Street here in Spartanburg.
" But those white folks they worked for would not let them alone. They would send Penola as much as a ten-dollar gold piece for Christmas, and they kept on at them to come back.
" So Penola, she persuaded me and her mother to break up our home and rent it, and go live with our children in New York. My wife was in bad health, and I was not able to keep on doing regular work. This was in 1934, and I was then sixty-six years old. I had saved up a thousand dollars, and I had me some rents and so it looked all right.
"But I could not make out to live with my children, for I was too old to be raised over. My wife and me settled down with the baby boy; all the others was married by that time. Too soon our money run out and things got hard. Bills was heavy, and our baby boy could not make much. I had to spend four months in a hospital, and my wife was sick a heap too. The time came when I had to see my wife sitting crying for bread, and I did not have it to give her. And all them children with plenty, but not mindful of us. Then I wrote to Penola, and she came to us. I know that I suffered more than any other man ever suffered to be living. Penola sent us back to Spartanburg on the train.
"Then in 1936, when I had got things together again, and was making out, they tricked us back up North. They sent me a ticket to visit my son in Cincinnati, and my wife she refused to go with me, and she went to New York. I loved my wife, and I kep' on writing her to come to Cincinnati, but she would not. She had become very indifferent to me, and had gone off and joined a Sanctified Church away from me. She liked New York, and so I went there to her; but she had become quite indifferent to me by then, and would not have anything much to do with me. I told her I was coming home to Spartanburg, but she said she would not come with me. I loved her and I hated it. I begged her to come back to me. But I come along home in April. I had business to attend to here. That was in 1937. I never saw her alive again.
"In July my wife died in New York, and they brought her home to be buried. All the children came with her except one daughter, and she was in the hospital with a baby girl and could-not come."
"And now you live alone, do you?"
"Oh, no, I rent out my place here in Spartanburg, and stay with my aunt up near Thicketty. She lives on a little farm I own there, and I make my home with her. She has had three daughters and three sons, but all are married and gone now but one gal and one boy. They are all crazy about 'Uncle J' - dat's what they calls me. And I calls my aunt - she name Amanda Walker - 'Little Aunt'. She is my aunt, but she is fifteen years younger, and that's how come we call one another that way.
"I sleep in the best bed in the house - a great big feather bed that just buries me, and it feels so good to my old bones. 'Little Aunt', she's the old-fashioned kind, and she still uses her spinning wheel. She say she like to have something to do with her time. She buys raw thread to spin on it. She weaves some too.
"Oh, yes, I recall lots of old-fashioned ways that aint no more - like having to haul the wheat to Mr. Jack Kendrick's daddy's 'ground-hog' thrasher, and standing up and pouring it into a hopper and turning a crank to run the fan for it by hand. It's long since they done things that way when I first holp with farming. But my 'Little Aunt' she sticks to the old ways where she can; she is real old timey. She takes the best care of me. And she aint going to suffer for it; I've got her in my will."
"Have you prepared to die?"
"Well, yes sum, in a worldly way I have. I hold membership in two burial societies, and I have arranged with Mr. Woodward the under taken for all the details of my funeral. (Woodward is a high-class Negro undertaker) An' I have made a will partly; but one or two things in it I am not settled on in my mind yet. I want Penola to have the most of what I leave. I carry three insurance policies, and I have a few pieces of property here and there to dispose of."
At this point a caller came in, and promptly the old Negro rose and said his goodbyes. It was an embarrassing moment. Usually the etiquette of such a situation demands the production of a drink or a bit of tobacco, or a satisfactory quid pro quo. The lady who had listened fascinatedly to this old man, so much more sagacious and thrifty and successful than herself, had a feeling that such an offering would touch both his sense of pride, and - what was infinitely worse - his sense of humour. So she contented herself with warm thanks and cordial goodbyes. Later, encountering the gentleman who had, in response to her request, sent in the old man to see her, she spoke of her perplexity.
" You were exactly right," he said at once. " I met him on the street and asked him if he found you, and thanked him for coming. I, like you, realized it would hurt his pride to be offered recompense. I told him we sometimes offered pay for such help, that we were gathering historical facts of one sort and another for the Government. He at once responded, " Captain, don't worry about that. I has quite a respectable bit put by and can take care of myself well, I am always glad to help out the white folks any ways that I can."