WE'LL GET ALONG SOME WAY
Original Names	Changed Names
Durham	Bolton
Mrs. Wiggins	Mary Mote
Sam	Bill
Date of first writing:	June 29, 1939
Person interviewed:	Marada Wiggins (white)
Address:	2407 Hart Street,
Place:	Durham, N. C.
Occupation:	Unemployed knitter
Writer:	Omar Darrow
Reviser:	Edwin Massengil
Number of words:	About 1,750
WE’LL GET ALONG SOME WAY
A little girl of six was playing in the front of Mary's house, but she said that her mother had stepped out for a few minutes. There were several children in the house. The oldest boy of fifteen was pale and thin. He was preparing a bottle of milk for the ten-months-old baby. Its dress was dirty and from all appearances had not had the care of a mother all day.
"We get our milk from the clinic," the boy explained. "There are so many children here that we just can't feed all of them right. There are eight of us."
Someone entered the room; a middle-aged woman. She appeared to be slightly embarrassed. She spoke, then she went over to the corner where she sat down on the trunk.
"I never thought that I would come to this," she spoke with disgust. "Sometimes I just wonder what it's all about and whether or not we'll ever be any better off than we are right now. Before the hosiery mill called that strike Bill, he's my husband, and me worked there. He was a pressman in the print shop and I was a knitter. We made good money, lived well, and had all that we needed, but it seemed that we couldn't save nothing. I had to hire somebody to look after the children then, and I reckon that person kept our expenses up mighty high. Nobody takes care of your stuff like you do yourself. The only thing that we was able to put any money into that we could use was a little furniture, and then it has done us very little good, except the beds and the stove. We have not been able to rent a house large enough to put it all in, so we have had to sell a piece now and then. It's been five years since that strike, and all we have left is enough beds to sleep on, that dresser over there, beds in the other rooms, and mirrors on the walls. We ain't even got a good table to eat on.
"Bill's got a WPA job, but that only pays him $18.50 every two weeks. If it won't for the printery that gives him a little work, when he's not working on WPA, I don't know how we would make out. The boys pick up a little work when they can get it, even if it don't amount to but a nickel or a dime.
"Before Bill got on the WPA we just went hungry sometimes. I could get along all right for myself, but when I saw my children going hungry it was more than I could bear. I stood it until I just decided that I would commit suicide, for I felt then that the children could get in the orphanage. I took some poison, but I took too much. I wanted to make a clean and quick job of it, but I didn’t know that a person could take too much poison to kill him. But I learned it since. I wouldn’t tell Bill or the doctor that I took them tablets, for I was afraid that if I did that the orphanage wouldn't take the children.
“I had another child after that, and I felt that it was coming here to starve, too. She was born at the county infirmary, and after she was born I had a nervous breakdown. I went plumb crazy."
Mary picked up a small book, opened it, and said, "This has been more comfort to me than anything else." This book was on the subject of scientific thought. "This book has taught me to concentrate. Even with all of these children and what I need to do for them, I can now throw that worry aside and get into that back room and concentrate on the one Healer and the one Guidance for us all. It strengthens me, and life has now grown a little more bearable.
”We like a lot of having what we need, but we are living and have two meals a day. I do feel thankful for that, and we seem to have good health. The children are never sick, and they don’t have such as they should eat.
"We have to pay $6 every two weeks for house rent, and save fifty cents on the fuel bill. Me and the children do the washing. What few things we have to wash or wear is just as is sent to us from the WPA sewing room. I go around to the place that the WPA distributes commodities, and this last time they give me four packs of powdered skim milk, five pounds of country butter, three pounds of navy beans, twenty-four pounds of flour. That was graham flour and it makes awful bread. I've tried every way I could think of to cook it, and I ain't been able to do anything with it yet. That stuff just ain't fitten for a dog to eat, but I have to use everything I can get.
"One of the boys now is working downtown. He goes down once a week and folds papers, and sometimes he makes forty or fifty cents. He is trying to make enough to buy his clothes for school this fall. Another one of the boys gets up early every morning and goes out and picks berries for breakfast. They, with butter, do make that flour eat a lot better. He wants to pick some for preserves, but we can hardly get sugar for our needs right now. But there is something about us all that keeps us hoping that in some way the future will take care of itself.
"I was lucky in getting this dress for the little girl. I kept house for a lady one day, and she give it to me. It is cheap, but it is the best we have had in a long time. Let me show you the clothes we got.”
She went into the next room and on the wall hung the entire lot of clothes for the house. There were not many, but those that were there were ready’ to be worn. They hung on nails.
Mary pointed to a dress. "That dress was issued to me from the sewing room two years ago to be worn as a street dress. One of my little girls give me this tie. She bought it with a dime that a man give her. I wore this dress to church ever since, too. They sent me another one this week.
"I just got the clothes this week that I should have got last fall. Now they are too small for the children. That all helps a lot, but I don’t get a thing for the boys. That is why they have to get out and try to earn their clothes. That suit over there belongs to the boy that is in there with the baby. He gets out and works when he can find something to do, but he ain’t done nothing in the last week. He is very kind about helping out with the baby and loves to do it. He is my child by my first husband.
"My first husband died when the little girl was real small. Then I met Bill. He had three small children. We got to going together and then, decided that on account of the way that we was brought up that we could get along and be kind to each other, so we got married.
"You see, my mother married a man who had grown children. When my sister and me come along these older children was not as kind to us as they could have been. That made life unpleasant for both of us. Bill's father married again after his mother died, and he married a widow with some children. She was not good to Bill one bit.
<text not clear>
“Well, we don't have much, but I guess we are now better off than a lot of people. We will get along some way. Maybe we can get the children sent to school enough so that they can read and write and learn enough so that people can't cheat them out of anything.
