George Carter,
7 miles west of Talladega Springs, Ala.
Jack Kytlea
Editorial Department
"A WOMAN'S LIKE A DUMB ANIMAL
For forty-two years, George Carter has been pulling and shoving at the handle of a cross-cut saw. He is a big, slouch-shouldered man, six feet three inches tall, 220 pounds of bone and muscle. He is 62 years old, but he says proudly, "I don't never ask no rest time--I ain't never been white-eyed but once, an' I got to tell yon 'bout that." His skin is dark and leathery, his eyes black and squinted, his coarse, black hair streaked with gray.
It was Sunday afternoon, and he sat there on the slanting porch of his shanty, with his willow-bottomed chair propped against the wall. His huge feet were covered by rough cotton socks, out at the heels and toes. He pulled hard at a cob pipe through a slender cane stem, and he said: "A old man gits purty lonesome-like out to hisself this-a-way; but I ain't got no cause to grumble. I been 'round lots in my day, an' I done buried two ol' women. You couldn't give no another'n. They's too many runnin' 'bout that you don't have to feed.
"Gittin' down to what you aied me, I been loggin' and foolin' 'bout sawmills since I was a duck of a boy. ol' man Blalock, over at the valley. says he wouldn't give me far four common man. He oughter know. He's seed a lot of loggers.
"Why, when th' ol' man was runnin' a mill over thar in th' holler. buyin' his lumber tree he tree, he says to me, 'George, I got to make a profit. I got to git trees that'll make fine, clear boards; an' it's go'nter be up to yon to git 'em. 'Well, sir, I got enough of 'em to make his rich. I jest go up to a tree an' look it over, an' I can tell you what kind of lumber it's go'nter make. I can spot th' knots 'way up 'mongst th' limbs. I can even tell 'bout how many feet of good boards or floorin' there is in a tree.
"He ain't never paid as right, but I don't need nothin' much now. When I was a young duck I worked for fifty cents a day, stump to sundown: but I weren't workin' for him back them. Th' ol' man pays me two dollars now, an' me s'posed to be th' boss logger. I ain't s'posed to work but sight hour a day, but I could count on my ten fingers how many times I got out o' th' woods fore good dark.
"One time I went to him 'bout my pay, an' he put on a mouth that was as pore as a widder woman. He says, 'George, you know I'm yore friend; I'd pay you more if I could. But my sales is 'way down. If I'm go'nter keep eatin' myself, I can't pay my help no more. It'd bust me, an' then we'd all be out in th' cold.' Well, I ain't been to him since that day. He thinks I'm a damned fool, but I ain't blind. A man that's been lumberin' as long as me knows a few things I can look at th' stock in his sheds an' know that he was lyin' with a face as bare as a baby's rump I know what I out in th' woods, am' I know how much lumber it'll make.
"He's got plenty money to keep him th' rest of his life. He don't bank it over at Sylacaugy. He banks some of it in Birmingham, an' some in Mobile. Tony told me 'bout that, an' he ought'or know; he mails most of th' ol' mam's letters up at th' Springs. Tony's th' commissary man, an' he says ol' Blalock is so stingy he wears buttons on his pants made out of his own wood. He's that tight, all right."
George stretched his towering frame, lifting his huge, sun-baked arms above his head. He shuffled his chair nearer the edge of the porch, where he could prop his feet against the two-fey four railing. He knocked the ashes out of his pipe.
"I been 'round," he said at last, "an' I ain't proud of some of th' things I done. I never did know no mammy an' daddy. Some said I was a woods colt, but they never said it to my face. Anyway, I was gived away. I was gived to a ol' man named Sears over on th' rirer--me an' a girl they said was my sister.
"That ol' man nigh ' bout worked me to death. He had a big farm over thar' an' it got to whar I was doin' jest 'bout everything. I stood it 'til I'se fifteen year old, an' then I runned away. He kotched me th' first time an' whooped me 'til my ol' jacket stuck to my back, it was so full of blood. But I made up my mind he wasn't go'nter keep me' Next time I runned away, it was in th' night, an' I Crossed th'; river an' set out down th' road. I kept on goin' an' 'fore I knowed it, I'se in Selma.
"I tell you, I was so hongry when I got tha, an' I'd drunk so much water, that my. belly, thought I'd took in washim'. I've heerd folks say they wouldn't bag far nothin' if they was starvin' to death; but they jest ain't never been hongry enuff. I went up to a house an' I bagged, an' I got some coffee an' some cornbread. I ain't never tasted nothin' so good as that, an' I seen good Vittles in my time.
"They was a circus thar in Selma, an' I'd not seed one before in my life. I Jest comed up on it while I'se walkin' an' I went up, boy-like, to listen to th' music. They was takin' down one of th' tents, an' when I'se standin' thar goggle-eyed, a man come up on me. He says, 'Boy, you look a stout; you wanta work?' An' well, I was needin' a Job 'bout as bad as a body could. I pitched in right thar, an' I done so good that they took me along in th' work gang.
"I done all right, too. I was 'bout six foot high than, an' weighed close ter two hundert pound. I was like a ox, an' couldn't none of them me outwork me But my dander kept risin' up, an' if I'd had bug-sense I'd a knowed trouble was comin'. I'd keep gittin' my danderup when th' boss-men'd come round with hit cussin' an' bullyin'. I'd bill in my inaards when he'd kick a nigger, an' I got to thinkin' what was go'nter happen if he ever kicked me.
"He weren't high as me, but he was broad an' built close to th' ground. He didn't have no good side to him--he was jest mean as hell--an' even when he was in good humor, you knowed he was jest a rattlesnake in th' sunshine. Yon knowed there weren't nothin' 'bout him that was any good a-tall.
"Well sir, I let a rope slip one day, an' he comed 'round to whar I was. We was at a little town in North Car'lina, an' that's a good piece from hyar. He started cussin' me, callin' me things that showed me thar was go'nter be trouble. Then, 'fore I knowed what was happenin, ' he kicked me.
"I reached down on th' ground, an' I got my fingers on a sledge hammer that was lyin' thar. I said, 'You son-of-a-bitch. you kick me jest one more time an' I'll kill you. So he'p me my good God, I'll knock yo'r brains down yo'r throat.'
"I'll say this for him; he weren't no coward. He jest looked at me a second or two, an' then he comed t'ward me. I knowed he meant business; I had to perteck myself. I raised that hammer an' I knocked him in th' head so hard that he fell like a sick ox. I run like hell, then, but didn't nobody try to kotch me. I guess everybody was glad.
"To this day, I don't know what become of him. He might a-died, fer I hit him a solid lick. Since I got religion, I pray 'bout it sometimes, but I ain't never been able to feel sorry 'bout it. He axed fer it, an' if he got Well, I bet he didn't kick nobody else fer a long time."
George stuffed his pipe with sack tobacco again, struck a match on the pineboard floor, and puffed silently for a few moments.
"It took me mor'n a month to git back hyar. I was ragged an' hongry, an' didn't have no friends to go to, but I made up my mind I weren't goin' back to ol' man Sears.' I'so feelin' grown now, an' I knowed I weren't goin' to take no more beatin's from him. I knowed I'd kill him if he ever laid a hand on me. fer I Couldn't even think 'bout him an'not burn in my head. Sometimes I thought 'bout that gal that was s'posed to be my sister, but I never knowed that she was. She was a little ol' skinny, light-haired gal. an' she never favored me. Some folks say I got Indian blood, I wouldn't know. But I guess I done things in my time bad as a Indian.
"I done things that th' good God won't ever forgive me for. When I come back, I didn't have no friends 'cept Tom Green, a nigger that lived down in Coosa County 'bout th' bend. I went down thar with him, an' he was as bad a nigger as I was a white man. I took to card playin' an' whiskey drinkin' down ther, an' we raised so much hell that we driv' his ol' woman plumb out-a th' house. when we'd give out-a whiskey, we'd jest make us some more an' go right ahead raisin' hell.
"A bunch of niggers who worked at th' Jackson sawmill over at th' Springs useta come down to Tom's house on Sundays, an' Tom an' me'd play cards with 'em an' take what they bad. That's one of th' things I won't ever be forgive fer. There was them po'r niggers who'd git paid maybe three dollars on Saturday, an' then Tom an' me'd git 'em drunk an' take everything they had. You see this scar on th' side of my head? Well, I got it right thar. A crazy nigger gived it to me with a butcher knife.
"I stayed down thar in them woods 'til I was goin' on twenty year old. Tom an' me was makin' whiskey an gamblin' an' fishin' a little fer a livin' an' we was doin' good. But then one Saturday, Tom got full of likker an' went over th' mountain to a sawmill that had started runnin' over thar. They was a bunch of niggers workin' at the mill, an' one of 'em was a nigger named Doc, who had a tall, yaller gal for a woman that made Tom's mouth water. Tom saw her once, an' than he comed to me an' said that he couldn't look at 'or an' stand still. Th' thoughts of her jest runned all over him; an' than, that Saturday he got likkered up.
"He headed straight fer that Doc's shack ' spite all th' way I begged him to stay away. He had a pistol in his overall pocket, an' I knowed that ha was goin' atter what he wanted. I begged him right to th' door leadin' up to th' shack, but they wasn't nothin' could be done. He went up thar and walked in th' door.
"He wasn't no osooner in than Doc's woman started hollerin'. I was standin' out in th' road watchin', fer I knowed Tom was drunk enough to shoot me if I tried to stop him. The door was open a little, an' I could see him wrastlin' with that yaller gal, an' her screamin' like she was in a bed of snakes. Niggers started runnin' out of all th' shacks, an' some of 'em headed straight fer th' sawmill boiler room.
"I knowed then that thar was hell to pay, for that was whar Doc was workin'. In no time a-tall, he come runnin' t'ward his shack, an' he had a rifle in his hand. He stopped out in the front yard, an' ha called out, 'Come out-a my house, nigger, or I'm comin' atter you.'
"He hadn't no more than said it when Tom come to th' door. Tom didn't say a thing, he jest leveled down with his pistol an' started shootin' at Doc--I don't know how many times. But Doc jest stepped back of a tree thar in th' yard an' waited 'til Tom had finished. Then he raised that rifle to his shoulder.
"I never seed a shot gauged better' on that one. Tom stepped back from th' door, kinder to one side, but Doc seemed to know whar he was standin'. He shot through th' wall, 'bout two feet from th' door, an' that bullet got Tom right through th' belly. We runned up to th' house an' he was dead. Th' gal was under th' bed.
"Now I'm th' sort that knows what side my bread's buttered on. I knowed then people might say I was Tom's friend an' have it in fer me. But when I seed he was dead, I knowed that a dead man can't do nothin' fer nobody. So I started cussin' him right and left, an' tol' Doc that I'd see th' law didn't do nothin' to him. I did that, too, fer I went over to th' county seat at Rockford an' helped see that they didn't bother him. They jest had a little hearin', an' then they, turned him loose.
"I didn't lose nothin' by tellin' what I knowed. They was a young man named Hughes who was runnin' th' sawmill, an' he told me that he was to thank me fer what I'd done fer his nigger. Well, sir, I seed that th' time was right. an' I axed him fer a job. He gived it to me, an' that's whar I started out sawmillin'.
"I was a grownup man, an' I was as tough an' as stout as a mule. At first, I helped fire th' b'iler, totin' slabs fer it. but then one day Mr. Hughes come up to me. He says, 'I'm short in th' woods, George; I need loggers out thar. How'd you like to try yo'r hand at it?. I tol' him that I'd like it fine, an' th' next day, I was pullin' at th' end of a crosscut saw.
"Well, sir, I had som'pun happen out thar that gived me a lesson. I don't min' tollin' you 'bout it, fer it's got funny to me now. They was a little ol' man helpin' me named Davis, an' he weren't nothin' but a runt Th' first time I seed him I wanted to laugh, fer it was funny to think he could keep up with me on a saw.
"Th' second day I worked out thar, he was goin' in to th' commissary fer son'pun, an' I give him a dime an' axed him to git me some 'baccer. He was gone a couple of hours, an' when he come back he seemed mighty worried. He come right to me, an he said, 'George, I done lost that dime of your'a; I'll pay it back come Saturday.' An' I was wantin' 'baccer, an! I got mad as hell. I said, 'Yon stole my money.'
"Well. sir, he straightened up his little old wizened self. an' he said, 'That's a lie.' He was white as a sheet, an' he was treamblin' like he was go'nter fall to pieces. I knowed he was scared as a rabbit, so I took a step t'ward him an' said, 'If you say that ag'in, I'll slap yo'r face.' He come right back at me. He said, 'It's a lie--a double dogged lie!"
"They was just us two away out thar in th' woods--mlies away from th' closest soul. I riz up my arm, an' I slapped his face so hard that it cracked like th' stinger on a cowhide whip. I slapped it that hard, an' then I turned to walk off.
"I've stirred up a yaller jacket nest many a time, an' I've had 'em git over me faster'n a country bey pickin' a banjo, but I ain't never had nothin' git on me as fast as that dried-up little ol' man. We was standin' on th' side of a hill, an' he come at me head first. His shoulders hit me in the belly, an' I went down on my back, with my head p' inted down th' hill, an' my feet P'inted up. It was all sudden-like, an' I couldn't a got up if it'd bin th' end of th' world.
"I tried to hit at him from whar I was lyin', but he wasn't nowhar I hit. He was jest like a banty rooster, an' he hit me in th'face so fast that you couldn't a counted th' licks. He jest sit on my chest an' beat on my nose an' eyes an' mouth like he was beatin ' a drum. I couldn't do nothin', so I said, 'You have whooped me.' He got up then, but my eyes was swelled 'til it was all I could do to see, an' my mouth felt like it was big as a him.
"It's a funny thing, but I got to likin' that little ol' man. He tried to pay me back my dime, but I wouldn't take it. wewent on cuttin' logs together, an' it weren't long 'fore we was mighty good friends. An' it was him that I was goin' to tell you 'bout--th' only time in my life I ever was white-eyed.
"It was all on account of a ol' cheap watch. Bein' out in th' woods as we was, We couldn't hear no whistles fer quittin' time, so th' man that owned a watch did all th' time-callin'. Well, this was my watch, an' it was up to me when we was to rest. It got to whar I allus called time for 'bout fifteen minutes every mornin' so we could go over to a spring close by an' git us some water. When we'd drunk, we'd lie down awhile an' talk.
"Things kept up like that a long time, and it come to th' point whar Davis weren't doin' much work. He wanted to rest all th' time, an' we couldn't keep up with the teamsters. Well, sir, th' notion struck me that if I'd let him call th' time he might do better work, so one day I took out my watch an' handed it to him. I said, 'You keep th' watch awhile Mister Davis, an' you call th' time."
"Now, I've made lots of mistakes in my life, but that'n was th' worst. That little ol' man went crazy as a bat. He was allus takin' out that watch an' lookin' at it like he was a boss, an' he couldn't git to workin' early enough It got to whar he wouldn't even lie down when we'd go to th' spring, an' he was stingy 'bout goin' a-tall. We'd git down thar, but jest th'minute I laid down, he'd take out that watch an' say, 'Got to git back on th' job, Carter; got to keep th' trees faillin'.'
"It tickled me fer a while, but it got to whar it weren't funny. One hot day in August we was cuttin' legs, an' he was worse than ever. He worked like we was th' only loggers in th' woods, an' by dinner time, I was blowin' an' sweatin' like a mule. That evenin', he jest kept on sawin' like ha was fightin' a fire, an' I knowed I couldn't make it no further. I took my hands off my end of th' saw, an' I says to him, 'You batter let me have th' watch ag'in. We'll take turns keepin' time, week by week.' But I never did git 'round no more to lettin' him carry it.
I was beginnin' to make fair money fer them times--dollar am' a half a day. I was growed up, so I got my mind on havin' a woman of my, own. I got to castin' 'round fer one, an' I got my, mind sot on a little ol' gal that lived ever on th' Peters' Place. Her ma was passed on, an' her pa wasn't doin' no good at keepin' her up. She was ragged as a can of kraut. Her pa was too busy raisin' hell to mind atter her, an' I knowed he'd be glad to git rid of her.
"One day I axed him 'bout it, an' he said he didn't mind. I traipsed over thar a couple of times an' did a little purty talkin' to th' gal, an' one day I tol' her I wanted her to come an' live with me--that it was all fixed with her pa. She studied 'bout it for a minute or two, but I guess she was glad te come. She'd had a hell of a life thar whar she was. I tuk her tomy shack that night, an' she kotched on right off. Weren't no time 'fore she had th' place lookin' better--scrubbed clean as a whistle-- an' she planted some flowers out in th' yard.
"She never was much purty, but she was a good woman. Her name was texas sum'pn-er-ethert I don't recollect her pa's name. She weren't half my size-- didn't weigh a hundert pound--but that jest suited me. I allus have liked a little bitsy woman. They don't give no trouble, an' they don't eat much.
"I guess I loved her some. That is, I loved her fer awhile. But like I said, I'se useta raisin' hell, an' it weren't long 'fore I got my mind on that ag'in' I guess I'se purty bad, but shouldn't no woman ever think she can put bits in a man's mouth. I recollect that I come home one day at dinner time, an' I was hongry an' t'ard. She allus had my dinner ready fer me. but this time th' hoe cake weren't quite done, an' it 'peared to me that she weren't doin' nothin' to help things. She was sittin' at a guilt she had hangin' from th' ceilin', an' it made me madder to see her sittin' thar workin' with a needle an' thread when I was starvin', an' she should a been in th' kitchen. Well, sir, I jest give a runnin' leap, an' leaded sq'are In th' middle of that damned quilt. Down it come, railin's an' all."
George laughed boisterously, stamping the floor with one of his huge, socked feet. He slouched forward in the chair, his elbows on his knees.
"I'm tellin' you this. fer I'm headin' up to a p'int. That little ol' woman was a-feared of me, an' she kept her mouth shet, no matter what I done. But all th' time, she weren't keepin' her mouth shet fer ever'body. She was goin' up to mister Hughes' house behin' my back, an' she was tellin' him how bad I was treatin' her. That shows no woman can't he trusted. If they are like a mouse 'round you, well, you can bet th' shirt off'n yo'r back that they're talkin' to somebody. An' her talkin' her head off to Mister Hughes weren't doin' me no good, though I didn't know 'bout it till later. If I had knowed, I'd a busted her wide open.
"It all come to a head one mornin' when I weren't doin' nothin' that most any man would't do. They was a gal lived up on th' hill 'hove my shack, an' she was a sight fer sore eyes--big-chested an' broad hipped. Well, I ain't denyin' that I'd been watchin' her fer a long time, an' I knowed that she had her eyes sot on me--any man can tell when a woman wants 'im. She come to my place every mornin' fer buttermilk that I'se lettin ' her folks have; am' on this pertic'lar mornin', she jest happened to kotch me right. That miserable little el' woman of mine was big with a baby, an' I didn't have no eyes fer her.
"This gawky ol' corn-fed gal come saunteria into th' kitchen that mornin' when I was sittin' thar getting' my grub. I looked up an' seed her, and she looked better'n I'd ever seed her look before--an' she was smilin' at me like she was thinkin' 'bout th' same thing. I guess that's why th' notion struck me all of a sudden. I knowed that my ol' woman was out at th' lot. An' things was sot jest right.
"Now, I'm tellin' you this, fer I'm leadin' up to plint. I get up from th' table an' walked over to whar that gal was standin'. She didn't move a leg. I says, 'Ye'r kinder frisky, ain't you?,' an' she giggled woman-libe. Well, sir, I jest eased my arm 'bout her them, an' she was soft as a feather bed. I was huggin' her like all hell--I had ev'rything jest like I wanted it--when my el' woman come in at th' door.
"She didn't say nothin' at first; jest stood thar with her eyes buggin' out like a chipmmnk's. I weren't goin' to let her faze me, so I jest kept on huggin', but th' gyl was squirmin' an' pawin' so bad I couldn't hold 'er. Then my ol' woman said, 'George, what are you doin'?' An' I come right back at her. I says, 'I'm havin' a good time, mama.".
The giant figure straightened in the chair, and the huge hands came down upon the huge knees with a resounding smack. A burst of laughter ruabled from the leathery,"bull-like throat.
"I guess ye'r wonderin' what th' p'int is," he said after awhile, "Well. this is it! Thar ain't no sin 'bout nothin' like that 'less yon git kotched; that's all th' sin they is--gittin' kotched.
"Well, sir, my ol' woman couldn't keep her mouth shet 'bout that neither. She went straight as a pigeon to Mr. Hughes, an' she must-a tol' him a bellyful. Anyways, he comed up to me on th' job a few days later, an' I could see that he had his dander up. He called me to one side, an' he says. 'Damn yo'r hide, you eught'er be killed. Somebody ought'er take a shotgun an' blow th' skin off'n yo'r stinkin' bones.' I tol' him somebody had been tetin' a passel of lies, but he says, 'Don't be layin' nothin' off on that little woman. I'd fire you if it weren't fer her. As it is, I'm go'nter run you off this place if ever I hyar of you mistreatin' her ag'in.'
"That shows you can't put no trust in a dammed woman, but I knowed Mister Hughes meant what he said. It got to worryin' me some, for them was hard time an' I couldn't 'ford to loss no job. If it hadn't a-been fer that. I'd a busted that women wide open, but I knowed if I tetched her she'd go runnin' to him. so I jest bided my time.
"They was a meetin' goin' on 'bout that time, an' I done a lot of studyin' 'bout it. I knowed Mister Hughes was a churchly man, an' I get to thinkin' that I'd put myself in good with him by. j'inin' up; he'd done a heap of talk to me--'bout how I'd ought'er git myself right with th' Ged A'mighty.
"Th" hardest thing I ever done was that. ol' Reverent Sardis from over at th' Valley was doin' th' bollerin', an' he was th' damn-dest hypocrite you over seed. He run a little ol' store whea he weren't preachin', an' when a gal'd come in th' store, he'd try to hug 'er. I 'member they tol' me that one gal comed in fer a sack of sugar, an' that when he tried to love 'or up a little she busted that sack of sugar over his damned head. They said that he could comb his hair fer a week an' git enough sugar to sweeten his coffee with.
"Well, I went up thar to that meetin', an' my ol' woman traipsed along with me as proud as a mother wren. She didn't know nothin' 'bout what I was doin' it for, so when we went in an' sot down, she begin lookin' about happy-like. with her little ol' eyes wet as a baby's behin'. I sot an' listened to th' seraont, thinkin' bout what a hypoorite ol' Sardis was up thar on th' platform, bellerin' like he'd bust his throat open, I never listened to 'im, but when they started th' singin', I went an' J'ined up.
"I wasn't never in a church-house before, an' I felt like a damned fool. ol' Sardis shuk han's with me, then sot me down on a bench in front of ever 'body. They was th' most takin' on thar I ever heerd, with these fools all a-bellerin" an' a-jumpin'. Some of them was a-cryin', an' that was right down my way. I allus could cry easy, thihkcin' 'bout what a hard row I'd had to hoe. So I beginned a-cryin' with th' others, an' they comed down to th' front, pawin' at me an' makin' me feel like I was in th' crazy house.
"Attar it was all over, Mister Hughes come 'round an' tol' me how glad he was. He called, me 'Brother' an' I knowed I'd got him whar I wanted him. I kept him thar, too, fer I went to that church-house regular. They weren't but one thing that was good 'bout it. ol' Sardis couldn't 'ford to preach at th' mill but twice a month, fer he had another church some'ers. It was a hard job, but I stuck it out--I stuck it out fer six damned years--'til ol' Sardis was dead an' in hell, an' a new preacher comed--an' 'til Mister Hughes went busted an' had to quit sawmillin'.
I had three young'uns now, so I had to git me up another job. But th' first thing I done was to git me a hick'ry stick an' best th' lard out-a that damned tale-carryin' woman. I beat her'til she was down on her knees hollerin' fer God's leve, an' I teached her a lesson the didn't never fergit. She never did carry no more taled oa me. She never did say nothin', neither, when I got me up a woman that I wanted to fun with, an' I got me up a-plenty.
"But don't you never do that, son. I'm a ol' man now, an' I know all thar is to know. When you fun with mor'n one woman, you never do seems to fun as much as you want to you want-a foller ever' woman that comes along. You don't hav' to do that, but I do. I'M So weak.
"It didn't take me long to git another job attar I left th' Hughes mill. I was th' best logger in that country, I knowed my trees like they was people, an' I was th' stoutest man anywhar to be found. I went over to Shelby County, clos't to four-Mile, an' I kotched on right off with ol' Man Brasier. He was th' kind that never give a damn what sort of an you was, jest so you was a good worker. well, that suited me fine, for I didn't have to go to church no more, an' I could git out in th' pasture an' Paw up sand with th' cows.
"I guess I pawed up enough of it to fill th' Coosa River. That was one plane whar they, was enough women to suit as, an' I runned atter 'em 'til my tongue was rollin' out like a damned dog's. My little ol woman didn't open her mouth, neither, fer I had learned her how to keep it sewed up. Th' best times I ever loved her, I reckon, was right atter we beginned livin' together' an' when I stood lookin' down at her dead face. She died a-havin' a kid. She shouldn't ought'er a had it, fer Doc Begrer had tol' her she'd die if she did.
"They was a woman name of Nora livin' thar that I liked a heap, but I had done made up my mind that I weren't never goin' to feed no other woman regular, They's a lot of things to be done 'bout a shack, though, an' a man can't do all of it---'specially if they's a passel of kids runin' 'round. I tried batchin' it fer nearly a month atter Tex died, an' I weren't doin' no good at it. One Sunday, mornin' I got to thinkin' 'bout it, so that evenin' I went over to Nora's place an' tol' her how I felt about it. We'd funned 'round a good while, anyways. so she got up her duds an' comed over to my shack.
"But right atter we beginned livin' together regular, I tol' her how things was go'nter be run. I knowed she hadn't hardly lived whar she had been, fer her ma was a widdar woman, and thar waa a gang of other brats thar. I knowed that meat an' bread et regular would be enough to keep 'er with me an' I was right. She was a good worker, but she never did take a likin' to my other woman's kids. I had to git her up some of 'er own, an' that was all right with me I allus did try to keep my women totin' a little bitsy 'baby. That keeps 'em from studyin' devilment."
Again, the rear of laughter burst from the big throat, and again the huge hands were clapped hard against the huge knees.
"I don't guess I'se as rough on Nora as I was my fust woman; but that was on account of her workin' to keep me in a good humor. Sometimes I'd git drunk an' whale th' hell out-a her a time or two, but mostly I treated her as good as any woman ought'er be treated. Don't never be too good to one of 'em. A woman's like a dumb animal--like a cow or a bitch dog. You. got to frail em with a stick now an' then to make 'em look up to you.
"Why, I tell you sump'un; they's been men workin' at loggin' camps whar I been that handled their ol' women like they was gold dollars. They'd pet em up, buy purtys fer 'em, an' keep their backsides kivered with glad rags; an' then ol' George hyar'd come along an' take 'em fer hisself. I've seed men that didn't have no sense 'bout handlin' woamen. Yon never ought'er tell one of 'em that she looks good, er that anybody'd have 'em 'cept you. She'll git to believin' it if you tell 'er that, an' she'll start struttin' 'round like a rooster that's whooped ever'thing in th' countryside.
"I tol' Nora how things was go'nter be run, an' they, was runned that way, for mor'n 'leven years. She gived me six young'uns while we was livin' together, but she got to whar she weren't wuth keepin'. She got te creepin' 'bout th' house like a wood-legged woman, an' her hide got as maller as a persimmon. I got to thinkin' once that I'd run 'er off--she weren't doin' me no good--but it was fer th' best that I didn't. She was tuk with a chill one night, an' she went cat a awful way.
"It's ge'nter come my time some day, but I pray to God I don't go out like that woman. It was awful. She'd got to whar she talked a let 'bout Sinnin', an' how me an' her was doin' wrong by havin' kids an' not even bein' married. 'Bout a month 'fore she died, she says to me one day, 'George, le's go over to sylacaugy or some'rs an' git a preacher to talk over us.' That was funny, as hell to me, an' I thought she'd went bug-crazy. But you know, I'se thinkin' of what she said jest th' other day. Do you s'pose that's why she died that-a-way?
"When she was lyin' thar tremblin with th' chill, she kept raisin up her hands an' yellin', 'He's in th' kitchen now! Th' devll's in th' kitchen, an' he's comin' atter me!I She went away yellin' things like that, with 'er eyes wide open. I wonder if th' damned devil was in thar atter her?
"Well, if he was, he's ge'nter be thar with feathers on his head when it comes my time. He's go'nter do a frolic, fer he's got a heap a meat to fry when he gits to me. Reverent Dailey, that young feller over at Harpersville, tol' me th' Lord could save anybody. He tol' me, 'Though. yo'r sins air of scarlet, I will wash 'em white ae snow.' That'e what I'm countin' on. That's what I went to Judge McKinnon fer an' got him to give me one of his old Bibles. I ain't never read a lick in my life, but I got to thinkin' I didn't want to go out without a Bible in ay damned shack.
It's go'nter take a heap of washin' fer me, fer if it's a sin to have young'uns an' not be married, I done a lot of it. It's got to whar anybody could come up an' say. 'How're ye, pat', an' I wouldn't know if I ought'er knock hell out-a him or kiss 'in. But I got religion, even if I don't go to no church. Reverent Dailey said he was go'nter pray fer me, an' I guess that'll wash me off a little.
"I done los' track of most of the kids I had by my two women I kept 'em with me 'til they jest drifted off an' didn't come back. One of th' little ol' gals -- she never was bright--went to sylacaugy to work in th' mill, an' somebody tol' me she was runnin' atter ev'ry pair of britches in sight. If I ever kotch up with 'er, I'll bust some of 'er ribs loose. My oldes' boy, was makin' likker down on Cohagie Creek last I heerd--I don' know whar he is now. I don' know whar none of 'em is, so don' ax me 'bout 'em.
"I been workin' fer ol' Blalock a good spell now, an' I reckon th' place is as good as ary'n I'd find. But he don' pay me like he ought'er. They ain't nobody knows a tree better' me, an' they ain't nobody can do harder work. ol' Blaleck thinks I'm a damned feel. but I been 'round."
As he talked, the black squinted eyes kept turning with increasing intentnees upon a marrow, weed-flanked trail that ribboned toward his shanty over a stretch of bottom land. Now, he roused his big frame from the chair and glanced inside the bare, two-room structure. His eyes paused upon the face of a cheap alarm clock that ticked above the fire place.
"I ain't rushin' you off," he said after awhile. "This place is yo'rn to stay at long as you want to. But I thought I better tell you they'e sene fo'ks comin' over hyar atter awhile--they's Bud Beker an' some of them Eatris boys. They go'nter have some likker an' some gals along, an' we mought try raisin' a little hell. I thought I better tell you 'bout it, but that yo're welcome to stay."
[But the visitor was ready to go. Already,] the sun was disappearing behind the fringe of pine trees over on Sulphur Mountain. Already, there was hoarse laughter down the path, punetusted with an occasional shrill outburat. Somebody in the approaching crowd was plunking "Red. River villey" on a banjo.
7/25/39
S. J.