Luke Warn, Negro.
Red Bay, Alabama.
Re. V. Waldrep
Historical Department.
LUKE WARN: HE AIN'T TALKIN’
Luke Warn leaned against the creosoted power-pole on Red Bay's main street. It was evident Luke was passing a few hours of that Saturday afternoon before going where his team and wagon were hitched behind the stores to drive homeward with his load of flour, coffee, sugar, and meat He watched the depot, where in a few minutes the I. C. train, from Birmingham, would pass through on the way to Chicago.
"Spin us a yarn about your life, Luke." I approached him and smiled, hoping that a friendly manner would disarm him.
"I's got nothing to tell yon 'bout my life. There is one secret we's all got end that's yourself, and I ain't gonna tell ay secret. I don't mean I don't trust you-all. You's a good white man." Luke had turned and spoken, and now he looked to the depot.
"I don't mean to ask you to tell everything."
He looked around once more, lifted a head to smooth back his moustache, straighten the frezzled ends. I remembered that Ples Epps described Luke's face as looking like it belonged to a monkey. "I don't min', Luke began, "tellin' I was born over here on the Cooper place." The cooper place is 5 miles from Red Bay, the site of a store now gone, and the site of an old. grist mill also gone. "The first work I ever done was fer yore granpa out there. I was 18 when I started workin' on ay ova--way from my family, I mean.
"I useta haul stuff to Iuka fer Mr. Wash, yore granpa; I'd sell cotton, and brang back th' money to Mr. Wash. I hauled, he'ped gin cotton there at the water mill, and grind corn meal, fer about ten years, and then I moved away and stayed thirty years 'fore I come back into this part of the country. The people are better, 'cause they ain't so many niggers and they ain't so many white mens too. They ain't so mean'round here. I likes it better than I liked Corinth where I farmed."
"What other work have you done?"
"In the winter time, 'way back yonder, I used to sawmill in the winter.
I done purty near everything. I even sold a quart of whiskey ones... " He stopped and seemed to afraid to go on, as if his tongue had stuck to the roof of his mouth.
"Go on Lake."
"No, I ain't gonna tell you my life. I just won't do hit...
"Yes, I guess it's because I was mean part of th' time. You want me me tell you the good things I've done! I'm afeared they'd be purty few and fer between.
"I's been married twice. The first one died with the flu. I's had 8 Chillun, and they's all died 'cept 5." Now closed up; he was looking past a car that was parked; then he ran his eye over the frame. I asked him if he ever owned a car.
"No, I never did have no car. Back In good times I Went to town to git me one. I looked at a second-handed car, and the man I was farming fer tole me he wouldn't buy no second-handed car, and he tole me to come back next week and we'd buy a new one. I went home and I thought it all out. When I went to town the next Satiday, I decided I didn't want no car. Them thangs won't run without gas. And you has to be fixin' and flxin' on something nuther all the time."
I still stood by as he was silent, and he looked at me suspiciously. He was still leery of his tongue.
"You wants to know ' bout my life. I can't tell you nothin' that would do you no good. If that there sidewalk was life--he waved down the street toward the postoffice with a calloused hand--"and I had to go through it, walked on hit; I don't know just how I'd walk, if I loped, hopped, er crawled. If I stopped and ung' round an' made bad faces at people, er if I smiled at all th' peoples. Ho, I can't tell you nothin' 'bout how to live. You, couldn't learn nothin' 'bout how to do hit. If I did tell you."
"Would you be religious as you walked down that street, turn the other check like Jesus?"
"No, sir:" His face broke into a smile; "no, sir, I wouldn't. Nobody but Jesus could've done hit. I ain't very religious. I mean I don't do nothin like prayin' and shoutin'. It ain't in me, I guess. I joined the church; the Missionary Baptist--in Pleasant Site. I goes to church every Sunday. My religion," he said, "can be b'iled down! it's just faith and a-trustin'. You don't know nothin', and you just hope and trust you air right. Now, that's th' way I sees hit."
The train from Birmingham, headed for Chicago came to a stop at the depot as we watched the mail being piled in and the mail being piled out.
"I never have been to Birmingham, but I went up to Memphis and stayed there fer a while once. No, I couldn't carry a bale on my shoulders." Lake is not a big man; ha is squat, long-armed. "Some of 'em could. I seed a feller once that could jump three feet with a bale of cotton. He did hit Luke crouched with arms extended before him. "He'd grab hit with cotton hooks in front of him, and he'd jump hit ahead of him.
"When I was in Memphis I rode a steamboat. The cheapest ridin' I ever done.
hit was. I was on the boat to go across, give 'em a dime,and they started goin' up the river, and I jus' stayed all th' day. Hit was fun, but I ain't no boat like that since."
I asked him concerning any difficulties he had had with white man, whether he drank, cussed, danced, or raised hell.
"You's ast a lot of questions."
"I want to write your life..."
"You're going to write my life? That," he scratched his graying head, "that's how come? I ain't got mo life to write 'bout. I ain't goin' to tell nothin'. Yes, I've been drank. I fought some--not much. I fought William Tiffin once; he was drunk at a. dance, and we had hit 'round and 'round' He was a white man, you know, and you wouldn't've through we'd a-fit. Us Warm boys used to fight them Tiffin boys all the time. They didn't care." Ha paused: "Dr. Arch, your uncle says we's right honorable niggers. I never was in no rals trouble, never did go to jail. You mean, has I ever had any ups and downs? I's had planty of 'em!"
"Crops are bad this year..." I suggested.
"I'll make 'bout a half-crop. We's had a lot of overflows. Three or four bales, I guess. Ho, th' corn in the bottom ain't no count neither.
"Here, I told you a lie; I did have some trouble." The tone of his voice conveyed to me his carefulness in telling What he intended to tall; "You knowed 'bout my trouble, reason you. It was with Mr. Epps.
"Him and yore granpa was runnin' a store over here. He stood good, Mr. Epps did, fer some stuff. I was a-goin' to pay hit, but I didn't want to when I carried some cotton in there. I didn't have but $8; Mr. Epps, he stood fer $10. I carried some bags of cotton in there when yore granpa was out. We were back in th' back-end of th' store a-weighin'. We weighed hit out, and Mr. Epps, he said: 'We'll jus' put this here cotton on this here 'count of your'n. I weren't half-way willin' 'tall. Some peoples callus sassy niggers. I told him no, no.
"He didn't say nothin'. I got watery in the feet and knees, fer he was awfal quiet. He got off his knees where he was stuffin' cotton in a bag out'n the weighin' basket. I can see his hands a-grippin' the basket. He went away, and I heered him up at the front-end o' th' store. I got back my good feelin's, and I thought shore hit had plumb blowed over. I went ahead pokin' at that cotton, thankin' I'd git me $8.
"I weren't payin' no 'tention then, but I knows now he was a-lockin' and a-barrin' th' front door. he comes back:
"'Hit goes on yore ' count,' he says.
"'No, hit don',' I says, needin' that there money.
"He jus' shoved me back over that basket, an' I tries to kick myself up. But he comes across with a long rope, with a iron pea on th' end--one of them thangs they used to be on cotton scales. He whummed me, and I could feel hit a painin ' me something terrible. He beat down, and kicked me, and he was all silent and meanin' what he was doin'. I runned up to th' store front to git out, but I jus' hurt my hands a-tryin'. I got in a corner, and he kept chasin' and whuppin' me with that there iron pea. It done me plumb out, hut he tole some people how he wasn't aimin' to kill me.
"Somebody begin to knock on the barred door.
"'What air yuh doin' in there. Ples Epps?' says your granpa a-beatin' on the door.
"'I's whuppin me a nigger,' he says and he goes ahead larrupin' me all over th' place. I skinned my legs and arms, and sprained my ankle. He was breathing hard when he quit.
"He says, 'Don't you fergit you is a nigger and I's a white man;' he says that when he's through. 'You's a nigger, and I want you to git that there other $2 fer me right away.' He unbarred the door, and I slunk out whiles your granpa come in. I sent my brother, Jim, with the rest of the money.
"They say we air sassy niggers. We is high-priced niggers, too."
"How! High-priced?"
"How come we's high-priced niggers? I give you a example. Mr. Epps and the t'other heirs in his bunch had some corn they wanted hauled. Well, we hauled hit, and we told 'em $8.50 a load. They say a load is just ten bushels. They say, no. Mr. Epps, he say he ain't gonna pay; he say he'll be damned 'fore he'll pay hit. They didn't pay hit, but paid $1.50 a load."
He grinned and shook his head. He ran his hand through gray, short kinks. He stuffed his large hands in his pants. Luke was in pants over a pair of too-long, winter underwear. His shoes were heavy, and they were covered with a thick coat of dry dust he had picked up while plowing.
"Forget your shirt this morning?"
"You wants to know if I forgot to put on my shirt this mornin'? No, I didn't forgit hit. I just didn't aim to put hit on. I's got on this long-sleeve unerwear, and I don't need no shirt."
"What kind of house do you live in, Luke?"
"My house ain't no secret. Hit has three rooms in hit. Hits got a kitchen, a stove, and some dishes. We cute the wood fer the stove every night. I don't know how many corde I haul to my woodpile. It burns fine, end makes hit plumb hot."
He was plainly annoyed when asked about his family and more intimate matters. "My wife an' th' girls work cm the farm, yeah--and they hoe, plow, and pick. Then when things air laid by, they wash for white folks in town; they cook far people. Some of 'em air married, and they got girls at home too. 'Course there is plenty of room to sleep. The kids can sleep together thick as flees."
His youngest child is a baby. When naked his views about birth control, explaining its meaning, he didn't know whether to be angry or not.
"Does I believe in usin' things to stop 'em from a-comin'. You air gittin' mighty inquirin', ain't yon? That is a pussonal matter, I reckon, but I don' min' tellin' you me end my wife we ain' never interfered with nature a-tall, and I reokon nature a in' overworked us. Eight kids ain't too many. When we git a kid, we want it, an’ it makes us know what we's workin' for.
"Kids come in handy then cotton pickin' comes, and nature ain't took advantage, end I don't reckon nature could've if it wanted to, bein's we could use purty nigh all that's come along."
"How old are you?"
"Now, I ain't tellin' you how old I is. Anyways I don't know. Some people think I'm old as yore Uncle, end I can't see no reason why I ain't. That'll make me 'bout 70, you say?" He thrust out his chin, opened his month:" 'Bout right, too. See, I got my teeth. They're White, see? They's four gold 'uns My moustache, see, is grayin'. I need t' trim hit, don't IT but I'm done too old to care 'bout how I look. I got kinky hair like any nigger 'tall, see?
"You. gonna write this?" he asked.
"I ain't wuth nothin' to you. I's a nobody, if there is any nobodies. I got a secret like anybody else, and if I go to tellin' hit, then I won't have none. All us have things we don't tell. Sit wouldn't do me no good to talk, and hit shore wouldn't do you no good. I said I ain't been in jail; I said I ain't done nothin' good to speak of; so I ain't fitten to make no writin' about. I can't even write myself, mar read, ner anything.
“Why don’t you go to school teachers or preachers? <text not clear>I don’t min’ talkin’ to you. I didn't know what you was up to with all them questions. I thought you was a white man just a prankin' a nigger. Lots of white people ast queations. You got a purpose, ain't you? That's 'nough to acare a person. I don't know as why I oughta be scared. I ain't really scared; I just ain't caring 'bout ‘vulging no secrets. I wouldn't have no secret if I did."
He appeared to be defending himself: "I'm just a nigger that farms. I ain't nothin' else. I work hard, 'tend my crops. I'm too old to do nothin' mean. Women don't git on my mind no more; I don't prank no more....
"Did women ever git on my mind? That there la a question I guess anybody could answer. Hit 'pears to me, if you don't min' me sayin' hit, that writin' 'bout men and women a-gitting on each other's min' ain't important. Ever'body knows they does, and just how they does git on each other's min'. You can't tell nobody nothin' 'bout women and mens."
"What do you want most....!" I asked.
"I's wanted me a woman, I's wanted dollars, and I reckon there's nothin' I's wantin' now but dollars; so I figers I'm jist half-dead. My wife-- she's done turned cook for me.
"'Course, 'course, I stepped 'round--man's gotta do hit.
"How do I pass my time when I ain't workin'? That there ain't often, but let this old man tell you that passin' time ain't nothin' 'tall. These here gray hairs come ' fore I knowed hit. You want to know my' diversions?' Eatin' and a-wishin', I guess."
8/14/39
S.J.
