Waitress,
January 6, 1939.
Imogene Coleman,
County Jail
Paris, Tennessee.
Nellie Gray Toler, writer.
Revised by Aswell.
NO GRUNT COMING
She was seated on her bunk in black brocaded two piece pajamas bound in yellow. New red bedroom slippers trimmed with fur were on her feet, and her hair was freshly shampooed. Neat clean dresses hung on the wall on one side of the cell and toilet articles were on the sill of the barred window. On the blanket beside her was a sack of Bull Durham tobacco, and cigarette papers. She was busy shaping her nails in long points. Her hands were soft and white and her skin fresh and vell cared for.
"I guess I've never been good, she said. "Don't hardly know what that is. Anyway, I'm not religious, but this is the first time I've ever served a term or been locked up. I'm in here for seven months for helping out on a robbery is why I'm where I am today. Guess I'm just plain lucky, though for I've gotten into lots of escapades in my time. Nothing serious till now, though. I always managed to escape till this time.
"I've been married twice. Married a Webb first time, then married Chet Younger last, and they are both living. I never did have no children. I'd been separated from Chet about a month and a half when this trouble happened. He's been to see me twice, I think, since I've been up here, but I don't think I'll ever run away with him again. When I get out in March, I don't think I'll go back with him.
"My mama and papa separated when I was little, oh, about eleven years ago. One lives about a mile from the other and they haven't ever got any divorce. She's got her a man and he's got him a woman. Maybe if they'd stuck in married life I might have done better myself. I don't know.
"I've got two sisters and two brothers at home, but I'm the baby girl. I've got a married brother that lives in West Paris, with two children, one in Detroit. They all come to see me in jail, too.
"I'd been going with Rufus Snow ever since me and Chet parted. Oh well, about a month I guess. He drove a truck. So I was out at my brother's wife's mother's and a car or truck drove up one night and asked if there was any women or girls there. My brother told him no, nobody but Imogene. The man in the truck said for me to come out there. I thought it was Rufus or I never would gone out to the truck.
"Well, it was John Snow, Rufus' cousin, and he said he had a man there from Golden Pond. He wanted me to go along with him.
"Well, I told him I 'Wouldn't go with nobody I didn't know and so the man from Golden Pond said,'Oh shucks! I'm all right.' So I got in the car and went. He was pretty well drunk. Must been drinking all day and two girls had already been out with him that day, anyway.
"Well and so we was driving along and John wanted to stop at Mr. Lampley's and so we did. Rufus was sitting in there waiting, he wanted to know where we was going and we told him to the Black Cat. We drove on there and stopped outside and John told me he had plenty of money on him and to get it away from him the first chance I got.
"I said I'd not rob nobody and the from Golden Pond man heard me. I told him he'd better leave John if he didn't want to get robbed because we didn't need him nohow. So he said to me 'I heard what he said to you about robbing me while ago.' The man was pretty well teed up but he knew what he was doing anyway and what we said about robbing him. Well, me and him drove on down to Mr. Claxton's and he drinked beer. I got me some cigarettes because I didn't want no beer. He, well he was drunk and cussing around and Mr. Claxton tried to make him hush and finally ordered him off and he cussed around and finally drove on back to the Black Cat and got a cabin, the first one on the side you go in.
"So he bought two pints of whiskey and four bottles of beer. He wanted the whiskey and I told him I didn't like it. So he got the beer for me.
"We went on in the cabin and was drinking beer. I hadn't gone to bed or nothing neither, when somebody knocked on the door and I opened it and it was Rufus had drove up with Carnell Jackson in his car. They and John comed in and got the money from the man from Golden Pond who was so drunk he didn't know what was happening. Rufus tooked it and told me to come on and go with him. They had it already made up and I went with Rufus. We let John and Carnell out up town and me and Rufus went on to a cabin at the Airflow. Rufus counted the money in the cabin because he had it all. We hadn't been there but a little bit when the Law came and got us, too.
"I told them how it was because I hadn't done nothing and didn't help plan it or know nothing about it and I wasn't into it so I told them all about it, too. They'd done got Carnell Jackson and he turned State's Evidence and told it all up town before they comed to the Airflow after us.
"Well, I didn't cry none, because I knowed it wouldn't do no good and would just make myself sick for no use. I haven't never cried about being in here. I just make the best of it. It ain't so bad, I don't guess. Nothing to do but stay here. But I'll be out someday and then, well, watch my smoke! I'll make somebody pay plenty for this and how!
"I had at first--all four of us had--a lawyer. Rufus broke jail and got away. Our lawyer got us to compromise before the judge and state's attorney. The man didn't prosecute, for he was a liquor runner from Golden Pond and a bootlegger and he knowed the only thing he could do was try to keep it quiet and not let his wife and family know if he could help. He was glad to get back home, money or none. The boys got eight months in jail. My lawyer got mine down to seven. And the costs will take thirty days to lay them out. Be about June when I get out of here now.
"I was put on the spot and that's how come me in here and no mistake about it. Roped into it, that's all. But if I'd gone before the jury I'd got lots more than I did. So I got no grunt coming. I was glad to get off as light as I did, that's all.
"The first three days they kept me locked in here. Now the outside door is locked at night but the cell door is left open. I can get outside in the hall and look out the window if I want to, but I can't see much. I don't eat nothing they have here. All you get is five biscuits, a piece of fried fat meat, and gravy for breakfast and beans and bread for dinner. For supper they give you beans, bread, and boiled Irish pota toes with peelings on them. My folks brings my meals to me. They bring me a plate every meal whether I eat it or not. They have to. I throw it in the whizzing pitcher here under the bed where it can keep the company it ought to. With my folks bringing me my things, so it ain't so bad.
"They let me go home Christmas night and come back Monday night, and last weekend. Guess I'll go this one, too. I just stayed there and didn't even go up town at all while Itm there. I do like the sheriff told me too, because if he's nice enough to let me go home, naturally I want to do what he says. Anyway, I didn't have no business of running around, anyway.
"They've had several women in here five or six at a time sometimes and they have to sleep two on a mattress on the floor sometimes when they ain't got enough room anywhere else.
"I had some dealing with the law once before this. One time I was before the grand jury. I saw the killing where Hurley Henderson killed Benton Craney. I stood on the porch and watched it and the grand jury had me up and I told them how it was, but they sent Hurley to the pen, anyway. Benton ought to have been killed. Good enough for him, anyway. Hurley's out now, but I wasn't scared in court. See all this tattooing on me, here on my upper shoulder, on my right arm in three places, here on my chest, between my breasts, on one of them too, and here on my belly and back here where I sit but you can't see it. My husband did that before we married. He was handy with the needle.
"I aimed to go to Puryear today and see Chauncey Freeman, Gordon Brovming's campaign manager and get him to call the Governor and get him to pardon me. They say now he's got defeated and is getting out that he's pardoning them right and left now. If I just had a little money I could get out of here now. The State's Attorney and Judge would sign for me to have a pardon if I had a little money to back me. Baxter Clark ought to do something for me now because he went with me a long time and he ought to get me out. He could get me a pardon if he'd go to Nashville. I know he could! I'm aiming to give him a few days more and believe me if he don't get me out, when I do get out of here I aim to fix him plenty. I know lots would fix him. If his wife was to find out a few things, gee but it would make hot stuff here. He'd come under in a hurry then!
"I lived in Detroit eight months once. I liked it there a whole lot, too. A good place there. Shucks, I had a good time and liked it, too. I had two jobs up there. I worked as a waitress in a cafe one place and as a hostess or hot girl in another. Got burnt pretty bad there and come back here to be cured. I'll watch my step next time.
"I like whiskey but it sure don't like me much. I can't drink gin at all, tastes like perfume smells, all but orange gin, and I like that, though. I drink beer and that's what makes me so fat. It's good for you, too. It passions a man up, too.
"The sheriff is sure good to us here. He's the best one I ever heard of. I can't kick on his account. It ain't his fault or he'd let me go if he had his way. It ain't so bad don't seem to me, though of course I want out, but I have lots of company here. If I'd done anything I'd feel bad about being in here, but I ain't ashamed of it none, because I didn't do nothing except go to the cabin with a man, and that ain't nothing to be ashamed of, I don't think.
"My mama knows a lot of men here but they're all scared to come out and try to get me out because they don't want it knows they know us. Well, their wives might find it out and it'd be some tall explaining to do. I think though, one of them will go to the Governor or call him one and get him to get me a pardon before the sixteenth because he can da it till then, because he don't go out of his governor's chair till then, and that's a little over a week off now.
"Do you know Bessie Mae Boatwright? I run around with her some before this happened. She'd already been out with that man from Golden Pond that day and got sixteen dollars off him before I went out with him. She's a little kin to me and we're about the same age and I'm just a few days older than her. She can sure make them throw up the money. I wish I knowed how like she does."