Another version of "Life History of Mr. and Mr. Truman Barger, Beachtown, N.C., " entitled "Life Story of Mr. and Mrs. Exil Hardin, Tenant Farmers of Yadkin County, " can be found on pages 4815A-4830
Date of First Writing:	November 10, 1938.
Name of Family Interviewed:	Mr. and Mrs. Exie Hardin.
Address:	Yadkinville, Yadkin Co., N.C.
Occupation:	Tenant Farmer and Tobacco Basket Split River.
Name of Writer:	Claude V. Dunnagan.
Name of Revisor:	Claude V. Dunnagan.
LIFE HISTORY OF MR. AND MRS. TRUMAN BARGER, BEACHTOWN, N. C.
***************
We sat there silently. The woman stared into the dying embers in the huge stone fireplace. The dim light reflected only partially the silent resignation on her face. It was a haggard face. And yet, there was a subtle beauty, almost faded, that lingered in her eyes, as though youth had not fully gone. Somewhere in the past, I reflected, she must have known some bit of happiness. Certainly, the calm serenity on her face could have been due to nothing more than a remembrance......a vague impression.....of that bit of happiness.
A sickly infant pawed at her elongated breast. She mechanically placed the nipple in its mouth with an unconscious motion she had done it so many times. Before her, on a cracked stone hearth, three children sat scratching figures with burnt charcoal. They were silent as they tried to reproduce the animal pictures the school-teacher had shown them the day before. The woman, sitting motionless in her chair, seemed not to see them, to see nothing but the grey ashes and dying embers.....
The silence was broken by the sudden bark of a dog outside the door, followed by a curse. The heavy door swung open and a man in overalls came in. The flickering light from a lantern on the wall showed his face to be pudgy, and mouth covered with tobacco juice. Throwing a dirty overall coat into the corner, he nodded at me and moved toward the fireplace. As he sat down, he turned to his wife, apparently oblivious to my presence.
"Where's Joe?" he said.
He ain't come in yet, " The woman continued to stare into the fireplace.
"Got any supper?"
"Nothin' but bread and a few beans...from yesterday, " the woman answered. "Didn't you get no money from Hobson?"
"No. The baskets ain't done yet. It'll be a week. He ain't payin' nobody till they're finished."
The woman heaved a sigh and stood up. The baby was asleep. Moving over to the corner of the room, she laid it down on a wrinkled straw tick and went back to her chair.
"Seems like you'd be seein' there ain't no use tryin' to make a livin' doin' somethin' that don't pay nothin'. Wish you'd quit foolin' with them tobacco baskets and go to farmin' like I told you when we was married."
The man stood up quickly and faced her.
"I told you I ain't goin' to push a plow for no stinkin' landlord: Not if I have to die first." He paused a moment. "It'd be diff'runt if I had my own land.....but I ain't". He turned again toward the fire. The woman pushed the three children away from the fireplace.
"Git to bed, all of you." They moved silently across the room and lay down on another straw tick on the floor.
"Ain't nobody too good to tend a farm, " she said in a monotonous voice as she pulled a patched blanket over the children. Truman Barger sat down and leaned forward to throw a stick of wood on the fire. Presently he smiled slightly and turned slowly to his wife, who had returned to her seat by the fire and was filling her lower lip with snuff.
"You know, Mellie, I been thinkin'......if I could ever get enough money to buy back my log-sawin' outfit, I orta make a pretty good livin'.....like when we was married. We had enough to eat then.....before the babies come."
Mellie spit into the fire and settled back in her chair.
"You couldn't make nothin', Truman, even if you got it back. They got a new sawmill up in town, now, and I hear they ain't gettin' hardly no business a-tall. Seems like the young'uns are goin' to starve 'less'n you start farm......". She paused quickly, and seemed to be fumbling for another work to express her thought. I could tell that she was, in a vague way, aware of her husband's sensitivity about his failure to own or till any land......his refusal to accept the terms of any sharecropper landlord. Mellie finally seemed to find a more indirect approach.....the right words she was fumbling for. "Carter come over today while you was gone and said he wanted somebody to tend his farm down near the creek. Said he'd give us half....he'll furnish the stock......"
Truman looked at his wife a moment then turned his face to the floor.
"It ain't no use....I can't do it.....it won't work."
Mellie paused a minute, then asked abruptly, 
"What's Hobson payin' you now?"
"A cent a split....same as before."
"How many'd you rive today?"
"'Bout seventy-five.....we ain't workin' next week, though... says he's got enough till market opens."
"What you goin' to do then?" Mellie asked.
"Nothin', I reckon, till they start up again."
Mellie leaned forward and picked up the poker. She stirred the fire in a mechanical motion. Then there was the sound of someone fumbling at the door. Joe, Mellie's son, came in. His overalls were as unkempt as his father's. His body didn't look as old as his face. He shuffled across the room and sat down on the side of a rickety bed, looking toward me in brief glances, and again, toward his parents by the fire. As he dropped his shoes to the floor, Truman stood up and turned toward him.
"You goin' to the woods tomorrow and help me rive. We got two more days to work, and I got to get in two hundred splits, 'fore we get through." Joe nodded silently and crawled under a blanket.
Truman stood motionless a minute, then turned to Mellie.
"Get any milk today?"
"'Bout a quart", she answered. "The young'uns drunk it all. It seems like this cow ain't any better'n the last one. She's goin' day again."
Truman picked up a battered tin dipper and went out the door. In a moment he came back with the dipper half full of milk. He offered it to me. I declined. Then he handed it to Mellie.
"Drink it. It's all I could get."
"Did you.....get any?" she asked.
"I got some over at Hobson's today. I ain't hungry."
She drank part of the milk and stopped.
"I'll save the rest for your coffee in the morning. It ain't much, but it's better'n none." She sat the dipper in the windowsill beside the chimney.
I spoke. "I'll be going now." I went out and closed the door behind me. As I crossed the hill, I turned and paused a moment, staring at the dim light in the cabin window. I moved on. When I glanced back a few moments later, it was dark.
*******************
Nearly four months had passed before I again came to the Barger's cabin.
"Come in, " the voice of Mrs. Barger directed. I walked in. At her breast was a baby feeding. "I've had twins since you was here last. Twins.......and trouble on trouble. Seems like a body just can't get on, no matter what they do."
"Tell me about it, " I suggested, seeing that she needed to talk to someone. She was silent for a moment, as if considering. Then she began talking in a flat, passionless tone.
"I reckon it wasn't more'n a couple of weeks after you were here last when the first thing happened. I was standin' in the door holdin' the baby 'bout sundown, when I spied a man runnin' over here. I figgered it wasn't Truman......he wasn't due for two hours. It was Joe and when he got here, he was 'most winded. "They got Pappy!" he says. "Who got Pappy?" I asks. Then he tells me all about what happened. Seems like Truman'd been drinkin' over in the woods while they was rivin' and when he was drivin' Hobson's truck over to the basket factory that evenin', he turned over and wrecked the truck. It didn't hurt it bad, though. The law put Truman in jail right after that and I went over to see him that night. I walked over and back......four miles. They tried him next day for drivin' drunk and he got ninety days. He's been on the roads all these three months. It's been awful lonesome like with him gone......" She paused and looked down at the nursing baby. I could tell by the look in her eyes that she had really been lonely......that Truman meant more to her than she probably thought when they were together all the days in the past. She sighed almost inaudibly, as though she were having trouble in suppressing the urge to break down and cry.
"I was over at town a few weeks ago to see the relief lady 'bout gettin' somethin' to eat, but she said the government wasn't givin' nothin' then. Seems like the people that's got things just don't care if us poor'uns starve..... Comin' out of the courthouse, I run into Hobson. He never paid Truman what he owed him on account of Truman turned his truck over. I asked him for it...said we needed it awful bad....but he just kept sayin' the damages to the truck cost more'n he owed him."
She sat silent for a moment before she finally arose and carried the baby over to the corner of the room, where she lay it on the straw tick and covered it with a ragged blanket. As she resumed her seat in her chair by the fireplace, she dug her hand into the pocket of her jacket and pulled out a small snuff can. She opened it and scraped a gum brush in her mouth, she looked into the can, put the lid on and placed it in the mantle at the end of a neat row of other empty snuff bales.
"Them three months has gone by awful slow, " she presently resumed. "When the twins come, we had to sell the cow to pay the doctor, and then it didn't bring enough. The young'uns ain't so strong as they was....what with no milk to feed 'em. I guess we wouldn't be alive 'cept for the things we could find in the woods.......nuts and berries and things...and what the neighbors give us sometime." She paused again, and as I watched the flickering light of the fire play over her face, it was obvious that Mellie was getting older quickly.......that poverty, child-birth, and worry had left on her face a premature memorial to the passage of time.
"I guess Truman'll be comin' home soon, " she said suddenly, without changing the expression on her face. "It's been nigh onto three months since they took him away. It seems longer, but I reckon its just on account of so much trouble I've had since he left. Three months its been and he'll be comin' home soon....... maybe tomorrow....."
The door swung open and Joe came in. He was thinner than when I had been there last. His face seemed to carry a more hardened expression.....more mature, physically. Kicking off his mud covered brogans, he settled in a chair at the other corner of the hearth, pulled out a stained bag of dried tobacco and began rolling a cigarette. Mellie continued to stare into the flickering light of the fire for a moment before she seemed to notice he had come in.
"Get any work done?" she asked without turning her head.
"'Been shuckin' corn for Carlton. I'll get give bushels when we're done."
"I heard corn ain't bringin' much at the mill this year...."
"'Bout fifty cents, I reckon, " Joe answered. He licked the ends of his cigarette and offered the sack of tobacco and papers to me. I took them and began rolling a cigarette. He watched me amusedly as I fumbled with the paper and spilled the tobacco out the ends. When I had finished it, he reached forward and pulled out a half burning ember from the fire. He lit his then handed it to me. We sat silently, watching the wreathes of smoke circle upward. Mellie continued to chew her gum stick, occasionally leaning forward to spit into the fire. Presently Joe spoke.
"It's gettin' cold, Ma.
"Yes, it's gettin' cold, " Mellie echoed.
"We'll be needin' more wood soon."
"I reckon so."
A chip of burning wood popped out from the fire. Joe kicked it back on the hearth. Then he sat still for a moment, looking at his mother. Mellie's lips began to move.
"Joe...."
""What?"
"I been thinkin'......we been havin' a heap o' bad luck lately. I remember, when I was a little girl, the preacher used to say the Lord protects them that has faith, or somethin' like that.....and you know, Joe, we ain't been goin' to church like we should've. Maybe God's punishin' us on account o' that......"
"Maybe so, " Joe answered softly.
"I was over to Carter's yesterday, " Mellie continued, "and Mae says they're holdin' meetin' tomorrow night down at Deep Creek Church......said she'd keep the babies if we wanted to go........"
"I reckon we might as well go......" he said.
"She turned to me. "I reckon you'll be goin', " she said.
I nodded.
When we got to meeting next night, the church was nearly full. We went in and found two seats near the back. We had never seen the preacher before. Somebody whispered that he was a traveling evangelist from up North. He was immaculately dressed in a black suit and high, white collar. Picking up a tattered hymn-book, he turned to the congregation.
"We will turn to page sixty-four and sing the first two stanzas of 'At The Cross."'"
Mellie couldn't read but she opened one of the hymnals. There was no accompaniment. The preacher raised his arms and began singing lustily in a heavy voice. The congregation stood up............
"At the cross, at the cross, 
Where I first saw the light, 
And the burden of my heart rolled away;
It was there by faith
I received my sight, 
And now I am happy all the day!........"
When they had finished, the preacher picked up two plates and handed them down the aisle.
"The Lord loveth a cheerful giver..." he said in a rolling monotone. "Freely ye have received, freely giver...........
We give thee but thine own, 
Whate'er the gift may be.
All we have is Thine alone, 
A trust, 0 Lord, from Thee!"
Joe looked at his mother, and reached in his pocket. As the plate came around, he dropped in a dime and took out a nickel. Mellie nodded at him as the preacher talked on.....
When the meeting was over, we took a short cut through the woods. It was after ten o'clock and we were tired as we walked silently through the forest. The sky seemed brighter than usual tonight, I thought, as Joe helped his mother over a barbed-wire fence. There was a brightness on Mellie's face.
"It was a good meetin', " she said. "I feel a heap better now.....the Lord'll provide somehow......."
Suddenly Joe stopped and pointed through the woods.
"Look Ma! What's that red light in the sky over yonder?"
There was a red glow on the horizon beyond the edge of the woods.
"Looks like somethin' burnin'!" Joe shouted. "Come on!"
As we neared the glare, it seemed to grow dimmer. Then, from the other side of the hill, there came the sound of shouting voices. Gradually the voices ceased. When we reached the edge of the woods, we could hear nothing but the crackling of burning timber....black smoke was rising from the other side of the hill.
"Lordy! Somethin's on fire!" Mellie cried. She followed Joe as fast as she could. When we reached the top of the hill, we stopped and looked down. Below us, lay their cabin, a pile of smouldering ashes. As we watched, the last standing beam fell to the ground, scattering the glowing ashes as it struck........
"You can live here, Mellie, till you get a better place, " Carter was saying. "'Course it ain't much now. I'll have the boys bring some chairs down from the house and some quilts. Sorry we couldn't save nothin' from the house. It just went up so quick....You're lucky none of the young'uns wasn't in there......"
"Yes......I reckon we're lucky......Mellie said.
Carter stood silently a moment looking at the children. Then he turned around and started for the door.
"I'll set some bread and milk for the little'uns, " he said, and went out.
After Joe and the children had rolled up under a blanket, Mellie sat down before the rocky, cracked fireplace and began nursing one of the twins, I said:"I'll be going now. I'll come back tomorrow.....with a few things...." She nodded.
Then the door opened.
"Mellie!" She whirled around.
"Truman!" She laidthe child on the floor and started toward her husband.....and stopped...."No.....you can't be Truman.....Truman was big and strong...you're so...you look so old...and thin... It ain't you, is it....?" she faltered.
The man came toward her.
"Don't you know me, Mellie?" his voice choked. "I ain't been gone so long...just three months....."
"Truman! What they done to you......?"
He sank to the floor in front of the fire.
"What's God done to all of us, Mellie, all of us....?"
She went over and knelt down beside him.
"Don't say that.......He knows best......."
She raised his head and wiped the perspiration from his forehead.
"It's gettin' cold, Truman.....we'd better be goin' to bed...the wood'll soon be gone."
"It don't matter, Mellie, it don't matter.....hold my head now, just hold my head........"
She held his head and stared into the fire. As I went out and silently closed the door, the flame flickered and died. It was cold.