Federal Writers' Project
Room 36, Federal Building
Greensboro, North Carolina
January, 1939
Family of Newton Owen
Steeds, N. C.
Husband:	Farmer -- steel worker
Wife:	Said to be empowered to perform cures
Harriet Works Corley, writer
reviser
THE FAMILY OF ISAAC BOBBITT
A half mile down the rugged red side lane leading off the Garner's Grove road at the first cluster of mail boxes, you find the farm of Ike Bobbitt lying in a cleared place flat as the palm of your hand and rimmed on two sides with pines. At little to the north, on a rise of ground overlooking the farm, is the Brownie Place. This is as it should be possibly, for when Ike was a boy, the Brownie Place--so called because the old man once owned it--had been his home and he liked to feel that wherever he might be his house still lingers in its kindly sight.
Ike as everyone knew, had been born “across the creek in Randolph”. But upon the second marriage of his mother, who had named him for Isaac Newton--”the man who made apples drop to the ground”--the boy left the farm and came to the Brownie Place in Moore to “batch” with his uncle. Later his two elder sisters married and moved out; and when two half-sisters appeared in the family, his mother's farm seemed to lose its charm for the boy. It didn't seem the same any more. The Brownie Place was the only home he knew.
Ike liked the boys in this new neighborhood; not only were they venturesome and lively but they had ideas. They were not going to stay here in the country and never see anything except maybe Carthage or Asheboro; they were very emphatic on this point. Instead, they were going to join the navy and see the world. The boys did not know exactly how to go about joining anything so remote from their lives, but judicious inquiry brought this information. They could do something about the matter if they could get to Raleigh. Anyone there could tell them where to go.
They learned, too, that at eleven o'clock every night a Raleigh train wandered through Hemp, eight miles away. They could go to bed early; then when the house was dark slip out through a window, meet at the schoolhouse, and reach Hemp, in time to board the train.
Only one of the boys failed to appear at the rendezvous but the other three, including Ike, reached Raleigh as planned. And after four years, said to be glorious, sailing hither and yon on the high seas, they returned to the community very swagger and extremely informed.
Ike immediately capitulated to the charms of Bessie; of Grace; of Mabel; in fact of any of the girls who made near-heroes of them.
It was just about decided--in her father's mind at least--that he would marry Bessie when suddenly word went swiftly around that Ike had taken the youngest Harmon girl to the preacher. Nobody had noticed that he had been paying Mary any attention. Nor had he, it was decided. It was stated bluntly that his sudden decision to marry Mary Harmon was to “get shet of the rest of the girls.”
Ike was dark and handsome; Mary was a pure blonde, very young, very shy and not a little amazed at her good fortune in being “asked” by Ike who could have had his choice of all the girls for miles around. At the outset it seemed like a very good match; the neighbors nodded their heads approvingly.
Ike had saved much of his navy pay and on a portion of the Brownie farm, now his own, built a house for his bride, ugly and bristling with these here new-fangled lightning rods not very often seen in the neighborhood. It differed from its neighbors too in other ways. The front door, for example led, not into the front room but into a hall; “a notion Ike got in some foreign country” and the kitchen was expressly designed to let in the sun from south and east.
Not only was Mary a perfect cook and housekeeper, but born in a family of girls, without brothers, she knew much about the work of the farm and gradually took over most of the chores; milking and feeding the cows, planting and hoeing, and pulling fodder, piling potatoes in the hill against winter. She would even chop wood if Ike was not at home when she needed it.
Ike had known the Harmon girls as he had known all the neighborhood families, casually and through current gossip, the workin'est family everybody said, for miles around. He knew that old man Nelson had “led Annie on”, that nothing had come of it and her heart was broken. He knew that Hazel, the second eldest girl, had married a no-count man and was back at home now with three babies on her hands to care for, and that Jessie, the third girl who had married well and moved away, and inclined to be uppity, was quite the envy of her other sisters.
But he knew almost nothing about Mary except she was pretty and that seemed sufficient. He was not aware of the legend of Mary so familiar to the neighbors that they had long ceased wondering. He had never heard that Mary could “make the cure.”
Nor did Mary wish Ike to know about it for he had been away from the community, had taken on city ways and maybe wouldn't believe in her power. He might tell her to stop such nonsense. Worse still, he might laugh at her. But it was true, she knew it was; she had the power given her by the Lord, because she had never looked upon the face of her father, because she was a posthumous child. She could cure thresh. All the mothers from far and wide believed in her. It was true that the doctors in Hemp and in Seagrove had laughed, then scoffed, then ra'red back and raised a row because she had treated the children. One of them had called to see her about it and to threaten her with the law. All because Johnny Drew had been suffering not from thresh but scarlet fever I How was she to know? His mother had told her thresh.
Ike had not heard about her power. But soon he noticed that horse drawn wagons care and, even trucks, were regularly coming down the red road, always with a woman and a kid aboard and that Mary would stop her work, coming in from the fields or taking her hands out of the dough, to receive them.
“You sure have a way with kids”, Ike would say smilingly. “Every woman who comes here hands her youngun over to you and you don't give it up until the truck starts back. You must love children.”
Mary did not answer.
“Never did sec anything like it”, Ike persisted.
Then one day Ike came home from the mill and swung the sack of flour out onto the porch without looking at Mary.
“I met Lon up at the mill”, he said finally. “Says he and Myrtle aim to come and see you. The kid, too. Says she has the thresh. Reckoned you could cure it.”
Still Mary did not answer. He looked at her obliquely; then said, “You don't fall for that stuff, do you Mary? They told me about you at the mill. You don't really think you can do what the doctors do?”
“I never saw my father”, Mary said in a low tone. “That gives me the power to cure babies. Just like marrying a man with a name like her own gives Alice White the power to cure whooping cough.”
Ike laughed loudly. “And how does Alice cure whooping cough, please tell?”
“With bread she bakes. That cures it. I never saw my father. I can cure thresh---”
Ike stopped laughing. “Tom Jackson never saw his father, either. Does that live him the power to cure children?” He seized her by the shoulder. “Mary! Snap out of it!”
“You’ve been out in the world,” the girl answered, her tone heavy with monotony, her eyes on the pine trees beyond the wheat field. “You've learned lots of crazy things out there. Drinking and women and not believing in God and in doing His work here on earth.”
“I knew about drinking and women before ever I left”, he said. And Mary laughed.
“Do you think God picked you Mary, to cure children?” His voice was scornful. “Then what's all the doctors doing, spending money to go to college and all?”
She was silent.
“Do you think God picked you?”
She nodded.
“Reckoned God picked me, Ike. I'll believe it to my dying day.”
Abruptly he left her and when later in the day Lon and Myrtle swung down the red road with the baby, Ike took down his gun from the crotched sticks over the door, and started off past the cane mill into the woods which stretched into Randolph.
Lon who had looked forward to a chat with “Mary’s man” sat disconsolately on the wagon tongue while Myrtle and Mary went into the house with the baby. A half hour later the women emerged and climbing aboard the rickety old wagon the little family went on its way.
But shortly before Ike returned another mother and baby came to see Mary, finding her at work and as he came past the cane mill he saw the little group in the field outlined against the dark pines.
Dressed in blue overalls, and one of his own shirts to protect her arms from sun and scratches, her fair hair glowing like a halo, Mary stood waist deep in the wheat. She held the child in her arm and hushed its crying. Then, eyes turned to the sky, her lips moved in a solemn incantation.
The mother stood entranced and he could see the father hack by the barn, sitting with bowed head. He watched in fascination then saw Mary bend slowly over the child as if to kiss her. Ike crept nearer. Mary was breathing into the baby's mouth! A thousand germs breathed into the mouth of a child already ailing. In the name of the Lord. And these people believed!
Walking slowly toward home he saw Mary still carrying the child in her arms, return to the yard and place the baby now fast asleep on a pillow in the back of the wagon.
“She'll be well now, Mary”, the child's mother said confidently. Her husband nodded, and clucking to the horse they started up the red road.
Mary watched them disappear over the brow of the hill. Her eyes were serene as she turned to face Ike.
“So you think the kid will get well, sure, now that you have breathed all those germs into its mouth?” Ike's voice was shaking.
Mary laughed.
“Something else you learned in the navy?” she asked quietly. “Germs? Yes, the baby will get well.”
“Say,--Mary, look here-You've got to stop this, Mary.”
Her eyes glowed with a mystic fire.
“I can farm, as well as a man. The old place still belongs to us girls', I can go back there. I don't need you, Ike. Never speak to me again about the cure while I am your wife.”
So from that day the subject was forbidden between them. Mothers with ailing children still streamed down the red road from far and near; fathers, meeting Ike at the store or at the mill looked at him in mute gratitude because of his wife's power, but none dared speak of it to him.
“Ike thinks Mary's crazy to try to cure babies. He's all het up over it, makin' out she's wrong.”
“Mary ain't wrong; God picked her. If Ike stops her, it will be a sin.”
“Don't let Ike stop Mary doin' God's work!”
Rumor raced madly over the roads, but for all that, life in the little household seemed to go on smoothly enough. He had studied in the navy; frequently now on winter evenings Ike would study or read after work while Mary patched quilts or sat before the fire cracking hickory nuts. Theirs was the only house in the community to have what was termed a “good lamp” fit to read by.
“Folks kind of think you are putting on, Ike, reading those silly books,” Mary would say.
“I'm not the most educated guy in the world. Maybe a little reading will do me good. Might do you good, too.”
“What are you reading?”
“All about how to run a farm.”
Mary hit a nut squarely.
“You don't have read for that. Ask me. I can tell you!”
He laughed indulgently.
“You can come darn near it, at that,” he admitted a little ruefully. For Mary had indeed carried on most of the work of the farm. If Ike happened to be hunting or away on the day it seemed to be the time to plough, she strode forth to find some one to plough for her. She laid off the vegetable garden and the tobacco field, moved the wood pile, “because she thought it would look better somewhere else”. But it didn't, so, single handed, she moved it back again.
She built a pig lot down near the branch. Men passing by watched her hurl the swift axe at pine trees and reduce them to neat little logs for the fire.
The old wives warned her.
“You'll pay for all this, Mary, when you are older”, they would say.
“It's got to be done. Maybe I won't live to be old.”
Nor did her outside duties affect her stem but kindly care for the house. Snow white curtains billowed at the windows. Swept and scrubbed, it shone like a new pin.
She cooled milk and butter in the well, baked potatoes, sweetened in the sun, mixed a heavy though delicious crusty coarse cornbread, and light fine grained biscuit. She gathered turnip greens, or mustard or cabbage and cooked them with ham hocks serving one of these almost daily. She canned tomatoes, green beans, and sauerkraut, peaches, apples and plums for use in winter. Without knowing very much about it, the meals were fairly well balanced, by their tastes in food. Her table was set as lavishly as the garden in summer and her store of can food in winter would allow.
Ike tried to keep the heavier work from Mary's shoulders but it was difficult; she was firm in her insistence to carry her share of the load. And so gradually more and more was left to her. While Ike roamed about with the other men taking the dogs and his gun, Mary cooked and ploughed, scrubbed and planted, sewed and gathered in the harvest.
And so more and more Ike absented himself until gradually Mary took to limiting this phase of the situation which began to work out as twelve hour rambles over the countryside and to include not infrequent visits to the nearest still. Not the first woman perhaps to interfere with her husband's activities, nevertheless she came in for her share of criticism now from the neighbors.
“Looks like Bessie or any o' them others woulda let Ike do 'about as he pleased”, people said. “Specially Bessie. It begins to look like Ike should a married Bessie.”
It did indeed, but Bessie only smiled and shrugged her shoulders. One day she met the newly married couple on the road and smiled boldly into Ike's eyes.
“It will look like you, Ike”, she vouchsafed calmly. “They always do.” The two walked on in silence. And Bessie called after them. “I don't mean Mary's baby, Ike!”
Mary's baby was born a little after Bessie's and was a boy resembling perhaps both his parents but his mother far more than his father. Bessie's baby, a girl, could not possibly have looked more like Ike than she did. Nor did Bessie attempt to keep either the baby or the fact of its resemblance in the background. At the school breaking walking up to Mary with the baby in her arms, Bessie looked down at her little girl and said, “He will always love me more than you, Mary.”
“He married me, Bessie,” Mary breathed, without turning her eyes toward her tormentor.
Bessie laughed. “All the better, maybe for us both. But he can still come to see me, Mary. The way ain't barred.”
Mary flushed and was silent.
Nobody knows what words flew back and forth in the squat little house waddling among the flowers like an ugly hen; but folks imagined. Men passing by heard Mary's voice shrill and discordant at any hour of the day and night, and shook their heads in sympathy. Women clustering about one another’s fires, vouchsafed that she was lacing it into Ike fit to kill. Loitering on the way to school, children reported that Ike's woman was sure giving him down the country. You had, they opined wisely, to look out for them Harmon girls.
Out of the house, however, Mary held her peace, scorning to discuss the matter with even her sisters who flocked defensively about her. She held her head high; but she kept away from all gatherings where she might meet Bessie.
Earle, Mary's first baby was followed by a little blonde girl, Ada, named for Ike's mother. Mary did not recover as soon as the doctor had hoped and he spoke to Ike.
“She's been working too hard, Ike. I know there's no stopping her or any of these women. But, if you can, see that she takes a long rest.” Then he climbed into his car and chugged off.
Ike sat down by Mary's bed and grinned at the new baby who struck at his extended finger and then clung desperately.
“Remember Bill, I used to talk about after I left the navy? He's in Pittsburgh. How about me writin' him to find me a job in the steel mill where he works?”
Mary moved her head weakly on the pillow.
“You ought not to be chopping wood and helping me butcher and all that now; the two kids'll need you. We'll live in a house with steam heat and water running out of a pipe into the sink, and light you get by pressing a button.”
“Lights to read by”, Lizzie returned.
“Read, yes.” His voice was eager. “Sew!
Or cook. Or iron! You won't even have to heat your irons, Mary. They'll heat themselves.”
“I suppose the pies and cakes will cook themselves in Pittsburgh,” she said noncommittally.
“Pretty near”. His voice grew persuasive. “The kids'll be growing up, Mary. These schools ain't good enough for 'em. Come, let's go north. Remember those pretty clothes you saw on the ladies at Pinehurst? I'll dress you up like the catalogue!”
And thus it was that a little later, Mary and Ike announced that they were going north.
They had a sale. The farm went to Ben Wilson; the horse and tools travelled over into Montgomery County; the chickens and pigs and the furniture scattered all over the neighborhood like chaff before the wind.
Seated in the car beside Ike, her baby in her arms, Mary held her head high, did not look back at the house in the hollow. Her heart within her was rejoicing. She would never lay eyes on Bessie again.
Never again would she see Bessie. But never, then, would she see the place where she was born, or her friends or her sisters and their families.
But the city, as Ike had promised it would be, was full of miracles. She wrote to her sisters, and to Annie, Ben's wife, and to Clara, Jim Smith's girl.
She and Ike had left home, Mary wrote with nothing but the clothes they stood in and the cash they had got from the sale--plenty even for the city where everything cost money, eggs and meat and sugar and lard. Even dresses you bought all made at dime stores. Only the rich people owned their own houses, nobody at all owned land--or very much of it. Ike's 200 acres in Pittsburgh! Why, they would be called rich!
The community may have gasped at the news but they did not indicate this astonishment on paper and presently the correspondence dwindled to Christmas and Easter cards and finally ceased.
And so, for eight years, they heard little of Ike and Mary, except during a visit or two when, resplendent in “northern” clothes, they drove back to Moore County at Christmas to visit one of Mary's sisters.
At these times, a gun hanging in the crook of his arm, a hound nosing at his heels, Ike would trudge over sedge and cla'red land, through pine stretches with his cronies. He filled his lungs with the sweet air and looked about him. The steel mill seemed very far away.
“But down here the work's too hard for Mary”, he would explain when his friends urged his return to the community. “She’d do all the work; I couldn't help it. Even up north she scrubs and fusses more than the other women.”
He considered. “Anyhow, Ben's got the house.”
“He's behind in them payments, Ike.” Someone reminded him.
“Who told you that?” Ike's voice was sharp. He hated gossip.
“Ah shucks, Ike, Ben did. Reckon he'd be just as well pleased to move an' not have to pay no more.”
Ike's eyes narrowed.
“He could live at the Brownie Place, free,” he began. “I could fix that.”
“You could fix that, sure you could, Ike.”
“Sure, I could.”
But he did nothing about it and just as they were preparing to drive back north, Ben strode into the yard. He stood by the car, kicking the ground with his heavy shoe, his eyes averted.
“Hear tell you're about to take the house away from me, Ike,” he soberly.
Mary and Ike both protested in chorus.
“Why, Ben, that ain't so. That's wrong, Ben, we never-----”
Ben spat speculatively.
“Hear tell you'll fix to let me have the Brownie Place, effen I stop paying and give you back yore land.”
“Now Ben---”
He laughed loudly. “Ike, you old hoss thief, you spoke just in time. Trying ever since you come in to let you know I cain't pay nohow. Wisht you would take the farm offen my hands, Ike, that's a fact. Me, I like the Brownie place.
Land's better; house suits me jes' as well. Come on, Ike, move back any time.”
All that next year in Pittsburgh Ike recalled Ben's words. Ben had been serious. At least, despite his fine luck with tobacco, he had sent no more payments, and when Polly, their third child was a year old, Ike and Mary decided to go back home.
Cheerfully Ben moved his family over to the Brownie Place. Annie and the gins scrubbed the vacated house and polished the windows, and then Ike and a new car brought the family, a huge truck (like a house) brought a thousand dollars' worth of catalogue furniture, and the Bobbitts were back on their own land.
Ike adapted himself speedily to the change, and so apparently did Mary. Ike swung back into the way of hunting with the other men, of chopping down trees and bringing in pine, ploughing and planting and harvesting. Mary didn't seem to mind drawing water from the well or filling lamps or feeding the chickens even if she didn't have to do all these things in Pittsburgh. She went back into print dresses, didn't wear her city clothes.
And finally word went about that Mary had discarded her high heels and her fancy hair-comb and was going barefoot about the house with her blonde hair in a knot at the nape of her neck. There were those who remembered that Mary's feet were mighty pretty.
But the neighbor women, most of whom had grown up with her, agreed that she had changed since she went up north, that she “wasn't near so friendly.”
She didn't do things as she used to do for apparently during her absence she had learned other methods. Now Mary rinsed her wash more than once and hung it, not anyhow the line set, but carefully across the wind to billow as it dried. She put flavoring in her pumpkin pie, made banana cake, talked about iodine. Until popular sentiment crushed them down, toothbrushes hung in a rack on the porch; and her family slept, not in its underwear in winter or the raw in the summer, but in pajamas and night gowns! Not a person but hadn’t seen them swinging on the wash line. Mary was not the old Mary.
After a few attempts at acquiring her former status with the neighbors, Mary ceased visiting around; instead, she invited the neighbors to come to her. On Saturday evenings she would turn on the radio early, light all the “good” lamps, get out the hickory nuts and the popcorn. The young people would play bingo on the dining room table furtively eyeing the catalogue chairs as they seated themselves. The men gathering about one fire, the women, with their babies sitting about the other, would gossip mildly. Eagerly Mary would display a quilt she pieced up north. Maybe that would show them that she hadn’t changed.
But rumor, drifting back next day like smoke after the passing of a train, was threaded with talk of Mary’s uppity city ways and show off furniture. She would cry sometimes at night while Ike would try to comfort her.
“Give ’em time, Mary,” he would say.
“Give 'em time.”
“They don't bring their babies to me any more, Ike, to cure.”
“Then they got sense.”
She was silent. Ike persisted.
“You don't mean you believe all that hooey now, do you? After that month you spent in the hospital, when Polly was born? After you've learned about germs and catching things and disinfecting and the Lord knows what--”
“I can cure their babies, Ike, the same as before. I am still the same person.”
This time Ike did not lose patience. Instead, he laughed, rumpled her hair a little and gave her a playful push.
“You are, at that. Nothing can change you. Maybe that's a break for me.”
On the first Thanksgiving day after their return, Ike gave a shooting match on the old site near the cane mill. He had raised ten turkeys as prizes. Shots at ten cents each would pay off their market price; the surplus shots going to the winners.
Early in the morning trucks rolled down the red road to empty families unto the second and veil. It started out bravely, a few days before the holiday she and Ike drove to Hemp to buy toys and candy for the children. On Christmas Day she cooked a fine meal, chicken and dumplings, vegetables, pies and cake, But she did not enjoy it for she knew that presently Ike would go off and she would be left alone with the children.
The sun set, and men neighbors straggled by, decorously at first, but later wearing all too aslant the air of doubtful festivity. Ben Wilson, weaving home, singing the praises of his good wife Annie, was hushed by his two boys, Bob and Tom, just starting out to make a night of it. Lige Dunn, trying to keep in the road, reminded everyone that Nellie's in the Col' Col' Ground. Sven Myrtle's man, usually good to her, was “roaring.”
At midnight, Mary put out every light save one and went unhappily to bed like so many other women in the neighborhood.
By ten o'clock next day, Ike had not returned and when Annie came over to borrow a handful of meal, Mary overcame her reserve and confided in her visitor.
“Shucks, don't pay no mind to them men third generation; new Fords shot like shining cannon balls over the crest of the hill to spill swaggering overalled men who stacked their guns and sat down in the sun to wait.
Little girls gathered to compare ribbons and sweaters; grown girls to giggle in groups and in smothered whispers point out the latest arrivals among the boys of their own age.
While the men shot, Mary entertained the women on the porch, where, without interrupting the mild exchange of gossip, as noon approached she wrung the neck of several chickens and cast them on the grass to wait until later when she would pick and stew them for Ike and those of his cronies who remained after the gathering dispersed.
“Don’t kill them hens; wait and see if Ike wins a turkey”, the women advised.
But Mary continued calmly with her work. She knew how Ike's luck ran. If he should kill a turkey, she replied, it would be when he was shooting for somebody else. An sure enough, Ike bagged a prize, while shooting as proxy for Jim Brown's baby.
After Thanksgiving came Christmas, a holiday over which Mary would prefer to draw a at Christmas! Ben, he ain’t home yet, neither. Bob and Tom got as fur as the tobacco barn and bedded down thar. They won't come to the house until they'se hongry.”
“Ike never stayed out all night before, Annie.”
“He ain't anywhere he hadn't ought to be, child. He's with Ben. Maybe they all are up to Lige Dunn's sobering off. Ain't no woman there to r'ar at 'em. That's where they be; to Lige's.”
That was where they were, but for three days after his return, Mary aid not speak to Ike. The episode had its effect, however, on the women. Now Mary, waitin' all night for her man off on a drunk, was one of them. The afternoon of the third day Tom Johnson's girl from over Black Ankle way brought her ailing baby slowly down the red road.
That was some years ago. Today a steady stream of babies reaches the squat little house in the hollow where Mary lives with two daughters, Ada, 16, studying at the academy to be a stenographer, and little Polly not yet in school. Earle, 18, a bell boy in a nearby winter resort, returns home rarely.
Ike is rambling, gone north again to work in the steel mill; he intends to send for his family “soon” and reestablish a home for them in Pittsburgh. The censensus of opinion, however, is that instead of uprooting Mary now Ike will return to her on the farm.
“Farming is easier”, the neighbors argue, “sonner or later, don't all the boys come back? Look at Jim Towne, been to Nicarogua, Norfolk, all them places; he's back. Look at Walt. Look at Lige Dunn. They like it here; there's farming and 'possum hunting and corn likker. Gosh a Mighty! Ike, he'll be back.”
