A CITIZEN OF MISFORTUNE
Original Names	Changed Names
S. A. Lamm	Bill Stafford
Bertha Renfrow	Sally Baylor
Clayton E. Beaman	Ransom Clingman
Lula Whitley	Sarah Buckner
Roger Armstrong	Pete Reisner
Date of first writing:	July 1, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	S. A. Lamm (white)
Address:	Wilson, N. C.
Occupation:	Merchant
Writer:	Stanley Combs, Wilson, N. C.
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 3,000
A CITIZEN OF MISFORTUNE
Bill Stafford was born November 17, 1892. His parents were living on a farm at that time, hence his early boyhood days were similar to those of other farm boys. The past few years of his life have been filled with experiences that are different from that of his early life and of his early boyhood friends.
"My father," said Bill, "was one of them ne'er-do-well North Carolina farmers. There was eight of us children, and we all was quite an expense to Father. Being the oldest boy, I was soon taught how to work and had to do my share.
“I did not get to go to school regular like my boy friends and early companions. I was needed to help raise a living. Father moved to Wilson when I was fifteen. Up till then I had finished three grades in the county schools. After we hit town I got a little more schooling, enough to finish another grade.
“Father opened a grocery store and I helped him in the store till some of the others was dig enough to take my place. Then I got a job in the wagon factory. I worked in the factory a little over three years, then I got tired of this job and wanted to try something else. I soon found work with a bowling alley. This was not just what I wanted, so I hunted me another job and finally found one in the poolroom and cafe. It was not so many months until I got a chance to purchase the business, which I did. I run it as my own for about two years. During this time I began stepping out with the other young fellows and soon found myself going steady with Sally Baylor.
“Early in the Spring of 1913 I sold the poolroom and cafe and rented me a farm. On June 22, of that same year I married Sally. We farmed for a few years and did fairly well. We grew tobacco, cotton, corn, and hay. We always had a big garden, and Sally always worked in it. She worked hard and helped all she could. The babies, four of them, made lots of work and worry. She took that work on herself and helped me what she could when that was done. The work varied with the seasons but from year to year it was right much the same grind. We grew a little tired of it all. The older children were in school when Sally and I talked it over and decided we could do as good in town and maybe have less work and worry. At any rate, it would be a change, and we made up our minds to try it.
"I came to town after the crop was made and done away with and rented a house, the one that we was married in. I also rented a small store building and put in a small stock of groceries, drinks, tobacco and other things, and went into the retail business. For awhile we thought we would do better. Sally's work was, of course, easier on her and we was both glad. We felt that the schools was better for the children, and, at any rate, they was better located and the children could go more regular than they did in the country.
“Business was good at certain seasons of the year, and at other times it wasn't. In fact, it was so brief that we felt the need of more income. All the time I was more or less acquainted with a certain sporting element in town. There was more work in the store than I thought, more than I could do alone, yet not enough to keep two of us busy. I had to hire help. This gave me a chance to get away from the store for little intervals at the time. I used this time to visit with some of my cronies here and there over town, and we often amused ourselves with a game of poker. Some of these fellows handled a little liquor and at such places we would take a little drink every now and then.
“Things went on right much the same from season to season and from year to year, until at last I found myself more interested in this sort of thing than ever before. I would gamble for the sake of money rather than for amusement. The cards got me. I had begun to take drinks, too, and I wanted them larger and more often. In fact, I got to doing just what so many of my pals were doing, keeping a little on tap for sale. This all enlarged my acquaintances especially among the gambling, drinking, and sporting classes. Our card parties developed into all night games. We played first one place then another, dodging the Law. In this we were rather successful. The Law found it was hard to get something definite on us but some of it was watching all the time. After awhile, the chief of police and a deputy sheriff seemed to take special pains to catch some of the gang.
“I had two slot machines installed, as they were means of picking up a few additional nickels. These machines were installed by Ransom Clingman. He held the key and serviced the machines, and he made regular weekly visits to these and his other machines. The machine was doing well and we both became friends.
"On Saturday, as was my habit, I checked my stock of goods and drove to town to place orders for my supplies needed to get me over the week end. When I returned to the store about ten or ten-thirty a. m., a fellow was there playing one of the slot machines and informed me that the other one was out of fix. He said he was going to town and if I wished he could leave word for Mr. Clingman to come out and fix it. I readily agreed to this arrangement as I knew it would save me a trip to town. About one or one-thirty p.m, Mr. Clingman drove up and fixed the machine.
"I stayed on and worked at the store all the rest of the day and till late at night, except when I carried Sally downtown about seven o'clock. I came back home without getting out of the car. Between eleven-thirty and twelve that night we closed the store. Three of my friends had spent the evening loafing with me in there, and when we closed I asked the boys if they wanted to get into a game. I told them we were having a game at Jessie Deane's farm. Upon arriving, we found the game in progress. Instead of it being the regular poker game, they were shooting crap. We continued to play and drink all night long.
"Along about five o'clock in the morning the party began to break up. After talking awhile, we decided we would go hunt another drink of whiskey. We talked for a few minutes there, then took a second drink and returned to town. On the way back I felt a little bit high, so I asked one of the other boys to drive for me. He did this and when we reached town he offered to drive me home. The other car followed so he could ride back. As soon as I reached home I went to bed and slept until I was awakened by my wife for breakfast. I did not get up for the meal but told ray wife to call me about one or two o' clock in the afternoon.
"Several hours passed and I was asleep, sleeping off a drunk. My wife come to the room and called me and said there was someone at the door that wanted to see me. I told her to tell him to come in. She showed him into my room and it was the constable. He wanted to know what I was doing all night, and I told him. He then told me that Mr. Clingman had not gone home that night and that his wife was uneasy about him.
"I got in the car and drove to town. I met Sarah Buckner. She wanted to know if I had seen her man, Pete Reisner, and I told her he was at his brother's. She asked me to drive around there and get him and we would all go for a ride. He was there, and his car was standing in the street.
"He left his car key with his wife, and he got in the car with me. We picked up the two girls and drove on out. We were driving slowly down the road and was out of town some four or five miles when someone in the crowd discovered his wife in his car trailing us. We stepped on the gas and soon left her behind. When we got back we bought a pint of whiskey and all took a drink. After this, we drove out and bought some sandwiches.
"It was now between seven and eight o'clock at night, and I had been driving. We had finished our eats and I asked where to next. Sarah and Pete suggested we go to the woods somewhere, so I drove out and followed a road often used by lovers. Just before we reached the park we rounded a curve in the road and approached a hill. Here we came upon a group of parked cars. Several people were standing about, so we stopped to see what was the excitement. As soon as we stopped the car a fellow came over and told us Ransom Clingman had been found over there murdered in his car, but the thought never occurred to me then that I would have to suffer all these long years in prison for a murder I did not do.
“The Law continued to work on the case, running down every clue they could, and after about four weeks a deputy came to my place and told me the coroner wanted to see me. When I reached his office he was out, but a deputy was there and said he was going to lock me up. I asked what he was locking me up for, and he told me it was none of my damn business but I would find out in time. On our way to jail we met the sheriff. I stopped and asked him what it was all about, but he said he didn't know.
“About two hours after I was put in jail the officers brought a woman in and put her in a cell a few doors away. It was the one I was out with on Sunday night. She didn't know why she was locked up either. Then one of the police told me that we were being held for questioning about who killed Clingman. On Monday night about eight o'clock an officer carried me over to the courthouse where the coroner was holding another hearing about the murder. The boy who worked for me in the store was there. He told the officers that Mr. Clingman and his wife had been at the store about one-thirty and had not been back since. At the close of the hearing the coroner turned me loose.
"About two weeks after I was released, the boy and I went to a dance. We came home about three o'clock in the morning, and as we turned into the yard someone ran out from behind the store and called me to stop. It was an officer. He accused me of being drunk and driving drunk, and the boy and I were both taken to police headquarters and locked up. The boy was held in jail.
"In a few days a constable came to my store and told me that he had a warrant for me charging me with the murder of Ransom Clingman and that he would have to take me back to town.
"I was put in jail without the privilege of bond. The prisoners in the jail told me that the boy had just been taken out, and they told me how the chief and coroner would come for him about twelve or one o'clock each night and take him out and keep him for awhile, then bring him back and lock him up. He told them that they wanted him to swear a lie on me. I was in jail about ten days or two weeks when my wife and my mother came to see me. They insisted I get a lawyer. The lawyer demanded a hearing. At the hearing the boy told that Clingman stopped at the store about seven or eight o'clock. The story that he told indicated that I was guilty.
"I was in my cell only a short time when my lawyer sent the bond papers for me to sign. His man told me I would be released in a few minutes. Several days passed and I was still in jail. I asked the jailor why I was not released and he told me someone was giving me a dirty deal. Later on in the day I learned that my bond had been raised $5,000. I made arrangements for this additional amount and felt sure I would soon be out, but after a few more days I was told I would have to give another $2,500. This made my total bond $7,500. I soon arranged for this only to learn of another $5,000 increase. Soon after I arranged for this increase the chief and coroner came for me. I made sure I was being released, but they called another prisoner and we were shackled together and loaded into a car. They were going to take me to another jail.
"I slept very little that night. Before long someone come to my door and asked me if I wanted some breakfast. He bad a tin plate in his hand and be pushed it under the door to me. There was a spoonful of grits, a little gravy, and three small biscuits.
"The next night I was taken down the hall and told to peel off the clothes I had on and was given my clothes. I looked out the window and saw my mother and sister in the car waiting for me. On our way home Mother told me about my bond.
"I was free once again until court that following September. I was anxious to have it over with and be free. I knew I was innocent. I had faith enough in our courts and jurors to think everything would work out right.
"Court convened September 7. My case was set for Wednesday morning. The witnesses told about the same story that they had told at the last hearing. There was much conflicting evidence presented. The jury took the case and after some deliberation returned with a verdict of guilty of murder in the second degree for me. The judge then sentenced me to not less than twenty nor more than twenty-five years in State Prison.
"I was sent to the farm. Here I started work in the ditch. My hands blistered the first day, but I had to keep going. The second week they were in such bad condition that I was transferred to the plow. I got along better here, as I was raised on the farm and plowing was in my line. The guards took a liking to me and trusted me further and further until I was made a trusty. I was doing well until one night we all went to supper and the captain ordered the coffee taken up and water put in its place. We were all treated pretty rough. In a few days we were separated and returned to work. I took no part whatsoever in what was done but was put back under the gun. I felt this was unjust and decided to leave. In a few days I made my escape. Then I was caught and returned. They made a C grade man out of me, double-shackled me, and sent me to the rock hole. I stayed there until all white prisoners were removed. From here I was sent to the farm. Then I was carried and made a trusty. As such, I was sent here and there and worked for the officials, the Governor, and did many errands in and about town. From here I was transferred to road work. I ran away from this camp, but I surrendered myself to the sheriff. I was again placed in C grade, but in about ninety days I was promoted to B grade. After another three or four months I made A grade again.
"In 1931 a fire extinguisher exploded, nearly killing me. My lower jaw was broken and I was sent to the hospital. They wired my jawbones together, but the bones never healed. Then I was paroled.
"The March following my release I was in a wreck. The automobile that I was driving had Stolen plates, so I was returned to prison. I was placed in solitary confinement for forty-one days and was removed to the prison carpenter shop. It was not long until I worked myself into B grade, and about three or four months later I was promoted to A grade. I ran away again. This made the third time I escaped. Each time I escaped I would come to see my folks but stayed hid out in the country. I lived this way all summer, then I was caught and sent back. I was put to work again as a C grade man and worked in the carpenter shop. In five months to a day I made B grade; six or seven months later I was made A grade again. In this rating I was allowed to do errands in and out and over town, and in 1937 Governor Hoey paroled me again, making my second parole.
“As soon as I was paroled I came back to Wilson and started in business here as you see me now. Money is slow in a small business like this. I hope to make enough so I can employ a lawyer to fix up papers so I can end my parole with a pardon. Last February I married me another wife. I am trying to get started again and intend to make good. I declare once more I am innocent. It's a terrible thing to send an innocent man to prison. I hope someday the truth will get out about who killed Clingman.”
