Anne Winn Stevens	
Asheville, N. C.	
December 6, 1938.	
Mr. and Mrs. Charles Ledford
262 Depot St.,
Asheville, N. C.
THE LEDFORDS
Near the intersection of Depot Street, and Clingman Avenue, Asheville, is Foster's Store. From the street this structure presents a queer jumble of building material. The first storey, which houses the store, is made of brick and half hidden by billboards. The second and third storeys constitute a dilapidated tenement constructed of weatherboarding and patched here and there with large sheets of tin. The building is five-sided, presenting an odd arrangement of planes and angles to the street, and is backed up against a muddy hillside. It has never been painted, but the walls are grayed and blackened by heavy clouds of smoke, which whirl up from the shifting engines of freight trains beyond Depot Street.
Opposite the store, but on a lower level are railroad tracks and a jumble of coalyards. On Depot Street, which the building fronts, a stream of trucks and buses bump noisily along on the uneven brick paving. There is no sidewalk. The narrow strip of ground between the pavement and the building is rough and muddy. At right angles to the street a slippery, red clay road climbs crazily to the houses on the overhanging hill.
The entrance to the tenement, the journey's end for worn-out workers and their families, is through a small, uneven plot of ground encumbered with rubbish, garbage and stagnant water. The steps to the wooden porch are full of holes, and some of the boards are loose. The floor of the porch is in the same condition. On this side of the building are raw, unterraced, red clay bluffs, rising perpendicularly and dripping with moisture in damp weather. In clear weather they shut out the sunlight from the rooms in the rear. Indeed, the building is so curiously faced that very few of the rooms get direct sunlight. At night the entrance is unlighted, or lighted inadequately by rays from passing cars.
Within the tenement to the right of the entrance two leaky spigots drip cold water into a dirty sink. These spigots provide the water supply for the entire tenement. There is no water above the first floor. At this sink, women may be seen washing their clothes in the draughty hall with the door kept open for light, though the temperature may be low. The rambling hall is not only dark, but damp and unheated. The rooms on each side rent at two or three dollars a month and are devoid of heat, of artificial lighting, of plumbing.
From the walls both of rooms and hall dank and mouldy plaster has fallen in huge patches, laying bare the lathing beneath. Both floor and walls are discolored with soot and dust. Sickening odors pervade the place. A flight of crude steps leading to the second floor has only a handrail as protection, and that is placed too high for the reach of small children; for unfortunately there are children living with their parents in the sunless, crowded rooms above Foster's Store.
It is in this tenement, on the second floor, that the Ledfords live, or rather exist, - seven of them in two grimy rooms. The larger room, triangular in shape, is big enough for two beds. The mattresses are filthy, and there is no evidence of sheets or pillow cases. Like all the rooms in the tenement, this one is sooty and mouldy, unheated, and is lighted at night by a kerosene lamp swinging from the ceiling. In the daytime, light struggles feebly through the unwashed windows. There are no window shades nor curtains. The smaller room has only one window and is used for bedroom, kitchen, and dining room. It is barely large enough for a bed near the door, a cook-stove near the window, and a blackened pine table cluttered with empty tin cans and fruit jars. Three low, folding, plush-covered chairs look as if they might have been salvaged from a junk heap.
Mrs. Ledford, a large rawboned woman, clutching a six-month old infant to her breast, sat in a chair near the kitchen stove. She wore a wrapper so dirty that the original color could not be guessed. Although still in her early forties, she looked sixty. Her skin was so deeply ingrained with soot that she might have been mistaken for a Negro. The baby at her breast resembled a child's blackened, and abandoned doll. Its head still almost bald sprouted a few, short, black hairs, like coarse wires. Its eyes showed no intelligence or response. It made no sound, not even a whimper. It was wrapped in some filthy garment, much too large, and its legs, clad in the dark, striped stockings of a much older child, hung limp.
"No," said Mrs. Ledford to the visitor, she don't move her legs none. Seems like her back was hurt when that young-un," pointing to a frowzy headed three-year-old, "pulled her offen the bed, and let her fall to the floor."
"But surely you have taken her to the clinic," asked the visitor.
"No, I aint never tuk her thar. I caint leave the other childrun that long."
"But she needs medical care. Besides she ought to have sunlight and fresh air. She looks smaller than when I saw her several weeks ago."
"I guess my breast-milk aint very strong. And I caint take her out in the sun, for thars no place whar I can take her and the other childrun. I caint let them play in the street with all them trucks and cyars passing by, an' I aint got no one to leave 'em with."
"But you don't keep the other children shut up in the house all day?"
"Yes, mam, they aint nowhars else to keep 'em."
On a box behind the stove sat a sixteen year old boy, the one approximately clean object in the forlorn room. He was stripped to the waist, and was washing himself, a basin of water on the floor between his feet. As he rubbed his arms with a soapy cloth, he was making a lengthy and pleasurable job of it. Against the squalor of the room his body gleamed white; but it gave no evidence of muscular development. Feeble rays from the window lighted up his freshly washed, yellow hair.
"No," said his mother to the visitor's inquiry, "He don't go to school no more, he quit in the fourth grade."
"No, he caint get no job."
"Did he try to get into the CCC Camp?"
The boy now spoke. "I went to see about it, but they turned me down. They said as how I'm too young."
"He's sixteen, and they don't take them thar till they's eighteen" contributed his mother.
Meanwhile, the boy slipped a clean, light blue sweater over his head, and with the stove as a screen continued to complete his bath. Then in the fashion of boys everywhere he proceeded to comb and slick back his hair slowly and carefully, surveying the result critically in a fragment of mirror he had propped on the window ledge.
"Is your next boy still in the reformatory?"
"Yes," answered Mrs. Ledford. "seems like he's best off of us all. I caint never get off to go thar to see him, but he come to see me onct or twicet. He looks real stout. He gets plenty to eat whar he is - plenty of milk and butter."
"Will he be coming home soon?"
"No'm, he's got fo' year more to stay, yit."
The boy in question, fourteen years old, had been sent to the reformatory for "ganging up" with two other boys and breaking into an A. and P. grocery store.
The baby having fallen asleep, Mrs. Ledford laid it down on some filthy rags in a large card-board cartoon, which sat on another paste-board box and served as a cradle.
Meanwhile, Mr. Ledford who had been engaged in moving their meagre belongings from further up the hall to the triangular room next door came in followed by three small children - a boy of eight, and two girls aged six and three. They were obviously clad in garments from a needle-work guild, whole and substantial, though far from clean.
"He aint able to hold no job" said Mrs. Ledford apathetically as she indicated her husband. "He strained hisself lifting rocks on the road, workin' with the W. P. A."
"The doctor won't let me take another W. P. A. job," said Mr. Ledford. "He says I aint able to work. I got high blood pressure."
"He gets dizzy spells, and falls," added his wife.
Asked his age, Mr. Ledford answered proudly, "I'm seventy-seven year old," and with evident satisfaction "I done raised three families. I got fourteen children."
Of these, Mrs. Ledford admitted she was the mother of eleven, seven of them still living.
"Seems like I been married a hunered an' fifty year,"
she sighed.
"My oldest gal, she's twenty," Mrs. Ledford continued. "She wuz workin' and livin' hyar up to las' week. Then she married a widow-man up to Marshall. He's got four younguns."
Mrs. Ledford was born in Asheville and has lived here all her life.
"I aint had much schoolin'." she said, "I went to work in the cotton mills when I wuz eleven year old, and worked thar till I got married and the childrun come."
Mr. Ledford, who had taken his seat on the foot of the bed, from which he darted now and again to lead back one or more of the children who had slipped stealthily into the hall, was small spry and thin. In his soot-begrimed face, his pale blue eyes stared oddly.
His mouth below his close cropped gray mustache was full and sensuous. He seemed like some wild, startled creature that belongs in a wood.
As a matter of fact, he was "brought up" in the country.
"I wuz born and raised in Mitchell County on my father's farm," he said. "It was a fine farm. Pa raised corn, wheat, and oats, an' he' had a big apple orchard. Me and my brothers worked on his farm. We made a good livin' thar, but Ma she wuz never stout. She wuz sick in bed for fo' year befo' she died. It tuk all Pa could make to pay doctor's bills and taxes. So after Ma died, he tuk and sold the farm to pay his debts, an' he cut us all off, - cut us all clean off.
"Then hit wuz I come to Asheville and begun to work in the cotton mills. I wuz a weaver more'n twenty year. Then my eyes got bad, and I wuz gettin' old an' I lost my job."
He complained about a cut recently received on his "pension," as he called the Old Age Compensation.
"The Gov'ment done cut my pension seven dollar a month. Now I gets only twenty two dollars. Five of that goes for room rent, and five for coal. With seven people to feed I can't hardly manage on what's left."
"What's left gives us only bread," said Mrs. Ledford dully," "only bread."
"I couldn't manage without I got odd jobs some days," continued her husband. "I work in gardens, clean out cellars and some times lay concrete steps. I caint do no full day's work, though.
For these odd jobs Mr. Ledford "gets paid" fifteen cents an hour.
"No, I aint gone to school much," remarked he. "All my larnin's in the Bible. I studies the Bible a good part of the time. Why, I can tell you the meaning of all the beasts in the book of Revelations."
When he was asked to what church he belongs, as a cue to securing aid for the children, Mr. Ledford insisted he needs no church. He maintained that his views on the scriptures are entirely his own. Since they satisfy him completely "Why listen to a preacher?" he asked.
"Ive got the Book," he declared, "and the Book says 'Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness' That's what I seek, God's kingdom and righteousness. The Book says seek and all these things shall be added to you' I've proved that to be true. All these things have been added."
He was entirely serious. The ironic implication of his words never dawned on him. It would have been cruel to ask him, "What things?"
At the door, Irene the bright-eyed six-year-old stole up to the departing visitor. "Ask Santy Claus," she whispered "to send me a doll with real hair."
