Project #-1665
G. P. Smith
Charleston, s. C.
SUGGESTIONS FOR AN ANECDOTAL HISTORY
Introduction should set forth the aims of the book, that it is to be a collection of anecdotes with just enough of the historical background to give the stories their proper setting. They, In turn, should be stories chosen because they are characteristic of of the Lew Country and of the period in which they occur. They should imply more of the historical background than is actually related, should suggest a great deal about the character of the people and the spirit of the times. Personalities should be stressed, with many stories about outstanding men and women. The introduction should be written simply but with style. The tone of the book should be sounded here. It should be the compact seed out of which the book as a whole grows. An introduction is just an affectation unless it is of this nature. I suggest that the chronological order be observed as much as possible so as to convey to the reader, along with the savor of the times, a sense of historical movement.
Part I. Period of Exploration and Settlement:-
I see no objection to mixing legend and history here. Legend is often as eloquent of a people, especially a people in the period of formation, as is history. So anecdotes of a legen-dary character are entirely in order. The reader, however, should be made aware that he is moving through that fascinating territory Where fact and legend are magically interwoven, Where legend throws a glow of romance and mystery over fact, and fact confers a durable integrity on legend.
This period may be brought to life by stories illustrating the national ambitions that came into conflict along the southeastern coast of America. The story of the revenge of the Chevalier Dominique de Gorgues is a good example. "I do this not to Frenchman but to heretics," was the taunt of the rapacious Spaniard Menendez. And his consummate reply was the swinging bodies of his enemies and the inscription: "I do this, not to Spaniards, nor to Catholics, but to traitors, robbers, and murderers."
Along with this may go stories of piracy; stories revealing the nature of the relations with the Indians, those of the earliest explorers, and later those of the settlers; examples of Indian revenge, friendship, eloquence, stories illustrating the very beginning of slavery, how the planters went about adapting the first batches of slaves to their system, how each batch fresh from Africa was broken in. I think perhaps this is one phase of the early life of the country that is not very well known by the average reader. What were the first beginnings of the plantation system, of those customs and practices of the slave system which in time became traditional. The effort should be made to dig up stories that will bring this period of beginnings to life in an interesting way. The fear of slave insurrections played a greater part in the life of the South than is generally realized. Stories of Cato and Denmark Vesey could illustrate this.
This industrial life of the Low Country should be illustrated with stories of the culture of rice, indigo, cotton.
There should be stories indicating the hardships and disasters with which the colonists contended: Indian attacks, enmity of the Spaniards, the fire of 1740.
Part II. Period of the Revolution.
This is an exciting period. The search should be for anecdotes showing how patriotism ceased to be a matter of loyalty to the king and became a new loyalty. It should be shown how the colonites were influenced by English tastes, manners, and customs, and to what extent the Low Country revealed the effects of these influences. As the resistance to taxation became a movement of independence, the emergence of leaders is a fascinating phenome-non. Stories should illustrate the character of these leaders and the quality of their leadership. The raising of military units, the activities of the Secret Committee, the enthusiasm and the sacrifices made for the cause, should not be overlooked. The partisan warfare provides some of the most thrilling stories of this period. Of course most of them are pretty well known, especially the exploits of the Swamp Fax. But they still make good reading; and if some new ones on this phase of the conflict could be unearthed, they should make extremely interesting reading. Since South Carolina was the first state to form a regular republican government it might be well to relate in anecdotal form some incident connected with the formation of this government.
Part III. The Plantation Period:-
There is danger in treating this period of becoming bogged down in the sentimental tradition. There is a romantic aura about the South; and I don't think it is all false by any means. There is a great fund of romance in the story of the South; certainly there is in the story of the Low Country. To ignore this in writing such a book as here planned would be to miss an opportunity. Yet care should be taken, in the stories selected and in the manner of presenting them, to give as well rounded a picture as possible and not a sweetly sentimental one. If the compilers of these stories and those who put them into the form of an anecdotal history can truly summon up the spirit of the Low Country, that will be sufficient, and the work abundantly stimulating to the reader. The fund of material is almost unlimited, and it should be possible to round up stories that have never been published before. Suggested types of stories: relations between master and slaves, position of overseer, relationship between factor and planter, dueling, the plantation tournaments of which there are still some survivals in the state, the significance of "the Big House," education of the planters' sons, amusements of the slaves, the task, punishment of slaves, reluctance of most big slave owners to break up families, slave sales; education, theaters, dress, manners, conduct, rigidly conventional, taboos, etc, etc.
The story may be brought to a conclusion with 1860 or continued beyond that data, even up to the present, if it is thought advisable.
"Never change an overseer if you can help it," was an express-ion sometimes used during plantation days. It illustrates the at-titude of the planter toward his organization, and his awareness that the overseer was a sort of key man in that organization. The average planter was interested, naturally, in making his land pay a satisfactory return. He was interested also in the welfare of his slaves and in keeping them contented. The man held responsible for these things was the overseer. If he was a poor manager, money might be lost on an entire years crops. If he were unable to handle men skillfully, slave disorders might occur, disturbing the peace of his plantation and perhaps even endangering the safety of his family.
Louis Manigault speaks in a letter of an overseer of this type, in his employ. The crop was a failure the first year of his in-cumbency, but he excused himself on the grounds of lack of ac-quaintance with the situation. He promised that he would do better the following year, after the experience he had had. Manigault kept him. His reluctance to dismiss the man is explained in a letter in which he quotes the phrase, "Never change an overseer if you can help it."
But the man did no better the following year. Manigault speaks of him as being "Elated by a strong and very false religious feeling. . . . " He placed himself upon a level with the blacks, thus making proper discipline practically impossible. Re attended their religious meetings as an equal; and when any dispute arose between the workers and the drivers, trusted negroes acting as assistant overseers, he took the side of the workers, thus destroying the usefulness of the drivers. The result of all this was another failure the second year and the dismissal of the overseer.
Note: Some stories of this type could be used, though I believe the effort should be made to get as many stories as possible of a more intimate nature. There are workers on the Project well qualified to get these stories.