Another version of "I'm Allus Hongry," entitled "Pattern of Ignorance," can be found on pages 393-396.
Orrie Rohinaon,
on river near Talladega
Springs, Alabama.
Jack Kytle
"I'M ALLUS HONGRY".
Orrie Robinson said, "It'd kill me to go thar--to th' big jail, I mean. I was in th' ons over at Rockford goin' on a month, an' I nearly died. Why, I'd git up in th' night an' heat th' or'n bare with my han's so hard that ay fingers'd swell an' turn blue. I guess I wouldn't never git useta bein' hemmed up that away."
He lounged in the ruffled red sand of the river bank, propping his cadaverous torso with an elbow that rested on a pillow of brown pine straw.
A slim fishing cane was in his free hand, and hit dull, gray eyes were intent upon the bottle stopper he was using for a cork. His voice was nasal, so high pitched that he seemed to whine as he talked.
"They got me red-handed," he said without looking up. "I was over thar on Hatchett Creek, near whar th' ol' Wllliams' Place is, an' I thought that I was hid so good that a ha'nt couldn't fin' me. I was juggin' up th' stuff, gittin' ready to carry it up th' river soon as night come. But whan night come I's locked up tighter'n a coon trap, an' I guess ev'ry damned depity in Coosa County was a-wollerin' in my likker.
"It ain't above 'am. They says they pear it out, but they ain't never poured none out when I was watchin'. I know that bastard of a Tom Hinson ain't never poured none out, an' he was headin' th' gang that kotched me.
They tear'd up th' still, but I seen that they put most of th' likker in a bresh pile--th' little that 'as left atter they'd all took a jug fer evidence.
"If I'd a seed 'em 'fore They was clos't enough to've shuk han's with me, I'd a got away. They ain't no fat-bellied depity go'nter outrun me in a fair race; but when a man's got th' diff'rence in his han's, they ain't no use bein' a fool. ol' Hinson'll shoot if you bat yo'r eye. He's th' son-of-a- biteh that shot that Crawford boy down on Paint Creek, an' they ain't nothin' never been done about it. Th' boy's folks tried to raise a stink--he didn't never fool in no likker--but they couldn't git in th' back door. Ever'thing was squshad up.
"But when things come out th' way they done, I'se glad I didn' run er try nothin' brash. If I'd a had doodle bug brains I'd a knowed that maybe Judge Hammet'd treat me good as he could, fer I've knowed 'in a good while, an' I've done some favors fer 'im. He useta come down hyar to fish 'fore he got down with rhsumatism, an' I'd row th' boat fer 'im an' dig bait."
Orrie at up as suddenly as if he had been stung by a wasp, his eyes hard upon the tiny cork. It hobbled, hesitated, and then plunged under the yellow water. Orrie lifted the slender cane with a snap, and a moment later, a small greenish bream was leaping in the sand. He picked, it up and deposited it in a large bucket of water that stood nearby.
"Them's th' best bait you can git fer yaller cats," he said when he had run his hook through a work and placed it in the water. "It's ag'in th' law to use 'em, an' if th' game warden kotehed me I'd be in a hell'uva fix, but he don' never come down this way. I've get nearly a hundert of 'em in that bucket, an' I'm go'nter put 'em on my trotline. I bet I git a good cat; th' water's jes' right."
He slouched down into the sand again, crossing his thin legs Indian fashion. His shoes were held together by wrappings of twine; he wore no socks.
His overalls were caked with grayish river mud, and they were heavily patched at the knees.
"How, I got down to whar I's goin' up 'fore Judge Hammet," he went on in his whining tone. "I knowed they wasn't nothin' fer me to do but plead guilty, an' I felt lower'n a moccasin's belly. I felt like I wouldn't a ksered If lightnin' had struck me dead, fer I didn't see how I'd stan' goin' to Kilby. Jim Sherlock was thar once, an' he'd tol' me all about it. He said they treated you wors'n a bare-footed nigger boy; said they whooped him fer not sayin' 'Yes-sir' to a guard.
"When I's took in th' courtroom they was a nigger up 'fore th' ol' man, an' I heard what was said. They'd kotched him stillin', same as me, an' when he got a year an' a day my heart sunk. I knowed I's a goner. But what you think happened?When I stepped up in front th' Jndge peered at me over his spec's, an' he looked s'prised enough to jump out-a his britches. He says. 'What you done?,' an' I tol' him how I'd been kotched with th' likker.
"Wall, sir, he looked at me fer a minnet, an' then he beckoned far one of th' depitys that was on th' raid. They locked nheir horns an' whispered awhile. I thought they was hell to pay than, but atter awhile Judge Hsmmet saya, 'You ain't never been in no trouble 'fors nowt?,' an' I says, 'No, sir, God knows I ain't.' He writ down sump'un then, an' he says atter awhile, 'I'm go'nter let you go home, but I'm warnin' y'u. If you ever come in hyar ag'in It's go'nter be two years in th' pen. Don't you go back over thar an' make no more likker. If y'u do, they ain't nothin' I can do ag'in.'
"I never was as happy as whan I heerd them words, an' I ain't never seed nothin' as purty as this ol' river when I sot ayes on it ag'in. I made up my min' then that I wasn't never go'nter make more likker, an' I ain't.
It's hard as hell to git enough to eat by jes' flshin' an' piddlin' with that ol' pore land of our'n, but it's better'n bein' in jail. I don't want-a go to Kilby. I'd die down thar.
"I reckon a man gits to llkin' his own stompin' groun's better'n any he'd fin'. I reckon you'd like a town best, but me, I wouldn't have no callin' to be thar. I was borned in these woods--right over thar by Hogan's cliff--an' I been hyar goin' on forty-one year. I reckon th' ol' say in's right that you can't git away from yo'r raisin'.
"Course my raisin' ain't been nothin' to do no jig about. Whan I was younger'n I am now, I had a idea once an' awhile to git outa hyar an' go some'rs else, but I jes' never did. I didn't wanta leave my folks. We ain't got nothin' but a shirt tail an' a pray'r, but we ain't low-down. We ain't like them Ellisons over at th' Kingdom. They ain't never tried to do nothin' but beat people outa ever' thing they could, an' thay'd steal th' handles off'n a coffin.
"Ever since I's knee-high to a grasshopper I ain't knowed nothin' but hard times. Me an' Pa has been th' only menfoks, an' he never was much stout. My two sisters an' my Ma helped all they could---chopped cotton, pulled fodder an' that sort of thing--but women jes' ain't built fer hard work. They shouldn't ought'er have to do it.
"Things are worse right now than they ever was, fer th' ol' people is gittin' too ol' to do any work atall. They ain't ge'nter live much longer, an' then it'll Jes' leave me an' my sisters. I useta hope they'd git 'em a man apiece so as to ease things up, but I don' reckon they ever will. It's party hard on a gal to live out like this. They ain't many men, an' them that is aroun' ain't worth havin'.
"You seed my oldes' sister, Ruby, whan you come by th' house, an' I guess you seed how her han' was tied up. It worries me a lots, fer it's jes' rottin' off. It's been goin' on that-a-way since las' fall, an' they don' seem to he nothin' to do about it. We tuk her to th' doctor in Sylacaugy right atter it happened, hat he didn't he'p her. We ain't been hack since.
"We was pullin' fadder, an' she was tiein' ap a handle when a rattlesnake bit her right on top of th' hand. Didn't nobody kill it--it crawled right off-- so that's what Made it so bad. If you kill th' snaks, some of th' p'isen is killed, too! bat if It gits away, then you better start prayin'. We thought Ruby was go'nter die. We kilt a good layin' hen, cat it open, and stack her han' inside it to suck out th' p'isen. That alias does good, bat her arm swelled ap 'till it was twice its size. By th' time we got to th' doctor she was oat a her head, breathin' gaspy, like somebody dyin'. Th' doctor said we'd waited too long an' that they wasn't much he could do. An' he didn't do much.
"They ain't nothin' I hate wors'n a snake. I ain't never been bit by one, bat it's because I got good dyes fer 'em. Thay's moccasins on this river so old they walk on crutches. One of Ed Hope's little boys was bit by one las' spring. They gived him all th' likker they could pour down 'in, but it didn' help a bit. He was stone dead inside two hour."
Orrie took his hook from the water, baited it again, and spat on it. "That'll make 'em bite," he explained. He moved down the bank a few yards, paused in front of a half-submerged anag, and began fishing beside it. Almost immediately, he jerked oat a fingerling catfish.
"Ain't worth a good damn," he cursed. "A big fish has get to be hongry a hell to bite one o' these. I reckon it's on account of their sharp fine. See how this'un bristles 'em out, like he wanted to fight!" He removed his small catch gingerly, glared at it, and then flung it far up into the woods.
"Ho, sir a man can't do no fancy eatin' when he hasta git his grab fishin'. He can eat a bellyful o' fish, bat he'll git tard as hall eatin' ' em. Sometimes when they's nothin' else in the house, I jes' go hongry. Bat that ain't nothin', fer as that matters. I'm allus hongry. Atter we split up what's on th' table 'mongst flour of as, they ain't enough lef' to feed a kitten. I git to feelin' sometimes like ol' man Rylant. Ever' time he hears 'bout somebody dyin', he'll say, 'I'm glad to hear it.' An' if you ax him what he means talkin' that-a-way, he'll tell you, 'Thay's better off'n we'uns; thayis in Heaven playin' on gold harps, an' we'uns is pore as ever.'
"Maybe he ain't sech a ol' fool as people think. I feel that-a-way when I fish my lines hard all week, an' still ain't got a damned thing. I feel that-a-way, when we'uns raise a little sump'un, an' then haveta give it to os' Man Mac. He owns that crop of our'n, an' we work it on shares; but thank God A'mighty, he don't own th' shack. We'uns built it, an' its on Alabama Power Company lan'. They's supposed to charge three dollars a year fer it, but they don't never come 'round to git any money. They jes' axes us to taks keer of th' lan' an' watch out fer fores' fires.
"If they come. I don' know whar we'd ever git three dollars at one time. Atter we settle up with Shop Cooper, at th' Springs, we ain't got a thing. I dan' know what we'd do if it wasn't fer Shep, so I don't 'grudge him nothin'. He's let us have sump'un to sat when they wasn't a penny he could hope to git. I owe him a coupl'a dollars now--I've owed it a smart while--but he don't never dun me. I'd do a lot fer him if I ever got th' chanet.
"I remember back when I was a boy that fishin' was good on this river. Seems to me that ever'thing was better then. They was a feller named Hesey who had his lines out right whar I got mine now, an' he made good catches all th' time. But that was 'fore th' dam was built. an' 'fore th' river was full of mod. Fish jes don't like mud. I got a notion they ain't many of 'em left in hyar. They goes up th' river whar th' bottom is sandy.
"Thom that's loft is kept sksered to death. Ever' Thursday, th' power company starts openin' th' gates, an' th' river starts down. You know that skeers the fishes. It'd skeer us if we was a fish an' th' water started down all aroun' us. We'd do jes' like they does; we'd head fer th' middle an' our min's wouldn't be on nothin' to eat. When anything gits skeered its belly ain't cravin' no vittles.
"Most of my good catches is made on Saturdays an' Sundays. You see, the gates is closed then, an' th' water starts backin' up. That sands the fishes closter to th' banks, an' they got their min's on feedin' ag'in. Sometimes I git cats that weigh upward of forty pound, but thay's hard to sell. Fo'ks says that th' meat is too strong and coarse. Fo'ks want these little old squealer eats that weigh 'bout a pound an' that ain't worth keepin'. It ain't no fun to take a little ol' fish all th' way to Sylacaugy an' not git mor'n 'bout fifteen cent fer it. An' you'd be s'prised to know how they try to beat a man outa what he's got cornin'.
"Maybe they's honesty lef', but you don' find much of it. Las' spring I got up a good catch of little 'uns--clost to fifty pound--an' I figgered out whar I could ease off some bills with what I'd get. Th' price is s'posed to be fifteen cent a pound--and fishes is worth ever' bit of it. But when I got to th' market at Sylacaugy, os' Man Cantrell started pokin' his nose 'bout th' fish, an' he tol' me, 'They's nearly sp'iled; they ain't worth havin'.
"Well, I knowed thay wasn't sp'iled. It was cold that day, an' fish don't sp'il in that kind of weather. But thay wouldn't a kept if I'd a had to drag 'em back twenty mile down hyar. I knowed What os' Cantrell was up to, an' I wasn't wrong. He sniffed aroun' awhile, an' then he says, 'Tell you what I'll do; I'll take a chanct on 'em an' give you six cent a pound.' I tol' him that they smelled a'rlght to me, an' that I'd worked mighty hard to catch 'em. But he wouldn't give no more. I had to sell 'em to 'im fer that, an' he turned right aroun' an' got twenty or twenty-five cent far 'em.
"It ain't fair to treat a man like that. Folks says that a bootlegger ain't to he trusted, but I'd take my chances with 'im ever' time. When me an' Son Bagwell was makin' likker down on Hatchett Creek, we got th' fairest dealin's you ever seed. Ever' Saturday night we'd lead up a motor boat with likker an' run it up th' river dost to Wilsonville. A truck from Birmingham would be waitin' thar, an' we'd dump th' stuff on th' banks fer 'em.
"Well, sir, we done that goin' on a year, an' we never did lose nothin'. Lots a times, we'uns an' th' men in th' truck wouldn't say a word. Me an' Son'd unload th' likker, an' then one of th' men'd stick some bills in one of our han's. It'd be dark, an' we wouldn't count it till we was back in th' river, but we never was beat. We got two dollar a gallon, an’ they never did try to beat our price down.
"It looks like I eughta made me some money when I was foolin' with that stuff; but you know, I ain't knowed many that made mach outa it. Pa useta tell me that they wasn't no money in it, fer it was ag'in th' Lord's way. He said them that did make a little allus ended up losin' it, and it looks to me like he was right. You take os' Guy Cheeves over on Paint Creek. He made a passel o' money an' he bought hisself a fine car and clothes. Then, all a sudden, ever' thing beginned happenin' to that ol' man. First thing, he was kotched, an' that cost 'im a purty pile. Then all his folks come down with sickness, two of 'em died, an' he spent all he had. He ain't got a plate to eat off'n now, an' Pa says th' Lord seed that he was punished.
"When I come back from jail. Pa said, 'Well, Orrie, you ended up like all th' rest of 'em. You're worse off'n you was when you started.' I knowed he is right. But sump'un happened to me 'fore that to show me they ain't no way of enjoyin' likker money. Me an' Son made up our min's we'd save us a stake an' go to town fer some fun. We worked hard, an' when it come time to go I had thirty-seven dollar in my pocket. I was eatin' in high clover, an' I was ready to throw a big'un.
"First thing we done was to fill us a coupl'a quart bottles, an' that's whar we made a big mistake. Time we got up to Talladega we was feelin' good as hell, but we didn't atop hittin' them bottles. Son knowed a coupl'a women, so we got'em with us an' drunk some more. Then we went outa town to a place that Son knowed an' got us a room apisce.
"Well, sir, they ain't much I remember atter that. Th' ol' gal that was with me was as ugly as hell, an' I knowed I'd either have to be drunk to play with 'er, or else put a sack over 'er head. We sot aroun' in th' room awhile drinkin' , an' she kep' climbin' up in my lap till I beginned gittin' tard of 'er. Atter awhile, I got so sleepy I couldn't hardly hold my head up, so I dumped 'er in a cheer an' stretched out crost th' bed.
'That's all I knowed till 'bout daylight th' next day. When I woke up I was lyin' thar with my clo'es on. My head felt like it was go'nter bust any minuts, an' my mouth tasted like I'd been kissin' a hound dog. At first, I thought I'd jes' took a nap, so I laid thar quiet a minute or two. Then I sot up an' looked over at th' cheer, an' I seed that th' gal wasn't thar.
"It takes things a while to soak in my brain, but all of a sudden I jerked up in th' bed. I felt in my back pocket, an' then I nearly jusped outa my pants. My money was gone. I runned around the room crazy as a hat fer a minute: then I got outa thar an' went to fin' Son.
"His gal wes still with 'im, but mine wasn't nowhere a to he found. We went huntin' her, but I knowed I'd never git my money back. You know damn well that th' gal with Son knowed whar th' other'n was, but she made out like she didn't. Anyways, we didn't find 'er, my cash was lost, and I didn't git nothin' fer it.
"It wouldn't a been so bad if she hadn't a been so damned ugly. They wasn't nothin' aha had that I wanted. I'd a lot rather it'd been a purty gal, fer that wouldn't a galled so bad. But when I thought of that gumpheaded heifer spendin' my thirty-seven dollar, it made me madder'n a stuck bull.
"I coulda bought lots fer that money, an' it got nex' to me when I seed how my sisters an' Ma needed clo'es. That was th' Lord punishin' me, I tell you straight; Th' best thing fer a man is to git hell skeered. Pa saya that. He says that when a man gits akeered enough of roastin' his damned skin on the devil's red hot coals, he ain't go'nter do nothin' much bad. That's like I am now. I ain't makin' no more likker an' I an't runnin' with no women. They ain't nothin' closter to th' Lord than a good woman, an' they ain't nothin' as awful as a bad 'un.
"If I was back whar I was once, I might marry somebody. I thought a let of Mr. Blalock's oldes' gal when I was cornin' on a young man, but I never did let her know nothin' about it. I useta go over thar to help the ol' man chop his cotton jes' so I'd be whar I could look at her. It's funny what a fool a man is. She never did pay me no min', but I still think she's a fine woman. She married. Ben Farris, an' they got a houes full of kids now.
"It wouldn't be right fer me to marry nobody. They's lots a people that ain't able to keep up thelrse'fs that git married, but I ain't go'nter treat nobody that way. I ain't never had but one job whar I knowed what I was makin', an' that was when I's on some road work over at Marble Valley. You take like it is with me; my Pa an' Ma ain't go'nter be hyar much longer, an' then somebody's got to look atter th' two gals. Alice might fin' her a man some day, but you know Baby ain't never go'nter git well of that han'. It might be a year an' it might be ten, but that rottin' is go'nter keep up till it kills her.
"Ain't none of us much healthy. Ever' since th' power company backed this river up mor'n twenty year ago, they's been chills an' fever hyar. It ain't bad as it was right atter they built th' dam, but it'll still kill you. I b'lieve that th' fever come whan th' water was backed up over th' trees. The trees beginned rottin' an' that put th' fever in th' air.
"It ain't funny to be sick, but they's funny thlngs happen. Whan they first built th' dam, os' Man Mac come down with chills so hard that he shuk th' bed posts, an' he liked to died. It was a long spell 'fore he was able to be up, but whan he got outa bed, th' first thing he done was to go hell bent fer Rockford. He got a lawyer thar an' sued th' power company fer th' biggest figger of money he could think of.
"Well, that lawyer had a slick tongue. He had os' Mac thinkin' that th' money was as good as his already, an' they wasn't nothin' left to do but cash th' chsck. That ol' man went looney crazy. He run aroun' tellin' people ho was go'nter be rich, an' he bought up as much as he could on a-cradit. He even tol' Pa that he was go'nter give him th' land we farm on, an' th' biggest mistake Pa ever made was by not gittin' him to sign th' papers right thar. He'd a done it. He didn't have th' brains of a peckerwood.
"Course he didn't git nothin'. He went to court lookin' like he was already dead, an' he had a chill or two sittin' right up in thar. But th' jury didn't pity 'in. He night a knowed that they ain't no pore nan can win nothin' off'n th' power company. They look at us folks hyar on th' river liks we'uns was no better'n a dog. A pore man don' stand no more chanct than a June bag in January.
"They was lots of people died when that dam was built. ol' Man Jim Mason useta have a purty place over by th' Kingdom, and didn't nobody live thar with him. That ol' man was mean as hell. He stirred up trouble on this river long as he lived, an' he was past sevanty when his number went up.
"That was a awful thing. Didn't nobody see 'im fer nearly a week, so some of th' women-folks got to thinkin' he might be sick up thar by himself. A bunch of 'em went up to th' place one mornin', but he didn't answer when they hollered. They peeped in th' winder then, an' it was a awful sight. He was lyin' on th' floor naked as a jaybird. He'd fall off th' bed an' died without ever gittin' back.
"If you've ever seed that ol' house he lived ink you know how skeery it is. They ain't nobody ever lived in it since he died, an' its all growed up with honeysuckle vines. Atter he'd been burled 'bout a year they was soms people coms hyar who said they's kin to him. They took his furniture an' things, but they didn't even go to whar he was buried. They ain't nothin' on his grave to tell who he is.
"I had sumpin' happen to me clost to that grave one night that I don't like to think about. I'd been 'coon huntin' with a bunch from Fayetteville, but I left 'em long 'bout midnight an' started home by myself. I didn't think about ol' Hason, or I wouldn't a went thar. He never did like me. Anyways, I was right clost to th' place when sump'un ris up an' begin moanin'. Didn't nobody have to tell me what it was. I nearly run outa my shoes.
"That ain't the last time I've ased 'im. Jes' let me git 'round that ol' house of his'n, an' sump'un'll happen to let me know he's thar. We'uns naver had any use fer each other, an' that's jes'his way of tormentin' me. You know, I never could understand why it's jest th' bad folks that stays to ha'nt th' earth. I guess th' good'uns is done gone to Heaven."
Orris pulled in hi' line, winding It slowly about the slim cane. He walked over to the bucket, ran his hand into it, and sloshed around in the dingy water. "I us' have plenty of 'em in hyar," he said. That's enough to bait my lines anyway, an' I ought'er git some yallers with these baby breams."
He shielded his eyes with a brown, gaunt hand, and looked toward the sun, which was now a flaming crescent in the great elbow of the river.
"We got time to halt out 'fore night," he said. "Come on, I want-a show you a little island out thar. If I ever do hav'ta make any more likker, It's th' finest place fer a still that you ever seed."
8/4/39
S.J.
