July 14, 1939
L. Kastakapaulos
309 West Trade Street
Charlotte, N.C.
Manager Lunch Room and Billiard Parlor
D. W. Crawford, writer
LOUI
No names changed
L. Kastakapaulos, known to his public at the Elite Billiard Parlor as "Loui", looks out on the world with a perpetual smile, while he serves wine, beer, hamburgers and light lunches. He is short and dark; his pointed chin inclines determinedly upward but the grimness of his wide mouth is relieved by a neat little mustache, very black. Loui reserves his conversation for business purposes, but his smile, distinctly a business asset, is free. He dispenses a glass of water to the ragged newsboy and dirty-faced children on the loose in the same manner he would serve his best lunch or wrap a dollar bottle of wine.
"I was born", he said," in the little town of Bramage, Greece, in 1896. My father was a farmer. He raised cotton, corn, and small grain. We also raised some cattle that gave us a nice income. The land there is along a good-sized stream and is very rich. I started to the public schools when I was six years old but quit when I was thirteen and went to work with my father on the farm; that was all the schooling I ever got. No, I didn't especially like farm work. I tried to run away and join the army during the Balkan War in 1912, but I was too young and the officers carried me back home at once.
"As there were six children in the family and all pretty well grown up, and the farm was small, there was no objection from the family when I decided to come to America in June, 1914-. We had some friends in the State of Washington and when I landed in this country I decided to go there. It took most of my money to pay for the ocean passage and the rest was spent by the time I got to Kansas. I struck that place during the wheat harvest. I heard they wanted men in the wheat fields and since I was brought up on the farm I decided that would suit me fine. But I was very much mistaken. I had never shocked wheat like they did there and it took me some time to learn the trick. It was such hard work I made up my mind to leave that night---but I had no money. And I badly needed the good food they served. I guess I would have gone anyway if I hadn't been so tired, I went to sleep as soon as I lay down and didn't wake up till the bell rang at daylight. It was too late then to run away so I went back to the field. It was hard work and so hot some of the college boys had to drop out One fellow died from sunstroke.
"I made twenty dollars there in ten days--that seemed like a lot of money to me--and joined a bunch of men who were following the harvest season into the Dakotas. We worked for about another month. I then had money enough to go on to Washington. My Greek friends were working at a lumber camp, and I got a job at once helping saw down trees. That work was really hard, especially for one who had never tried it before, Some of the trees were six feet through. I went from one job to another--boss cutter, head logger, and finally got to be a sawyer. A man was not supposed to live long in those days as a sawyer. He was strapped on the log carriage, driven by a steam piston. When the saw outs through the log, the carriage is jerked back at a terrific speed. The sawyer has to move the log the exact space of another board as it moves backward. If his nerves don't soon break down he is likely to be killed by a broken saw. The saw is seventy feet long and runs over two large pulleys at a terrible speed, just like a belt., They break sometimes and often wrap around'a man and tear him-to pieces. I understand they have eliminated all that danger now by having the saw guarded and an enclosure for the sawyer.
"While I was working in the lumber camp I took out naturalization papers, and when the United States entered the World War I figured I would join the army. But the government had to have lumber and we were notified that we were already in the service. So my, ambition to be a soldier was blasted again. We were paid good wages during the war but living expenses were high and we didn't save much. In 1919 I heard from a friend in Charlotte who wanted me to come here, so I did.
"I have been here since 1919, and have learned all I know about this business since that time, I went back to Greece three years ago and married a girl I knew before I left there. Her people and mine had it all planned years ago. Yes, it suited me all right--suits her too, I think. She likes; it very well here but it is hard for her to learn the language. She is learning fast now since she has been attending the WPA Adult Education classes. She goes three times a week. She gets lonesome, of course, but she will soon get over that when she learns more of the language and customs. The neighbors, both Greek and Americans, have been mighty nice to her. No, we have no children. She belongs to one of the clubs for Greek women; we both go to church and the movies, and attend all the name-day celebrations and other social functions of the Greeks, We're happy, all right.
"This business here? Oh, it's pretty good most of the time I make a fair living. It's not so good in the summertime, too many people go away, or sit in the shade. In the wintertime they want a warm place to hangout. Most of our business comes from the middle of the afternoon till midnight. Yes, we' have all sorts of people in here; the good and the bad; mostly good. We don't allow any rowdy conduct. In fact we seldom have to call anybody down. It all depends how you handle people--you give them a rod, they take a mile.
I generally call a man down before he gets too noisy, and the next time he know about how far he can go. They all soon learn that we don't permit any funny business in here. Oh yes, some Greek places close for our National Holiday, March 25th, but we don't. Sometimes part of the force goes on a picnic or to a meeting, but not always. We are Americans. When the Americans close, we close.
"I don't know when I'll go back to Greece, maybe never. I would like to go there for a vacation if I had the money. Every Greek wants to spend a vacation in Athens. There everyone has a good time. No, I don't think I would send my wife back alone; don't think she would go that way. Yes, some of the old-timers would like to go back there to die, but not me. This is my country now; it has given me a good living, and a much better one than I would have made in Greece, so I want to die and be buried here. But, let's not talk about that. Have a glass of wine." And Loui drank to the future of America.
