Arlie Lee	Curb Market Huckster,
(Hennegar, Alabama	West Side Market Square,
Route #3)	Knoxville, Tennessee
October 25, 1938.
By Della Yoe. Revised by
Jennette Edwards
SORGHUM FROM SAND MOUNTAIN
"Sand Mountain sorghum! Pure, mild and thick," Arlie Lee intoned in the soft drawl of the deep South to bring customers to his stand on the west side of Market Square.
A woman from the surging stream of bargain seekers stopped at the spot where Arlie Lee's spick-and-span blue truck was sandwiched in between time-worn vehicles that filled the curb market. He demonstrated his words by dripping the sorghum from a spoon into a container he kept from sampling.
"lt's pretty too. Forty cents a bucket, ma'am. Two for seventy-five cents. Five pounds to the bucket."
Arlie Lee was a young man. His blue overalls and sweater were neat and clean. "They was no hot water where I roomed last night, and I ain't had time to be barbered." He rubbed his bristly chin as the customer meditated over her buy." "No'm, must have been some other feller here last week. First time I've had sight of Knoxville. His'n was likely good, but this sorghum of mine's made from cane grown right there on my farm in Alabama."
He pointed proudly to the shiny rows of tin buckets--with yellow paper labels giving the producer's name and address--stacked neatly in the truck.
"There were six hundred five-pound buckets in that truck and I drove a hundred and sixty-six miles from Alabama to get it to this market."
"I'll take a half dozen buckets--my husband thinks there is no sweet like good sorghum. He used to live on a farm."
"Six buckets. Well, I'm proud to let you have it." Arlie Lee picked the choice half dozen from a back row. "There's lots of good sorghums. But to my mind and knowledge they's none can beat good old Sand Mountain Sorghum, and I ought to know something about that. Been making and selling it all my life. Won't you rest yourself in this chair whilst you wait. Now you did a smart thing telling them to come by and carry this along for you in your car. Sorghum ain't light weight--not Sand Mountain Seeded Ribbon Sorghum."
With a blue cotton handkerchief he rubbed the wood seat of the chair clean. "Now your husband knowing of the country will like this sorghum. Spent all my life on a farm. Born there. Farmed all my life, but I sure have had to fend elsewhere of late years to get by. Forced to, you might say, by the gov'ment. Cotton's always been my money crop. But a man like me can't make no money on cotton the way it is now. So until this here ruling of the gov'ment not allowing farmers to put in only just so much of his land in cotton is changed, I'm changing my farming. Besides my cane crop, I raise poultry and live stock now, and I guess I might say that 'taters is my best money crop now. I grow two crops of 'taters a year am they's always a market for them."
"The allotment now for growing cotton is according to a man's cleared land. I've got thirty-three of my forty acres in cleared land. So my allotment this year was for five acres. I'll not have more'n two bales of cotton this year, and that'll be for our own use. Seems like it costs you more to farm these days, whether you do or you don't cooperate with the gov'ment. I used to get fifteen cents a pound for my cotton before this new program come in. The way it is now, a man can't make more'n about eight or nine cents to a pound of cotton."
Two giggling girls stopped before the truck, asked to sample the sorghum. Arlie Lee showed no sign of impatience, treated them with courtesy given to certain customers. "It's pure, mild and thick--pretty too," he said, dipping fresh samples from the open bucket to the container. He gave a small wooden spoon to each girl. The samples disappeared, the girls walked away.
"If you don't cooperate with the gov'ment you've got to pay the tax assessor two cents on the pound before you are allowed to sell. Works a hardship on a fellow anyways you take it. Figger it out for yourself. It costs from twenty-six to thirty-dollars a ton for fertilizer. It takes four hundred to six hundred pounds of thirty-dollar fertilizer to make a five hundred pound bale of cotton, It runs about six to eight dollars a bale paid out for cotton picking. I most usually pay cotton pickers from sixty-five cents to a dollar a hundred pounds. It takes twelve or thirteen hundred pounds of seed cotton to make five hundred pounds of lint cotton. It costs me from three-fifty to four dollars a bale to have it ginned. And then I have to haul it seven miles to market--nearest market to my farm."
He paused as if to let the commonsense of his reasoning sink in, then continued on the government.
"And it's a sight of inconvenience and waste of a body's time and strength to just try to cooperate with the gov'ment. You leave your work on the farm and go see the County agent to get your papers signed up. Well he's twenty miles off. And then when you get there, they's always something you'd ort to have, you ain't got with you. Now there's that blue pool thing--I didn't have my blue pool ticket with me when last time I went to see about my allotment for cotton raisin'. Went to Ider to see about it--when I go there they said I'd have to go to Fort Wayne. That's a heap travelin', and as for me I can't see no sense or justice in it. So I've quit cotton growin' till things change. Some says the rule was just made out for one year. I don't know but I hope they are right."
Arlie Lee watched two women cross the street, head in his direction. "Sand Mountain sorghum! Pure, mild and thick. It's pretty too. Forty cents a bucket. Two for seventy-five cents. Five pounds to the bucket."
The customers decided on the "two for seventy-five cents" -- argued over which one should put up the odd penny, asked what else he made to sell.
"It's just sorghum I've got this trip," Arlie Lee said regretfully. He handed a bucket of sorghum to each one.
Methodically he filled in the gap left in the front row by the sale of the two buckets.
"Some thinks there's difference in those in sight and buckets in the hind row. Guess they thought I had other truck back of the buckets. Wish I'd had. Don't have a sight of stuff to sell, 'cept sorghum. We don't have to buy though, raise everything that we eat and fare well. Have our own meat, render our lard, plenty of milk and butter, fresh fruit and dried fruit, vegetables—'bout anything a body could want to eat. Times are when I haven't want for a bite, though, get in a stew thinkin' 'bout the money I need. Debt is what worries me most. My wife, she's been sick for more'n four years. She's done farm work all her life. Worked in the field when she was a girl. That's what broke her down. Her people was renters. Our little girl, she's just eight years old--can't be a big help to her mother--she's our only one. Guess one's nuf for pore folks. Farmin' work's awful hard on a woman. Specially when she's sickly like my wife--not able to do work round the house half times. When she's too tired to shift or down sick-to-her-bed I get a hired woman from next farm to help us out. That costs. Then there's the doctor to be settled with. That ain't cheap.
"Our house ain't very big. Just all to a floor--three rooms and a kitchen. Don't have no electricity. We use well water. I water stock at the creek that runs alongside my farm. It's a nice farm. I take a smart-sight of pride in it. Keep stock in fair shape. Mules most think is best for farm work, but I always like a good brood-mare for an extry. Sell the colts, too, and that's good money when prices is up. Best mare I've got now is a three year old. Was offered $200 for her past spring. But I wouldn't sell her. I just couldn't leave go of her for cash. Folks said "She'll get old, like as not hurt a leg and be a cripple." But I just kept in my head, "a brood-mare is always a good extry on a farm and she's a nice little one." I guess the baby gets her holdin'-on-to turn from me."
Arlie Lee smiled with contentment when he spoke of his little girl.
"She's a sight of help with the chickens. Has pets 'mongst 'em, though, won't part with 'em for nothing. It takes a sharp one to slip one out without her getting wind of it. I'll say, "Honey, maybe 'possum caught it." She hands me right back, "Dogs didn't bark last night." Well, I'm proud that she loves 'em. She's to the age to go to school now. They's a good one less than a mile from us. And a church too. we can take in meetin'--does it mostly of a winter when the farm work ain't so wearyin'. It's a Baptist church--guess that's good as the next one."
A customer interrupted his narrative.
"No'm I ain't never advertised it. That you have mind of ain't Sand Mountain Blue Ribbon Seeded Sorghum, is it? That's mine. Like as not talk of it might have drifted up here from Alabama. It's pure, mild and thick--and pretty too. Just forty cents for a bucket."
She counted out forty cents, waited until Arlie Lee handed down a bucket he selected with care.
"Well, I'll be--me advertisin' in magazines--don't read papers even, scarcely none. I just 'pend on the other one to tell me and there's a sight of 'em that likes to shoot their mouths off. Feller come to our place other day wantin' us to buy some sort. Farm paper, he said--told all 'bout a cotton pickin' contraption same folks had set together. I told him straight off I had no mind to pay machinery to take keer of work pore folks needed for makin' a decent living.
"He was full of politics, too. Ask me what was thought of 'ministration, in my part of Alabama. I jest said, "I'm Republican"--thought that might shut him up from showing off what I had no mind to know. Well, I am. Republican, if that matters one way or the next. I know one thing. I ain't never had much sorrow for those reliefers. That puts me to mind of a story I heard a feller say about reliefers, not long back. Boll weevil was pretty bad down our way past year. And the bean beetle. One of them bean beetles was settin' on a leaf when a feller come along and put some WPA flour on it. And the bean beetle just set on there, eatin' that flour until it starved."
Arlie Lee walked to the edge of the curbing--looked in the direction of the corner around which his customer bad said her car would come.
"I thought I heard a blowin' for here. No'm it's just an allfired truck, like as not blowin' for same one to pack to 'em what's bought.
"Heap a right I got makin' little of them reliefers -- signed up for PWA myself. That's different. That's for the able bodied men -- we works on PWA between crops. Debt jes made me sign up. Them doctor's bills. Looks like don't make off the farm nuf to stay even. This sorghum here help me out some. Yet that ain't much 'ginst I pay for gasoline for the trip up and my eatin' here. I mostly sleep in the truck.
"They say Saturday's the big day on this market. I've been here since Tuesday, 'morrow's Saturday. Like as not I'll sell out. Won't make me mad. I'm itchin' to get back. I always have a cravin' to start home oncet I'm out of sight of Sand Mountain. Sand Mountain's a big un -- size up right alongside these Smokies. It's a likely place to live. I haven't mind of another spot in the world where I'd ruther do my farmin'."