June 8, 1939
John Henry Middlebrooks (Negro)
S. Jackson Street
Athens, Georgia
Blacksmith
G.M.S Cune
THE CITY BLACKSMITH
There was no "spreading chestnut tree" to shade the shop where Jim Center was placing two plow points in the glowing embers of his forge when I entered. He arranged them in what he apparently decided was the hottest spot in the bed of coals, dipped a can of water from a tank beside the forge and poured it around the edge of the fire before he turned to me and said:
"Mawnin', Miss. Didja wanta see me 'bout somepin?"
"Yes," I replied, "I'd like for you to tell me something of your life and your experiences, if you aren't too busy today."
He apologized because he had no chair to offer me, and invited me to be seated on an old nail keg that evidently did regular duty as a stool. "Don't git too nigh the fire," Jim warned. "It's powerful hot on a day like this, but I'se got to have a fire to git these here plow p'ints hot enough to beat 'em out 'fore I can sharpen 'em up. They ain't hot enough yit," he declared when he lifted one of the plow points with his tongs. Carefully placing it back in the embers, he sat down on another keg near me and began: "I don't 'spect I can tell you much that you'll want to know, but I'se been here a mighty long time. Yessum, this comin' March'll make it twenty-three years that I'se been doin' business right here in the same shop. You'll have to 'scuse me for I'se got to git to work whilst I talks. Them folks'll be wantin' these here plow pints 'fore night."
He went back to the forge and removed one of the red hot plow points. He fastened it in a vise that was attached to an iron table, quickly selected another plow point from a small pile on the floor, and put it into the forge. As he began hammering on the point in the vise, he said: "Yessum, I’se got to sharpen all the p’ints you sees here, and then too, I’se promised to shoe a mule today, that’s why I’se got to work and talk all at the same time.”
Jim’s voice rose and fell, and his flow of words kept time with the ringing beat of his hammer on the hot metal.
"My mother was fetched to Oconee County from ’way off up in Virginny in the fust year of the war for freedom. They brung her ’round by Gusty (Augusta), Georgy, to Oconee County where they sold her to some white folks. Right down there in Oconee County is where I was borned. We stayed down there till I was ’bout ten years old and then we moved here and lived with some white folks right where the First Baptist Church on Pulaski Street is now.
"Course I had done went to school down in Oconee County some, but the first school I went to in this town was in old Knox Institute on Pope Street. Ain’t it a sight the way schools is done advanced since them days? Why, I’se got a niece that’s only ten, and she’s in the sixth grade already. I was just in the fourth grade when I was sixteen," Jim laughingly admitted. "When I was going to school we studied the old Blue Back Speller, and, just let me tell you for sho, when you larnt that old book you knowed somepin.
"I made my very first money gwine atter milk for the white folks. I hadda walk two miles every mawnin' 'fore I went to school to git that milk, and they paid me 50¢ a month for the job. That was a good long ways to walk but that 50¢ made it seem a lots shorter for that was good pay for Chillun then.” He grinned. "Betcha couldn't git one to walk that far every day now - two whole miles - for 50¢ a month."
He drew another plow point from the fire, replaced it with one on which he had been working, and poured a can of water on the coals about the edge of the forge. When he had repeated the heating, beating, and cooling process about five times on one plow point, he let it remain immersed in the cooling tank about five minutes. Leaning on an iron table he remarked, "Well, that’s one that's sharp enough to slice down into the ground all right." He was picking up a plow point when a Negro man came to the door and asked, "How long 'fore you can shoe dis here mule?"
"Can't do it 'fore atter dinnertime now," he answered.
"De folkses needs dis mule in de field right now," the man argued. "How come you can't shoe 'er now?"
"'Cause I'se busy now," Jim announced. "I told you to leave the mule when you was here this mawnin', 'fore I got started in on these here plow p'ints. The folks what sont 'em here needs 'em to plow with too."
The argument continued with the result that the man left the mule. After his departure, Jim said, "I tried hard to git 'im to leave that mule early this mawnin', but he had to go gallivantin' 'round. If he just hadda left 'er I coulda finished shoein' that mule ’fore ever these plow p’ints was brung here to me.
"I started out when I was real young to learn the blacksmith trade," Jim said, as he poured more water on the coals about the edge of the fire. "The way I learned my trade was by workin' 'round for other folks in their shops. It was harder then to do the work for they didn't have so many improved tools to work with like they do now. I wisht I was able to buy me all the new and different tools and machines. Why, when I first started out, we didn't have no way to weld things together ' cept by meltin' the metal and beatin' 'em together. Now with these new weldin' machines we can do the job in a jiffy, 'thout half the trouble.
"Back then, we had to use home-made charcoal for our fires, but now we's got a special sort of coal for blacksmith's forges. See?" He pointed to a small pile of coal near his forge. "That coal's fine and small, but it's clean and it'll burn good and give off a strong heat. That's what we needs. In some places 'way out in the country you'll find 'em still usin' the old charcoal and the bellows too in them old-fashioned forges. Bet you never did see no blacksmith forge before where they didn't have to have a bellows blow the fire to git it to burnin'. With this good coal and improved forges we don't need no bellows no more."
"If we coulda charged the same prices back in them early days that we gits now, we woulda made lotsa money. Do you know 40¢ was counted a good price for all the work it took to shoe a mule? Now the prioe is from one to five dollars, 'cordin' how bad the mule is. Sometimes they sho cuts up rough and bad, and don't you ever think that mules is done stopped kickin'. They'll evermore lay you out with them heels if you give some of 'em the chanct. I done been kicked so many times I have to oughta know, but I'se never been hurt bad enough to have to lay off of work. 'Bout the worsest time I ever had was when I got kicked in the face, and if that old mule hadda got a fair lick at me, I'd been ruint. Yessum, just plumb ruint.
"In my younger workin' days we never had the 'musements laic folks has now. We had to work lots harder for our livin', but I sho had my share of what good times was to be had then. That was mostly dancin'. I was a good one on that, specially on them old patillions (cotillions) where they had sixteen couples on the floor at one time. Oh, I could shine then! My fust wife was sho one more graceful figger in them old waltzes. Now, me, I never could dance them old waltzes. My foots was miles too big, and they was all the time gittin' in my partner's way, when I wasn't trippin' up on 'em my own self. But just to please my fust wife I'd try to waltz with 'er, even if I did git all tangled up with my foots.
"Another thing, I was a good hand on shootin' craps. Some folks what tries to be stylish calls that playin' dice now, but t'aint a thing in the world ' cept plain old shootin' craps. 'Course, at fust, they alius lets you win whilst you'se larnin', but atter you'se played awhile, you'se sho got to work and talk to them gallopin' little dice iffen you 'speots to roll seb'ens and leb'ens 'nough to win you somepin. I lost as many times as I won, but I sho did love to shoot them craps.
"We played cards too, mostly seb'en-up. 'Course that was gamblin' right along. I never larned how to play poker, for in my gamblin' days that was mostly just a white man's game. Colored folks didn't have 'nough money to play it. I still don't see how come shootin' craps, playin' seb'en-up, and poker, is gamblin' any more than these here games of bridge. You can't pick up a newspaper 'thout you sees where the white folks is been havin' big bridge parties, and even some of their churches gives bridge parties. You pays to go there to play, and then you plays for money. Now, what's the diffunce? 'Course they says they gives the money to the church, but the law don't bother 'em none 'bout playin' their gamblin' games. They don't catch the folks what gambles in these big important clubs neither, but it sho do make the cops feel grand when they can find a little crowd of colored folks shootin' craps and they puts 'em in the lock-up if the pore folks ain't got 'nough money to put up a bond."
Jim put more coal on his fire, and again he carefully poured water on the coals about the edge of the heap. Sparks had burned tiny holes in the faded shirt that was minus sleeves, and his patched pants had once been khaki-colored. The high tops had been cut from his frazzled old shoes to form slippers. As he slowly dripped the water over the coals the sooty smoke billowed out over the shop. "Miss, you'se sho gwine'er be dirty when you gits away from here," was his statement, made without regret or embarrassment.
"Why do you pour water on the fire if you want it to burn?" I asked Jim.
"Good gracious, Missy!" he exclaimed. "Don't you know iffen you keeps the coals 'round the aidges damp that'll throw all the heat right towards the center of the fire? See here now, I puts these plow pints right in the middle of the fire and they gits red hot quick. 'Course it does scatter smoke and cinders when I pours the water on. That's why everything's so dirty now. I'll just bet you don't know why I keeps that big old tin reflector disc standin' up there at the back end of my forge. That's ’cause it helps to keep the fire hot and keeps sparks from blowin' back there in that pile of Junk. Did you ever see so many old pieces of wagons and buggies? There’s many a tongue and wheel in that stack of stuff," The side of the room toward which he pointed was packed and piled almost to the roof. The only cleared space in the room was the small area around his forge and anvil. The rhythm of Jim’s measured speech corresponded with the beat of his hammer on the anvil as he continued his story.
"Yessum my shop is a pore one because it's in such a pore place. All this buildin' here is mighty old, and most of it has been in use ever since Athena was just a little bitty place. Just a part of this room where I works was put on since the World War." He called my attention to the difference in the masonry where the new section joined the old part. "Most of this place used to be wooden," he continued, “but gradually, from time to time, they's replaced the wood with bricks and mortar. That little wooden buildin' 'twixt here and the colored barber shop used to be the office of old Dr. Steiffer. I think he was there as late as the World War. One of the oldest parts of this buildin’ is where you see Mary’s little eatin’ place, and I’ve been told that’s where the first postoffice this town ever had was - right in that same little room. In the rooms upstairs over the old postoffice was where the first council meetings was held, and right at the back of that upstairs room was the first old jail - they called it the guardhouse then. Some of them old iron bars are still over the windows. Yessum, I does business in one of them, famous old places, but it’s sho gwine to ruin and decay fast. Looks lak the city would want to keep it all in good repair for these young generations to see, but I guess it's all too out-of-date for them; they wants everything new and fixed so there won't be no work connected with it.
"All down here - plumb to the old graveyard - used to be a horse-tradin’ ground, and it was famous as a campin' ground too. The long wooden stables where the traders kept their horses was right back of this shop, but long before they stopped usin' this as a tradin' ground they replaced that with a brick stable. Horses was too valuable to risk loss by fire, and the city didn't lak 'em to have wooden buildin’s so close in town. In them days this was the best spot in town for a blacksmith to git trade.
"My, how everything is changed now! Even religion ain't what it used to be, for now the church members just goes along with the sinners, and you can't tell which is who by the way they lives. Church members dances, plays cards, gambles, goes to shows, and does just 'bout like the sinners. There ain't no shinin' lights left in the church now for the sinners to follow. If sinners follows church members now, they's headed the wrong way sho.
"Me? I belongs to the Baptist church, and that's a powerful good 'nomination. I was raised up in the Baptist church. They tuk me there when I was so little I'd go to sleep and they hadda wake me up to take me home when preachin' was over. I guess I done better then than I does now. I don’t go to church now lak I oughta. I just neglects it. My wife goes more'n I does.
"We ain't never had no chillun. They ain't nobody 'ceppen just us. When my fust wife died I married up with this 'oman, and we gits along mighty well."
"I'd better see if that mule is still tied 'round at the side, 'cause if it gits away from me, that nigger would have a fit,” said Jim as he went to the side door and looked around. "She's still there. Guess I'd better finish up these here old plow p'ints pretty quick so'se I can do somepin 'bout gittin' some shoes on her. She sho needs 'em bad.” He removed another plow from the forge and again his story began to pour forth in jerky measures as he wielded his hammer.
I don't know how we would git along if it wasn’t for them chickens and pigs and our good garden, for it’s hard to make a livin’ these days when we ain't gittin’ nigh the business we used to have.
"Automobiles and trucks is sho done a heap to drive blacksmiths and railroads out of business. The man went broke that used to hire me for wages, and that’s why I hadda open up my own shop. That was twenty-three years ago. Now I’m ’bout to have his spe’unce and go broke my own self. They just ain’t no business hardly. I gits me a little work on mules and horses from the farms, and a few farm wagons is brought in for repairs, but it’s all mighty diffunt from them days when blacksmiths was just worked plumb to death ever Sadday.
"Folks made they trips to town in buggies, carriages, and wagons - mostly wagons - and whilst they was doin’ they tradin’ at the stores and deliverin’ butter and aigs to town customers, they would leave they horses to be shod and let us know what they wanted done to the buggies and carriages and wagons. Everybody wanted their turnouts fixed up nice for Sunday. A man would let his buggy wheels squeak most of the week, but he wanted ’em rollin’ right and lookin’ nice on Sunday. Big famblies climbed right into them farm wagons and went to church drivin' mules on Sunday. They didn’t have no cars then. When you sees folks comin’ into town in a wagon these days you can just know they don’t own no automobile. That is, lessen they's got somepin to peddle and sell. Some farm folks is got a idee that city folks will buy a dozen eggs or a pound of butter a heap quicker if they see a farmer out in the road drivin' a mule. If they comes in a car, the city folks is apt to think they's peddlin' things that’s been shipped into town. When cotton growin' was good - ’fore the boll weevil days - it tuk a sight of mules and wagons to haul that, and that meant fine business for blacksmiths. Now all my business comes from the country, for the warehouses and delivery systems use trucks 'stid of horses and drays, and they ain't many of us left that knows the blacksmith trade.
"As late as the end of slavery time, every big plantation had its own blacksmith. Most times he was a slave that had been trained up for that trade. Fact of the business was, they had so much good labor on most of them big plantations that they done everything right there on the place. They ground they own meal and flour, and wove the cloth for they clothes, all right there. My mother used to set for hours atter supper tellin' us 'bout the ways they done then. What we loved to hear 'bout best was the good times they had at harvest times. They even had some of them old cornshuckin's when I was old enough to remember 'bout 'em. I can ricollect them big old piles of corn that it sometimes tuk 'most all night to shuck. There was plenty of corn liquor for 'em to drink as they worked, and they thought that work was fun as long as the captain of the cornshuckin' kept on singin' 'em reels so they could keep time as they flung them shucked ears towards the pile. Whenever a boy found a red ear of corn he was sposen to kiss the beat lookin' gal, but if he was bashful he could have a extra drink of corn liquor instid. All that’s past and gone now. They ain’t no more farmers left that’s able to give no cornshekin', and mighty few of 'em raises ’nough corn for it to take two men to git it shucked out in quick time.
"I’se got way off from my talk ’bout blacksmithin’. See that campus crost the road over there! Well, when they wasn't no automobiles, lots of them students used to bring they saddle horses to college with ’em, and some of ’em even brung nice lookin’ buggies along. They gimme most of they work and that meant lots, for it sho counted up. Then too, I used to git the work on the cavalry horses they use over at the college. Nowadays they keeps somebody at they barn all the time to do it, but I don’t miss that so much, for they don’t keep half as many horses over there as they had in time of the World War anyhow. At one time their work did pay me good.
"The biggest pleasure I has now is fishin'. ’Course I don’t have much time for that, for I has to stay close ’round here to pick up all the work I can git. I’se got one fine day comin’ for my fishin’-fun. That’s the Fourth of July. That’s one day that I always goes fishin’. I goes off on the river somewhere and just spends the day. I don’t catch so many fish, for all the streams around here’s just been fished to death nearly ’bout. If you goes out in the county to do your fishin’ you’se got to have a license, and that costs a dollar and a quarter. I feels lak they’s got too many ’strictions on fishin', ’specially considerin’ these hard times. They’s lotsa folks that could have fish to eat sometimes if they could pay that license so’se they could go out and catch a good bait of perch or maybe some catfish.
"Them ’strictions on fishin' ain’t the worst thing them folks that manages the laws is gone and done. Our council is done passed a law 'ginst folks keepin’ they own cows and pigs in town. That sho hurts us pore folks that has to ’pend on raisin’ our own meat and on gittin' milk and butter from our own cows. It works hardest on the folks of my race in this town, for ’most nigh everyone of ’em is tryin’ to raise a pig to kill for next winter’s meat.
"I was right tickled at a notice in the paper 'bout one of the council meetin’s. It said that when they was arguin’ this law 'bout pigs and cows in the limits of the city the meetin' got pretty rough, and just ’bout as many was votin’ one way as another, and all of 'em bound not to change they votes. Did you read ’bout that meetin'? Well, it said one of them councilmen riz right up in meeting’ and said he wasn’t gwine to vote for no sich a law, for folks had raised pigs here as long as the town had been here. He went on to say he didn’t give a damn what kind of law they passed he was gwine’er go right on keepin’ his cow and his pigs, and he didn't 'spect to git no permit from no neighbors or from no chief of po-lice neither.
"Our race has ’vanced a long ways since them old plantation days. Negroes is larnin’ how to take keer of theyselves and of each other. Then too, they’s gittin' more eddication in more ways than one. They’s larnin’ how to make they own lives successful as well as how to please the white folks. Our race is represented by men and women in ’most all of the professions and in nearly every kind of business.
"The most of us is just piddlin' away tryin’ to make a livin’, and it’s powerful hard for some of us to do even that. That brings me right spang up to my favorite subject - insurance. I’se a great believer in insurance, specially for the folks of my race, for not so many of us can save up money enough to take care of us when we gits sick or dies out.
“Missy, it does look so bad when anybody dies that ain’t got nothin' to pay for a funeral with. Apt as not, they ain’t got no folks that can pay them ’spenses. Then somebody’s to take a list ’round to git up nickels and dimes ’nough to have ’em put in the ground. I’ve seen that happen so many times, and I’se knowed the re-mains to have to stay at the undertakers place a long time whilst folks was takin’ the list around. Atter all, it’s ’most and gen’ully our white friends that holps us the most in them sad days. It’s sho mighty bad. I thinks it’s lots better to put a few pennies into payin’ insurance every week, for then you knows for sho you’se gwine'er have a funeral on time and be no ’spense to nobody else when you goes outen this here old world of trouble."
Jim put his last plow points in the fire. "I’se got to hurry up and finish these here plow p’ints,” he spluttered, "’cause I don’t know how long it’ll take to shoe that old mule. Sometimes they’s powerful wild. It’s mostly from the way they was shod the first time. Iffen you’se patient and gentle with ’em, they's hardly ever bad after that, but when you starts off rough and beats ’em from the start, you’se apt to git ’em so soared they’s gwine’er be powerful hard to manage atter that. I’se done finished these here plow p’ints. Does you have the time, Missy?"
"It’s one o’clock," I told him.
"Well, I guess I’se done told you ’bout all I knows, and I’se got to git out there to that mule."
<text not clear>
