Mount Vernon Springs, N. C.
RFD
December 8, 1938
K. P. (Katherine Palmer)
THE MARKAM FAMILY
I stopped on the ridge at Rabbit's Crossing and looked over the surrounding countryside. The fields lay under a heavy November frost. A misty sun. struggled through the morning clouds. A little cottontail skipped across the road in front of the car. I remembered hearing about the tremendous number of rabbits that used to be shipped from Chatham County to all parts of the United States.
An old man was passing and I asked him to direct me to the farm of Delke Markam. "It lies a half mile north of here straight down this clay road" he told me.
As I started the engine I realized that this exact spot had often been described to me as the geographical center of North Carolina.
The road was rough from recent heavy rains. It was bitterly cold. I finally came to a place which answered the description given me. Clusters of frost bitten purple asters lined the drive. The house was of white wood with red brick chimneys and green blinds; white and red freshly starched curtains shone at each clean window. Several comfortable chairs were on the porch. I surmised that I was visiting the better class of farmer.
Lydia Markam, a young woman of about thirty-five, answered my knock. She had a healthy out-door complexion and possessed fine and regular teeth. Lydia. wore a blue and white checked short flannel coat, white crocheted blouse, red checked apron, and black shoes with low heels. Her eyes were a sparkling blue. Her face was open end pleasant as she cordially invited me to come in.
We joined a fat neighbor woman at the fire side. The two friends had been sorting varicolored pieces of cloth which they intended to use for winter quilts. They were sitting in one of the bedrooms which evidently also served as a living room. It was simply furnished and very clean. Two brilliant home made rag rugs partially covered the floor, and a beautiful quilt with an odd red and green tulip design lay on the bed. A small bureau stood against the wall. Photographs, Mavis powder, and violet toilet water crowded the top of it. A handsome cupboard stood in one corner. It was filled with blue and white dishes. I noticed a lovely teapot. A very old clock stood on a table near the window. It's ticking filled the room cozily. A cheap radio was on a chair. On the small mantelpiece were two cracked crockery vases and a gaudy up-to-date calendar bearing a picture of Ginger Rogers.
A variety of plants filled the room. They were planted in Snow Drift lard buckets. Two fat pink begonias were on a stand. There was a graceful flowing wandering Jew plant, a little green shamrock, maiden-hair fern, and a bowl of some sort of odd orange berries.
Mrs. Markam followed my gaze around the room. She seemed very proud of her plants and of her clean nice home.
I explained that I was not prying, but that I was really interested in the details of her daily life on the farm. Her friendly eyes sailed their willingness as I asked if I might see the rest of the house. There were four other rooms.
The large kitchen was spotless and sunny. A wooden table, covered with red and white oilcloth, stood in the center. Bunches of peppers hung drying from a nail. Two rabbits lay on a chair; blood seeping slowly from their mouths onto a newspaper. A cracked mirror, shaving equipment, and white tin basin were on a box in a corner. The room contained both a wood and gas range, and a sink with running water. Lydia also possessed an electric churn and iron. Skippy, the striped cat, and Gyp the collie rose from their beds behind the stove to greet us.
Mrs. Markam opened a door leading into a good sized pantry. Every possible variety of canned meat, fruit, and vegetable stood on the neatly arranged shelves. The other two rooms were small, sparsely furnished bedrooms. There was no bathroom in the house, nor a dining room; the family ate in the kitchen.
We returned to the fire where the neighbor woman rocked silently. Lydia explained that Mr. Markam was down at the barn feeding the stock but that he and the baby would be in. presently.
Almost at once we heard their footsteps outside. The door was flung open letting in a gust of icy air, and Delke. Markam came in, the little girl laughing on his shoulder. Delke was of medium height, with sandy complexion, red unruly hair, and mild blue eyes. He wore a brown leather jacket and faded overalls. His large hands were rough and cracked from the cold. While he was friendly, he seeded shy, and not as intelligent as his wife. He sat down heavily and began to fill his pipe.
"Those are good fat rabbits in the kitchen, Lydia," Delke said.
He glanced at me shyly. "I went hunting this morning. This is some place for rabbits, lady," he ventured. "There was over nineteen thousand of them shipped from Siler City in 1910." He again lapsed into silence. I gathered that this had been a long speech for him.
The baby played with a little red wagon in front of the fire. She was two years old, and her name was Jane. She were. a. white and red cap, white sweater, warm red leggings and white shoes. These her mother removed when she became warm. Jane was very blond and she had blue eyes.
"The baby has quite a time finding names for all her pets on the farm." Lydia smiled at me, "She has two white geese named Jack and Jill, a calf named Betty, a sheep named Lucy, and the last litter of little pigs we named for the seven Dwarfs. The sow we call Snow White."
I told Mrs. Markam that I wanted to be show, over the farm and to hear how she worked out her financial problems. But first I asked her to tell me about her diversions which might interest a woman of her type and situation.
We settled comfortably in our chairs, the baby in her mother's lap. I addressed my remarks to Mrs. Markam as Delke seemed dozing in his corner.
"I think we have lots of fun at our quilting parties. We have one every winter at Christinas time. Women for miles around come in with their work and we have such a fine time talking and joking together. The quilts are just as pretty as can be, and we have such a nice friendly group.
"Corn shuckings are a merry time around here, I can tell you," she continued brightly. "That's when all the young folks join in and I do believe that more courtships have started at corn shuckings than at any other time I can think of." Her eyes lighted with gaiety, "You know if a boy finds a red ear in his sack, he may kiss the girl of his choice. We all shuck fast as we can all through the afternoon and when evening comes we have the biggest and best supper you ever saw in your life! The things to eat that we do have! There's stewed chicken by the barrel full, fried chicken, pork, beef, as many hot biscuits as you could possibly eat to save your life, two kinds of potatoes, rice, thick white gravy, beans, green tomato pickle, water melon rind pickle, quince and peach jam, plum and grape jelly, damson preserves, apple butter, stuffed eggs, apple and cherry pie, cocoanut cake, chocolate cake, every kind of cookie you ever heard of and homemade candy, too."
She paused for breath. "Oh yes, I nearly forgot the best part of the supper, the large steaming cups of hot black coffee, and all you can drink."
"Where are these affairs generally held?" I asked Lydia.
"In somebody's barn, if the weather's fair enough, and we eat in Kate Cameron's large kitchen. Each family brings its part of the supper."
"What did you contribute last year?" I asked.
"Oh, chicken dumplings and chocolate cake mostly," she answered modestly.
"The nicest part comes after we've finished supper. Then the Dunlap boys take out their banjos and play every song you can think of, from Coming. 'Round The Mountain to It's June in January, and there's square dancing too, and plenty of flirting; I can tell you that.
"It's just about the same at wheat thrashing time. All the farmers help one mother get their wheat in, then at night we all have a big supper together. The men are mighty tired, though and ready to go home to bed early. Sometime we have a little trouble with some boy who has had too much to drink. I remember last year Winifred Edwards just wouldn't leave, kept saying he wanted to stay and talk to Snow White a while longer. Win's a good boy, and a fine farmer though," she added loyally.
"I belong to the Home Demonstration Club. It meets at a different neighbor's home once a month. We learn about cooking and the proper feeding of children at these meetings and we've all learned a lot.
"We have a church social which meets once every two months. We sing a little, talk about raising money for the Chinese children we are helping, have a prayer together and go home.
"I teach the ladies' class at the First Baptist Church. You can just see the white steeple across the ridge from here."
Mrs. Markam told me that she was also an active member of the choir and missionary society. She said that the Sunday School picnics kept her pretty busy in the spring.
"About once a month we take a trip to Raleigh and Greensboro to shop and see a good movie," Lydia went on.
I asked her which movie actor she preferred. She said that Spencer Tracy was the favorite of both her husband and herself and added that he seemed a real man -- not too good to do honest work on a farm if he were ever called upon to pitch in and help.
"Delke and Jane and I drive into Siler City every Saturday unless the clay gets too slick. We like to look in all the store windows and ask the prices. I miss the dime store a lot; the old store has burned you know. Rose is building a large new one now. I do hope it will be finished by Christmas time. Jane just loves the little woolly Christmas lambs and colored candy."
Delke rubbed his eyes, and with a shy smile and affectionate word for Jane, he left the room. We heard him in the kitchen pouring water.
"Wont you have a drink?" Lydia asked me, "We have a deep well with soft clear drinking water."
She brought me a glass, and a large yellow apple. They were both delicious.
After adding some pine knots to the fire, she wrapped Jane securely in a quilt and put her to bed in the next room. She turned on the electric light, its soft glow mingling with the flames. The gray November light came in the window.
As she again seated herself opposite me, I noticed that she looked a little tired.
"What time do you get up in the morning?" I asked casually.
"Five o'clock," she answered promptly. "Sooner, when I am busy during the canning season. Delke always gets up at four-thirty to see to the milking and to watering and feeding the stock. Would you like to hear about the things I've put up for this winter?"
"Indeed I would," I assured her.
"Well," she began, "this fall I canned fifty quarts of meat; beef, sausage and chicken. I canned one hundred and seventy-five quarts of vegetables and one hundred quarts of fruit. I also put up a large amount of jams, pickles and preserves."
"All these good things must be a tremendous help in solving the problem of daily meals," I suggested.
"It does help a lot" she answered. "For breakfast we have grits, sausage, biscuits and coffee for Delke and me. The baby has a fresh egg, milk and a dish of stewed fruit, usually peaches."
"We have our chief meal at noon. Then we have collards and turnip greens in season, chicken about twice a week, pork, potatoes, and some sort of pie.
"Supper is usually a light meal unless some friends drop in on their way home from town. Then I might open something a little extra, some damson preserves or maybe I stew a rabbit.
"On Sunday I get my dinner all done before I leave for church. I just warm it up when we are ready to eat. We nearly always have a pretty good Sunday dinner, chicken, rice and gravy, and beans or tomatoes fresh from the garden, or some I've canned if it's winter. We all like apple jelly a lot. We have chocolate cake and home made ice cream for dessert.
"Sometimes Delke brings home oysters or fish from the market in Siler City for a special treat. Delke is a big help to me on Sunday morning. He stays with Jane and tends the fires.
"We always enjoy the Greensboro Daily News after dinner. Delke likes the news about crops in different parts of the country, and I enjoy the pictures of the brides in the Women's Section, and I like to read about new ways to cook things."
"How about the expense of clothes?" I asked next.
Lydia laughed and replied, "That's one problem that doesn't worry me. I have one nice dress and hat to wear to church. The ginghams I wear here at home I can run up myself very cheaply. They have such pretty patterns these days. Jane's clothes cost very little, although lately she has begun to outgrow her sweaters and leggings right fast."
"As for poor Delke, he never buys anything for himself. He's had his leather jacket five years. I must remember to look at the overalls on sale at Montgomery ward's in Greensboro this Saturday."
"I don!t want to wear you out with question," I said next, "but would you mind telling me your political views?"
Mrs. Markam's pleasant face beamed. "Delke and I think Mr. Roosevelt's about the greatest man we ever heard of," she said simply.
"So that's that," I smiled back at her, "Will you count me in on it, too?"
It was getting late, and I ashed if I might be shown over the farm. We wrapped ourselves warmly and went out into the biting air.
It was hog killing time, and the red bodies of two slain sows lay by an iron kettle near the steps.
"We have 275 acres," Lydia told me, "with about 40 acres that are cleared."
The farm was surrounded by splendid woods. Cedar, pine, oak, and holly trees rose in the distance.
"The mistletoe and running cedar are lovely for Christmas," she said, "and in the spring the dogwood and redwood run wild in the thicket yonder."
A Sufficient amount of winter wood was stored neatly in the shed. It had been cut and dried months before.
There was a large fenced in pasture where sheep and horses nibbled at a few stray grasses. Two cows and a black mule stood patiently at the gate. Lydia told me that corn, wheat, oats and cotton had been planted.
"There is a vast amount of work to be done here. I can see that, I said, "It must be a job cutting the hay." She nodded. "I wish you could go over the place in summer. You should see my track garden at its best. I have such nice dewberries, raspberries, and strawberries too. I have a year 'round garden. There's always something growing and it's a comforting feeling."
I looked at the frost bitten garden where a few late collards and turnips greens straggled for existence. Three pumpkins, those "clowns for November" lay on their fat sides.
The trees looked gaunt and deserted in the orchard. Apple, pear, peach, and plum held out their arms toward the lowering sky.
"I get a great deal of pleasure out of my flower garden too," Mrs. Markam remarked.
"Delke has a small tobacco patch too but he doesn't do very much with it." I noticed a few dried leaves in a sandy spot in the garden. "He still stocks up on Lucky Strikes in Siler City.
"We have a Negro tenant named Guy Marfit," she continued. "He gets one-fourth of the crop as his share for the work he does. Guy has a wife and four children. They own two mules. Their house is just across the road there."
I looked, across the misty field. A cabin stood smugly against a small hill. Thin smoke curled out of the one chimney. A tall Negro was just going in the door.
"He's a good darkey and a fine worker." Lydia commented. "We never have any trouble with him." She glanced toward her own house. "Let's go in and have some coffee and cake," she suggested.
On our way in, we passed a small shed. It sheltered a car. "Oh yes, we couldn't do without our Ford, " she laughed. "We use it for everything, especially for carrying provisions in bad weather. We used to go to town on horseback."
Over our coffee Lydia told me of several terrible years when their cows and little lambs had died from some dread disease. And one year the horse had fallen through the ice and broken its back.
"It may sound foolish, but the coming of the mail-man out here helps so much when things are black and wrong. Delke and I almost fought over the newspaper during those trying times, and when the Sear's Roebuck Catalogue came you should have seen us. We were like two children, I guess."
"With all the hard work you do and all the patience you show, you deserve a good income, Lydia," I said, "would you mind telling me some details about just what you do make?"
"I am glad to tell you," she answered. "Well, let's see, I sell ten to fifteen pounds of butter per week at thirty cents a pound, and a large amount of surplus vegetables and fruit each week. I always get a good price for grapes and figs. I make about $40 a month with eggs and butter, and then there are regular customers for quilts and rag rugs. People pay well for them too. I can't say just what Delke makes on his sheep, cows, and calves because the amount varies from year to year. We sell $120 worth of pigs a year, $200 worth of cord wood per year, $50 worth of grain. This makes a total of $850 a year. Then we sell milk too. Anyway Delke and I figured that with everything combined we made $1,000 last year.
"We have exciting plans for the future," Lydia went on. "We are going to build warm houses and have blood tested chickens. Then we will be able to get thirty-five cents a dozen for eggs the year 'round. I want to get a "heavy" breed of New Hampshire Reds, and Wyandottes. We hope to have three hundred hens and to sell thirty dozen eggs a week."
The time had come for me to leave, but I was reluctant to bid the Markams goodbye. Lydia urged me to stay for supper but I was uncertain of the clay roads after dusk. I did, however, think of the good country supper I was missing. I remembered the remark about stewed rabbits and the damson preserves newly opened for friends.
Lydia came with me to the door. Suddenly her eyes glowed with love and pride. "That's Dr. Gilmore passing on his horse, Major Flash. He's the best human being in the world. He's a big man up in Greensboro now with patients of every class and type, but he never forgets his boyhood friends down here in Chatham. The doctor believes a farmer's the finest thing there is and he's bringing up his sons to think so too. It always does me good to see him go by."
She held my coat for me. "Well, goodbye, Lydia," I said. She smiled, "Come and shake hands, Delke." He came slowly.
"And tell the baby goodbye," I called over my shoulder. It had been a day well spent. I started down the red clay road which led over the hill through the pine woods. I thought of how much Robert Frost would have loved the Markams.
