Savannah Unit
F.W.P.
Georgia
January 17, 1939 
Capt. Allan F. Leigh (White) 
Miami, Florida
Sea Captain.
George Conway, Writer
CAPTAIN X
As I approached a group of fishermen busily engaged in mending, an old net near an old wharf, one of the men looked up and smiled. I smiled and introduced myself. After the introduction was acknowledged, I explained my object in stopping and asked if he would object to my writing his life history. Taking out a pipe and filling it, he requested me to make myself comfortable. He blew out a cloud of smoke and began:
"I was born in Hull, England, the oldest son in a family of eight children. My father was a fisherman, owning a small ten- ton fishing boat. The money he earned fishing was barely enough to keep food in the home; a sixpence at Saturday was a heavenly gift. Clothes were scarce in the home; a winter coat was used five years! a full suit of clothes was to be seen on. Sunday or special holidays only.
"My father spoke often of buying a fine home and of sending the boys to trade school. All of these plans were shattered when his boat sank one day off the fishing banks. He was never seen or heard of again.
"At the time of my father's death, I was in the sixth grade. It was necessary that I leave school to assist my mother in the care of our family, which I did, taking a job as assistant ship's cook on a fishing boat.
"My aim in life was to captain a boat of my own some day. It did not grieve me to leave school, as my school days were unhappy due to hunger and overwork.
"On the fishing boat I was given a chance to learn something of the fishing industry. This was something my father had not permitted me to do, having kept me busy counting fish or working at home.
"My mother, a frail woman, died two years after my father's death, leaving the children to the care of an aunt in Sussex, England. I saw them once before they left for Sussex, the last I was to see of them.
"After working for three years on the fishing boat, I managed to save enough money to buy myself some clothes and sea equipment, also a ticket to London, where it was said fishermen were needed and wages were good. This, I thought, would afford me a chance to see my brother and sisters.
"Arriving in London one hot August afternoon, I went immediately to the East India Dock trade section to look for a place to live. I rented a dingy little room over a sailors' tavern at three shillings a week.
"After resting that night I went forth the next day in search of work. Tired and footsore from walking along the quays all day, I stumbled into an eating-house on one of the side streets abounding the limehouse district. There I met an old sailmaker who said he needed a threader. The pay was four shillings weekly, plus room and board at his home. After working two months, one afternoon my employer sent me up near the London Bridge for some supplies.
"As I stepped off the lorry I accidentally bumped into an American sailor, who was drunk and lost. He asked me the way to Haymarket square. He said he wanted to give the lions a drink. Then he produced a large roll of American paper dollars, the first I had ever seen. I explained that I had been in London only a short time and did not know directions, whereupon he took me by the arm and said, 'Come on, buddy, you're the first Limey I ever saw and liked!' In spite of his drunkeness there was something. I liked about him. I went along, more out of curiosity than for his company.
"As we turned into the entrance of Hyde Park from the strand, he called to a group of men crowded around a group of beautiful girls, 'Hey, lads, look at our new Limey cook.' This astonished me as I had told him on our way uptown my experiences on the sea.
He then gave me five dollars of American money and told one of the girls to drink with me. I was so bewildered that I was in one of the pubs before I knew it. The woman startled me with, 'What will you have, dearie?' As the ale struck bottom, I registered surprise and she leaned closer to me, looked at me sharply and realized my extreme youth. All my sixteen years felt embarrassed at this drunken look which was bent on me. But I mustered courage to leave after paying for the drinks. As I left, I heard the same girl say, 'Blow me hard if it isn't a tyke'!
"The next day I discovered that the drunken sailor was the boatswain's mate of the "Anna-L", a four master out of New York. He hustled me from the dive where we had spent the night, to the ship. There he kicked me into the sailor's foc's'l'e. As my eyes grew accustomed to the semi-darkness, I saw a burly crew of Irishmen. Red florid faces looked at me, rum soaked and mad, for having to turn to early.
"The cook came for me shortly after I finished storing my clothing. He took me to the ship's galley and there he gave me a mountain of potatoes to peel. I was told that we were to sail for an African port on the evening tide.
"After dinner was served and the dishes washed, I got into my bunk to take a short nap. I was awakened some hours later by running feet and booming voices. The ship quivered and I leaned out of my bunk and found we were underway.
"Ten months later we reached New York City. The thrill of the beginning of a new life will never be forgotten.
"The Captain paid us off for the voyage. Immediately after he had finished with the custom emmigration and quarantine officials, I packed my sea bag (made during the voyage) and took my leave of the ship.
"I was walking slowly up West Street looking at the big ships and busy locomotives when a big Irish policeman said, 'Move on with ye!' I asked him where I could locate a place to stay. He gave me a number on Christopher Street. Finally I arrived at the house. I knocked and a woman opened the door. (Later she was to become my mother-in-law). I asked her if she had accommodations for me and she answered that she had.
"One afternoon sometime later I want into the small parlor in search of someone to visit with. Upon entering I saw a beaming old gentleman and a lovely brunette girl playing checkers. I stood near and watched and after a short while the old gentleman looked up and smiled. Then he introduced the young lady and himself to me. (I was later to find out that the young lady was the landlady's daughter.) After explaining my lonesomeness he invited me to a game of checkers with them. He saw by my speech that I was English and I told him that I was a fisherman.
"After looking for work among the fishing fleet and not meeting with much success, I came in one day discouraged and entered the parlor. In the parlor was the kindly old gentleman, a Mr. H--by name. He asked me if I would be interested in joining a fishing fleet leaving early the next week for the Grand Banks off of Newfoundland. I was nearly speechless, as this was wholly unexpected. He gave an address near Fourteenth and Broadway. Next morning I had signed as a fisherman with the fleet. I took my leave of the Christopher Street house, with the request that after the fishing season I would be permitted to return.
"I worked all summer fishing. Just before Christmas I returned to the Christopher Street address and again rented my old room.
"Next morning I deposited over two hundred dollars in one of the banks near the house, with an additional hundred dollars to keep on my person. Later, I bought myself an outfit of clothes, the first I ever had.
"I found work through one of the fishing fleet captains who liked my work while at sea. The position was that of a carpenter's helper in a New Jersey shipyard.
"For five years I worked in the shipyard during the winters and fished during the summers. At the end of this time I had saved over two thousand dollars.
"The following summer I married Dora L._. This was the happiest occasion of my entire life.
"In the summer of 1929 the fisherman off the Grand Banks objected to our men coming into their waters to fish. The fleet manager suggested the Florida Capes as our fishing grounds in the future. The Portuguese fishermen were using these waters and we felt they would not object to our fishing, as the coast was a long one. The manager called me one day and asked me if I thought myself able to stand the examination for a master of fishing vessels as one of the fleet captains could not make the trip South. An exultant feeling welled up within me. I felt qualified to hold the job, for during the long winter months each year, Dora had taught me mathematics and grammar. I felt that my knowledge would be sufficient to get the license. Suddenly the thought occurred to me that my third papers had not been granted, giving me right to citizenship in the United States. I told the fleet manager of this. He assured me that this would be taken care of at once. Before many weeks had passed I received my citizenship papers. Soon after this I was successful with my examination and became a master of the fishing vessels, the second happiest occasion in my life.
"We transfered to Florida and shortly after Dora, my wife, joined me. We located in Miami, Florida, rented a bungalow at the end of Flagler Street. The rent at that time was twenty dollars a month.
"The next year our first baby, Allan Jr., was born. Two years after this, Patricia joined us and a year later Roy, the youngest, was born.
"In 1933 the fishing business was bad and we all lost money. Luckily for me Dora had saved a little money which carried us until the next season.
"We now own our own home, a five room house, furnished and paid for. Dora and the children are very happy. The oldest boy is doing, well at school. Patricia is showing signs of advancing.
"Altogether we are well contented. I make from two to four hundred dollars a month during fishing season. My wife teaches Sunday School at an Episcopal church. She also operates a small confectionary and the extra money helps in clothing the children.
"Every winter Dora's mother visits us. I hear regularly from my brother and sisters in England. They are all doing well now, and are planning to visit me next year. 1 shall never leave the South, or America, as I am very happy here.
"I am a Democrat in belief and heart. I have never accepted relief or temporary aid from any Government agency."