Hotel Collonnade
Spray, N. C.
November 15, 1939
I. L.M. [ Ida L. Moore]
HESTER
I had observed with interest the enormous hunch of artificial purple violets she wore on her light-weight navy blue coat as she passed my window that morning. Violets seemed incongruous on that massive bulk, propelling itself across the porch with such determined vigor.
She sat before me now in my room at the hotel, wearing a rayon dress of navy blue background on which diminutive tan bulls jumped through pea-green lariats. They were frolicsome looking bulls and involuntarily my mind hummed "Ferdinand the Bull." I sat there watching Hester's rugged face and its framing of frizzly white hair in the glare of the light under which she had dragged her chair.
"I told my children just before I had that operation," she was saying, "if I hader learned to wrote I'der sot down some of the things that happened to me way hack yonder when I was a child in Patrick County, Virginia. I told 'em if I could remember it all hit would make a marsterpiece. That was a long time ago," she finished as she gave her bulk another shift to fit it more comfortably into the too-small arm chair.
"How long ago was that?" I asked.
Hester cast a glance toward the adjoining reception room from which came the intermittent chatter of the younger boarders at the hotel.
"I don't make no practice of tellin' my age," she said as she inclined her body forward, "and I wouldn't want it to get out around here because young folks these days is had about slurrin' at age." Then in a raucous whisper she continued, "I'm sixty year old, though people that knows about it says I don't look it."
She toyed with the wristwatch which dangled from her bosom by three lengths of a broken band while she eyed me closely to determine whether I really thought she looked sixty years of age.
"You certainly have plenty of color in your cheeks," I said. "Maybe that keeps you looking younger than your years."
"No'm, that's caused from low blood," Hester explained. "The doctor says I've got low blood but a woman I know at Martinsville says it looks more like high blood to her. I reckin the doctor knows."
Hester was uneasily silent for a moment and I knew that my response in regard to her age had been far from satisfactory.
"You seen Mrs. Osborne out thar tonight, didn't you?" she asked, "that one with the plumb snow-white hair," she went on, referring to a prematurely gray-haired woman whom I had decided earlier in the evening was not more than fifty years old. "Now would you say I looked any older'n her?" She held her head sidewise in pathetic expectancy.
"I really hadn't thought of comparing the two of you," I said, but I never would have guessed your age to be sixty."
Her purplish bulge of a nose broadened across her face as her mouth spread in a satisfied grin. "Though what's kept me lookin' young, I don't know," she said. "I shore never have been took care of, not in my life. I was orphaned when I was a little bit of a child. When you lose your Ma and Pa while you're young and you're awful pore besides if you don't see the blue hen's chickens I'll give it up.
"Pa died when I was about eleven and Ma had died when I wasn't much more'n a baby. I went first to live with my brother George and he worked me so hard hit looked like I couldn't live. He never meant to be low-down, but he was tryin' to get ahead -- you know how 'tis when a body wants to be somebody and he don't have much chance except by gettin' all the work he kin outa them around him. He had me cuttin' cornstalks on a hillside in March when the wind whupped around me like as to cut the breath from my body. I never had on enough clothes and that made it wusser. When my sister Maggie heared about what George was doin' she got real mad at him and come and took me to her house.
"Durin' them yurs when I stayed with Maggie, I'd pick peas on the halves for the neighbors, and I'd knit socks to sell too. That away I bought the few clothes I had and Maggie fed me fer the work I done at her home.
"When I was fourteen I made a change I thought was goin' to be the best luck ever come to a pore gal. A Methodist preacher -- he was what they called a broken-down Methodist preacher because he never rode a circuit no more and he drawed a pension -- wanted me to come and live with him and his wife, to help out with the work was the way he put it. Well, the first week I was thar they put all the cookin', the washin', ironin', workin' the garden, feedin' the stock, and cuttin' the stovewood on me. Hit wa'n't long before I found out workin' fer a preacher wasn't no better than workin' for a brother that's tryin' to get ahead. Wust part of it, they wa'n't no way of gettin' ahead of him. I tried it oncet but never got nowhere.
"I'd been apickin' up what I thought was plenty apples fer his two hogs every day, but he didn't miss nare day tellin' me I was starvin' the hogs. So I says to myself, 'I'll fix him fer shore.' That evenin' come feed time I raked up over a bushel of apples and toted to them hogs, knowin' when I done it hit was enough to might nigh gorge 'em to death. When I was through I went in and I says to him, 'Well, the hogs'll eat marster well tonight because I give 'em over a bushel apples.' I set thar just as innocent like, waitin' fer him to show fright over what might happen to his hogs. 'That's sorta like it, Susie, that's sorta like it, Susie,' he says, settin' thar rockin' and fittin' his fingers together and lookin' powerful pleased. Hit wouldner made no difference to him if you'd killed off everything on the place if you done it aworkin'.
"Hit didn't suit me to stay thar no longer'n that comin' Christmas. I went from thar to stay with Mrs. Bridges and she tried to be a mother to me though she had to work me powerful hard. 'Bout that time the boys was tryin' to set up to me, so she talked to me one day and told me since my ma was dead she felt like she ought to tell me how to act around boys. Sometimes I've thought maybe she scared me off too bad because I was always afraid when a boy started showin' me right smart attention he wa'n't up to no good. Hit's likely I passed up a better man than I got -- or ruther, one that coulder made me a better livin' -- though my husband was a all right man. I sot my mind back thar then to be decent, I was decent, and I'm a virtuous woman still though I been a widow fourteen years. They's never been one word against my name and fer that I'm mighty proud.
"I was stayin' with Mrs. Hazelup when I met Tom. He was thirty yur old then and livin' over on the North Calina side of the line with his ma and sisters. He come to the Hazelups to get seed taters on Easter Monday 'twas -- and he seed me passin' through the house though I never stopped to pay him no notice. When he left Mrs. Hazelup told me he'd said I was a marster pretty girl, and I answered back,' 'Twon't do him no good. His looks never pleased me none.' His sisters told me later that he come back home sayin' he'd seed a girl he wanted, knowed he wanted soon as he flashed eyes on her.
"Hit wa'n't long arfter Easter Monday till he was back at the Hazelups agin. Fust thing I knowed he was sottin' up to me regular, and a body will turn, won't they?
"The Hazelups had let me have a little tobacco patch and I worked in hit when I'd done all Mrs. Hazelup had laid out fer me. Hit brought me enough to buy me a weddin' dress, gray and wine-checked worsted made with a basque. All that seed it said it was powerful pretty.
"Now, this'll surprise you might nigh to death, I know. Me and Tom was married out in the middle of the road standin' by a buggy. Tell you how come we done it. I never wanted to be married at Mrs. Hazelup's nor the church neither. Why, I don't know, but I told Tom nare one of them places suited me. He made arrangemints with the preacher and witnesses to be up close to the line at twelve o'clock the fourteenth day of November.
"Tom come fer me in his buggy and co'se I expected to see just the preacher and witnesses when we got thar. But word had leaked out and the whole settlemint was up thar settin' round a big blazin' fire when we drove up. Little chance I had of runnin' away though I shore felt like it. They wa'n't nothin' to do but stand up thar before all them folks and get married.
"We went on to his ma's house and Tom took the rest of the day off from his work.
"'Twant long till me and Tom sot up housekeepin' to ourselves in a two-room log cabin. We had a bed, a table, three chairs, and a few dishes. I pulled all the straw to fill the tick fer our bed and I fixed it up till it lay real good.
"Co'se it wa'n't long till the chillun started comin'. I give birth to ten hut four of 'em died when they was infants. I worked right along with Tom in the field when I was able, done everything but plough. He never would let me plough. But in spite of all we done hit was awful pore livin'.
"We kept a few chickens and now and agin we'd have a dozen eggs to take to the store. I always made Tom promise though if he couldn't get as much as ten cent a dozen he'd bring 'em hack home, told him a mess of eggs would be good for me and him and the chillun too.
"'Bout the wust luck we ever had in the country, I reckin, was the time I left the clothes in the rinch water over-night. Few days before, knowin' that the moon was a little better'n half full, I'd made me up the prettiest lot of lye-soap, had awful good luck with it. With so much good soap on my hands I decided to wash up everything in the house. I didn't get a early start like I meant to, so I'd just got as fer as rinchin' when night come on. I put the white ones in one tub and the colored ones in another end covered 'em with water.
"Durin' the night while I was somewhur between a doze and sleep I heared water drippin' and I thought, 'Hope hit ain't rainin' when mornin' comes and I'm ready to hang out the clothes.' Then I fell off to sleep.
"What do you reckin I found out next mornin' when I went out to the wash-place. They wa'n't one single rag of clothes in them tubs, not nare one. I sot down thar on the wash bench and cried. Hit was the fust time I ever knowed clothes to be stole from water though I had heared of 'em bein' stole off the fence.
"We was in bad shape, awful bad shape, because not nare one of us had a change. Mrs. Maston, our closest neighbor, heared about our bad luck and she brought over two of her dresses and a sheet fer me to cut clothes out of fer the smallest chillun. She was a good woman, Mattie Maston was. Pore thing, she died about three month arfter that, and I shore lost a fine neighbor."
Abruptly Hester stopped talking. She smiled broadly, looked at me, and said, "I'd tell you somethin' if I knowed you wouldn't think I was common fer tellin' it."
"Please go ahead," I urged. "I'm sure I won't think you're common."
"Hit happened at Mrs. Maston's buryin'," she remarked.
"I'd like to hear it," I said.
"Well, Mr. Maston believed in buryin' his own close to his house. He'd already buried one wife and a daughter out thar no piece from the house, and now his second wife was dead. The neighbors had come to help put pore Miss Mattie away, and the buryin' had got along as fer as lettin' her down in the grave. They used plough lines in them days, you know, -- never had the fixins like they do now fer buryin' folks. Old Mr. Maston was kneelin' thar by his second wife's grave when of a sudden come the sound of a mule not fer away eatin' and poppin' off grass. Hit sounded awful loud comin' into the quietness that had settled round that open grave.
"I reckin the sound cone last to Mr. Maston, hut when he heared it, he got up off his knees, picked up the plough line and started toward the house. He went inside and t'rectly he come out with a feed bucket. And while the rest of us was down thar still aburyin' Miss Hattie, Mr. Maston was standin' up thar next to the house sayin' 'Kup...Kup...Kup...' The mule come up to him and he put the line on him and tied him to a tree. Then he come back down to the grave. Mr. Maston always would look arfter his stock.
"The preacher started into his last prayer and that give us all a chance to bow our heads. I thought to my soul hit would ruin me but I'der choked myself to death before I'der laughed at a buryin'.
"Me and Sally Malone walked home together that evenin'. We was deep in the woods and well away from the house before air one of us spoke. I turned to Sally and I said 'Did hit make you want to laugh?' and Sally said, 'Susie, don't you name it to me. I've went this fer without laughin' and I don't want to do no laughin' about what happened at a buryin'. We went on a little further, both of us awful quiet. Then of a sudden both of us busted out laughin' and never tried no longer to hold back.
"Hit was yurs and yurs before ever I'd name that to another soul. I see you're laughin' so I don't reckin you think I'm common, do you?"
"Not at all," I said, and laughed again.
By the time I had stopped laughing Hester was looking quite solemn, her mind catching up other threads of the past.
"We scuffled along, me and Tom, but they was times when it looked like we wouldn't be able to make tongue and buckle meet. One of my sisters had moved down to the cotton mill at Spray and one yur we went down to see her. Her man and four of her chillun was workin' in the mill and they'd bought up a sight of things fer the house and had had better clothes than they'd been use to in the country. Soon as we got back home I started beggin' Tom to move down to the mill. Hit was a right good while before the notion took with him, but I kept mentionin' the things Carrie had in her house just like I'd give my soul to have some of them same things myself. Finally Tom give in and we made arrangemints to move.
"We got thar one blustery day in November and Carrie's man had a fire just ablazin' and the room was good and warm. While I was settin' thar tryin' to thaw out I noticed what a little bitty fireplace hit was. I says to Tom, "The fust thing we've got to have is a cookstove. This fireplace shore wa'n't built fer cookin'."
"Didn't you have a stove of some kind already?" I asked.
"We'd never had one in our lives. Didn't nobody but real rich folks have stoves in Patrick County in them days.
"Now, Tom and the chillun never made no big money in the mill but we'd been so pore and scuffled so hard that havin' cash money comin' in regular made us feel right well off. Tom started off totin' water to the help and he never did work up to what you'd call a real job in the mill.
"They turned the money over to me and arfter I'd bought the groceries and paid down some on the furniture I always had a few cent I could put back unbeknowins to anybody. The girls kept wantin' a dresser fer their room so the second Christmas we was at Spray I bought and paid fer one outa them savins I'd kept back. When the chillun got older co'se they started wantin' more and more and hit kept me busy schemin' how to get it.
"I half-soled all the shoes fer the family and now and agin some fer the neighbors. The little bit I made that way I put by and had it to draw out when sickness come along. I done the sewin' fer all the girls and sometimes I took Tom's wore-out pants and cut out little ones fer the boys. Co'se I never always done as good as I wanted to, but what I couldn't cut I managed to bruise. Sometimes I'd stop by the lookin' glass and say to myself 'You ain't broke much yet, you don't look so old.'
"When I done my wust breakin' was durin' the World War. Charlie and Fred both had to go. Charlie never got across the waters but Fred did. He was right thar when the Hinnenburg Line was broke.
"Hit was somethin' that could might nigh wreck you, waitin' fer one of them overseas letters. Though I never did get to go to school I knowed enough, to read my name on the envelope and could tell if it was in Fred's handwrite. Long as he could write hisself I knowed the Germans hadn't got him. Fred and Charlie both could write to me theirselves. I had seed to it that everyone of my chillun got to go to school some, not no big amount you understand, but they went till they could read and write and figger some -- enough to struggle along on.
"Hit was always Fred that I done the most worryin' over because he was over thar in a strange land in the thick of the fightin'. One day I got a letter from him with a two-blue star pin in it and he said, 'Wear it, Ma, because you are 'titled to it since you've got two boys in the army.' Well, I sot thar and fastened that little pin on my dress and then I busted out cryin'. I was thinkin', 'Hit may be the last time Fred'll ever send anything to his ma. Hit may be the last letter he'll ever write home.'
"But another letter come from Fred. They wa'n't nare other one from Charlie. A telegram come sayin' he was bad sick with the flu. Another one come two days later sayin' he was dead. Hit's fer Charlie I wear the Gold Star pin. I'm fearful of losin' it so I don't wear it all the time but I always keep it whurever I'm stayin'. Hit's in my room down yonder cross the hall now."
Hester wiped at her eyes with the back of her hand. I reached over and gave her my handkerchief which she accepted with a nod. Presently she was in complete control of her feelings and her voice without the suggestion of a sob was saying, "I had a dream the night before that fust telegram come and I've thought about it many a time. I dreampt of seein' a cemetery with a open grave and all the country around it unfoldin' like a movin' picture. They was some trees that stood out from the others, and one green hill of grass. When we went to bury Charlie I took him to a cemetery I hadn't been to before. And as I rode along, the country unfolded to my view just like it had done in the dream, with the same trees standin' out from the others and the same green hill of grass. Even while I was ridin' along and my heart might nigh breakin' with grief, somethin' in my mind said, 'You seed this in the dream.'
"Co'se I ain't never been one to put much stock in dreams, but I'd had one while we lived in the country that 'peared to have a meanin'. I was awful sick and they'd about give me up. I dreampt I was on my way to heaven but when I got to the gates they wouldn't have me. I'd dumb steps until I was wore out and finally I had got to the gate. Somebody said, though I never seed who, 'We ain't ready fer you.' Next day I had a turn fer the better and in a week's time I was out of bed.
"Them two dreams I dreampt once and never dreampt again but hit's not been that way with another one I had. Time and agin I've dreampt I seed Charlie dyin' and callin' fer me and everytime hit's the same dream.
"Fred, he come home arfter they wound things up over thar across the waters but he'd got a wound in his back that's always give him a right smart trouble. He never married till the next yur after his pa died and hit was a blessin' too, fer I don't know what I'der done without him when Tom was so had off. Tom was sick fer two yur and four months before he died, had Bright's disease. His mind went had on him the last few months he lived. I begin to suspicion his mind when Spring come around that yur and he never even mentioned a garden. Not nare seed did he ever tell me to get.
"The fust time he ever done foolish talk was to Fred one day at dinnertime. Fred come in from the mill and he said, 'How you feelin', Pa?' 'Sorta tired, Son, Sorta tired,' Tom answered him. 'I've been settin' in the back alley all day tendin' to the hands.' Fred wanted to see if he could get him straightened out so he said, 'No, you ain't, Pa. You've been in the bed.' Tom looked fretted then and he spoke that way too. 'Yes, I am,' he said. 'I'm runnin' this mill and you just as well know it. But the help won't do right. Did you ever see such a mess? Why, they've scattered bobbins all over the floor.' Arfter that, such things was common talk with him and his mind never did get no better.
"My husband's gone and my chillun all married and I ain't got nobody to stay with me now. I bought me a little place on t'other side of town -- cost me $2500 the place did -- outa the insurance money the governmint paid me on account of Charlie dyin' in the army. Hit's been acomin', $28.75 every month, but in the last letter they sent they said just one more was due me. I knowed hit was goin' to give out some time and I'd tried to save a little bit back every month. But when I was in the hospital a month ago hit took $300 to pay them off. I was thar fer two weeks with a operation and part time I had to have special nurses.
"When I got outa the hospital I come hur to bo'd a while with Mrs. Godwin till I got strength enough to do my own work. I've got three daughters livin' but ain't nare one of 'em can leave their own family to come keep house fer me.
"Hit's been aworryin' me some, me here payin' bo'd and my money might nigh gone. Ain't none of my chillun mailin' enough regular to live on either. Now take Annie -- she's the one that lives at Burlington -- her husband got put off at the mill and he's just been jobbin' around at fust one thing and then t'other. So many folks has got just a piece of a job, you know, since Roosevelt divided up the time. Hit just seems he caint get enough work started to go around. And still a body caint live wuth nothin' on a piece of a job. Hit's hard to know just what to do when it comes to votin'. Tom, he belonged to the Democrats but now and agin he'd go over to the Republicans. Times didn't get no better fer him so he'd come back and join up with the Democrats agin.
"Ain't many that knows my governmint money is about to run out and I'd ruther it wouldn't be mentioned here at the hotel. I'm goin' to have to go to my home next week. Hit's lonesome livin' by youself, ain't it? My daughters has all got a houseful of chillun, and they'd bother me a sight if I had to live in the house with 'em. Co'se now plenty folks my age do get married, but marriage is a rough undertakin'. I don't know as they's many would want me but some mought. People does say I'm still a right young lookin' woman."