Long Pine
Seaboard, N.C.
March 31, 1939
Bernice Kelly Harris
A SOUTHERN GENTLEMAN
"While I live on a farm most of the year, I'm not by nature cut out for a farmer, if you know what I mean. It's sentiment that keeps me here, sentiment for the land that has been in our family for generations. Instead of moving to Suffolk or Norfolk, where much of my property is located, or to Virginia Beach where I have a cottage. I choose to live at Long Pine here in the country, except for two or three summer months at Virginia Beach.
"Do you see that gun tree yonder in the field? Numbers of people ask me why I let it stand there drawing my land as it does, honey could not induce me to cut it down, however much it does draw the land. Under that gum tree I used to play as a boy. Mr. Jack Jordan, our overseer and as fine a gentleman as ever lived, often tied his pony to one of those limbs and lay under the tree to take a nap. While he was asleep, I'd slip on the pony and ride away. When Mr. Jordan woke and found his horse gone, he could be heard cursing a half mile. No, that gum tree is worth more to me than all the cotton that might ever be grown there; it's a symbol of my boyhood.
"I was an only child. My mother died when I was quite young, and my father married again. Father was a big landowner. In fact, Mr. Sam Calvert, who was register of deeds for thirty years or more and knows more local history than any man in Northampton, told me last week that my father had more records of transfers of deeds than any man in the county, . He lost considerable money once in a chain of stores and had to recoup his finances by going into the lumber business. His interest, however, was the land; he was rooted to the soil like the ante-bellum plantation owners, and something of that predilection he transmitted to me. Not boastingly, I'll say that my father was one of the sanest, most levelheaded men I ever knew.
"So far as we are able to ascertain, this land was orginally an Indian reservation belonging to a chief named Long Pine.There are scattered here and there in the county some very positive traces of Indian blood. The Buffaloes, who live just up the highway near Gumberry, were doubtless Indians, but they have intermarried with Negroes until the Indian has about been bred out of them. Etha, who cooked for us some years, had some Indian characteristics. One was her stolid silence, not the mention the physical traits; she'd work all day without speaking, in perfectly good humor the whole time.
"My father's hobby was Indian lore; he used to enjoy helping me collect arrowheads that could be found all about the fields and still are unearthed now and then. It is surmised that Long Pine sold the land to the Calverts, the oldest family in this part of the state, who later sold it to the Woodruffs. During slave days the Woodruffs were in possession, the Woodruff who was killed by one of his slaves, Ephraim. I know you have heard of Ephraim's Light, which local tradition has made into a sort of legend --- and I might add I've seen the Light! After killing his master, Ephraim for a time hid in a cave of the well, so they say, but was soon discovered, tarred and feathered, and burned to death. The pine tree at which he was burned stood just on our line. It's gone now, but yonder's the site. Since then, particularly on rainy nights, Ephraim's Light has been seen by scores of people.
"From the Woodruffs the land was transferred to the Bridgers family, and then my father bought it just a few days after I was born, December 1888. It was for his son, he said, and it has been in our possession ever since. I'm holding on to it for my grandchildren. (Said facetiously, for there are no children.) Once I sold this farm for $40,000 but bought it back the next morning. People have wondered sometime why I didn't build on the Joyner lot in Seaboard, which is certainly one of the most desirable locations in town. I've much sentiment about this property, about these paths where I rode horse-back when I was a boy, where my father and I hunted arrowheads. So instead --- partly because of the sentiment and partly because my wife, a great lover of antiques, had an idea to work out --- I converted a tobacco barn up here on the farm into a cabin where we might spend the winter and spring months while waiting for the beach season to open. From that one-room log cabin with a tiny attic and a small kit-chen added at the side, has evolved our present log home, Long Pine, with 'parlor, bedroom and hath.' While electricity and water works may have somewhat standardized our cabin in taking from its rustic picturesqueness --- if you like to call it that --- at least we are more comfortable here among our pines.
"My wife has collected for Long Pine a number of valuable antiques, including early American pieces, a sword and canteen used by some of her ancestors in the Revolutionary War, a communion pitcher over one hundred years old, Staffordshire, old glass, binnacle lanterns, brass, and so forth. She has also collected antiques for dealers. I know she's told you about the time she finally sold an old washstand that had been stored in one of our outhouses until there was an acceptable offer on it. A dealer paid her price and took it away with him. She was so elated when I came home that she very enthusiastically showed me the check.
"'I've sold the washstand! It's gone, ' she announced.
"'Hell! And so's my liquor then!' That was a fact; I had used the antique for very modern purposes.
"The lock of this front door came from the old Barrom place, located on the Norfolk highway betwen Boykins and Courtland. Onethe lock you notice the English coat of arms. Dr. Barrom, my greatgrandfather, could trace his descent directly to England. His grandfather held a grant of 2000 acres from the king, and the bricks in the old Barrom house were brought from England. I was told in Richmond on one occasion as Dr. Bar- rom's picture was being pointed out to me, that I've reason to be proud of my great-grandfather, who served in the Senate very brilliantly. My answer was: 'Would Dr. Barrom "be proud of me?' I think not so much about ray own pride in ancestry as I do about whether the noble ancestors mightn't be ashamed of me.
"I've been a landlord since I was seventeen years old. All my life I've lived with tenants and liked them. My father's death forced me into possession before I was through school and ready to assume the responsibility of a landowner. For three years I went to Horner Military School, then to Randolph-Macon, then to the University of Poughkeepsie.I belonged to Kappa Sigma, the German Club, a baseball team, and other campus organizations. In fact, I loved everything connected with college life except my studies. On the side I studied a little law.
"For four years after leaving college, I was connected with the American Tobacco Company; then I came home to look after my farming interests. It was so lonesome here after my associations in New York, Danville, Richmond, and Norfolk, that I felt I couldn't stay. There was nothing in Seaboard then, not as much as now. A friend in Suffolk asked me to come down there for a visit, with ft view toward something permanent if I made up my mind to leave the farming to farmers. I did so and became interested in real estate, investing in Norfolk and Suffolk property, sometimes banking a little.
"This was the period during which I met my wife. I saw her in a Norfolk store one day and couldn't get her face out of my mind, though I had little hope of ever meeting her. I did meet her quite by accident not long afterwards. The girl with whom I had an engagement for the spring German, got sick, and a friend arranged a date for me with a pretty black-eyed, black-haired girl, ' so he said. 'But don't fall for her, ' he warned, 'for she's spoken for already.'
"When I saw the 'pretty black-eyed, black-haired girl' coming down the steps that night, I recognized her as the girl in the Norfolk store who had so impressed me. I said to the friend with me: 'Yonder's the girl I'm going to marry.'
"'Not likely, ' he answered, 'That girl goes with the richest young man in Suffolk.'
"'I don't care anything about the richest young man in Suffolk. She's my gal, and I'm going to marry her.'
"I did. We've been together over twenty years.
"My instinct for the land, if you could call it that, persisted. Not until the last few years, though, have I really settled into "being a landlord, and I do it differently from any landlord you'll talk to around here. The truth is----and I don't care about having this mentioned---- I built up here at Long Pine with the idea of restoring or creating an old Southern plantation, with comfortable cabins for my tenants ---- whitewashed? Well, Maybe ---- an overseer, acres and acres of cotton, old family retainers, and fine landlord-tenant relationships, in the best Southern tradition. But I never caught up with my idea. The attitude of labor, the darky's mode of living, are too changed. Cotton plantations are apparently on the way out, or at least the cotton surpluses and prices are discouraging, and sharecropping as practiced around here is too contrary to my idea. So, from the cotton plantation in-the-best-Southern-tradition idea, I have gone into hog-raising!
"About the only remnant of my original idea is the retention of the Ramseys, Negro tenants that have been in our family for four generations. My wife would leave me, I often say, more quickly than they would. I rely on the Ramseys; no matter what I want done night or day they can he depended on to do it. They never ask me for anything that I don't make an effort to grant; sometimes I growl about it, but in the end they usually get what they ask for. The Ramseys are a right interesting set of darkies. Mag, sixty-eight years old and a sort of matriarch, rules over her household of twenty darkies --- children, grandchildren, and in-laws. About fifteen live in that house yonder in the field, with, another arrival expected daily, They're from all sizes, from the lap and knee baby to the big strapping sons, Joe and Jake, whose families live together under one roof. My observation is that Negroes are more prolific now than formerly; Joe has ten children, besides the one that is on the way. That's true of other darkies around Seaboard too. Mag is the one who directs things yonder, who gets the men out of the bed mornings. She rises at three o'clock and calls it a night.
"The Ramseys live at home, for the most part. They have a cow, hogs, their own vegetables. Every year they have a big barbecue and Brunswick stew at their place for the tenants on my farms. Jake drives a big Pontiac and goes about where he pleases, often chauffeuring for me. I made a bargain with the Ramseys fifteen years ago, and that understanding has held; there have been no renewals, While they don't make anything, or even pay out years like the past one, they live well and are apparently happy.
"Only Jake's and Joe's families work on the sharecrop basis here on this plantation. The other four farms are worked by day laborers, who are hired by Jake and Joe. In other words, these two darkies are more like overseers than sharecroppers, for I depend on them to look after the farms and the labor, charging it against them. The other four farms are operated from this one, with the farm implements and the teams taken from the barns here to work the other crops. If I had to employ sharecroppers on the current basis, I shouldn't farm. It appears that day labor is being increasingly used on farms in this section; if cotton is decreased much more, day labor will be a necessity. Since I'm trying to develop a stock farm, sharecropping doesn't fit into my set-up at all. It can't be done on a sharecrop basis.
"I asked one of the biggest farmers in this part of the State some years ago which of the various systems of sharecropping was the best from the standpoint of the landlord. 'Son, ' he said, 'the best system is to see that the sharecropper has just as little as possible and that the landlord gets it all. That's the only standpoint for the landlord.'
"My plan would be for the landowner to pay minimum wages to his men by the week and then allow them a certain cash per cent of the crop. This would induce then to make as big a crop as possible and thus create more interest among them and more profit for both sides. I learned this when I was in the coal business in Norfolk. Labor received $2.50, irrespective of the number of loads hauled during the day. When I cut this system and gave them $2.00 a day plus a cash dividend for every load hauled, I saw the greatest difference at all. Maybe this wouldn't be practical for every Tom, Dick, and Harry, but it proved best for me. Hence, my theory that the same plan would work in sharecropping.
"For two years now I've been falling back, farming; this year I was behind $1800. Where I had been making sixty to seventy-five bales of cotton I made only thirteen in 1938. My intention has been to specialize in peanuts, complementary to my hog-raising project, but now there's a discouraging slump in the peanut market that bodes no good for the farmers of this section. We can raise prettier peas here, but farther in the South they can produce them cheaper, and their inferior grades are proving just as marketable as ours. It seems to me that we are headed for the rocks if there's no change. Farmers here have made a living, some have made money, farming. But we can't go on making cotton for eight cents when it costs ten to produce it, or raising hogs for seven cents when they cost ten.
"If crop-control is relaxed, farmers will go right into overproduction again. If they make one hundred bales this year and lose money, they reason that next year they must make two hundred bales, when the logical course would be to cut the crop to fifty bales. But farmers are like that. The only way they've been able to make money in thepast was by rigid economy and lower costs of production.
"Yes, there must be control, for farmers have become so educated agriculturally that they can produce more than can be consumed. I think Roosevelt's great, but my criticism of his program is that he is trying to help some people that can't be helped. There are certain people that can't be improved, and what is being done is very superficial and artificial. So far as politics is concerned, I never had the least desire to enter it actively. In fact, when it comes to voting I select the man I like, the things he stands for, no matter what the politicians say.
"As for my town tenants, I have little trouble with them. They are trained to pay rents and groceries; if they don't, they get out. So my collections are 'good. Because I built at the right time and in good locations, my real estate has netted me some money. The-proper location is more important than the kind of house. Investment in real estate now at current prices and conditions wouldn't pay, but fortunately I struck it right. With the help of an agent, I collect rent from sixty-odd houses in Suffolk every week, depending on a collector in Norfolk to see my tenants there. In inspecting the property, I notice that the tenants live very well. Sometimes when they say they haven't a nickel to pay their rent, I look around and see good looking food in the pan. There is little unpleasantness, however. Most of the tenants are glad to see me, some having been with me twenty years. Many who are unemployed could better their condition if they used any sense. They are too choice about jobs. Many colored women will work: only in the peanut factory, while good jobs as cooks are available. One unemployed tenant who was on relief was offered a job cleaning yards; he hesitated, wanting to know if he took the work how it would affect his "lief.' The WPA no doubt has done good along some lines, but it has been abused. One of my tenants left Suffolk to take a job in a northern city, but she was gone only a short time. 'The work was too hard for me up No'th, ' she said. Another woman, white, who had rented from me some time lost her job not long ago and was unable to pay the rent. Feeling sorry for her, I made no effort to force payment, but let her stay on in the house. After a few weeks I went to the Planters Peanut Manufacturers and interceded for the woman.
"'Yes, ' I was told, 'we'll take her back. She was foreman here and a good worker. We're glad you called her case to our attention.' After she started working, I found it impossible for some time to set anybody to the door at the house she rented from me. Finally, I had to chase her down on the street in order to ask her to make a payment on the rent she owed. The next thing I knew, she had moved out of my house to a place nearer her work, she claimed, for which I didn't blame her if she had acted in good faith. But after my extended leniency and my good offices for her with the Planters, her action was galling. She seems not to realize that I could make her lose her job as easily as I got her in again. I'm just giving her time. It doesn't pay to be lenient with tenants.
"This woman is an exception rather than the rule. I say unhesitatingly that women are better tenants than men. They'll say. When I bargain with tenants, I always say to the woman of the house: 'Now, I'm looking to you for the rent. I'm making you personally repsonsible, for you'll be here when I call to collect; so I'm renting the house in your name.'Seldom am I disappointed. Sometimes tenants abuse property, cutting up the steps and underpinning for fire-wood, but I soon get rid of that type. In my twenty-five years of experience with town tenants, I think I've never been to a house when the tenant didn't ask for some kind of repairs or improvement; not once have I failed to promise him what he asked for, with no intention of carrying out my promise. Before another week the tenants will have forgotten that particular repair and will have thought up something else to ask for. Again I promise. If the Lord holds me responsible for all the promises I've made, it will be too bad for me. Most of the requests are unreasonable or impracticable, for I do keep my houses in good repair.
"As farmer, banker, coal merchant, tobacco executive, and landlord, I have had contacts with the richest and the poorest, the best and the sorriest, from New York to Florida. In my opinion ninety-nine per cent of people are pretty decent. The fact that a man fails to pay a debt doesn't mean that he is dishonest; his intention is honest about meeting his obligations, hut a miracle doesn't happen every day. When I hear a fellow say another is a cuook, I begin to wonder about the fellow who makes the remark. So far as young people are concerned, they're as fine today, perhaps finer, than they were a generation ago. I was talking to a friend down town recently who was of the opinion that the young people of today are going to the devil.
"'Look here, ' I said, 'you have four children. Do you think a single one of them has ever stolen a chicken?'
"'No, of course not, ' was his answer.
"Neither do I think so. But before you were as old as your youngest, you had stolen a hundred chickens, sold them, and thought it was a lark. You haven't a child who would think that was funny.
"'you're right, ' he admitted.
"For practically every charge brought against our present youth, a counter charge against the past generation can be brought. Complaint is made sometimes that chivalry for which Southern men have been noted is over and done with. I venture to say that men provide more household comforts and conveniences today, more cooks, for their wives than at any time since the War between the States. I don't think any man ought to expect his wife to struggle over pots and pans, even if he had to eat crackers.
"We need to get a different slant on values here in our community, in North Carolina perhaps. Money isn't so important. I mean the accumulation of property, the emphasis on wealth, the idea that a rich man has top ranking. In Virginia -— I'm a Tar Heel, and I don't want to be misunderstood — many of the richest people can't cross the threshold of some of the poorest. Instead of reverencing money and moneyed people we do need to adjust our sense of rallies and let blood and character count more.
"I wish I could write. I'd like to have the ability to write the history of this farm. Hell, I've even wanted to write poetry! One afternoon just at night, I was standing here in this grove of pines when the poetic impulse took me, though I couldn't put it into lines. Junius was riding a gray mule up the path yonder, yodeling — nobody can yodel like a darky coming home from a day's work, mule-back. Over there a mocking bird started up, and from the fence yonder came 'Bob white, bob white!' The wind in the pines, the birds, and Junius! I thought of the lines:
'The curfew tolls the knell of parting day, 
The lowing herd winds slowly oer the lea, 
The plowman homeward plods his weary way — '
I think that's beautiful.
"For the past ten years I've done little reading, not even current history in newspapers. I used to pore over the Library of Southern Literature, which I have a fine edition of, there in the room. If you haven't done so, sometime I'd like for you to read the oration delivered by our own Matt Ransom in the Senate. I'll look it up and let you read it. Some Senator had Just called Virginia a 'traitor State' when Matt Ransom rose in all his eloquence and said 'Gentlemen, I can't hear In silence this accusation against the State of Washington and Jefferson and Madison' — and so on. His defense is one of the finest things I ever read.
"My favorite poem, I believe is Hiawatha. You needn't mention this either, but one night when my wife was at her home In Smithfield I happened to pick up a copy of Longfellow. I turned to Hiawatha, among the prettiest things ever written, and began reading. I forgot all about bed-time. In the drawer of my desk there was a pint of whiskey, which helped me further to forget. I kept taking a little nip and reading the Indian tale, oblivious of time. The next thing I knew Etna had come to cook breakfast!"
<text-not-clear>