R. L.Perry,
Macon County August 24, 1939
Life Story of Mary Simpson of Mt. Zion Community.
Mary Simpson is a dark brown skin woman. She is about 41/2 feet tall, weighing about 130. She has soft hair which she keeps dyed jet black. The gray root hair close to the roots may be seen. Her almost round face carries a very pleasant smile. When she talks to you she looks straight into your eyes with her sharp, dark brown eyes. She holds herself quite erect and has a quick gait. Her speech is clear but quick. She is a good entertainer.
She is a farmer and enjoys it. Most of the work is done on shares.
The year around you can find hams and bacon which she kills and cures on her place.
R.L. P.
Lacon county
Aug, 24, 1939
This very attractive and convenient farm home is about 12 miles north of Tuskegee. The house cream painted sets about 100 feet from the Franklin and Danville highway. It is a pretty little bungalow that is sure. to get a second look from passerbys. On. the. porch are pot flowers and porch chairs with white slip over covers. On etc; side of the gate entering the lane lending up to this lovely house is a rock column about four feet high in which are growing pretty cedars. Several bushes of Crepe Lyrtle are growing just inside by these columns, of back are Green shrubbery grows along the rock lined lane up to the yard where verbenas are blooming along the walk to the concrete steps.
The lawn is a thin of beauty. There lies on the left of this large lawn a lovely rock garden where grows zenias, verbenas and daisies. A large shady pecan tree stands to the left of the lawn about 15 feet from; left corner of the porch under which are two green lawn chairs. Pretty green shrubbery (some flowering)grows all around the house. A picturesque little flower garden of roses and other flowers lay on the right back side of the lawn where flitted bees butterflies and humming birds. A fence of shrubbery divides the front yard from the back yard. Setting on the right in the back is a large barn and stable, nearby is a chicken house and other little houses for various uses. There were lots and lots of plymouth rock and white leghorn chicken, in and around the stable. Peach, fig, and pear trees were hanging with lucious fruit. A flower garden is in the back. also. A well with concreted curbings is on the back with a rope and bucket hanging from a post over the well. a dipper and a cup is hanging there for passerbys. Of course this well is to be replaced very soon by the Government pump system. The government also has the Dixie line electricity out on this farm.
When I told Mary my mission, she hesitated at first. After I explained why and for whom I wanted the information, she agreed to ive it to me so many people visits this rather unusual woman who has achieved an enviable enviable resutation.
She was peeling peaches and they were nice ripe soft ones. She likes to share, so we both enjoyed the luscious <text not clear>. As we ate she began to tell me about herself.
"I was born right here in this community (Mt. Zion) January 1, 1876. I can remember very well how religious and good my mother was. She was a faithful Christian and always had family prayer. She taught us to kneel when we would pray. I can remember that my dad would sit up as we kneeled because he wasn't a Christian. My mother's daily Christian living and praying converted my dad. He joined the church and became a deacon. This made my mother happy. She lived to see all of us join the church.
"My parents more farmers and always worked hard and tried to teach all of us to work. My dad was brought here from Georgia a slave, Right here on this same spot my dad and mother bought 320 acres which belonged to the white people to whom my parents had been slaves. The white people said that they wanted their Negroes to have the land.
"I started to school when I was seven years old. My first teacher's name was Mr. Rich pots. Oh, I was so happy to start to school. I worried mother long before it was time for me to start to school. We could not start to school until we were seven years old. I do not remember having one fight in. school. There were two distinct classes in our school. One of these classes was called, fat boy's class and the pretty girl's class to which I belonged.
"I can remember how I always wanted something pretty for the house even when I was a little girl. I made my first quilt when I was about eight years old. When they would ask me what I wanted the Santa to bring me, I would always ask for vases for the mantle when I got a house of my own. I had seen large seven room homes, about three of them in the community, of course they belonged to white people. I was a little girl but I had hopes of some day owning a seven room house, nicely furnished, like those three seven room houses in our community. Evan though I had never seen a Negro in such house I believed that it was possible for any one to work and save and get a beautiful home. And if this was possible I had a mind that I would be one to own such a home.
"Aside from a beautifully furnished home I longed to own a fountain pen, a watch and chain and a pair of nose glasses." Here she laughed and said," I have to wear glasses now and I dont find it so pleasant as I dreamed when I was a girl'!
"I learned from my mother, at an early age to love Sunday school and church. While I was quite young, I remember a sermon the pastor preached when I was a child, but I was a Christian, his text was, 'Delight Thyself in The Lord, And He Shall give Thee the Desires of Thy Heart". I believed this statement, together with my mother's faithful Christian life helped me to struggle dad strive to get those things which were the desires of my heart. Yes, I believed that if I would try to serve the Lord that he would help me to realize my desires. I always went to Sunday school and church and tried to do what I could in my church and community to help make it better. I tried and still do try to help in Christs program to evangelize the world I may can't do much, but I do all that I can as far as I know.
"I was not able to go on as far as I wanted. to in school. So anxious was I to go to school that then I had a chance to go to Tuskegee, I was happy even though I did not have but fifteen cents. It was in 1895 I went to Tuskegee. At this time you did not have to pay an entrance fee. I worked in the day and went to school at night. I worked the first year in the Teacher's home. I worked the next year for Mrs. Penny and the next year I worked in the sewing room. I had only one apron, but I washed that apron in the evening, I would get up early iron that apron on the lamp ckimmney and make a clear, appearance the next day. I got so bare for clothes that Mrs Richardson, Cart. Richardson's wife that's at the Institute went to the "barrel room"and got me some clothes. She was a Riss Laura Labry then. At Tuskegee in those ways the Northern white people would send barrel of clothes down for poor children. the room where key of three clothes was called "Barrel Room." They had plenty children who needed them. In. those days we had plenty fine smart children who would come to school bare and penniless. They were poor but ambitious and the Booker I. saw to it that these poor ambitious children were given a chance. I was one of these children who wanted a chance. I was given a chance and I worked as hard as I studied. My health failed me and I had to stop school. As I recall about my fifteen cents that I had when I entered school, the funny thing I had that fifteen cents when school closed. I was afraid if I spent my fifteen cents, something would turn up that I needed it worse, for, so I held tight to that money.
"I decided to get married. I was only fifteen when I married the first time. I married Henry McKenzie. My life was shocked by a mob who lynched him. A<text not clear> Johnie Siglers was found dead and they suspicioned that my husband did it. They had his trial but the jury split on it. So the side that wanted him hung took him and lynched him.
"I didn't let this coward me down. I decicded to work and try to make a mark in life so that some one would know that I lived and had not lived in vain. Looker T. Washington would go round lecturing to farmers, he would always tell us to bring something to town with us to sell so we could have a little cash to get the things we needed without going in debt for everything. I took this in and profited by it. Then Mr. Washington would teach the farmers to raise plenty food stuff this I did and it meant so much to me. When he would send county agents around I always cooperated with them and I always found that they could help us in our farm problems.
"I made a sad mistake when I married my second husband. We was the type who did. not want anything. His <text not clear> it was poster Simason. We had some land where we were trying to farm. This land was just washing away. I did not know anything about terracing but I did know that if a ditch was dug across the Field. it would present the washing away of all the rich soil. My husband seemed perfectly satisfied about the land washing away. I studied the directions of the wash and I decided we would dig ditched to prevent it. I told my husband, Moster, about what I thought should be done. He cursed me out but I was determined about what I thought was right so I marked the ditch by digging holes along and then argued with Moster until we argued into a fight and then he helped me to dig the ditches. This would happen every spring. An argument, fight and then the ditches. I would rake he ditches and help with all the hard work around the farm for I wanted something. I boarded the teachers, took in sewing and did every thing I could possible do to try to fix up. my little humble home. We had only one room and a dirt floor kitchen. But I had seen over to Tuskegee the nice toilets and I 'wanted one. I wanted a <text not clear> room to<text not clear> I tore down an old shed that we did not need and built a toilet Myself. I took some of the boards and made a partition in my kitchen and made a dinning room. The neighbors saw my toilet and my other fixings around so they followed. I was the first in my community to own a toilet. Before this time we all had thought the woods afforded a good enough place for a natural toilet..
"I kept on trying to make little additions to the home and trying to fix it so it would look attractive and this would make my husband mad. We just could not agree. He treated me so bad that I just went to court and asked for a divorce. Well the court gave him everything, even the forty acres of land we worked together and bought. I did have forty acres of land my father left for me. But I did not have a mule or nothing to start my farm on the following year. But I still remembered, "Delight thyself in the Lord and He shall give thee the desires of thy heart". I still had faith in God.
"I had gone through so much bad treatment from my husband that I had nervous indigestion and the doctor had to put me on malted milk for a long time. Deacons asked my husband why me parted, he said, "She's too damaged high minded. When the She wants too much.
"I had a son in Cincinnati, Ohio. He decided to core down and help me on the farm. This was in 1918. After the ctops were laid, my son Clarence McKenzie went to training camp at Tuskegee Institute. We made eight bales of cotton for which I got forty cents (40¢) a pound. The government gave me $15 for a son and this helped me to pay the debt of $1011.75 and to buy back the forty acres which the court gave my husband. I struggled hard this year to do these things. I did a lots of peddling and working at night. At this time I was so anxious to pay my debts and start fixing up my home that I had one cress for Sunday and join to town and one pair of slippers which I bought for 50¢. I went to church and was not shame for I believed so strong that if I delighted in the Lord and His. works that I would have something some day.
"While my son was in training at Tuskegee he met and married Hottie Fostoak, oil. ell queen. She helped me lots at that time. I had someone working on halves and I always carrier good insurance on my little home. When the house burned my insurance was paid.
"Mrs Lanra Daily and Mr. Robert Thurston was demonstrators at this time and is yet. They taught me how to do proper terracing and to plant winter cover crops which has improved my lard so very much. I continued to peddle to help myself so as to keep out of debt. I wanted to but that. insurance into a new home. Mrs Daily made my plans and helped me with the plans for this new home which I am in now. The house cost $2000. The insurance was $1700. I put that $1700 into the house and furnished it and moved into it in 1930. High after this the prices on cotton dropped to five and six cents per pound. This left me with a big debt. I had another hard struggle, but I kept faith. In 1933 the government had the farmers to plow up their cotton and was allowing 10¢ pound and estimating a half bale to the acre. I had twenty acres planted. So I pulled through that dark spot. I have gladly followed the clans of the government every since. It has helped me to have clear to dyy my one hundred and <text not clear> acres of land. The government is making it possible for us to enjoy electricity and many system of running water. God bless the <text not clear>. <text not clear> too evelt gave farmers rural delivery and then comes <text not clear> and gives the farmer the joy of bright lights and running water. And <text not clear> has helped us in so many ways that we no longer feel forgotten. If I did vote I surely would vote for Poosevelt to be president another term.
"Well, I just keep on thanking God for letting me see the most of the desires and enjoy the things I use to long for. I recoumend anyone to delight in the ways of the Lord and He will surely give you the desires of your heart.
I should think Mrs. Mary Simpson certainly has the desires of her heart. As well as pretty outside and attractive, her home is very attractive inside. It is on the farm but as modernly and attractively furnished as any city home.
In the living room is a beautiful mchorary living room suite, a victrola, a library table on which sets an attractive table lamp. On the mantle are two very pretty vaser. A pretty vase sets on the victrola. A large what-not rack in a corner with what-nots on. the shelves, a smoking stand and a magazine rack, pretty scrim curtains with drapes and everything harmonizes beautifully in her rooms. All the floors are varnished and I base becoming floor coverings.
The guest bedroom has an oak vanity bedroom suite, white curtains with pastel floral drapes and becoming wall pictures and vases.
The other two bedrooms are lovely furnished with maple furnishings.
The dinning room has a rich oak dining room suit. consisting of nine pieces. A. very attractive and gorgeous oblong mirror hangs over the buffet.
The bathroom is furnished in white.
The kitchen is very attractive. The wood and coal stove is soft green and yellow. convenient shelves and a cabinet add to the convenience and neatness of this kitchen. A pair of snow white curtains with three rows of varicolored braid hung at the two windows.
The pantry is inviting. Every shelf in this spacious pantryis fillet with canned fruits and vegetables, <text not clear> and jams.
Excellent taste is shown through bout t is lovely farm home in Color, harmony and furnishings.
Mrs. Mary Simpson is now one of the highly respected citizens of Lacan county. She is active in religious and civic organizations. The is president of the Woman's district convention of the Ebenezer Association. She says she is happy. She says she always felt that people should live to be known, to be useful and to be looked on as one worthy of being an example for someone else.
