Date of First Version:	January 5, 1939 (white)
Family:	Miss Jane McNeil and her sister, Lou.(white)
Address:	Boomer, N.C. (Wilkes County)
Occupation:	Farming.
Writer:	James Larkin Pearson
Revisor:	Claude Dunnagan. (January 25, 1939)
What is left of a family.
I had been standing on a rocky ledge reveling in the beauty of the laurel covered foothills below Eagle Rim, when I heard from behind me the sound of a woman's voice. "Whoa, Pete!" she shouted. The shout jerked me from my reverie. I looked around and scanned the hillside. About fifty yards above the mountain trail, I saw, on the side of a steep, rocky hill, an old broken-down mule pulling a plow. Behind the plow plodded a disreputable figure in ragged overalls and mud-caked brogans. The fact that the figure holding the plow handle was a woman did not surprise me as much as the fact that she was apparently cultivating a rocky, arid patch of land which was so steep that it seemed hardly capable of holding itself together, much less of supporting a crop. I moved from the ledge and started up the side of the hill. Then, as the woman threw the reins to the ground, she reached forward and put her hand on the mule's neck. Her words, though half mumbled, came to me clearly:
"Reckon you can stand it through the summer, Pete? I know you're gettin' old an' wore out like me. Pore ole feller. We have a hard time of it, don't we. It didn't use to be like this back yander when Paw was a-livin', an' me an' you was young. We lived easy then, didn't we, Pete? An' had fun, too. I remember mighty well when you use to run an' kick up your heels when you was a colt. I use to imagine you was a-laughin' same as a boy. Now you're gettin' old an' stiff-j'inted......your eyes is gettin' watery an' you always got a sad and troubled look on your face. I guess you must be thinkin' 'bout them happy days, too, 'fore me an' you was left alone here to <Text Not Clear> this ole farm. An' pore ole Lil up there at the house all by herself while me an' you works. Maybe it's wusser on Lil than it is on us, though. We got each other for company, Pete, an' pore ole Lil ain't got nobody 'til we quit work an' go home."
"Who's Lil?" I asked quietly, coming up behind her.
"Sister Lil.....", she said, hardly turning toward me. "I didn't 'speck nobody'd be a-listenin' at me. I go on to Pete like that a heap o' times when I feel sorta low. You live in these parts?"
"No," I said. "Just tramping up to Eagle Rim. Thought I'd stop by and get my canteen filled with water....if you didn't mind."
"The nearest water's up to the house, I reckon. Me an' Pete's goin' up now. You can come along if you like. It ain't so far.... just over the hill yander."
Unhitching the plow chain, she started toward the barn. The weary old mule followed close at her heels, his nose almost touching the ground. I trudged along behind them through the soft clod. When we reached the house, she pulled the harness from the mule's neck and turned him into the barn lot. It was then that I first noticed why I had thought she was a man. She was large, rawboned, and gangling. Her face was as leathery as the cowhide that hung on the stable wall, as though she had spent the better part of her life plowing in the sun. Her hair should the coarse straightness of a man's, and a ragged uneveness left by careless clipping had left.
"It's been a spell since we had visitors. 'Course lots o' folks go up the trail to Eagle Rim, but they don't hardly ever stop here. It gets awful lonesome here sometimes, "she sighed, as she reached for the dipper above the well-box. '"Course, I got ole Pete, and there's Lil. But she's ailin' all the time, an' when I ain't workin' in the field, I got to wait on her. That's her lookin' out the window up there, now." She pointed toward the house. "She just sets up there on a ole couch, all day long, lookin' out toward the hills. I guess she's worse off than me an' Pete, what with her stomach trouble and rheumatism." She paused and hung the dipper back on the wall.
"That's fine water," I said.
"It's purty good, I reckon," she answered in a matter-of-fact tone of voice. "We been drinkin' from this well for nigh onto fifty year, now, ever since I can recollect. Gran'pappy dug it when Pappy was a boy, an' it ain't never gone dry." She pushed a strand of hair back from her face and sat down on the edge of the well-box.
"Them was happy days," she said presently. "Seems like only yesterday that all the folks was a-livin', an' runnin' around the farm here.....everybody doin' somethin' an' laughin' an' talkin' an' singin'............ They're all gone now... sleepin' on that little hill over yander." She gazed toward a small knoll at the foot of the mountains, "......all gone 'cept me an' Lil an' ole Pete. An' ole Pete'll be goin' soon. He's been workin' for over twenty year, now, an' he's gettin' purty feeble. I aim to quit workin' him after this year's crops in. He's earned it, pore ole feller." She stopped to stare toward the barn, where old Pete had stuck his head out through the stable window. There was a forlorn look on his face. "I ain't seen many humans that's as faithful as Pete, an' not many I've thought as much of,.....'cept maybe one....a boy I useta know....." She dropped her eyes to the ground. "But he's gone now.....like all the rest of 'em....gone out o' my life an' left me here alone with Lil an' Pete." She hesitated and dug the toe of her heavy shoe into the ground. "I always wanted to get away from the farm when I growed up, but it don't seem like it makes any difference, now."
"If you wanted to leave, what kept you from going?" I asked. She smiled faintly.
"It was on account a Maw, mostly. But I ain't holdin' no grudges. She done what she thought was best, I reckon. Henry lived down the trail a piece, an' we always played together when we was young 'uns. He went down to the city an' got a big job. Then, one day he come back to the mountains an' asked me to marry him an' go back with him. I reckon I would've if it hadn't o' been for Maw..... she wouldn't hear to it....said I'd be crazy to do it. Well she was gettin' old an' Lil was sickly most o' the time, an' I just couldn't bring myself to leave 'em....seein' the farm needed tendin' an' I was the only one able to do much work. Henry come up to see me once after that. Then he left an' didn't come back no more. I never heard from him since." She sighed heavily. "But I ain't complainin' to nobody. It was my own fault, partly. Anyway, I still got the letters Henry wrote me. Whenever I feel sorta low an' the plowin's all done, I go read 'em sometimes.......up in the attic where I keep 'em. They're gettin' old an' tore up an' dirty, I've read 'em so much. Seems like I never get tired o' readin' 'em though........ I try to be hard an' not think much about the past 'cause it hurts so, but it seems like I just can't keep from cryin' a little when I hold them letters. It's awful silly, I know......them words bein' so old an' him gone so long....." She hesitated as she reached down and scraped the mud from her brogans with a stick. "I reckon if it wasn't for havin' to look after Lil, me an' Pete might as well just quit strugglin' an' lay down an' go to sleep for good...... like Pappy an' the rest of 'em, on the hill over there. Don't seem like they's much use in goin' on any longer, 'ceptin' for Lil...... I couldn't just quit an' leave her all alone with nobody but ole Pete......he don't mean nothin' to her. I reckon it's just me an' Pete, now." She turned abruptly away, dragging her dingy sleeve across her eyes.
"Won't you set a spell or eat a bite of vittles with us?" the woman begged hospitably. "No, thank you. Some other time perhaps. I must reach the top while the light is still good. You see, I hope to paint a picture of the mountains from Eagle Rim."
"Oh, so you're one o' them picture artists? Lots of 'em co me up here when it's spring, like now, when the dogwoods an' flowers are bloomin'. It's sure a purty sight, allright. Puts me in mind o' the Garden O' Eden, like you read about in the Bible..........."
"It is surely a lovely sight," I said, picking up my hiking bags. "I guess I'd better be starting for the trail. I've got a long hike ahead of me. I'll stop by again the next time I'm up, probably want to fill my canteen with your good well water again...."
"We ain't got much to offer visitors," she said shortly. "But you're shore welcome here......anytime, 'cause folks don't stop by much as they used to, when Pappy was a-livin', and it gets awful lonesome sometimes, even with ole Pete around............."
"I'll be back," I said, and turned up the path toward the main trail.
The sheer splendor of the view at the mountain top held me spell bound. I worked feverishly to complete a rough sketch until the fading light made me realize that I must hurry to reach the foot of the mountain before dark.
Still under the spell cast by the rugged beauty of the mountains I stumbled down the rocky path. A sudden turn in the trail brought me to a bluff overlooking the lonely farm I had visited in the morning. The shabbiness of the little house, the ugliness of the barren fields were mercifully shrouded in the rising evening mists. As I watched, a cloud moved away from the setting sun, leaving a diffused brilliance of red and gold spread across the entire western horizon. Sharply silhouetted against this glare appeared the drooping figures of the toil-worn woman and her decrepit old mule trudging wearily homeward. As they reached the barnyard gate she gently rubbed the animals forehead then turned toward the dark house................................................ These magnificent mountains can be cruel, too.
