August 3, 1939
Charlise Pope
Hickory, N. C.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Charlise Pope	Clara Price
Hickory	Hadden
Miss Lentz	Miss Lane
Clara Price was pacing back and forth in front of the court house. She was dressed in black, her hair was as black as her dress, her eyes were brown, and she had the reddest lips I have ever seen. She was small; not weighing over a hundred pounds.
"No, I can't come sit down. I got to stay right here where I can watch for Miss Lane, she's the welfare woman. Have you any idea when she is supposed to be here? I'll tell you anything you want to know, but I'll tell it standing up. If I don't watch I might miss her and I can't afford to come again tomorrow." She took a dirty powder puff from her black bag and rubbed it over her face. "I come to see about getting some clothes for my children. I've got three, besides a sick husband. I don't have much hope of getting anything for them, but I'm going to try anyway. I've been working in the sewing room but was laid off for thirty days.
"I was born and reared on the cotton mill hill here in this town. All I knowed was to play in the gutters. My mammy kept boarders; three or four all the time. Mammy and Pappy worked in the mill. Us children were too little to leave, so we had to go along. We were dumped in the bobbin bin and had to stay there 'till they were through with their work. I went in the mill myself and got a job when I was fourteen. I worked twelve hours every night and made nine dollars a week. Sometimes the boss raised the devil, but he was very good when everything run right.
I married when I was sixteen. I thought I wouldn't have to work but I got fooled. I worked all the time except when I was pregnant enough for it to show, as the mill wouldn't permit me to do it then.
"My oldest boy has infantile paralysis. I've been taking him to the State Orthopedic Hospital since he was four years old. My husband has ulcerated stomach; been sick and unable to work five years. We tried living in the country a short while, but my husband wasn't able to make anything.
"We live in a three room apartment in Hadden. It cost ten dollars a month, without lights. I make fourteen dollars and seventy-two cents every two weeks. I have to buy close to come out,' ain't much fancy living. For breakfast we have corn, biscuit and coffee, with a little fat back and gravy. I can buy a dozen ears of corn for twenty cents, it makes us three messes. Fat back is the only meat I can afford. We eat vegatables for dinner and supper. My husband has been to the hospital but nothing seems to do him much good.
"I want the children to go to school if I can get clothes for them. I declare I do wish Miss Lane would come. I can't stay down here so long.
"My children go to the Methodist Church Sunday School. I ain't never belonged to no church, my husband don't belong to none either. Oh yeah, I believe in going, I just ain't never went. I guess it's the way you're raised. If you're raised to go to church every sunday, you generally go. I wasn't, my mammy and daddy didn't go and they didn't make us go. I make my children go though.
"I'm a Democrat and I always vote, that is as long as I've been old enough. I'm just twenty-nine years old. I work awful hard. Some folks thinks it's easy for a woman to make a living, I don't. I try to do the best I can. There's not much to look forward to in a life like mine. I have no money to go to shows and ball games like other folks. We can't afford to have a car to go places in. So the only thing I can do is go to work, come home and work some more. I have to cook, wash, iron and keep the house up the best I can. No sir, the woman that's always ranting about 'she wish she could work' don't know what she's talking about. Any woman can work and make enough to keep herself but when it comes to supporting a husband, house rent, doctor bills, that's another song. Here comes Miss Lane now, guess I'd go before somebody else gets ahead of me."
