W.O. Saunders
GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH IN GASTON COUNTY
Adelphotis Arachoviton "Karyae"
( A Society of Greek- American Citizens from Arachova, Lakedemonos, Greece )
Copied from handbook of Gastonia and Gaston County by Joseph H. Speak, Gastonia, N. C., February 6, 1936
In the two Carolinas and surrounding southern states lives a large group of American citizens of Greek descent. Feeling lonely for oldcustoms and friends, a number of the leaders conceived the idea of organizing an association which would at once appeal to the spirit of need and want for periodic gatherings and effected the above organization in Sept., 1932. From the beginning it had a rapid growth, soon including members from many sections of the United States and Canada. In addition to its benevolent features, it has established an annual get-together meeting, which in the beginning lasted but one day. Beginning with the second year it was felt necessary to enlarge the annual program so as to include a two or three day period. The society early bought forty acres of very beautiful mountain land and valleys adjacent to Crowders Mountain, one of the highest peaks within miles of Gastonia, and there constructed a large pavilion, dining hall, kitchen and a group of cottages. During the second year of functioning, a splendid little chapel was built and is still maintained for religious service and worship.
Certain leaders of the Greek Orthodox Church of North and South America conceived an idea that the old Linwood College property would make an ideal location for a Greek college and induced the archbishop to visit this property with the result that the Archbishop Athenagoras made a personal inspection. Certain Greek leaders here, notably, Chris P. Leventis, P.P. Leventis, Andrew Trakas, John Petcheos and John Kiliveros met the archbishop on his arrival in Gastonia and piloted him and certain visiting ministers through the Linwood property, with the result that the archbishop became impressed with the possibilities offered. A meeting of certain city officials and representatives and religious and business leaders was held in the City Hall at which time the archbishop and visiting ministers were heartily welcomed to the city. On this occasion Mr. E. B. Denny and other officials made speeches of welcome. The archbishop was very generous in his response to the welcome extended. His speech was delivered in his nativelanguage but it was splendidly interpreted by Mr. Chris P. Leventis. Short conferences were held with the owners of the property, and very soon the property was bought for establishment thereon of an orphanage, old peoples' home, school for ministers of the Greek Orthodox Church, and a school for the teaching of the Greek language. It might be said that the citizens were much interested in the efforts of the Greek citizens, and particularly those who had large financial interest in the Linwood College property and they readily gave their approval of a price consideration which would bring into the ownership of the Greek Orthodox Church this very beautiful property. Two Greek citizens of Philadelphia, Mr. Constantine Stefano and his brother, made a very generous contribution of $12,500 for the purchase of the property, and on the passing of the deed, work was immediately begun on the renovation of certain buildings that could be used and the erection of others. These buildings were thoroughly equipped and furnished, water works and electricity being included in the furnishings, the grounds beautified and the president's home renovated, the idea being to make ready for the fall opening for at least one hundred children to be taken care of in the school. On Sept. 18, 1932, the Greek Monastery St. Stephanos was launched and dedicatory services held.
On this occasion the mayor of the city and other representatives took part in the formal dedication, and corner stone laying was in the hands of Archbishop Athenagoras of the Greek Orthodox Curch of North and South America, and certain ministers of the church. Representatives of the city had part in the program, as well also as certain city leaders.
An immense crowd attended this dedication, American citizens Of Greek descent and other friends coming from as far south as Texas and as far north as Pennsylvania and New York. Among those present and taking part in the program were the Stefano brothers of Philadelphia. The first President of the institution was Rev. Archmandrite Georasimos Elias and the first school Principal was Rev. Archmandrito Emil Pashalakis, and Rev. Joseph Pitsonis was the first supply officer.
The institution is the center of the religious activities of the members of the Greek Orthodox Church in the Carolinas with the exception of Charlotte, Winston, and Raleigh, N. C., and Charleston, S. C. It is the plan of the institution to erect its own chapel, but until this is done, the little chapel at Karyae Park is being used. This isa very beautiful little chapel and in it one finds a number of very beautiful icons of the Greek Orthodox Church dividing the Holy of Holies from the mani auditorium. There one also finds beautiful chandeliers and candle holders, a number of beautiful pictures and other symbolic furnishings.
Great interest has been shown from the beginning by the Greek citizens here and throughout the surrounding territory, but it would not be amiss to say that certain ones who have had a conspicious part in the gifts of time, energy, and money have been Messrs. Chris P. Leventis, P. P. Leventis, James P. Leventis, Andrew Trakas, John Petcheos, George Demetriades. Tom Stathakis, Nick Entas, and George and John Kiliveros. For a long period Mr. Andrew Trakas was on the building committee, Mr. P. P. Leventis served as Assistant Treasurer and Mr. Chris P. Leventis as Secretary.
The following is culled from an account of the dedication of St. Stephanos, September 18, 1939, appearing in the Gazette of September 19, 1939:
"This dedication marked the opening of the first national Greek college and orphanage in the United States. The throng was welcomed by Chris P. Leventis, prominent Gastonia Greek, who was in charge of the program. His words were supplemented by a brief address of welcome by W. Grady Gaston. Secretary of the Gastonia Chamber of Commerce; Dr. J. H. Henderlite, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church; and E. B. Denny, Mayor of the city of Gastonia.
"The dedication address, the principal feature of the program, was delivered by Archbishop Athenagoras, head of the Greek Orthodox Church in North and South America. The Archbishop, speaking in his native tongue, dedicated the new institution to the good of the oncoming generations of Greek-American youth, to the glory of God, and to the highest ideals of Greek and American citizenship.
"Chris Stepheno, seion of the Stephano family of Philadelphia, principal benafactor of the monastery, was presented to the audience and spoke briefly in acknowledgment of the introduction. Following the address of dedication, Archbishop Athenagoras conducted a colorful ceremony marking the laying of the corner stone of the monastery St. Stephanos Chapel to beerected near the Adminstration Building in the near future. He was assisted by Father Pashalakis, President of the monastery. At 6:30 o'clock in the evening, religious services were held at the Greek chapel in Karyae Park with Archbishop Athenagoras in charge."
