Carrie Black
Wash Woman,
College Grove, Tennessee,
October 17, 1938.
Interviewer - Ruth Clark.
Revised by - Mrs. Lena
Lipscomb and Aswell.
ONCE I WAS A PRETTY GIRL
The gasoline washing machine in the ramshackle shed chugged briskly. Beyond the great black kettle of yellow suds, bubbling and frothing over a bright heap of hardwood coals, lines of freshly washed clothes flopped in the wind on the lines that criss-crossed the bare back yard. In the air was the pungent smell of smoke and strong soap and the staleness of earth damp with waste suds.
Carrie Black brushed stringy gray hair from her red sweat-beaded face. The spongy flesh of her thick arms shook loosely as she stirred the suds with a mop stick. "Set over there on that 'tater crate," she invited. "I'm most through. Jist like these overhalls of being done."
With one arm held before her inflamed watery eyes to protect them from the smoke and steam, she dipped up a bucket of suds and waddled into the shed to pour it into the washing machine. She dumped in a wad of faded overalls and dropped the lid.
She moved to the door of the shed and stood with her fists on her hips. Her shapeless quaking bulk was covered by a patched lace dress beneath which a feed sack petticoat showed. Her ankles bulged over the sides of rundown men's shoes, square-toed stompers slashed across the insteps.
"I'm washer woman for the whole dadblame neighborhood," she said. "I have to leave all the house work and git a soon start in the morning. The menfolks git the wood. They tote the water. Then it's up to me.
"But I tell you, with this machine I don't git nowhere near as tard doing this as I used to jist washing for my folks and working around the place. You take last week. Well, I went out and scratched 'taters with the men. I believe to my soul scratching 'taters is the hardest work going. You got to git down on your knees and crawl the best part of the time. I'm not built for crawling. Yes, there I was, weighing over two hundred pounds--end I'm not telling how much over--there I was on my hands and knees in the briling sun crawling and scratching them 'taters. Law, law!"
Her entire body shook with laughter. "It must have been a sight to see!"
The amusement ran out in a thin trickle of chuckling. She glanced down at her pendulous breasts, at her arms lumpy with fat, at the swollen water-crinkled fingers. For a moment she stared at the ground.
"Once," she said tonelessly, "I was a pretty girl." Quickly she turned and lumbered back into the shed. She stopped the machine and began putting the overalls through the wringer. Presently she had hung them on the line and was seated on another potato crate in the warm October sun.
"You know," she said, "I had a good mother but she made a mistake. It's cost me a plenty, too. She wasn't married to my daddy, but she never done nobody any wrong. The biggest mistake she ever made was when she wouldn't marry my daddy when I were five year old. He wrote and begged and offered to come and take us away. But my mother said, 'I couldn't. I will never stop loving him, but he deserted me when I needed him most. After all I'd suffered for five years I jist couldn't trust him, nohow.'
"Well, my mother had one brother. We lived with my granddaddy in a log cabin with one room and a lean-to with a half-story bedroom upstairs. Grandpa didn't have much git-up and go to him. He was born rich and never had to work. He soon run through with everything. Grandma died leaving a tiny baby and it died from pure starvation. My mother was three and my uncle was five. The Lord only knows how they lived, but they did, and in time they paid off the mortgage on the log cabin and few acres of good farm land. My uncle built a shack across the road. They divided the land up. Ma is now fifty-eight years old and lives there with grandpa and he's in his 'nineties--ninety years of trifling man! Anyhow, that's where I were born forty two years ago. Mammy done all she could for me. I didn't have much clothes, but she made over old clothes the kinfolks give her, and I wasn't never cold that I remember of. She'd sell eggs and buy me a red balloon or some toy now and then--I didn't want much. Any little old thing was wonderful to me. Soon as I was old enough to notice, I knew that the women in the neighborhood wouldn't have nothing to do with us."
Carrie suddenly lunged forward and spit."Yes indeed! They was pretty high-toney, them neighbor women!" Her eyes blaring and nostrils quivering, Carrie left her seat. She muttered to herself as she went back to her washing machine and dropped another mound of overalls into the water. The gasoline engine wheezed, coughed, and took up its steady beat.
Carrie reappeared in the door. "l started to school when- I was six," she said, "but them wasn't no bright and happy school days. Not by no means! The other children picked on me all the time. They'd heard their folks talk, of course. One hateful boy used to set behind me and punch me and say I was a snotty little bastard. The teachers didn't know about it and I wouldn't tell. My mother told me that what they said didn't matter and for me to go along and study hard. I did and did better'n anybody in my class."
Her eyes were hot and her face twitched. "But I'll tell you one thing. When I got a little bigger the boys commenced to like me. The girls got hatefuler than ever. But the boys tooked me to parties and I didn't care what the girls said. I didn't have no place to take the nice boys I met at parties. Didn't matter much, for as soon as some nice boy paid me any mind some meddlesome old hen begun wagging her clapper. His folks would bear down on him and he'd quit me. They said you couldn't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear.
"Well, maybe I got to be a boisterous girl. I carried on' to show I didn't care. But I never done wrong. It looked like everybody--even mykinfolks--always expected me to do bad and wouldn't let their daughters go with me. After I finished the eighth grade in school I went to Paris to high school. My ma paid for me to stay at a place with things from the farm. It was hard at first, staying away from home. Well, I was soon glad to be away. Nobody in Paris knowed about me. So I done fine the first year. I had a good time even if I did study mighty hard. Then the next year, just before Christmas, I tooked the flu and had to stay out of school so long that it was hard to make it up. I stayed over one weekend and that sure was my misfortune. I met John Upchurch. And did I fall for him! He jist cast a spell over me with his talk about having plenty of money and a nice home.
"Well, I didn't say a word to anybody. I up and married him. And did I git a let down! When we got to his home, I saw a house all gone to pieces--it had been nice but it sure wasn't any more. It wasn't his, anyway. He had two old maid sisters who ruled the roost, and did they hate me! Well, I knowed something was wrong when they put me in a back room to sleep, and John slept in the front room with the windows and doors barred tight and fast. A loaded pistol was always under his pillow. He sure was afraid of something as sure as you was born. But, do you know, I never did find out what it was he was scared of! I pretty near went crazy then trying to find out."
Carrie busied herself hanging out the last run of washing. Then she cleaned out the machine, emptied the tubs, and turned them upside down on the benches to wait until the next washday. The dying coals of fire were put out with dashes of water and the black boiling pot was left to dry over the hot ashes. Carrie gave a jerk to her dress, rolled down her sleeves, and stood with arms akimbo, looking into the past with a bitter smile.
"For five long years," she said, "I done all the work about that place. I was young and strong, and if I do say it myself, I wasn't lazy. My husband and his sisters wouldn't work. I had it all to do. I milked cows, I fed the pigs, and I made the garden. They even made me help a nigger saw wood so's they could have a fire to set by. And what did I get for it? Nothing! Not even thanks! So, when I went home to see my mother one time, I jist couldn't make myself go back. I stayed with mama and got me a divorce from that John Upchurch.
For several moments Carrie stared into space. The county needed teachers," she went on, "and I had had schooling enough to pass the examination. I got a school and taught a while. I couldn't be much of a success, though, on account of being a grass-widow and no married daddy.
It was while I was teaching that I met Bud Black. He's not much to look at but he's got a mighty good heart. He couldn't even write his name, but he loved me and I married him. He tries hard and would like to amount to something for my sake. I had a thousand dollars alimony. Don't know how John Upchurch raised the money, but he did. So Bud and me paid the a thousand dollars down on a farm. We made our payments all right for three years. Then the crops failed and we couldn't make all of the payments. The man who had the mortgage had always wanted mammy's place because he had land all around it. Now he saw his chance to git it. He said if she'd give a lien her place he wouldn't push us for payments on ours. But no siree! I'd never do that! So when we couldn't pay we had to walk out and lose everything. Nothing else to do and here we've been renting this farm for eight years.
We've never had to make but one contract. In the fall Doc--that's what we call the landlord because he's a doctor-- tells us what he wants done next year. He's an awfully good man even if he does cuss up a storm now and then when things don't suit him. But that wife of his'n is as snooty as it-out. She rides up to the orchard. She gits a carload of fruit, or roast'n-years or taters and never even so much as says thank you. But Doc now, he don't mind helping gather it. He's nice. I always give him some of anything extra good I have. Last spring I give him three early friers."
Carrie started down the yard toward the back door, "Got to start gitting dinner for the menfolks. They'll come in hungry enough to eat a bull and it bellering." In the kitchen she put on an apron, took apples from a basket, and began her preparations for the noonday meal.
"I believe in giving. That's part of my religion. I give pretty regular at church as much as I can. Then I do all I can where there's sickness or death. Bud and me belong to the Church of Christ. Bud never went to church before we was married. He said he couldn't take no part in the service because he didn't have an education. He's awful proud of my education. But he's not feeling that way about in church now and he prays in public, helps with the Lord's supper, and is on all sorts of committees. We never had any children of our own, so about five years ago we went to an orphan home and found a poor little underfed boy. We liked him lots and decided we wanted to take him home with us. It looked like a shame to take him and leave his brother, so we took both of them. But we wanted a brown-eyed girl, so three years ago we ordered one. The matron from the orphanage brought a poor little thing no bigger than a doll. Here she is now. You can see what a pretty little thing she has growed to be."
The child who came racing into the kitchen grabbed her mother by the apron and asked, "Mommy, what we having for dinner?"
Carrie said, "Fried apples and dog bread, some greens and beans."
"Shucks! Dog bread, again!" The child trotted out into the yard to play until the meal was ready.
"Dog bread's pretty good," said Carrie. "We keep Doc's hounds. He furnishes shorts for their bread. I bake it into biscuits and we eat what we want and the dogs git the rest. I always see to it that there's plenty left for the dogs. It makes good bread too, but the children do git tired of it sometimes."
Carrie put down her bowl of apples. Taking a large pan from the kitchen shelf, she poured shorts into it. She made a hole in the center and filled it with thick buttermilk. After she had measured the soda in the palm of her hands, she dashed it into the buttermilk, added a pinch of salt, and then reached into the lard can. Her hand came up dripping with lard which she added to the mixture.
"Making a living for three children ain't an easy job," she said. "Bud thinks I know better about things than he does so he always asks me about everything. It's not jist us living here, but Bud's step-mother and two brothers. Them two boys ain't very smart. They live in a shack on the place, but we have to look after them. It's hard to keep them at work, and they sure don't like to be told what to do."
Carrie dumped the soft bread dough onto the bread board, kneaded it vigorously for a few minutes, and rolled and cut it into biscuit with a pound baking powder can. Carefully she placed row after row of the biscuits in a large flat pan and set them in the oven to bake. Wiping her hands on the corner of her apron, she opened the back door and went out to the wash place, picked up an iron kettle, and returned to the kitchen.
"Here's the rest of our dinner. I had it cooking on the fire by the wash pot." From the pot she dished up a big hunk of fat meat, a bowl of green beans and another of turnip greens.
"It's a big responsibility to look after a family these days. Even if you don't have to feed all of them, you've got to look after them in one way or another. There's Bud's other brother. He's a no-count something if ever I saw one. His wife's the laziest white woman living. But he's got three nice Children, almost grown now. I do lots for them and learn them to keep their chins up if they have to die hard doing it."
Carrie went into the front bedroom and brought back a picture of a bearded man, stiffly posed in a chair before a photographer's backdrop showing a balustraded Italian garden.
"This is my pa. He came to see me last May. I've been crying and wishing for a father for forty-two years then when one comes a handsome wealthy one that a body ought to be proud of I could have none of him. He jist seemed to drop out of the sky, and expected me to be glad to see him, but I soon showed him he wasn't welcome."
Carrie took the picture back to the bedroom and returned with a ring having a tiny diamond. "He give me this, too, and left that picture. I didn't want them but he talked so pitiful about the way I treated him. He said that he left my mother because friends told him that was the best thing to do. He says he had never forgot her. After my mother refused to go with him, he married. He's now a prosperous farmer in Indiana. His wife died about two months ago. She knowed all about my mother and me, but he never told his son because he said he would be like me and never forgive him. He told some old friends that he come to buy a farm and give to me. I guess I did act plumb crazy but the hide-bound madness of forty years had to come out. Guess me and my mother both acted like fools, but I jist couldn't abide him."
She put on the ring and turned it slowly in the light to see the diamond sparkle. "Jist wonder if I'll ever see or hear from him again. Guess there's nothing for me but hard work. I'll educate my children if they'll take it, but I want more than anything that they turn out respectable. Maybe by the time they are old enough to make their own way, we can git an old age pension. I sure don't want us to be a weight hung around their necks.