FREE LANCE PREACHER
Name:	Luther and Sally Comer
Address:	Yadkinville, N. C.
Occupation:	Self-styled preacher
Writer:	Clalee Dunnagan
Revisor:	Claude Dunnagan
FREE LANCE PREACHER
(Luther Comer and Wife)
Luke lives with his wife Sally, and five children in a four-room L-shaped house on the top of a knoll several hundred yards from the road. Sally is 33 but doesn’t look it. Her face has lines and shows worry and hard work, but it is a baby-face, with soft eyes and thin lips.
She comes out on the porch with "Howdye do. Won’t ye come in an’ sat?” A little barefoot boy in overalls runs in to the Ronda land comes out with another chair. Bally sits down. She is large in the middle, and her flashy hips hang over the sides of the chair like a fertilizer sack on a rail fence.
"I reckon you’re wonderin’ why there ain’t no erope out in the field this tine o’ year an’ all the land's got weeds on it.
It’s been that a way ever since Luke got inspired to preach for the Lord, two years ago, as I recollect. We was doin’ pretty good till he took to goin’ around from Church to Church an’ pleadin’ for the sinners to come in to God. He claims it’s his life worse now an’ ain’t done a lick o’ work around the farm since he started doin’ it. I ain’t never got mad at Luke for doin’ nothin’, but it seems like he’d spend a little tine around have an’ try to raise somethin’ for his young ‘uns, what with all the good land around here goin’ to waste.”
A child begins crying inside the house. Sally goes in and comes out with the baby, a little girl less than a year old. "She's been cryin’ a lot lately. I’m beginnin’ to believe she's gettin' some kind of ailment, 'cause she won’t eat hardly nothin', not even my own milk. There must be something wrong with it, 'cause it looks sorta blue. I been intending to go to town an’ see the county nurse but it seems like I can't ever get away, an’ we ain't got money to pay no doctor's bills.
“I’ve had it hard all mu life so I’m use to it. Reckon I could get along anywhere.
"I don't remember much about my father except that he was a liquor dealer and got run out of the state into South Carolina. I was a little girl then, and my mother took me and left my father because she didn't want me raised up in a bootlegger's home. We went back to North Carolina and just before mother died she got the welfare people to look after me. They took me to Greensboro and put me in a home just outside town……it was a farm-house. I was supposed to work for my keep, and I really did. Why they treated me just like I was a man, or a horse. I was just a regular field hand. Soon as I got there I started workin' in the field, from sunup till dark. I learned how to run a corn planter an' hoe an' shuck corn an' sucker tobacco. I did a lot of plowin', too. Reckon that's why my back’s so strong today, an' I've been able to carry on like I have. I was almost grown before I started to school but I got through the third grade an' learned to read an' write a little. I'd have got further but my foster-mother went to the welfare office and told them that I wasn't learning fast enough so they let her take me out of school, and from then I had to work in the field all through the year. I recollect that two years straight I planted all the corn by myself and gathered most of it.
"Then one day, my foster-mother and me had an argument, an’ that night, I packed what few things I had an' went to the Smith’s house, down the road a piece. Then I went to Burlington and got a job in a boarding house, where I made five dollars a week and my keep.
"I guess I was so tore up I just couldn't stay one place long. I got to ramblin' around, goin’ from one place to another, till I got tired of everything. Then, I went back to Burlington and got work in a cafe for a dollar a day and meals. I had to work all day an' most o’ the night there. I got tired o' that too, an’ pretty soon I left Burlington an’ went back to the Smith's to stay for a while. One week-end, I went with them on a trip up in Yadkin County to visit some of their kinfolks. One of 'em was a young man an’ when I first talked to him I knew I liked him. That was Luke. Next week I went back to the Smith's an' got my things. We was married the next Sunday at the Church near his home.
"Luke was about thirty years old then an' hadn't ever been away from home. He'd been livin' with his mother an' father all his life while all his brothers and sisters had got married off.
"Pretty soon after we got married, his mother died, an' me an' Luke sorta took over the farm to run it. 'Course his father lived on with us, but he never did much work…..sorta lazy an' easy-goin’. He said he was mighty glad to have a woman around the house.
"Me an' Luke went right to work in the field an' put out a good crop that year. What time I wasn't workin' in the field, I was in the house cookin', washin' or cleanin' up. We got along alright till I got pregnant....awfully pregnant. I was so fat I couldn't hardly walk. Luke joked about it an’ said I musta been carryin' a elephant. It wasn't funny though, 'cause I got pretty bad sick an' had to go to the hospital. I had a miscarriage. They was twins, both born dead. The doctor said it was brought on by hard work, an' I had beater take it easy or I'd ruin myself. He said it'd kill me if I tried to have another baby. It hurt awful bad to hear him say that cause I was anxious to have some children of my own.
“I took a long rest an' let Luke do most o' the work, an' in less than a year I was pregnant again. I didn't go to no hospital that time, an' I want you to know that I didn't have hardly no pain that time, an' the baby was just as healthy as any I ever saw. That doctor didn't know much about women and babies, that said I'd die if I had another one. I've had five since then.
"’Bout a year after my first baby was born, Luke's father had a stroke of paralysis. We had to be with him all the time almost, waitin' on him an' takin' care of him. We didn't get out much of a crop that year, an' had to sell some of the land to live. In the spring, he got better an' was able to get about some, though we still had to sorta wait on him.
“That was back when the County Nurse lived down the road a piece, and almost every day after she got in she'd come in an' help me with the babies....I had three by then. She was awful good. Sometimes she'd bring candy an' flowers to Luke's father, and she always had some medicine when the children got sick, but she's been moved away for a long time now an’ I ain't had no help from the county office for nigh onto three years.
Then one day Luke's father was out pickin’ plums from an old tree in the front yard. It ain't here anymore, only the dead stump. It got struck by lightnin’ one night an' spilt open. Anyway, I was settin' on the porch stringin' beans and sorta watohin' pappy when all of a sudden, he seemed to sway a little an' then fell to the ground. Nobody else was at home than so I ran out in the yard an’ picked 'im up, as well as I could.....you see he was awful heavy, weighted nearly two hundred pounds. He was limp an' groanin' somethin' awful, an' it scared me 'cause I didn't know what was the matter unless it was some more o’ that paralysis.
“I tried to pick ‘im up but it wasn't no use. I couldn't hardly get his head off the ground. Then I figgored to get shold o’ his arms an' try to drag ‘im in the house, but it was all uphill an' I couldn't even do that. Then I heard ole Dobbin neighin' 'round in his stable an' that give me an idea. I run to the barn an’ put the harness an' bridle on him, then I clucked ‘im up an’ drove ‘im over to where pappy was layin’ on the ground. Ole Dobbin musta sorta £ knowed what was wrong an’ what I wanted of ‘im, cause he sidled up right beside pappy an’ stopped. Then I took the harness rope an’ wrapped it around pappy’s waist an’ tied a knot in it.
"Ole Dobbin looked sorts uncertain a minute an’ when I clucked ‘im up he didn't hardly know which way to go, so I run an' opened the door to the house an' came back an’ pulled the reins toward the porch. He stopped at the steps for a minute an' then walked right up on the porch, draggin’ pappy behind ’im. I clucked ‘im right on into the house. It took a lot o’ liftin’ to get pappy up the steps, but when I finally did, ole Dobbin was already goin’ out the back-door. Then I untied the rope an’ made a pallet on the floor for pappy to lay on. They wasn’t nothin’ I could do till Luke got back, so I went out an’ put Dobbin back in the stable, an’ came back to watch over pappy till somebody came.
"When Luke an’ the young ‘uns finally came, we got him into bad an’ Luke ran over to Tom Jenkin’s house to barrow a car an’ run an’ get the doctor. Just after Luke left, Pappy sorta raised up in the bed, let out one awful groan, an' didn't move no more. He was dead when the doctor an’ Luke got back.
"After the buryin’ we had to sell four acres o' land to pay the undertaker. We still had enough to raise a good crop o’ tobacco on but 'bout that time, Luke got down with some kind ‘o ailment, an’ when the doctor came, he said he had paralysis just like pappy. That scared me almost to death. That night I sat there beside Luke's bed washin' his forehead with a wet rag. He was in a fever an’ didn't hardly know what was goin' on most o’ the time. I kept askin’ God not to take ‘im like pappy ‘cause I'd wanta die too, if Luke want.
"They must be somethin' to prayer like the preachers says, 'cause Luke didn't die. He didn't get plumb well, but he was outta bed in two more weeks. It seems like he didn't have it bad like pappy.
"Maybe God just gave 'im strength to fight it off. The only way you could tell he was sick was his face. It sorta drawad his skin up around his mouth an' it makes ‘im look like he’s grinnin’ all the time."
At that moment, an ancient Ford rattles up to the front of the house. Someone gets out and the oar moves on.
"That’s Luke now. He's been over to the prison camp preachin’ to the convicts. He goes over 'bout twice a week an' holds meetin’ an’ directs the singin’. It sure gives him a heap o’ pleasure 'cause he don't never do nothin' 'cept that."
Luke comes in and takes a seat on the edge of the porch.
"Awfully hot today. Hare a chew? Ho thanks, don't smoke.
Been shewin' ever since the first time I went to a curin', forty years ago, an' I reckon I'll be a spittin' juice when I get to heaven, the Lord willin'. The Bible don't say nothing 'bout it bein' a sin, an' it sure keeps your mouth clean, kills germs, too.
"Had a nice meetin' today at the camp, 'cept for the singin'.
I swan, some o’ them fellers couldn't carry a tune if it was in a bucket. 'Course they try, an’ they're learnin’ fast, but it sure is a job teachin' 'em."
Two little boys who have been watering an old lop-eared mule at the water barrel come up and shyly sit on the porch steps. Luke hardly notices them.
"Yessir, I reckon I was 'bout as mean as they make ‘em back 'fore I got converted to the Lord. I was just lucky not to get slapped on the road myself. I guess I was full o' more cuss words than a peg-legged sailor in them days, an' they say I shore did use 'em when I had a couple o' snorts in me. But that time's gone for good, now. I ain't touched a drop in eight year. Sally'll tell you that, won't you, Sally?"
"Not as I recollect, Luke. You been sober for good spell, now."
"That's right, an’ no more cussin' an' swearin', either. Why when I think how close I was onto the verge o’ dyin' an' how the Lord answered our prayers an’ let me live, it makes me sorta ashamed o’ myself. I've made up for it, though, if savin' souls for 'im is the Godly way. I guess I've converted five hundred sinners since I been preabhin'.
"Preachin's sorta like any other business, 'cept you got to be honest 'bout it. You can't tell ‘em lies and cheat ‘em. First off, you got to study the Bible an' learn about how Jesus taught the apostles an' go out an’ teach the people the same way. You got to listen to their troubles and try to help 'em out 'o' their misery by tellin' 'em how Jesus suffered an' was resurrected.
"Nope, they don't pay me nothin', that is, not in cash, but they give me shoes an’ clothes an’ a lot o’ food. I been tryin' to show 'em what it'll mean to the county if they'll just get me some kind o' second hand car so I can get from one church to another, but they ain't done nothin' about it yet, an' I don't know whether they will or not. They like me a lot, but it seems like they're awful slow when it comes to raisin' money for some way to serve God.
“I don't have reg'lar preachin' times, but most o' the time I try to get two or three churches of a Sunday after the reg'lar services is over, an' the gag'lar preacher lets me preach to 'em for 'bout half an hour then. I take up collection now an’ then an’ get enough to feed Sally an' the young 'uns on.
"I'd go back to farmin' for a livin' but since the Lord saved my life I feel like I owe my services to him, an' they sure is a lot of the devil in this world that needs preachin' away. You just got to keep the fear o' hell in the peoples minds an' they'll come to God for salvation, alright. I know the land around the house is gettin' in pretty bad shape, but so is the souls of men, an’ if a man ain't got the fear of God in his heart he ain't worth savin'.
"Me an’ Sally don't care nothln’ 'bout polities, 'cause that's where a lot o' sin lies. If the politicians would get rid of the devil in 'em this country’d get rid of a lot o’ misery, 'cause they're the leaders an' most folks just follow the way they go, an’ most o' the time they're headin' straight to hell. I use to tell Sally if I get a chencet to preach to them politicians I'd make 'em get down on their knees an' ask God to forgive 'em their evil doin's.
"Well, now, I wouldn't say that there ain't some good men that's politicians. I believe this Roosevelt has got the love o’ God in his heart, 'cause any man that's done as much for the common workin' people as he has surely must he Godfearing’.”
