July 26th 1939
Gus McKene ( Kantontinos Kokens )
1417 West Trade St.,
Charlotte, N.C.
Cafe Owner
Dudley W Crawford, Writer
Original Names Not Changed
"GUS"
Gus MoKone, whose real name is Kantantinos Kokens runs a combination café, delicatessen, and smoke shop on the outskirts of the business section of Charlotte, Ha has no "hired help ", but sometimes accepts the services of his American wife during the rush hours, which are from eleven to one o'clock when the employees of the near by bakery and laundry are out for lunch. He enjoys the friendship of all his regular customers, but does not especially care for strangers or those who drop in occasionally. While ha apparently resents the continuous stream of youngsters from the public playground near his place asking for a drink of water or a "sucker": he really loves then all and would be lonesome without them a fact the children all understand, and they take his "balling outs" with a wink for their pals and a smile for Gus.
He is a Greek of the "old school", and has no patience with the trend of American civilization and especially as it pertains to the youth of this country. Having served as a soldier in the Greek army during the Balkan War, and never tiring in his recital of the military exploite of both ancient and modern Greeks, he believes that the United States should have a system of compulsory military training. Strict discipline in the home, law observance in public, and respect for the rights and wishes of their elders, in his estimation, constitutes the only' salvation of American youth. Upon this philosophy he has reared his four children, all of whom have won for themselves places of prominence in the business and social life of the community.
He grows eloquent in his recital of the causes which wrecked his country's civilization in ancient times and draws a striking analogy between practices in those days and the present time here in America. The freedom and independence of the American youth, and their resentment against the ordinary parental restraint are heading this nation for the "rooks", according to Gus, From his experience he relates the following story which he thinks proves the importance of properly handling youthful delinquency:
I suppose I was about twelve years old. One day my father sent me to town with a lamb to sell. I had to cross a county line where we had to pay a small tax, or take a ticket which was to be paid after the commodity was sold. I decided to act smart and left the highway at the line and dodged the tak man. While I was selling the lamb at the market an officer up and asked if I had a ticket from the tax collector. I told him I came in before he had taken up his post and it was too cold for me to wait until he came on duty. "All right", "I will take your coat till you sell the lamb and pay the tax." It was terribly cold and I didn't want to give up my coat, but there was nothing else to do. I went from one market place to another trying to sell that lamb, it was poor and hard to sell I got so cold I was miserable before I finally made a deal. When the dealer asked for my tax receipt I was unable to produce it, so he called a policeman and had me taken to jail.
"Well, there I was in Jail, shivering in the cold without my coat. In the afternoon I was hailed into court and received a sentence of ten days in the work house. In the meantime my parents had come to investigate, learned the circumstances and went book home without making any attempt to have me released-they knew it was no use it was not a reglar prison where all sorts of criminals were together, but a place of setsntion I was given light tasks all by myself; none of the others knew who I was or what I had done; I was tronted kindly and made comfortable I stand that allright, but the thought of facing my parents ande so miserable. When I returned home-and was I glad-I was welcomed as if I had returned the sane day I left No mention was ever made of my crime, and I received in my mind to avoid such a thing in the future. Can you Imagine anything like that happening here is America? My father was reasonably prominent; We were considered one or the best families in the valley where we lived, but that didn't get me anything when I broke the law.
"I may be wrong, but I feel like American parents will have to adopt some method of control over their children. Now look at that bunch back there around, that counter I happen to know they live more than a mile from here-they got no business here-, and If I don't watch thm they will slip something in their pocket If they did I wouldn't have them arrested because their parents would stand up for them and maybe say that I was mistaken.
If they were taken to court the Judge would probably release then with a lecture. I am not boasting, but Greece in practically free from serious crimes, and it is because they have always strictly enforced the laws."
Although not an educated man, Gus is well-informed about the history of his country; is familiar with Greek mythology and ancient literature Its gets enthused in his description of the natural beauty of his country According to his, its fields are the richestx in the world, its skies the brightest and its sunshine is the most soothing and gentle. He quotes Byron's tribute to Greece, and for obvious reasons considers him the greatest of all the Englis poets.
"Yes, I am going back to Greece I want to spend a vacation in Athens. You can't imagine what a grand time one can have there. Everyone is happy and gay, and who wouldn't be there? It is truly God's country."
"No, I'm not condencing America, it is only that I interested in herm future. I am merely speaking as an American citizen. This is also 'God's Country', but it is so new and has grown so fast I am afraid we are not placing the main emphasis where it belongs. We have so many things to do, so many places to go, so much leisure time to devote to recreation, and so much freedom, we forget the importance of quiet hours devoted to meditation, study end relaxation. I feel that we ought to slow down. However, I love America and am thankful for the opportunities she has afforded me and my children-America first and then Greece.
