Alabama
Mandy Johnson
Cottage Hill
Mobile, Alabama
Ila B. Prine
Mobile, Alabama.
MANDY JOHNSON, MIDWIFE.
Mandy Johnson, a colored midwife, who was born two years after the close of the Civil War, or after the S'render, as Mandy expressed it, is a native of Cottage Hill, Mobile County, Alabama. Mandy's father, Levi Johnson had always worked for Mr. Labusan who had a big farm and dairy. He raised chickens, hogs, and ran a vegetable wagon for Mr. Labuzan.
Mandy said she remembered her father's visits down on the creek nearby, to get mash or swill to feed the hogs. She said that someone had a whiskey still and Mr. Labusan got the swill to feed the hogs, "'cause it was good to fatten dem on."
"I remember one time," Mandy stated, "when I was a little bitty gal, one ob mah brudders an' me would go wid ay father to git de swill, an' when he would put it in de trough, we would put a clean board on one end an' drink out ob dat end, an' it sure was good. 'Course it made de hogs an' us drunk, but it was fine. Dere was six ob us chillen, three boys an' three girls, an' we always lived out here at College Hill, an' father allus worked for Mr. Labusan, an' now l'se got Chillan working for his son."
While Mandy was talking about her father, Rosie her daughter went into the house and came back on the porch with a large shirt, that had belonged to Mandy's father. It was made of old hickory cloth, and was an enormous shirt, nearly as broad as long. Mandy said her father was a big man, over six feet tall, and that he was compelled to stoop to enter the door of the house. The shirt still retained its color, but was beginning to break in places.
When Rosie brought the shirt out, it seemed to make Mandy sad, for she shook her head, and said:
"De old folks am pretty much dead out; dere's just a few lef'. Guess you ain't neber seed any dis here kinda cloth? 'cause dey don't make cloth lak dat any more. It tuk some cloth to make him a shirt."
"How long has your father been dead, Mandy?" I asked.
"I done seed so much trouble, dat I can't remember ebery thing but I knows dat my father's been dead a long time. "When I was little I useta he'p gather eggs for Hiss Labuzan. You knows dey had so many chickens an' lots ob land for dem to run on so dey jes laid all ober de place. De way Miss Labuzan would git us to work hard was, she would gib us loaf sugar for de mos' eggs us would fin'. You know us didn't hab sugar den lak us does now, it was in little loafs, so pretty an' white. I can remember de pretty silver tongs dey had to pick it up wid. Gentlemen, I'd run 'til I'd be broke down so I'd git de mos' sugar. I'd put it in my pocket an' carry it home an' eat it. My! It was good."
"Dat's been a long time ago. Jes think, I's been livin' here on dis place for more'n fifty years. See dat big oak out dere? My husband planted dat, when it was a li'l switch, an' dat pecan tree dere, I planted when I fust moved here. All twelve ob my chillen was born here, an' now dere's only six or seven ob 'em livin'. My husband useta work in a sawmill, 'till he got his leg broke an' it gib him blood poison. Den after dat he would go each year to Louisiana an' work in de sugar mills. Dat was when I tuk up bein' a midwife. Shucks! dere's plenty folks aroun' what's got grown chillen, dat I caught. I'se still got my papers, but I ain't able to 'tend now. I guess dey'll soon 'be comin' out an' take up ray papers 'cause I's gettin' so old."
The daughter Rosie then spoke up, and said she was a midwife, hut hadn't got her papers yet.
Mandy said, "No, an' you better not 'tend anybody 'til you does git 'em. Things is shore different now dan dey was in my young days. De doctors won't let you do lots of things now, that us useta do, but I tells you de women got along better in dem days dan de women do now. Why, when de women started in labor, us would put an ax under de bed so it would cut de pain. Anudder thing us would put de husbands hat on de wife's head.
"Some ob de things us gib de women, would be gopher grass tea. It grows in de woods wild. It make dem hab an easier time, an' den dere was times when de pains would stop an' den us would gib dem black pepper tea to make pains. It would stir up de pains, when dey would let up. An' don' let me forgit to tell you, dat dirt dauber tea was good too.
"When de babies got here us washed dem an' put dere clothes on, but let me tell you sometimes us didn't put all dat strong medicine in dere eyes lak dey do now. Dat stuff jus' nearly puts dey eyes out, it's so strong. You sees mo' folks wearin' glasses now dan dey eber did years ago. What us did, was wash de babies eyes out wid dere wet diapers, an' dat is de bes' thing for dem you can do. Then us would take a piece of linen an' put in de stove an' brown it real brown an' put it over de nabal cord, to make de cord come off folks jus' don't know how to take keer ob babies dese days, dey hardly puts no bindin' on dem a tall.
"Atter us git de babies all fixed up, den us would git a soft, white, rag an' put a lit'le sugar an' butter in it an' gib dem to suck. You call dat 'pap.'
"When de babies gits a day or two old dey usually breaks out wid de hives, but us didn't hab much trouble wid dem; jus' keep dem out ob de wind and git 'em broke out good. You knows dat little babies like a li'l whiskey toddy anyhow, an' dat's what we'd gib dem to make dem break out. Babies hab de thrash, too, eben grown folks hab dat. De bes' remedy for dat is take sheep saffron and tie in a rag an' make a tea out ob it. Jus' put it on de back ob de stove an' let it steep awhile. Anudder good thing, for thrash, is git a long white burr off ob a pine tree an' stick in de chimbley an' as it dries, de thrash will dry up too."
While Mandy was talking three of her grand children came in, and the youngest boy, who was low and fat and as black as a coal, was smoking a home-made cigaret of rabbit tobacco. Rosie, aunt, scolded him and told him to go on out in the yard with that stuff, because she did not like the smell of it. But Mandy said: "I likes to smell it. You know dat rabbit tobacco is de same as life everlastin' an' when I gits a cold, de chillen goes out in de fiel and gits it for me an' makes me a big cigaret of it, so I kin smoke it. Dere's plenty ob it out dere in my fiel'. I'se got nine acres aroun' here, but I can't eben hab a garden any mo' 'cause I'se not able to work it.
"De way I lib now is jes' wid Rosie, dis here daughter workin' for Miss Labuzan, an', too, Miss Labusan is allus sendin' me things. When I gits sick she gits me medicine. I promised her l'd git her some sassafras roots to put in her tea. She laks it in dis bought tea. Says it gibs de tea a good flavor. Horse mint is good for fever an' colds too. Talking 'bout sassafras, eber body don't know all 'bout it, 'cause dere's two kinds, de white and de red. De white ain't no good, so you has to be keerful when gettin' it.
"As long as I was able to 'tend de women, I was able to take keer oh myself atter ay husband died. I usually stayed ten days wid 'em while dey was layin' in. Dey paid anywhere from five to ten dollars for my stayin'. Now dat I'se not able to 'ten 'em I has to depend on Rosie here to take care ob me. Ebery thing is so different; nothin' de same. My chillen's all married an' some dead, I los' two grown daughters jus' las' year. I allus know when trouble's a-comin' 'cause if my rooster crows at my back door, I knows they's something wrong. If he comes to the front door and crow dere's a stranger comin."
Rosie the daughter, spoke up, and said:
"I believes in dreams too, 'cause the other night I dreamed my boy, what is twenty-one years old, come to me naked and plumb wet with sweat, an' I tried several times to pick him up an' each time he would slip out ob my hand, an' I told Ma 'bout it, so jes' yesterday my sister's boy Albert come a-tellin' me that his wife had died, from eatin' rabbit; and I said that's what my dream meant."
While Mandy and Rosie were talking, Mandy's youngest girl came in from the rear of the house, and stood by a window that opened on the front porch. Then Mandy said, pointing to her:
"That gal is ray youngest, but I can't do nothin' wid her. See, she's got her throat tied up an' is allus somethin' wrong wid her. All de young folks think ob now is good times. Here jus' a while back she was in de hospital in Mobile, an' dey couldn't find out what was ailin' her, so she den had to go to New Orleans, an' she stayed dere six weeks, but she won't take keer ob herself. She laks all dis here dancin' and frolickin' aroun', an' if she don't quit it, it's gwine to kill her, and she's the mother of twelve chillen. Laws-a-mercy! I don' neber sing none ob dem foolish songs. My favorite songs is de good ol' songs lak, 'De ol' Time Religion,' 'I'se "been toilin' at the hill so long an' 'Thank God another morning come.' Guess I ought not be too hard on de young folk's songs 'cause I useta bus' 'em wide open when I did sing dem."
Personal interview with Mandy Johnson,
Cottage Hill, Mobile, County, Alabama.
November 22, 1938.
Washington Copy
11/30/33
L.H.