Date of first writing:	December 28, 1938
Person interviewed:	John Wheedbee Cox: (white)
Address:	127 S. Salisbury St.
Place:	Raleigh, N. C.
Occupation:	Shoe salesman (retired)
Writer:	W. B. Sedberry
Revisers:	W. J. Sadler, Edwin Massengill
<text not clear>
JOHN WHEEDBEE COX
"I believe every person and everything is put on earth for some special purpose, and I can prove that in my Bible."
Those were the words I heard as I entered the door of a friend's room in which John Wheedbee Cox was standing. John picked up a Bible from a table, his hands trembling so that he could hardly hold it, and began to turn the pages.
"I have traveled all over the United States praying and studying, trying to visualize my mission here on earth," he said. "I have slept on top of mountains, and I have slept on grassy plains with nothing but a blanket over me. While I was out in those open spaces all alone I would pray, study the moon and the stars and all of the heaven, then I would look down at the ground and study the earth. And it was only fifteen years ago that the vision came to me telling me what my mission here on earth is.
"Now, if it's my life history that you want you will have to come to my room some other time for that," he continued. "My life isn't so good, but if you want to know about my work and life come over to my room some day and I will tell you all about it. I live at 127 South Salisbury Street here in Raleigh."
Two days later John was at home. The house in which he lives is maintained by the State and County Welfare Departments as a place of shelter for unfortunates. At the back of the hall on the first floor a piece of wire, on which is hung a black curtain and a dingy sheet, is noticeable. At the point where the sheet and curtain meet is the entrance to John's quarters. These curtains serve to enclose a portion of the back porch for him.
He is a grey-haired man with a whitish grey, beard- covered face, and he is usually found pecking at the keyboard of an old typewriter given him some years ago. Two Bibles were beside the typewriter, and in the room were several old calendars and two red signs with silver lettering, one of which read, "God Bless Our Home," and the other reading "I Am The Resurection And The Life." On one side of the table, which was made from a box, was a single bed with two faded quilts and a pillow. Against the wall was a white cabinet containing four drawers, and on this was a small picture of Christ and three small bags of flour labeled "Not to be sold." Just beneath his chair was a coffee can he uses as a cuspidor.
John pushed out the rocking chair, then took the straight-back chair in front of his typewriter. "I remember; you're the man that wanted my life history. Well you're looking at it right here. My work is my whole life and these books," he said, pointing to four loose-leaf notebooks, "contain 18,000 verses of the Bible in alphabetical order."
"Yes, I am a southerner. I was born in the town of Hertford, Perquimans County, in 1870. I am the oldest of six children, and all of them are dead now but one of my brothers. He lives down in southern Georgia. I was down to see him two years ago, and he was running a small cafe just a bit better than a hot dog stand. I told him as much sense as he had and as good a family as he came from he didn't have any business down there; he ought to get out and do some good for humanity.
"My father was a college graduate. He graduated from what is now Guilford College and was a school teacher, lecturer, and writer. He wrote a history book if anybody wants to know. I am Scotch and English by birth, but I am a bit Irish, too. It comes in from the Wheedbees.
"My grandfather gave so much money to a college up in Asheville, or near there, that a scholarship was left there for the boys that came along in the family and it never was used, because there won't any born until I came along and I wouldn't take it. I believe you can learn more from traveling. That is an education, seeing things, for what you see nobody can take away from you" When I was small my daddy would teach me from the old Blue-Back Speller. Then there was a country school near home and I went to that a little while. I remember when we got a dictionary to study out of. It was Webster's, and we all were lined up for a spelling bee. The word 'governor' was given out, and nobody in the whole line could spell it until it got to the last one in line. That was my brother, and he spelled it and went to the head of the class. I have never forgotten from that day how to spell governor.
"My mother was a well educated woman also, but I can't remember what college she attended. She was not the student my father was. My father was a very quiet man and studied and read about sill the time. He was in the War Between the States. A bullet hit him in the leg, and they sent him home from the army. He went in the retail business and sold everything from groceries to horse collars. He was just too conscientious, and letting stuff out on credit broke him.
"We moved on the farm then and made a fair living until he had two congested chills from working, so we left it. He never was good and well again. The doctor told him he thought a change in climate would do him good, so he moved to Nags Head and died there.
"Speaking of Bible prophets, you know, we have prophets these days. The night of the Charleston earthquake Daddy was sitting down in the front room writing. We were living in Hertford at the time, and Mother and we kids were upstairs ready for bed. Daddy had just written that in case of an earthquake on the Atlantic seaboard it would hit Charleston, South Carolina, the hardest. Well, that's where it hit the hardest. My father was a student who knew the geographical outlay of practically the whole world. Then again, after my father had moved to Nags Head he told me one day that he wanted to live long enough to see people travel through the air. Now, that is a coincidence that he should die just twelve miles from Kitty Hawk where the first flight was made.
"When Daddy died in 1885, I got my first job. It was with the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, working in the office. I held that job for about a year and quit it to take one with the Pullman Palace Car Company. Mother was such a religious sort of person that she wouldn't let me keep this job because I would have to work on Sundays. 'No Sir,' she said, 'no child of mine will ever work on Sunday.' That sure did go against me for I wanted that job. But I didn't keep it for Mother's word was law. I got a job in a retail shoe store and pretty soon I was making eight dollars a week, which was good money in those days. Then I got a raise to twelve dollars a week which was top price and a good living in that day and time.
"My mother died in 1887 and I went to Baltimore and worked for the best sho store there. They soon put me out on the road as a traveling salesman and paid me $75 a month and all my expenses. I made good on that job. The president of the company told me I led all the other salesman in service. I traveled through the West, Southwest, and Southern states. When Cleveland's panic came along you couldn't sell anything. There was not any money and the mills, sawmills especially, were paying off in bat hides. Bat hides? They were something like little metal disks, and that's what they used for money. The only place they could be spent was at the mill's commissary. That's the mill-owned store, if you don't know that.
"Yes, I was married once. But don't say any more about women. This is my life and I don't want her mentioned. She died about a year after we were married. I was twenty-one when we were married and she was from Virginia. We had no children. What was her name? Didn't I tell you not to say anything about her. Well, I mean that. If you were just an ordinary reporter I would tell you in so many words, that prying into my personal affairs was none of your business.
"This work here in front of me is my whole life at this time and I have nothing to do with anything else and am not going to have until I can get it finished and published. I wonder if you couldn't tell me how I could get a few dollars on some of my work just to bridge me over until I can get this finished? It is mighty hard for me to make ends meet. I have to get paper and little things like that, but God has always showed me a way and I believe He always will so long as I do His work.
"When Cleveland's panic got so bad I could not sell any shoes I quit traveling and went to New York and got a job in the biggest shoe store there. I got tired of that for I knew that travel was the best education a man could have, so they asked me to go and take charge of the Baltimore store until they asked me to go and get a local manager. Well, I stayed there a few months and taught a man the business.
"I left on my own then, just traveling and praying, and I would walk, go by train or any way I could get around. When my money would run short I would get a job, as a cook most of the time. I must say I am the best when it comes to cooking. I have worked in the largest hotels in the country from coast to coast. I liked cooking because in those days people would pay big money for a good cook. I was my own boss and the head cook even tells the landlord where to get off.
"Ha, ha," he laughed, "I remember one evening I had finished my work in one of the larger hotels on the West Coast and had gone up to the bar for a drink, a mug of beer I suppose. I got in a conversation with two or three men and was telling them some of the things of the world when the bartender came and told me that two very- distinguished Germans would like to speak with me. They were standing at the bar having their drinks when I approached them in right much of an awed way, for I had never seen them before and could not understand just what two such aristocratic-looking people would like to see me about. Just when I got to them the bartender came over and introduced us. They asked me to have a drink and I accepted, still wondering in the back of my head what could be their business with me. After we had a drink they asked me if I had ever traveled through the Old Country. I told them I hadn't. Then they wanted to know where I had learned so much about it and how I could relate about it in the most minute details without going over there and seeing it. I told them I had traveled quite a bit in this country and read quite a bit. They then asked who my father was and I told them. 'Well, they said, 'that is where your knowledge came from. It was commuted to you from him.' We had quite a talk over two or three more drinks."
He had reared way back in his chair and had his hands in the pockets of the old soiled pair of khaki pants he was wearing. He threw back his head, his grey hair overlapping his coat collar. The coat with blue lapels was of khaki also. Underneath his coat he wore an old knitted sweater which had grease spots all the way down the front. His sweater was buttoned up tightly as the temperature was almost at the freezing point and there was no place for a fire in his quarters.
"Oh, I had another experience out there. I was working as head steward for Miss Mamie, who was Irish and had married a Dane. They ran the swankiest inn on the coast at that time and about every afternoon after I finished my work she would meet me at the bar and kid me about being a traveling salesman. She wanted to know all of the things I did. On this particular afternoon she was down at the end of the bar talking to a young man. She called me to come over.
"I want you to meet a friend of mine who is a shoe salesman too,' she said.
"In a very sneering way he asked, 'Where did you ever sell shoes?'
"I told him about the houses I had worked for in New York and Baltimore.
"'Well,' he inquired, 'if you are so good why aren't you still selling shoes?'
"'Well,' I says to him, 'how much money are you making?'
"'Oh,' he said, 'I am manager of the store and I have just received a raise to seventeen dollars a week.'
"I just laughed in his face and said, 'That's the reason I am not selling shoes. I am making thirty-five dollars a week with my room, board and laundry thrown in free.' You should have seen that man leave. He didn't say good-bye to anybody, just walked out the door.
"The West was booming, building more railroads, and timber was plentiful. The sawmills were running full time, and the mining camps were paying off big. Boy, oh boy, the West in those days was the place to be.
"I got tired of it, though, and decided I would come back home. I got to Richmond, Virginia, stopped over there for a few days, and while I was there my vision came to me. Just think, after all those years of wandering around the world, studying and learning, I had to come almost home to get what I wanted.
"One night while I was sleeping there appeared two very tall pillars all shrouded in black crepe. On top of these pillars was a light. I went in between the pillars and it led me into a church. While I was in there I went right up to the altar and a voice said to me, 'You are about to receive a great gift.' I left the church and the next day a lady met me on the street and gave me a Bible.
"Well, that was my mission, to read and study and write about the Bible. I read it through and decided I should write 'The Beginning,' which is the beginning of time from the Bible. I started and I could not find the information I wanted in the Bible. I knew it was there but where I didn't know. I read it through again and in a little while I ran across something else I had not been able to find before. This kept up until I had read my Bible through seven times. That was my trouble; I could not find readily the information I wanted and needed to complete my story. I then put my story aside and started this Concordance of the Bible.
"You see here," he said as he picked up a loose-leaf notebook and opened it to typewritten verses of the Bible in alphabetical form. "I have three more sets like that. The one you. have there takes you through the letter 'H' Every verse of any importance will be right where you can easily find it. I have about two more months of work to do on it and it will be ready for the press. Then I've got to get a publisher.
"You can see what a handicap I have been working under. My hands shake so bad I can't use a pen at all. The doctor said it was palsy. I just have to peck it out on my old relic of a typewriter which a friend, gave me long ago. It wouldn't write this morning, and I couldn't print a letter. I turned it over to see what was keeping it from printing and I found where I had been putting some gasoline on it to make it write easier that the gas and dust had all lunged up under it. I washed all that out and now she's going O.K. I 've never even changed the ribbon on it.
"My eyes are not any good either. You see those magnifying glasses there? Well, I have to use the large one on all small print, and for fine dates this little one here is the one I use."
John reached over with his trembling hands, picked up his spectacles, bowed his head to meet his hands, put them on and continued, "These glasses are as strong as I can get. That makes three glasses I have to use. My eyes have never been any good for close work. I inherited visionary eyes. I can see things way off, and it surely has been hard on me to do this work but I'm about to reach my goal.
"I went to see the Mitchell Printing Company about printing this for me and they were very interested in it, but couldn't get to it until the fall of the year. That was two years ago. I only had 6,500 verses then.
"I went to Pentacostal, that's the Church of God. There I found where my mistake was after talking to some of the preachers. I did not have enough, so I came back and started to work on it again and now I have 18,000 verses, or I will have in about two more months, with God's guidance. Now it is too large for Mitchell Printing Company to handle. Can you imagine them running off two to three million copies right at first? Well, I'm expecting to sell at least five million copies the first year. Every preacher, lawyer, doctor, newspaperman and teacher, as well as the people that go to church, will want a copy. You know, people go to church and when they get home they'll start trying to find the text in the Bible that the preacher talked on and finally have to give it up as a bad job. When they have this Concordance of mine they can find it a in a half minute. I don't see any reason why I can't sell five million the first year.
"I think I will let the Nelson Publishing Company have it and send it out to their dealers. I can draw a royalty of ten, fifteen or twenty-five cents on each copy sold. That will bring me in enough money so I can rent me a warm office. You can see it is too cold out here to do much work and especially early in the morning, and that's when I like to work, about six or seven o'clock. Then I will hire me a stenographer and just let her keep a typewriter busy. Say, I may hire two stenographers, put one at a table like this and one over there. Then I could just walk between the tables and dictate. I know enough stuff to write and would like to get it out, but my handicaps will not allow me to work but so fast. I could easily keep two girls busy writing all day. You see, there is not a thing wrong with my talking and walking."
Some footsteps were heard on the other side of the cloth that enclosed John's quarters.
"Oh, that's Mrs. Jernigan, our landlady," he said. I would like for you to meet her," he called her in.
Mrs. Jernigan, a woman with dark brown eyes and black hair, entered. John introduced her to me, explaining that she was very good to him.
At her suggestion, John went over to his drawer to get. some work which he had previously prepared for publication. He picked up a bundle of envelopes, but his hands were trembling so that he could not get the contents removed. She helped him.
"Now, this one was returned to me from a religious paper which stated that they didn't pay for material," he continued. "And this one is from the International News Agency, refused because it wants fiction and short stories. As good as that stuff is someone should give me a few dollars for it. I've got lots more, and some of these days I'll find someone who will pay to publish it."
Mrs. Jernigan helped him to get the envelopes back into the drawer which had some bottles in it.
"Please don't think those are whisky bottles," John continued. "It is some liniment I use on my hand muscles when they get sore. I am not opposed to drinking just as long as it is not over-done. The Bible tells you it is permissible just as long as you don't hand the bottle to your brother. Then again, according to the Bible old Noah would get dead drunk, but did the Lord reprimand him for it? Not So if it was bad, it looks like He would have got after Noah.
"As I say, there is education right here in this Book. If anybody wants to know the secret of the world and of life all they will have to do is to study this Book. Yes, I have the secret and it came out of my Bible. I have it all figured out. In 1950 we will go into the Millenium.
"I go out real often to see Dr. Townsend, the Hayes- Barton Baptist minister, and sometime ago I was out there and inquired as to his wife. He told me she was in the hospital and that he had a baby boy. 'Well,' I said, not thinking how it would sound, 'the baby is not yours. I You should have seen the funny expression on his face. I then realized I had made a bad mistake and I said, 'Oh, you see the first boy born in the family is a Levite.' Yes, the first male child belongs to God. I am a Levite and ray mother always said she could not understand me. That's the reason she couldn't understand me. I was following the inner voice in me that she didn't know anything about, and that voice would tell me to do certain things that she could not understand.
"I was working in the transient home in Dunlap Springs just before I came to Raleigh, and there was one man there that was very much interested in the Bible and I loaned him one of mine. He kept it until the place closed up. When we left there he brought it to me and told me he had received more good from it than anything he had ever had in his life. Then there was another man that joked me about my Bible and my prayers and the blessing at mealtime. He used profanity something terrible. Several times I had a talk with him in regards to his actions and his way of living and he always turned it off in a sneering manner. One night just as we finished our evening meal he left the table, walked out into the yard and fell dead. Poor man, I cannot judge him" but I cannot see where he has a chance for an Everlasting Life.
"I came to Raleigh then and have been here ever since. I draw a little pension check and in a couple of months I will start drawing my old age pension. Mrs. Jernigan looks after my rent and sees that I get plenty to eat so I don't worry a bit about anything like that. I just go on with my work.
"If I can't get anyone to publish this Concordance when I get through with it, I'll begin at once on a true story. I'll make it so interesting they will have to publish it. I'll send it to every newspaper in the country. I'll smear the names of everyone that has refused to publish the Word of God right out where anybody can read it, and it will be so written that the people will enjoy reading it.
"Don't you think I can't write a story either. I know how to pick out all the main points. I'll have this fellow, say, John Smith, be doing something great for humanity. He'll go to all the publishing houses and get kicked, knocked, shoved about and insulted. Then one day he will miss his last chance and be turned doby the last publisher. Then all of a sudden this fellow in the office who's been listening, will get up, stamp his foot and say, 'By Jove, I'll back you,' The book will come out and John Smith will become a lecturer and travel all over making talks. When he makes his last lecture, just in keeping with all of his notions, the Battle of Armageddon will come and wipe out everything. Here, let me show you."
He picked up his Bible and his reading glass and read "And the blood shall run 1,000 furlongs, bridle deep."
"Boy, that's hot stuff. M.G.M. and all those Hollywood companies will grab for that."
The old fellow leaned back, the end of his bright red nose nestling against his whiskers. His crafty eyes were creased with delight behind metal-rimmed spectaoles. For a moment he stopped talking, rubbed his hands together and stared out into space, contemplating the success of John Smith, alias John Cox.
"I am going to burn up some people in this world," he continued. "I am going to make it so hot that you'll think two cats have their tails tied together. I am going to call a spade a spade and Hell, Hell."
