Concord, N. C.
September 25, 1938
M. L. W.
FOREST HILL METHODIST CHURCH
Location: Across from the Locke Mill on Buffalo Street.
Building: As this church was started by the Odell family when it owned the Locke Mill and has since that time received the constant support of the family, it is not comparable to the other mill churches. The large brick building, always kept in excellent repair, is equipped with a pipe organ, furnishings of good quality, and the floor is carpeted.
The People: The majority of the members are mill workers, but in appearance and behavior they are not different from the so called middle class found in another part of town. The peopleare nicely dressed; the women wear hats; younger women blossomout in their new fall outfits despite the heat, the largenumbers of boys and girls present are attractive and bright looking. There are no babies or very small children in thecongregation.
The Service: The large auditorium was full when the vested choir began the processional at 7:30. The congregation joined in the singing with spirit, but one did not hear any of the shrill, nasal voices that are so common in mill churches
The pastor was young, alive, intelligent looking and a good speaker. This quality, plus the text of the sermon, was enough to account for the size of the congregation. The sermon, "thou shalt so live that when thou fallest in love it will be with some one's soul and not with a bewitching curl or a handsome face." was the second in a series of fivesermons to youth on commandments of boy and girl friendships. The young people were naturally tremendously interested andattentive, but no more so than the older people. The sermonwas sincere and well thought out, the anecdotes on Shaw, Garibaldi, Coolidge and others perfectly adapted for theaudience.
It was a dignified service carried out in a thoroughlyconventional manner, but it was alive and the people enjoyedit. As they left the church, the preacher shook hands with as many as he could, saying something pleasant to each. Oneman could not resist the desire to display his wit, andclapping the preacher on the back roared forth for everyoneto hear "Well Sir, you preached that just twenty-five yearstoo late for me."
