1. Date of first writing:	December 15, 1938
Name of person interviewed:	Mrs. Pearl Arnold (white)
Address:	R.F.D., Country Club Road
Place:	New Bern, N.C.
Occupation:	Farming and Poultry Raising
Name of writer:	James S. Beaman
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 5,800
TURKEY RAISING
"I love this old place; it's not mine, but I love it. My man and my mother died here, and I love every piece and foot of it." With a nervous, sweeping gesture of the arms, both swung in unison, Sarah Bucksby--"Miss Sarah" to her intimates and the colored folks--indicated the living house, the large stock and dairy barn, and the fields lying thereabout.
"Of course, I'm just a little renter now," she continued. "We used to own a big place right on the edge of town. My husband and his brother, Mr. Bud, ran a big dairy there. We had lots of cows--good stock--Jersey and Guernsey cows. Some of the best bloods in North Carolina were in our herd. Must of been fifty or sixty head of them at one time when our milk business was at its best. I mean they was all pretty and slick, but some crooked men from up North or out West, I don't remember which, claimed our nice cows were sick and had the county coroner or somebody to kill 'em all off. Our cows wasn't sick at all; these men just claimed they was. But they killed 'em off and we lost the place, lock, stock, and barrel. Everything in the wide world we had and had worked so long and so hard for went. It was a big place right on the edge of town and my man and Mr. Bud and me and the girls had worked hard for it, and we'd almost paid for it but had to let it go.”
”This old place,” to which Sarah referred when she first started speaking, is a part of what is known to most Cartonians as the Huckney Estate. It is a large tract of land, 565 acres to be exact. The estate is bisected by the road almost evenly and has a frontage on the left on Burr River of something like three-quarters of a mile. It was bought and developed by the late Augustus F. Hardingwell, and for many years has been one of the showplaces in this section. The big house or mansion is a commodious brick structure of many rooms. Situated in a dense growth of pines and underbrush, it is almost obstructed from view to passers on the road. It gives a commanding view of the river to the occupants and can readily be seen by those who happen to travel by boat.
At the other end of the estate--the end nearer Carton-- and on the opposite side of the road, the farm buildings and the residence occupied by Sarah and her family are located. These buildings are back about one-half a mile from the road. To the rear, in front, and on each side they are bounded by shallow fields bordered by a thick growth of pines, oaks, and dogwoods, with a sprinkling of holly and sycamore. The buildings, all freshly painted white, appear as if set in a semi-circular frame of dark green.
Seated in a big green porch rocker on the "front veranda" one summer-like day in mid-December, a large pan of string beans beside her, she tacked in detail about her past life.
"If you really want to know all about it; I was born near Benter. My maiden name was Sarah Canopy. My father was Earl Johnson Canopy and my mother was Sarah Canopy. It was Sarah Easup before she was married. All the menfolk’s in my family have been farmers as far back as I know anything about, and I mean real farmers--landowning farmers. There never was a tenant farmer or a sharecropper in my family that I ever heard about, no siree. They all had good land and good stock and good houses and made a good living for their families. I had one older brother who farmed and was county sheriff all at the same time--he's dead now.
"When I was a little girl, we girls and boys had to go to private school--didn't have many public schools then like nowdays. We usually had right good teachers; sometimes they would live part of their time with us and part of their time with other people in the neighborhood who had children, too. I used to think that some of the young lady school teachers was the prettiest and nicest young ladies I had ever seen. ’Sister Bess' and I used to fuss and scratch each other about who was to sit next to Miss Banes, one I ’specially remember, because she was extra pretty and extra nice, and who was to carry the wood to her room and build the fire for her and fill her water pitcher for washing.
"Of course, we didn’t know anything about bathtubs and such in those days, and even if we did have one of the best farms in all that part of the county, I never saw a bathtub or even a water ’spicket’ until I went in training for a nurse. Yes, didn’t you know I studied for a nurse? It was at the insane asylum and I used to see and hear some funny things there. No, I wasn’t scared of the patients, that is, not much; but I used to hear some of the older nurses talking about how if you nursed there long enough you’d get like the patients themselves, and that would make me think and worry pretty much sometimes. Well, you see, I didn’t go crazy from staying there and I’ve had things lots worse than that to stand since then and I’m not crazy yet. Least, nobody ever says so but Mr. Bud, and what he says about anything or anybody don’t amount to nothing.
"You know how Mr. Bud is. Always was sorter on the soft-minded order--I don't mean crazy--just simple and childish-like. And since that place has come on his face he worries a lot, too. He don't want me and the girls to know what it is, but his doctor told Nellie and Mary both that it was a cancer, but he could cure it if Mr. Bud would come to see him regular for the treatment. I don't know; somehow, it don't look no better to me, but maybe the doctor's right, I sure hope so.
"Even if Mr. Bud don't always act so bright, he's smart as a briar about the place, and he's good to me and the girls and all the other live things on the place. And he sure knows all about turkeys and chickens--more than any man I ever knew except Mr. Ken hisself. Mr. Ken was my husband and Mr. Bud's his brother. They ain't alike in no ways, though. Mr. Ken always liked to dress up and shine around the girls, and he knew a lot of things besides farming and turkeys. He was a good business man, too mighty fast at figures. Went to school lots more than Mr. Bud. He kept books in Carton for fourteen years.
"It was in my second year of training that I met Mr. Ken. He had come up there from Carton to see about buying a team for his pa's farm near Bear Creek. He and Mr. Bud come up together. They both come out to the nurses' house one night with some other young men that they knew. We all played some old time games, and some of the other girls sang and danced while I played the piano. I took music and learned enough to have a class of little girls before I left for training, but I don’t ever play now. I still like to hear my niece, Isabelle, play old hymns and love songs that I used to like so. She plays real good, too, to be as fidgety as she is. She's up North now.
"I was telling you, though, about how I met Mr. Ken and happened to marry him. I could tell that night he came out to the nurses' house with Mr. Bud and the other young men that he was taking a shine to me, but I didn't let him know I knew it. No siree! And I didn’t let him or anybody else know that I knew I was going to like him a lot, too. He and Mr. Bud went back home after a few days and I didn’t hear nothing more about ’em for a long time. But, somehow, I kept thinking about him and wondering why I didn’t get any ward from him. And one day, sure enough, there came a letter for me from Bear Creek, and it said that he was coming up again for something lots more important than buying a team for his pa’s farm--he was coming by himself. Of course, I knew what that meant. It meant he was coming to see me! I was tickled by that letter, but I didn’t let on--didn’t write him a line. You know how girls had to be in those days with young men; they had to be mighty particular, and I was. I always tell my girls I was.
"Girls now ain’t so particular--maybe it’s better this new way; I don’t know. But I’m mighty glad my Nellie and my Mary are married, even if Mary is a widow now, the poor thing. My Maude, the youngest, she ain’t married yet; she’s the little snub-nosed girl with the pretty blue eyes you see riding back and forth in my car. My Maude, she don’t care much about boys; leastwise, that’s what she says, but I notice lately she has a different one nearly every week. You can’t tell nowdays what girls and boys are up to, with automobiles and picture shows and everything. Nothing like that when I was a girl--just church and Sunday School and prayer meeting and a school or church entertainment now and then. Sometimes we had a bazaar or a fair. My Nancy, my baby, works in a beauty parlor in Carton, but I hope she’s a good girl, always.
"But I’m telling you about me and Mr. Ken and how we met and happened to get married. The following Sunday week, sure enough, Mr. Ken came, all dressed up in a new suit and a new hat and shoes. Even dressed up like that, he won’t so good looking, but there was just something about him I couldn’t get out of my mind. He did what girls in those days called ’fascinated’ me a whole lot. Well, we had a real nice time then, but he didn’t say a word about loving me.
"Well, he went back home next day without saying a word about writing, but he did write. I got a nice fat letter from him in about a week and after that, we wrote back and forth for nearly six months before he said he was coming up to see me again. When he came that time he told me lots of nice things. He said he knew something that would suit me lots better than being a nurse at a crazy house. He was young, you know, and took things like that as funny--he meant being a farmer's wife. I reckon I blushed kinder, but it sure did please me a lot. I was going on nineteen and Mr. Ken was twenty-two when we was married.
"Everything at Mr. Ken’s pa’s farm was just like he had said and I was glad or that, too, because I had been use to a nice home and nice people. They gave us a nice, big airy room upstairs, and we lived right there with ’em for two year. It was a pretty old place with magnolia trees in the yard. Nellie was born there, and we named her after Mr. Ken’s youngest sister.
"Well, we lived there two years and Mr. Ken farmed with his father and his brothers, then he had a chance to go to Carton and work for a rich man. He didn’t want much to go, but I told him it was a good time to use what he had spent money to learn at business school way up in New York. And I was thinking about Nellie, too, when the time came for her to go to school. We were expecting another baby about that time, too, and there wouldn't hardly have been enough room for all of us in the one room out there.
"We moved to Carton to a little one-story, green house on Brady Street. We lived there fourteen years, and we were right happy, except Mr. Ken use to talk about how much better he had rather live on his own place in the country. He made a real good salary for those times, and he liked his boss, even if lots of people didn't. They said he was hard and would take poor peoples' beds and chairs and tables right out from under them for mortgages. Mr. Ken said he was always good to him, and he used to send me things for the babies."
Just at this point Sarah's story was interrupted by the rather sudden recollection, on her part, that "affairs" elsewhere needed her personal attention. Placing the pan of string beans in her vacated rocker and covering it with her discarded apron, she excused herself and retired into the house.
Returning through the house after a few minutes absence and resuming her bean stringing and the conversation with equal composure, she said, "Seems like I can't get anything done around this place like I want it unless I see to it personally, myself. Mr. Bud is good, but his mind is mighty foggy sometimes."
After some hesitation and a little firm insistence on the part of the visitor, Sarah consented to continue the narrative of her early married lire from the point where she had left off.
"After Mr. Ken had been working for almost fourteen year he had a good chance to buy a nice place at a good price on the edge of town, right close to where the waterworks plant is now. He had his head set on it, and it didn't make much difference to me. It was close enough in for the children to stay on in the Carton schools just the same as they had been doing, but the boss didn't want Mr. Ken to leave. Said he didn't know what he would do without Finally they made a deal. He said he would loan Mr. Ken part of the money he needed without interest to make payments on the place if Mr. Men would agree to do his book work for him at night.
"Well, siree, after we took over the new place on the edge of town we pitched in--me and Mr. Ken and Mr. Bud and Nellie and Mary and two hired colored men--and worked from before sunup till way after dark every day, except Sundays, putting things to rights and cleaning and scrubbing. The house was a nice, big nine-room house, but the people who had lived in it before us were poor renters and they let the place go down.
"We started off with just four Jersey cows and kept adding to 'em till we had fifty or sixty cows in all--Jerseys and Guernseys. Mr. Ken and the two colored men fed the cows and milked 'em and kept everything cleaned up around the barns and dairy sheds. Me and Nellie and Mary washed the bottles and strained the milk, and Ma helped, too, all she could. But she was getting old and feeble and almost blind. Mr. Bud, he delivered the milk in town. He was a big strong man then; didn't look skinny and puny like he does now, poor soul.
"He learnt nearly all the folks in Carton while he was on the milk route, and he could tell you some funny things about what he used to see around some folks' houses, if he would. But he's getting so old and stiff now he don't want to talk and joke like he used to then; just wants to come in at night after he's been hard at it all day with his turkeys and bees, eat a little supper, then go to bed. But I reckon he does feel bad, poor fellow, with that place on his face worrying him and his asthma so bad this changeable weather. And he never has got over missing Mr. Ken around the place.
"Well, we worked and we worked, all hands of us, till we got that nice place on the edge or town almost paid for; then we had to lose it, lock, stock, and barrel, because when we didn't have any more cows we couldn't make any more money. We all worried until we was almost crazy and didn't know which way to turn. Me and Nellie and Mary cried ourselves to sleep almost every night; and Mr. Ken and Mr. Bud went around like they was lost. It was a blow, I tell you, to have everything in the world snatched away from you all at once like that.
"We knew we had to do something so we started looking around for a place to go. Finally, and at last, Buster Maner, the man that looked after Dr. Hardingwell's furnace and flowers and boats, stopped by one day and told us he'd heard about our hard luck and told us that the folks living out here was going to move out. He said he believed that if Mr. Ken would go to see Dr. Hardingwell he could get the place and all the land he needed. Mr. Ken did the next day, and sure enough, Dr. Hardingwell told him he could come live out here and farm like he wanted to.
"We ain’t never had the heart or the money to try dairying again. But while Mr. Ken was living and Mr. Bud was hearty and strong we had a big truck farm out here, and we sold carloads of vegetables every year. Then Mr. Ken’s health started to failing and he had to give that hard work up, so he got him some big chicken incubators and set ’em up in the big barn. He got some purebred White Leghorn eggs out West--several thousand of ’em--and started in the chicken-raising business on a big scale, and he sold eggs and chickens everywhere. Why, he made enough money to send Nellie to a teacher’s school and Mary to a business school. He had 7,000 White Leghorns over this place, all at one time, but he never had quit worrying about losing his own place on the edge of town. It was during that time that he died.
"Me and Mr. Bud has managed to make both ends meet somehow since then. My two girls had married, and, if I do say so, I had two as fine sons-in-law as anybody ever had.
"We didn’t know how it would be when Dr. Hardingwell died and his widow sold the place. It passed through two or three hands before the present owner finally bought it. They’re all rich men, and I don’t know about their affairs; I just know they've all let me stay here where I want to be, and I pay my rent regular every month. Nobody knows what I pay but me and Senator Buck, not even Mr. Bud. Of course, the place isn't kept up in the shape it was when Dr. Hardingwell owned it. We had running water then at all three of the big barns and even clear down to the pigpens in the lower back pasture. But we can make out without all that now. We just want to make a little living and finish out our days here where we have so many memories.
"You see that big cedar right there off the porch on the right? Well, I've watched Mr. Bud's turkeys go to roost in that tree every night for sixteen year, and their 'tweep-tweeping' is the first thing I've heard in the mornings. Turkeys won’t roost in a house unless you make ‘em; they like to get just as high up off the ground as they can. Even in the coldest winter weather, with snow and sleet all over everything, all of 'em go up in that cedar to roost. That's their favorite tree. We make most of our little money from selling Mr. Bud's turkeys and my chickens and eggs. We sell a little butter and milk to help out, and sometimes a little honey when the bees have a good year. I used to keep a few paying boarders that had jobs in the sewing rooms in Carton, but I got tired of that and quit. They was all young girls and some of 'em gave me a lot of trouble.
"My chickens are just plain old time dunghill mixtures and I don’t keep more’n about a hundred now, but Mr. Bud’s turkeys ere ell purebred stock, Mammoth Bronzes. They are the biggest flock of turkeys in this county and, as far as I know, in all this part of the state. They’ll weigh more, on the average, than any turkeys I ever saw. Mr. Bud sure is proud of ’em, and I am too, for that matter. Sometimes Nellie says for sorter a joke, ’Mama, I believe you and Uncle Bud thinks lots more of the turkeys than you do any of us.’
"Sometimes, just before the selling season starts at Thanksgiving, he has as many as 350 full-grown birds on the place, and when other people are glad to get twenty-five to thirty cents a pound for theirs Mr. Bud can get thirty and thirty-five for his easy. That’s because they look so fine and healthy. Every fall he sends some or his finest looking, ’struttinest’ ones to the county fair, and they always win all the first prizes given for turkeys in all the classes. He sure takes some pains with those birds. He gives ’em the very best grain he can buy for ’em and the very best growing mashes, and he takes his hammer over there at that big rock and breaks up enough fresh oyster shells to last ’em all day. That makes them have strong and straight legs and shiny feathers, and in the laying season it keeps the eggshells from being soft.
"The mating and laying season is when Mr. Bud catches it hardest. Sometimes a hen will make her nest as far away as a mile or more from the house, and the only way he can find it is to get up before day and watch the hens real close to see which ones come down from their roosting place first. Then he has to watch those hens after they have been fed, because nearly always the first hens to come down from the roost are the ones that are laying farthest from the house. Nature seems to tell ’em they’ve got a long way to go and they’d better get an early start, but they won't leave until they’ve been fed, that is, most times they won’t. Now, you and I and nobody else couldn’t tell those first hens down from the roost from all the others in a flock of 300 turkeys, but Mr. Bud can, every single one of ’em. The way he does is to pick out a certain one of those early hens each morning and follow her, at a safe distance so she won't suspicion him, just as far as she goes. If it’s a mile or more he keeps right on after her and watches where she stops. Then when she’s had time to get good and settled down and ain’t suspicioning nothing or nobody he sneaks up on her, real easy-like, and grabs her before she has time to say ’ jiminee.’ Then he brings her back to the house and shuts her up in the crib. Usually they won’t lay when they're shut up, but he has some straw in there in case one does lay. After he's kept her shut up two or three days he lets her out about the middle of the day and watches her real close. In spite of all the pains he takes, sometimes a hen will steal her nest down in the swamp and he won’t know about it. And most and likely that's the end of her. But, sometimes, they do stay off that way and come up later with a nice brood of poults.
"Just as soon as a hen has ’laid out,' and starts setting on her nest--I mean the ones laying regular-like in the broomstraw and bushes in the big front field and side fields where he means for ’em to lay--he brings her and all her eggs to that fenced-in place back there where you saw all those good-size boxes with wire fronts on ’em. And there's a nice, clean nest he’s already made in each one with fresh clean straw, plenty or grit and charcoal, oyster shell, and clean water. He puts the hen’s eggs in there and then sets her on them. Usually they behave all right and go straight on setting just like they had been in the field before he moved ’em. Sometimes he has forty or more of them boxes with hens and eggs in ’em, and he watches ’em like a hawk watching chickens. Now, ordinarily, Mr. Bud ain't none too brave, but you just let him hear a found out thataway at night. He jumps right up out of bed and grabs up his single-barreled shotgun and marches out there just as bold as all get out. You see, we've had some turkeys stole from us.
"Between what Mr. Bud gets for his turkeys and what I get for my eggs, I reckon we do pretty well for two old, near-worn-out people. Mr. Bud, every year mostly, will sell around 175 gobblers and around 100 hens. He don't sell many turkey eggs; he needs most of 'em for hatching, and, besides, the folks around here don't want to pay the price you have to ask for eggs from such high class stock. Well, 175 gobblers and 100 hens will weigh up to about 4,500 pounds. Well, you can figure it for yourself--4,500 pounds at an average of thirty-two cents a pound. That is about 1575, but you must remember that ain't clear profits. Those birds eat a whale of a lot, and we have to buy almost everything they eat except some of their corn.
"Of course, I don't make nothing like what Mr. Bud does on his turkeys, with chickens and eggs, but I do right well at that. I reckon I'll average selling twenty dozen eggs a week when my hens are laying at their best, and I usually get around twenty to twenty-five cents a dozen for ’em. Then I sell some fryers, a few pullets, and young roosters, and that all runs up, you know. I handle all the money. It was my money that was outlaid to start it all--turkeys, car, chickens, cows, pigs, mule, everything. Mr. Bud is mighty good at handling turkeys but he don't know nothing about handling 'affairs.' I list and pay all the taxes, too. I vote, too, but I don’t try to have nothing to do with who or what Mr. Bud votes for.
"Sometimes Nellie or Mary will tell me that me and Uncle Bud have worked hard all our life and that we ought to come live with them where we could rest. Sometimes I do get pretty tired out, but there ain’t no place in the world, to me, like this old place out here. I mean to stay here just as long as they'll let me stay. I want to be laid out here, right in the ’main room’ where my man and my mother was laid out. I’m too old to be changing any more now. And there ain’t nobody going to look after your affairs for you like you can for yourself--not even your own children, if I do say it. No siree!"
