Approximately 3,300 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
THE THORNTON FAMILY
Date of First Writing	November 10, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Susannah Thornton
Fictitious Name	None Used
Street Address	507 Wilson Street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Textile Worker
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #3613
Mattie T. Jones
Columbia, S.C.
11/10/38
LIFE STORIES
THE THORNTON FAMILY
(White)
507 WILSON STREET
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA
Olympia mill village, Columbia, South Carolina, is a pleasant looking place. The main streets are paved, well laid off, and well kept. There cure up-to-date, steam-heated brick school buildings, offices, community houses, and churches. The houses in this section are of uniform size and style. Our visit on this gray November morning was to an undistinguished residence on Wilson Street. There was a pitiful lack of conveniences and culture, but a cordial welcome made their lack less evident.
Mrs. Thornton and three of her married children, eleven persons in all, live in this six-room house. It rents, with lights, for $5.60 per month. Two windows furnish light and ventilation for the room in which we sat. The dirty, uncovered floor was evidence of the fact that sanitary housekeeping is not an important item in the family's routine of work.
The furniture consists of two chairs, two iron beds, an organ, a sewing machine, a small trunk, and a chest of drawers. A framed mirror hangs over the mantel of the comer fireplace. This mirror once belonged to her mother, who is seventy-two years old.
On the walls of the room are a life insurance memorial certificate, a framed marriage license, a picture of the Dionne quintuplets, and a calendar beneath a Bible picture, the "Ascension of Jesus."
"I'm glad to meet you, Miss____________ Come right in. If you can stand the looks of the house. We ain't took time to clean up ranch this mornin'." With some embarrassment, Mrs. Thornton continued, "My name is Susannah, but they've always called me 'Susie.' Somehow I never did like 'Susannah.' Have a seat in this here chair."
Mrs. Thornton sat on the foot of the unmade bed and took on her lap a two-year-old grandchild. Her clear, blue eyes and straight, light hair, with her fair complexion, made her rather attractive looking, although she was too timid to talk to strangers.
Mrs. Thornton's blue print dress was faded, but neat and clean. Her teeth were all gone, and no false ones had been provided. Her head was covered with a shock of brown, unkempt hair. Her sallow complexion indicated the lack of a balanced diet, and the hard lines of her narrow, pinched face told a story of struggle and disappointment.
"I shore oughter to be able to tell you about things 'round here, 'cause I been a-livin' here twenty-two year, right in this very house, an' more'n thirty year on the hill. You may not b'lieve it, but I'll be fifty-one nex' April comin'. Yes, ma'am. I'm gittin on in years, "this friendly, never-saw- a-stranger sort of person continued. "I come to this mill in 1907, right after me an' Jim got married. But I ain't never worked in the mill but two weeks in my life, an' them was the first two weeks after I was married. Then I had to stop 'cause I wasn't well."
"Had your husband lived here before he was married?"
"Oh, yes, ma'am, he come to this mill in knee britches," showing with a gesture just how short the lad's pants were, "an' he stayed right here. He died in this very room. He worked in the card room; made 25 cents a day. You know children could work in the mill them times. There wan't no law against it."
"When did your husband go to school, if he started to work as young as that?"
"Law, chile, that's just it, he never had no schoolin'; never went to school a day in his life. He couldn't read a word nor write his name, but, before he died, he worked in the spinnin' room an' made $25 a week. He was a extra good hand. He could run anything in this mill. He done a lot of extra things beside his reg'lar job, an' made a lot of extra money, too. We had to buy clothes an' groceries an' things like that, an' we had children right along. We paid doctors' bills an' had right smart of 'em to pay. Sometimes we'd slip a lil' way back an' have it purty hard. An' then again we'd ketch up. As long as he stayed well, we done purty well on the money he'd bring home, but he was laid off sick for ten or twelve year before he died, an' he's been dead five year. He had convulsions from February till June before he died, an' I couldn't do nothin' much but nurse him most of the time. When he'd get a lil' better, an' I could leave 'im, I worked in the W.P.A. sewin' room to try to make a lil' money to help out with. We was havin' such a hard time."
As to her own school advantages, Mrs. Thornton hadn't gone any further than the third grade. She went to a private school in Columbia, taught by a Presbyterian preacher, named Blackmon. The tuition fee was one dollar a month in the first grade, and this was increased as the pupils advanced to the higher grades. Her father was employed by the city to dig ditches, lay pipes, and do other kinds of public works. But he had eight children, and the salary was not sufficient to meet all their needs; and luxuries were not to be considered. Education came in this class, according to his opinion. Be sides he was a wicked man. He cursed awful and drank whiskey, making life very hard for his family. Her mother, too, was indifferent about their education. But Mrs. Thornton believes in education and has sent all her children through the sixth grade. Then she had to take them out of school and put them to work in the mill. "I woulder let 'em went on as fer as they coulder went," she added in a serious tone, "for I wouldner took nothin' fer what lil' bit of learnin' I got. Education'll bring you a whole lot of things, work an' everything, an' it'll take you along in every way. I woulder been glad if my children coulder went slam through, so they coulder been doctors an' lawyers an' everything like that." After a pause, "I love to read what lil' I can read."
"What do you have to read? Do you take any magazines or newspapers?" A glance around the cheerless room revealed no sign of any kind of reading material.
"My daughter takes The Record, an' I reads that every evenin'."
To the question as to what particular part of the paper she likes best to read, she replied, "The deaths. I like to read about any people that's died. When some of my own folks died, when my uncle an' my aunt died, it was in the paper, an' they never sent me no word. An' lots of other folks die that I wouldner knowed about if I couldner read about it in the papers."
At the mention of the funnies, the expression of her careworn face changed from sadness to joy as she said with a twinkle in her faded blue eyes and a sort of condensing smile on her lips, "Yes, I like to read about Tillie an' Mao an' Jiggs an' lil' Orphant Annie."
In the adjoining room, the odor of hard-boiled cabbage and fried Irish potatoes told in no uncertain terms what the menu for the noonday meal would be. The daughter-in-law who was sharing the three-room apartment with Mrs. Thornton was responsible for preparing the meal. But curiosity finally got the better of Katie Lou, and, at the risk of having the dinner bum, she left it to see what the new visitor looked like and what her mission was at this hour of the day. She was a rather nice looking young woman. Her dress was clean. She had a dark, clear complexion and black, expressive eyes. A permanent added to her looks. She was reticent, but her retiring manner presented a pleasing contrast to the lack of reserve of the mother-in-law.
Katie Lou's father, John Busbee, was a tenant farmer and had lived in the country near Gaston, North Carolina. She attended the country schools whenever she could, but her parents moved about so much that Katie couldn't stay in one place long enough to learn very much. When she was fourteen years old, her father and mother separated, and Katie, with her three sisters, went to live with their married sister in Columbia. Here she went to school two years, or until she was sixteen and in the fifth grade. Her sister's health was poor, and she was forced to stop school and help with the house work and the care of the six little children. She regrets she has had so few advantages and is planning to attend the classes that are being conducted in the community by an adult teacher.
Katie Lou picked up the story here. "Then when me an' Charlie was about twenty-one year old we got married. We just knowed each other three or four weeks. We didn't take time to do much courtin'. What courtin' we done we done it in my sister's house an' on the side porch. He took me to a circus an' to the carnival. We saw the clowns an' the elephants an' all like that, an' we rode on the merry-go-round an' the ferris wheel. Then one day we went to Reverend Proctor's house an' got married. No'm, we never went nowheres. Come right on here an' went to boardin' with her," indicating the mother-in-law. "The next year we started housekeepin ' in the room upstairs. That was four year ago, an' we've done paid for all our furniture on the installment plan but the stove. It's an oil range, an' we're payin' on it now. I like it here as good as anywhere I've ever stayed, but I can't get a thing to do. Since they laid me off, I been tryin' an' tryin' to get back my job, but there's so many wantin' 'em I don't stan' no chance stall.
"'Course when everything runs along smooth-like, an' he gets regular time, we can live all right on what he makes. That's about $15.95 a week after social security is took out. Sometimes it's more an' sometimes it's less, 'cordin' to the frames they give him to run. He didn't make but $9 last summer, though, when they curtailed, an' then we had it tough. Had to borrow some money. We're payin' it back now every month, an' 10 cent on the dollar interest. We have to buy so much coal an' wood, an' sometimes we have it purty hard. You see I had to go to the hospital an' stay twenty days. An' we ain't paid quite all of that yet. Charity besides."
Here Mrs. Thornton interrupted the story. "She used to holler an' cry an' hoi' to the bed an' 'most have fits with so much pain every month. The doctor said she was turned all 'round down there, an' he took out her appendix an' one tube an' one of her wombs. I tell you, she was a sick woman."
The young woman took up the story again. "I'm better now. Feel lots better, an' don't suffer like I did, you know. You see I've got massenois" (mastoids), as she called attention to an enlarged face and neck. "Had it every since I was a child. "When I gets a cold, it aches an' thobs an' sounds like a train goin' through my head. When we get the hospital bill paid an' our furniture all paid for, I want us to try to save up to buy us a home of our own. I want one so bad I can't think about anything else. But I don't have no idea I can ever get one. An' then I want some children next, at least two or three."
As a sort of soliloquy, the older Mrs. Thornton said, "Some people want 'em, an' some people don't. That's the way it is. I don't want no children myself, not one every year. No ma'am, not one every year. My daughter livin' in there has 'em like that. She's that way now. Got three livin' an' two dead. One of 'em died with waterhead, an' one of 'em died with pneumonia. Both babies. An' she ain't been married no time. I had five children myself. One boy an' three girls still livin'. My daughter, Bessie, she's dead. Died when her baby was borned. She always put the request for me to keep the baby an' I kep' her till she was three year old. She loved me jest like I was her ma. But it was disagreeable with him an' he took 'er. He's married another woman now an' lives nex' door."
The conversation finally drifted to the diversions of the family. With no radio, no telephone, and no automobile, there isn't much contact with the outside world and not much knowledge of affairs beyond the walls of their three rooms. They are not much interested in politics, although they both voted. They felt it would be all right. Somehow their neighbors don't have time to visit with them much.
"Movin' pictures shows? No ma'am. No picture shows nor card playin' nor dancin' for me. Why, I ain't never been to but one show in my life, an' that was before me an' Jim got married. An' I ain't never go in' to another one as long as I live. No, ma'am, not me. My church, the Free Will Holiness Baptist (some people don't say that 'Holiness,' but I put it in every time) don't believe in picture shows. We ain't got no preacher now, ain't had none in months. But when we do get one, he won't believe in no picture shows. I'm tellin' you, there ain't no good in movin' pictures."
"An' won't believe in nothin' like wordly pleasures," the younger woman reiterated. "But me an' Charlie goes every Saturday night. We like Westerns. That is, we go if we have the money. If we don't have it, we borrow it from her. An' if she ain't got it, why she sends to the little store right down there across the railroad. She can always get credit from that storekeeper.
"Me an' Charlie had a good time not long ago. Two of our friends come an' took us out in the country in their automobile. We went to see my cousin livin' on one of these farms what the government owns, just two or three miles from here. They're awful po'. Never had a thing in the house to eat when we got there, but bread an' milk, an' it was Saturday night, too. They shore was the proudest to see us comin' with them five pounds of fish. We cooked an' eat every one of 'em, too. Cooked 'em out in the yard, 'round a fire, an' they shore did taste good." The expression on the young woman's face told the whole story of an evening of fellowship and fun, having forgotten for a time, at least, the cares and problems that vex every day.
"Sunday is a mighty lonesome day. We hardly ever leave the house. Some Sundays my sister's children comes over an' sets awhile. I jest about raised 'em, an' they thinks the world of me. These long nights, too, we don't have nothin' to do but jest set. They seems mighty long an' lonesome, especially if it's rainin'."
To the suggestion that the family would enjoy singing around the organ during the evenings, Mrs. Thornton said, "I love music the best sort, but the organ has been out of tune for a long time. Was out before Jim died. But that don't make no difference. I couldn't ever play it nohow, an' none the rest of us could. We bought it long time ago so's we could have prayer meetin's at our house.
"I know you enjoyed that. Do you still invite your friends to come in and have prayer meetings with you?"
"No," she said. And her face, which had been illuminated with keen interest and pleasure, suddenly became overshadowed with clouds of disappointment and sorrow. "I can't have company atall now, not for anything. I've got a chile eighteen year old, an' she can't talk nor do nothin' for 'erself. She's had 'epilatic' spells for twelve year. I tried to sen' her to school like I did the other children, but the teacher sent me word I'd have to keep her home. I don't know how much money I have spent on that chile for doctors an' medicine. But I don't have none to spend on 'er now. I don't have no income atall now; so I want to try to get 'er in this here school for the feeble-minded I've heard about, if I can get anybody to help me do it. I've asked that Methodist preacher what come here with you this mornin' to help me, 'cause I don't know nothin' atall about how to go about it. I ain't able to do much fer 'er now. It takes about all my time lookin' after 'er. An' you know she runs away lookin fer me every time I gets out of 'er sight. She's just crazy about me. She don't sleep none to speak of nights, just lays awake all night long. She'll run off in the dark, too, if I don't tie 'er to the bed. You see them strong ropes on the sides of the bed? That's what they're there fer."
The door between the rooms squeaked and then opened. The girl entered, drinking the contents of a R C Cola bottle. Mary had the appearance of a twelve-year-old child but weighed about 130 pounds. Her straight, disheveled, light-colored hair streamed about her face; her feet were bare; her face and form were void of expression. That empty face. She slumped in her mother's lap, placed her arms about her neck, and, patting her back continually, gave expression to boundless love and affection, which was returned by the devoted mother. An effort was made to attract Mary's attention or to interest her in something. There was no response. She laughed a silly laugh, as she does all day long. The mother says she never plays at all except with a colored ball, and the one she had was worn out. The cost of another, 25 cents, was placed in Mary's hand in eight bright coins; but the possession of money made no appeal to her. However, when the ball was later purchased, she reacted to its color, and even takes it to bed with her now. She will not allow anybody to touch it.
Mary fights with the abnormal strength that characterizes this type. This creates a fear complex, not only among the Thornton's friends, but even in the immediate family. "I can't never leave 'er a single minute, except I do try to go to church every Sunday night. Every day is like every other day with me, washin', ironin', scrubbin' an' waitin' on that chile what's as helpless as a baby. I don't have no money now. I keep house for ay daughter who works in the mill, an' she gives me an' the chile what we eat an' wear. Milk? No, Ma'am, milk costs too much. We can't afford it. We have right smart of meats, pork, beef, an' such as that sometimes, about half an' half meat an' vegetables. But we mostly have to eat what we can ketch."
The Thorntons have no space for a vegetable garden, but Mrs. Thornton has tried to have chickens and a cow. She became discouraged, however, when some one stole her cow and nineteen chickens one morning about 2 o'clock, and she doesn't try that any more. But even with these conditions, she thinks it better to live in the mill village than in the country, because of the conveniences the mill offers.
The railroad runs near the house, and the daughter-in-law says there are lots of "bums" who come from the trains to them for food. "We don't have nothin' much, but we never turn nobody down who comes to us for somethin' to eat. If we don't have nothin' but some bread an' one egg in the house, we cook that an' give it to 'em. An' we do without ourselves." Charity seems to be the only avenue of expression for their religious experience. None of the family, except the mother, is affiliated with any church, and none of them attend its services but her.
"I tried to raise my children right, " Mrs. Thornton, said. I always kep' 'em in the yard; I never allowed them to say 'yes' an' 'no' to people, but I taught 'em to say 'yes, ma'am an' 'no, ma'am. An' I wouldn't let 'em sass nobody nor quarrel with nobody nor fight among themselves. It's the way the parents raise 'em. If you raise 'em right, you'll have good children. Yes, ma'am, if you lay the pattern right in front of them, they'll carry the pattern on with 'em. But you got to start the saplin' right while it's young. Don't the Bible say, 'Spare the rod an' spoil the chile?' I taken all my children to preachin' an' to Sunday School every Sunday. But-but when they're little they're trampin' on your toes, an' when they're big they're trampin' on your heart. Here's my boy Charlie, he don't have no fussin' nor quarrelin' but he's been drinkin ever since he was eighteen year old. He ain't no drunkard, though, he always knows what he's doin'. Never does get down. Just starts drink in' soon as the mill stops on Saturday an' drinks till it starts up again Monday mornin'. Knows he'll get fired if he drinks while he's on the job. But nobody in my family dips snuff. No, ma'am, not snuff. An' don't you think it's disgraceful for lady folks to smoke an' drink an' tell lies like they do? None in my crowd does that kind of thing. I try to live right so my children will live right. I let my light shine here in this very house' Goin' to tell you, trash floats on the top. I'm saved, sanctified, an' filled with the Holy Ghost. Acts 2:4, speakin' in tongues as the spirit gives utterance."
The small yard space was enclosed with a wire fence, which was bordered with flowers, and beds of flowers were planted in every available space. The time came for the good-by and an expression of appreciation to her for a pleasant visit. She urged us to pray for her and especially for the afflicted child. As we passed down the walk, we admired her blooming flowers, and she said as we