A BLIND Mattress Marer
Original Names	Changed Names
Wilson Bedding Co,	Buman Bedding Co.
Mr. Holleman	Gabby Bassett
Date of first writing:	July 15, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	W. Moses Holleman (white)
Address:	Five Points, Wilson, N. C.
Occupation:	Manufacturer
Writer:	Stanley Combs
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
No. of words:	About 2,000
A BLIND Matters Maker
The Buman Bedding Company has been growing in importance steadily during the past few years. The local people know very little about it or the volume of work it turns out, except for the fact that the person who owns and operates it is blind and made his start several years ago in a very small way with a very limited amount of capital. Gabby Bassett is his name. He is quiet in manner and talks intelligently.
"I started here in 1922," said Gabby. "I had just finished my second year’s work at the University and had spent all my money. I could not borrow, so I had to give up my ambition to finish my college training.
"I was born on a farm in 1897. My rather farmed during the summertime and worked each winter in the woods at the lumber business. My mother was also raised on a farm. Both of my parents were used to hard work. There were seven of us children, four boys and three girls.
"During my early childhood days I had normal vision, and we did not know that I had any eye trouble. My early life was very much like that of other boys and girls. I worked at home, lived, and played on the farm, and attended school like they did, but soon after I reached my teens my eyes began to show signs of weakening and at somewhere near the age or fifteen or sixteen I was totally blind. It worried me a lot. I was at a loss to know what to do. Everything was dark; my entire future seemed dark. My younger brother grew up in very much the same way and finally developed blindness in his teens also. My older brother's eyes weakened, but he still sees a little. The girls all have normal vision. That has always been a mystery. I can't understand why the girls' eyes should be normal and we boys ail have weak eyes. The only account the doctors have ever given was just a weak nervous system and a general weakening of the nerves of the eyes.
"Being young and ambitious, I felt like something ought to and could be done. Life is mighty black when all is dark and nothing to look forward to, so I entered the Blind School. I stayed there awhile, studying and working hard. They depend a lot on manual training. I took a lot of interest in it, and I can see now where it was a big help to me. As soon as I was far enough advanced I entered the University. I had my mind set on being a teacher. Of course, I could not hope to teach in the public schools, but I hoped to teach the blind or possibly secure work in some of the colleges. I have a blind friend who teaches history in one or the western colleges. After completing the first two years’ work I found myself short of funds. I knew nothing about where to borrow so I had to stop.
"I came here and started to make mattresses. I had a very small amount of money and could not do much. I did most of the work myself, and my only expense was for the materials I used. I worked and saved and kept adding to my stock of supplies and have built up my business this way. At present I have these two buildings here where we do all our work. I have another building rented that we use for storage purposes. When I needed help I hired local men or boys and trained them for the work I had to do. All my help has been developed that way. I have one or two men now that are pretty good and can be depended upon. It has been slow, hard work trying to live and keep up with the growth of the business.
"Sometimes I feel discouraged in that I never have any money to spend, but I have made a little more than just a living each year. Evidence of this is seen in the stock of goods I have on hand and the equipment used in the business. We have several dollars represented here in finished goods. You see, we make about eight different kinds of mattresses. These are made up in different weights. The quality of the covering effects the value of the finished product so you see we have to keep several mattresses on hand at all times in order to be able to fill any order that our salesmen turn in. The kind of service a firm renders its customers is a big factor in its success. We try to give good service in everything we do.
"Our work requires three trucks at present. We keep one busy here, in and near town. The other two work the wholesale trade in the surrounding towns. Our territory is large and we have some competition scattered about in some of the towns we have to work. We keep a salesman out working the wholesale trade in this territory all the time and we get a nice volume of business through him. Of course, he cannot call at everyone's place of business just when they are ready to purchase some of our goods and they send the order to us themselves, but the mere fact that we have someone who calls by regularly helps hold that firm's trade for us.
"Recently we have put on a new all-time man who works for renovations and repairs. He is turning in a nice volume of business each week, working from house to house. He takes a lady's old worn-out mattress and sends it to us. We remove the old cover and run the cotton or felt through a machine that tears it all to pieces and blows the dirt and dust out of it. We then repack this material and add new stuff if necessary and sterilize it all before finishing the job. In this sterilization process we use an oven built up securely and well-insulated. The mattress is placed in here and the temperature is carried up to 240 degrees Fahrenheit. This method is fully approved by the State and meets its requirements. When we finish with an old mattress it is just as good as new. Our customer has furnished the larger part of the material and of course the cost is less than it would be for a new one. Our people are beginning to take advantage of such savings. More stuff is being repaired, too, now than formerly. We are equipped to do all kinds of repair work, and each week we secure some nice business from our salesman in our repair department.
"The business seems to develop constantly. The volume of work done in each department is greater than it was last year or the year before and with all the increase in business I cannot see that I have any more money than I had last year. I realize that with the increase in business more money is required to carry on the work, but I really think that the unit cost is greater, too. The investment here runs into several thousand dollars. Starting with near nothing and developing the business as it is with everything paid for may be enough to justify one's efforts, and perhaps I will realize more returns just as soon as I get amply equipped in each department for the volume of work there is to turn out.”
One of the men came in with a glider pad to be inspected before it was sent out. Gabby excused himself and walked over to the work table with apparent ease. Both hands were used in the inspection. He first felt of the material and satisfied himself it was of the proper weight (quality). He then ran his hands over the entire surface and very closely examined the edges to see that the seams were straight. He questioned the shape of the front corners and was told that the lady wanted the corners rounded slightly. He decided the amount to be charged and had a bill made out to be delivered with the pad. He can go to any one of several tables and tell you the price of any mattress stored on each and every one. This he does by his sense of touch.
"We have grown big enough here," Gabby continued, "that we are affected by Social Security. I think Mr. Roosevelt did a great big thing when he put this legislation into effect. Sometimes it is hard for us to make the grade, but we have to keep trying and so far we have always succeeded. The present administration has done more to help the little fellow than anyone within my memory. President Roosevelt has surely worked hard and deserves a lot of praise. No doubt he has made mistakes, but everybody that works makes mistakes. A person ought not to be judged by the little mistakes he makes but by the better things he accomplishes and the good he does for those that are yet to come. There has been right much said and written about a third term for Mr. Roosevelt. I can see no reason why he should not run. I sure would vote for him if he did.
"I talk with my friends a great deal. Some of them read articles to me from the papers; others read and talk with me about the things they have read. I have my radio. I keep one here in the office and one in the room at home. I get a lot of information from the radio. I would not be without it for a lot of money. It is a great comfort to me. I listen to the news flashes nearly every day. That keeps me in touch with things that happen everywhere. I am especially interested in the things that happen over in Europe. Frequently there are some good programs and talks to be heard. I try to never miss one of Mr. Roosevelt's talks. He is at the head of things here in America and is in better position to know what is happening than anyone else.
"Another way to learn what is going on in the community is to attend church. I go to the Missionary Baptist Church here. We have a very good preacher and I enjoy his talks very much. I get a lot from talking with the other men that attend the services. They are a fine lot of fellows. It all helps me keep up with what is going on in the world. Things change pretty fast sometimes now and handicapped as I am I would soon become a back number if I neglected my radio, church, and my friends.
"You would be surprised to know how much I enjoy a ball game. At this season of the year it is all baseball, but I enjoy football, too. I get more thrill out of the game by attending with the crowd. The loud speakers keep me informed of the happenings in the game. Usually I go with some friend and he tells me the plays as they are made. I can get all this over the radio, too, but there is an added thrill in being with the crowd. I can sense their feeling and I really enjoy it much better than I do a radio description.
"There are other ways a blind man can develop and broaden himself. I guess it is mostly laziness on my part or I would engage in some of them. I have in mind a membership in some of the civic clubs, being active in church work, and in politics. About the only part I take in politics is to go to the polls and vote on election day. Really a person should talk politics and live politics and be better prepared to cast his vote than the majority are who vote. Too many people let someone or some group do their thinking for them. They go to the polls and vote the Democratic ticket regardless of who is on that ticket. Their only thougnt is to vote the ticket. A voter ought to study the ideas and ideals of his candidate and cast his vote for the man rather than for the ticket.
"In a sense, the same thing is true in church work. A lot of people believe this or that because the church believes in so and so. The Bible says we shall work out our own salvation with fear and trembling. One group believes that if they are regular in church attendance and contribute freely to its support that they can do pretty much as they please the rest of the week. Another set seems to believe that the more noise they make singing and shouting the better the Christian, and so it goes. No one really knows. Each will have to live his own life and satisfy nis own conscience. I believe Christianity should be lived and practiced every day. We ought to do all the good we can whenever we have a chance. It is not necessary to carry on in a big way just while we are in church and feel like that will save us. I feel like the life we lead every day is a safer guide and the thing the good Lord will judge us by when we are called in death. This is just one stage of the greater life the Creator has designed for us. If we are successful here we have another chance at a life that is far greater than anything we can comprehend. If we fail it is eternal destruction."
