NC-445
Personal Life History
A Modern Housewife
(Name and address confidential)
Writer: W. O. Saunders, but story to be used only under a nom de plume -- say,
Wilma Alexander.
<text not clear>
HOPES IT WILL BE TWINS
One of those wires
"Yes, I'm going to have another baby; I hope it will be twins. Mama and papa think it's nice to have large lies; Nick's family has the same old fashioned notion; I have always let them have their way. I never did know what I wanted anyway.
"The truth is, I never wanted to marry in the first place. I couldn't make up my mind about that. But Nick was from one of the best families in town; he had a good business and some day his father would leave him a lot of money, Mama and papa thought it would be a fine thing for me to marry Nick."
"But you loved Nick?" I interposed.
"But I didn't love him," she replied with resigned matter-of-factness. "I never loved anybody. I never knew what love was. I read love stories, I go to the movies, I hear a lot of talk about love and romance; but it doesn't mean a blessed thing to me. I don't think I ever had a thrill in my life. All I know is to try to do my duty, whatever that is, and not be a disappointment to mama and papa.
"You see, mama and papa were already getting old when I came along. I was their baby out of a family of twelve head of children. They worshipped me.
"Mama and papa had had a hard life. Papa farmed and logged for a living. Everybody said he could do the work of any two niggers in the county. But he never made much money and everything went for something to eat and clothes to wear. Mama worked hard too, keeping house and cooking and serving for twelve head of younguns. She did her own washing and ironing; and at hog killing time she pitched in and did most of the work of cutting up the meat, salting it, making sausage, and making lard. She even made her own soap and made chitterlings. I never saw how she could mess with chitterlings, let alone eat 'em. Ugh! it makes me sick at my stomach even to think about them. But, do you know, Nick actually loves 'em. I tell him if he ever brings chittlin's in this house he'll have to cook them himself. But he sure does enjoy them when we go to mama's for Christmas.
"Well, as I was saying, mama and papa had a hard life. None of the children got any education except such as they could get at the public school in the district, and they had to walk four miles to that.
"But I guess, because I was the baby, mama and papa thought they wanted to do better by me. They sent me to town to board and go to the school in town, where they had a longer term and better teachers. And by the time I left high school, two of my brothers had grown up and had jobs. They helped to send me to a business college.
"When I finished business college I got a job as a stenographer and typist in a bank, and it was there I came to know Nick, and soon he was dating me. He used to take me on long automobile rides, picking lonely roads where we could ride slow, and he would tell me that I was the sweetest kid he had ever known and that he was crazy about me. And after a while he would put his arm around me and draw me close to him. At times he would sigh and I thought I could feel him tremble. But it didn't put any unusual feeling on me. He said I was cold, but that he'd rather have me that way than for me to be wild and hot-natured like some girls he knew.
"He said he loved me, and I felt sorry for him when I saw tears in his eyes the first time I had my hair bobbed. Everybody seemed to think I had a pretty head. My hair was naturally curly and I wore it in curls that fell all over my shoulders. You don't know what a nuisance those curls were or how hot they were in summer time. I was glad when bobbed hair came in style. But Nick choked up and great big tears came in his eyes when I had 'em cut off. He met me on Main Street that evening just after I left the beauty parlor. I was happy. But I felt sorry for Nick when I saw how he took on about it. I knew then that he really loved me.
"I guess, maybe, having my hair bobbed, led to me marrying Nick. When you feel sorry for anybody, it just seems to somehow draw you closer to them. After that I let Nick talk about marriage and plan the kind of home we would have, and all of that sort of thing. I knew I didn't love him, but I couldn't imagine myself falling in love with anybody. And then I thought about mama and papa. I knew they had their hearts set on me marrying Nick. My brothers had begun to tease me too; they said maybe they hadn't made such a bad investment in getting me educated; that I might bring some money into the family yet. Not that my brothers would have thought for a moment of sponging on Nick if I married him; they're not that sort. My brothers are just like papa; he never asked anybody for help in his life.
"Well, I thought about mama and papa, what a hard lot they had had of it. And what was there ahead for me? Just going to work at eight thirty every morning and quitting work at five every afternoon, with Saturday afternoons off. Sitting at a typewriter hours at a time until my shoulders ached and I hated the sight of a typewriter. And always having to smile and look pleasing no matter how bad you felt. Would they want me at the bank when I grew old and didn't look so pleasant? I thought about that too. And so I didn't discourage Nick when he talked about marriage and of me making a home for him.
"After all, he wasn't half bad. Some ways he had I didn't like. He was crude in some ways and sometimes I shuddered when he'd give way to one of his horse laughs. I knew he drank too, but he was one of that kind who could hold his liquor and no one had ever seen him drunk.
"I took a drink with him the night we were married. Awful tasting stuff! I don't see how anybody can say they like it; but I must say it gives you a careless sort of feeling and let's you have a good time. It sure will loosen you up. Now, whenever I go out to a dance or a party with Nick I always take a drink and let my self go. I guess I couldn't have a good time if I didn't. Nick says when I'm sober I'm too damned sober, and I guess that's the truth too."
"Are you happy? Or, to put it another way, would you call your marriage a success?" I asked.
"I'm as happy as I have ever been, and looking around and seeing what a mess so many other couples are making of their lives, I guess our marriage might be called a success. Nick is a home-loving man, he's crazy about our little boy that was born ten months after we were married, and he's not hard to suit about his food. Thank the Lord for that, for I don't like to cook. My other sisters are good cooks and good housekeepers, because they stayed home and learned under mama. Mama is one of the best cooks in Oranoke County and a swell housekeeper. But I left home when I was eight years old and mama never had a chance to drill any of her skill in cookery and housewifery into me. The summers I spent at home between school terms, everybody pampered me and wouldn't let me soil my hands in the kitchen. That suited me then, but I wish now I had spent some time in mama's kitchen and learned how to make her clabber biscuits, fry chicken her way, or make a pie crust.
"Of course, I can cook. I learned after we were married. I can't go in the kitchen and throw things to- Insert after 1st paragraph and line 7 on page 6 HOPES IT WILL BE TWINS
And I don't like washing dishes and making beds; but thank goodness I have a maid for that. If I had to wash my dishes without an electric dishwasher I'm sure they would pile up on me until one couldn't get in the kitchen. Nick says I am the most successful little messer upper he ever saw. But as long as I look after the cooking he's happy. He draws the line on eating Negro cooking and, you know, the only maids you can get in this part of the country are colored. gether, a dab of this and a dab of that, like mama does. I have to have a recipe before me. We have an electric range and that's a big help. When the recipe calls for moderate heat, I set the oven for moderate heat and that's that. How mama ever controlled the heat on the old wood burner she cooked on is more than I can understand.
"When we were first married Nick told me I couldn't boil an egg without scorching it. But he was nice about it; he went and bought me one of those funny little electric things that you set up your eggs in, pour in a spoonful of water, put the cover on and they come out soft, medium or hardboiled, according to how many spoonfuls of water you put in the thing.
"Nick is crazy about all kinds of electrical contraptions. He has bought me an electric dishwasher and an electric thing that grinds the garbage up and lets it run right down the sink. But I don't like to cook. It's a good thing you can buy so many things in cans already cooked. Nick says I'm the handiest woman with a can opener he ever saw. He buys me every new fangled can opener that comes on the market. Nick's good about that; he is always looking around for and buying some new kind of labor saving device for the kitchen. But he is always fussing about the kitchen knives; he says he wishes to God somebody would make and sell a kitchen knife that would keep an edge.
"If it hadn't been for magazines like the Woman's Home Companion, the Ladies' Home Journal and McCall's, I don't know how I would have managed. Not knowing a blessed thing about housework, cooking and having babies, I have had to depend on magazines and books. I had my first baby by the books and have raised him by the books. The next one will be raised the same way. It's awfully expensive, but you have healthier babies that way. They're not always fretting and crying and catching every disease that's going the rounds. If I had a bawling squalling youngun around me I expect I'd go plumb crazy.
"Mama laughs at me for being so particular about our baby. When I go to visit her I boil all his drinking water, sterilize his drinking glass and the dishes he eats out of. Mama has no patience with it. She says she raised twelve children without losing one of them and that every kid has to eat a peck of dirt before it dies. All the same, I'm going by the books. I just don't see how mama pulled through having twelve kids, with only an ignorant midwife to help deliver her. I went to the hospital to have my first one and I'm going to the hospital to have this next one."
"I have observed that you are an unemotional somebody; did you ever have a religious experience?" I asked.
"Lord, Know!" she exclaimed. "I have attended several religious revivals and seen how a lot of folks carry on when the preacher gets them worked up. It looks silly to me."
"But you belong to a church?" I queried.
"Never have joined a church," she replied. "I don't like to go to church. I go to Nick's church with him sometimes, and I may join his church. He wants me to and his mama and papa are set on it; they think it's something awful because I don't belong to a church. But what's the good of it? I know right from wrong and do the best I can to live right. Church wouldn't make me any better. And when I see the way so many church folks carry on: lie, cheat, steal, talk about their neighbors and run around with other women's husbands, I'm disgusted.
"Our little boy goes to Sunday School and seems to like it. It won't hurt him. I guess I'll join the church after a while, just to please Nick; but I know I'll never understand the bible, -- all those funny names and all the begettings in it. And do you really believe that God made Adam and Eve and put a serpent in the garden to tempt them? I never will believe that; I'm sure God is as good a parent as I am, and I wouldn't put temptation in the way of one of my children, let alone turning a tempter loose on him.
"But why have I been talking this way to you? You have just led me along and let me talk my head off, and I just started off to tell you that I'm expecting another baby.
"I'm not fooling about hoping it will be twins. Mama and papa believe in big lies and so do Nick's people. I guess it's up to me to please everybody, and if Nick and I are going to have a big family I'd like to have 'em and get it over with.
"There's something nice about large families after all; small families are generally selfish and never have the fun that large families have.
"Still, it's a great responsibility bringing a lot of children in the world like it is now. I just can't understand life anyway. It used to be that there wasn't enough food and clothing in the world for everybody; now there seems to be a plenty of everything, but we've got to have W.P.A. and all that sort of thing for people to keep from starving and freezing to death. What's it going to be like when our little Nick grows up?"