In an otherwise identical version of the "Grand Ways, the names have been changed. With those name changes it was published in These Are Our Lives (1939). The names in the version included here are probably the actual names of the people mentioned.
Rewrite: December 29, 1938.	Ella Carpenter,
House Maid,
1643 White Ave.,
Knoxville, Tennessee.
Interviewer: Della Yoe.
Revised by Aswell.
THE GRAND WAYS
Ella Carpenter, housemaid and cook in the large two-story brick residence on White Avenue, flashed a broad smile when she opened the front door. "Hello, there and come rat in. Mis' Pendleton she gone out. Ain't nobody home but me and Toodles. He's another one them Boston Bull pups Mis' Pendleton got since the last un died of pure meanness."
She led the way through the house.
"Yes'm, this a new uniform. I got on. Mis' Pendleton she make me change every day. I wears first one color and then 'nother color, 'cording to how she want me to. Sho' is glad she ain't got onto no black for house uniforms yet. Maybe next time she go somewhere and see the maids dressed in black, she come back, she say, 'Ella,' she say, 'I'm go' put you in black now. And then she give me a whole new set of uniforms--caps, aprons, and all. Ain't never give me no red uniform to wear yet, though. Wish she would. I likes that red. Me bein' light complected, I can wear most any color they is, but it's red that make me becomin' mo' than anything. My ol' granny use to make me dresses out of colored figgered calico. She say high colors sets off a light complected colored girl. She give me these earrings I wears daytimes. Make me look a Indian or a gypsy Mis' Pendleton give me that pair of long dangly pearl-like earrings she use to wear. I sho' proud of 'em. Come on downstairs where we can talk and I'll show 'em to you.
"Maybe it was my grandma," Ella chattered on as she went down the back stairs toward her basement quarters, "that put it in my haid to quit that cotton pickin' and came to Tennessee and git me a good job. Her name was Carolina, so everybody call her ol' Aunt Carolina back down there in South Georgia where I comes from She all time tellin' my mother that I was 'the biddablest of all the ten Carpenter chilluns.' She'd say 'Ella you is smart. You ain't lazy. You don't belong to walk on no plowed ground all the days of yo' life. Why don't you learn maiding Why don't you git a good job and be a lady like you's borneld to be?' We knowed some women, and men too, what was cotton pickers and come to Tennessee and got theirselfs good jobs. One of 'em got me this job. That's how come me living here. Been with the Pendletons ever since I come, and that was four years ago."
Ella turned the key and opened the door to her room-a combination living room, bed room, and bath. The walls were papered with clusters of wild pink roses entwined in a design of old fashioned garden trellises against a white background. Scatter rugs, made from old carpets that had done service upstairs covered a rough floor which Ella had painted a chocolate brown. "If'n I'd had my rathers, this flo'd been some other color," Ella explained. "But it's so dirty in this city. I couldn't keep it clean nohow.
"You like my furniture? So does I. This set use to Mis' Beatrice's, but they got new furniture for her room when she come back from New York. It's curley maple, they say. I think it's awful pretty. Granny Carolina she'd cackle if she could see me in a room like this, with my bed lamp and magazines on my table and flowers, even if they is paper flowers. Lord, if she could jest see them pink Swiss curtains at my windows! Mis' Pendleton she say she won't have no maid in her house she don't take interest in her own room and keep it nice. Say if you is ontidy in yo' own room how can I expect you to keep the house red up proper?
"But I always was tidy-like. Don't like to have a mess about me nowheres. I takes the same care of my clothes I do my room. See 'em things hangin' in my closet? They's mostly old clothes the white folks give me. I make 'em over and mend 'em here in my room nights. Do it all with my fingers. They ain't a sewin' machine in this house. Don't reckon they's ever been one. white folks nowadays don't have they clothes made up for 'em like they use to. They buys from the stole Bet they ain't a week Mis' Pendleton don't have a carload of clothes sent out from the sto'. Now, she don't buy all them clothes! She jest like to try 'em on befo' the mirror. She strut 'round in 'em. Then she send 'em back.
"Tha t woman's all time studyin' 'bout style. She mighty quick to learn me. Don't make no bones, neither, hoppin' on me when I makes a mistake. When I stops to recollect how us Carpenters had the grab habit at the table, most everything we had to eat all in one pot on the hearth or kitchen table, and now me steppin' 'round like a bird on sore claws, passin' eats one at a time, and cleanin' off table the same way, I thinks to myself, 'Ella, Granny Carolina was right. You is goln' to be a real lady.'
"That's my grandma's picture on the wall. Took by one of them travelin' picture makers, jest a year before she died. I sho' loved that good ol' woman. She was more like white folks than any colored person I ever knowed. She 'wasn't raised by white folks, but worked fo' 'em all her life till she got the rheumatics so bad she couldn't work no more. She come to live at our house when I was a baby. I'm jest twenty years old now, but I can recollect jest as well how she use to talk to me when I was jest a little bitty thing. If'n I'd cry or was sick, she'd take me on her lap and nuss me.
"Granny Carolina, she read the Bible to all of us, too. She an awful good woman. But let one of us young uns sass her or pay her no mind when she called us, and she'd take and wash our mouths out with lye soap and maybe whoop us with a willow switch. Didn't hurt none. But that ol' lye soap! Ever taste it? Worse'n castor oil. She knowed the switch wouldn't hurt much less'n she take and flip-flap, warn, warn, on the bare laig. When she do that you might as well had a burn from the fire. Her rheumatics didn't make no matter when she took it into her haid to give us a good switchin'.
"Granny, she kept a ol' cow bell by her chair on the flo'. When she want some thin, or somebody to come, she take and ringed that bell, bing, bing, bing! Three times jest like that. When she do that and out in the field we'd hear three rings, most generally meant she want me to come to the house. They all say 'Ella, Granny's callin'. Better go see what she want! Then when I get to the house, she say to me, 'Come on in the house out'n that hot sun, chile. Time fo' you to rest.'
"You see my mama bein' a widow woman and havin' ten chillun, every one of us had to pick cotton when pickin' time come. We went from field to field, everywhere they needed some extry hands. Didn't work fol no regular man, though. And cotton pickin' wages was all we ever had. Some of the colored families down there use to move around like circus folks. If they was too far fram they home when they got through the day's pickin' they sleep in folkses barns. But we never done that. My mammy never would agree fo' us to do cotton pickin' in a field that was too far from our house so's we couldn't walk back that night. She say, 'I keeps my family together. Don't git in no mischief that way.'
"Some days when Granny'd call me back to the house, when I was still so little, she'd set me to making firelighters out of scraps of paper. Matches was scarce. She say, 'Now Ella, you can work for your grandma a while. I pay you with a cookie.' She made the best gingerbread cookies I ever eat. Well, maybe not as good as the ice box cookies I've learned to make since I come here. Mis' Pendleton's so proud of 'em she 'stributes 'em amongst the neighbors lots of times. Granny never heard tell of ice box cookie. Neither did I till I come here. Never even heard of a ice box 'cept the froze-over wash tubs, some times, or the wash pans and buckets left outside on shelves by the back of the house. Never did have much ice and no snow either back where I come from.
"Another reason my grandma would call me back to the house was 'cause she was 'fraid I'd git a snake bite. You know them ol' cotton-mouth moccasins is poison. They quile up under the cotton bushes and you stick your hand or your toes under there, and he bite you right now. Nobody in our family ever got snake bit, but they was a boy once. He was workin' in the same field we was--that was after I was 'bout twelve years old and went to the fields all day with the others--and he was bit. Took him to our house and Granny fed him fat meat so fast it most choked him. Cured him, though. Granny say she hope don't nobody else 'round here git bit by a viper, That's what she call a snake. She say, 'Fat meat's too scarce.'
"Most any kind of meat was a treat to us. At hog killin' time, we'd git a ration of meat for helpin' neighbors render they lard. We jest had common food, dried fruit, and garden stuff, and lots of black molasses. I like that a heap better'n honey. Sometime when Mr. Pendleton go off on a huntin' trip, he'll bring back some comb honey from a farm. Nobody else here likes it much but me and Mr. Pendleton. He takes what he want and give me the rest. He was brought up on a farm. Mis' Pendleton she say, 'My husband was reared on an old Southern plantation.' He don't talk no foolishness like her. He talk about his boy-time days on the farm. And she say, 'Edmund lived on a plantation.' it don't make no diffunce to him. He let her talk and do like she pleases and go on talkin' 'bout that farm.
"I wonder do duchesses do the way Mis' Pendleton do? Seems like she sho' do have the grand ways. Most too grand, too, for her pocketbook. Leastways, that's the way it look like to me. Ain't never raised my wages since I went to work for her fo' years ago. Mr. Pendleton he did once. He give me a dollar raise. He come in the kitchen one day. He say to me 'Ella does you think you could use another dollar a week from now on?' But the Duchess, "(here Ella smirked, shrugged her shoulders, and mimicked the manner of her mistress) "the Duchess she didn't like that. Not her. She jest give me more work to do.
"When I first come here, they was jest three in the family, not countin' the dog. They give me three dollars a week then. That look like good money to a cotton picker. Pickin' cotton ain't no job for a lady. And here they furnish me with this nice room and my food and the clothes they give me ain't ragged like I was use to down in Georgia.
"When Mis' Bea trice come back from New York--you know she been there three years studyin' some thin, or other-- she give me a lot of' pretty clothes. Heap mol style to 'em than them Mis' Louise and her mother give me. Me and Mis' Beatrice has got the same kind of' taste in clothes. Sometime, when I go out on my af'ternoon off folks don't know at first whether it's me or Miss Beatrice. That don't make me mad. But it'd make her boil. She's been good to me, and I like her, but she's got her mama's temper. If she knowed folks thought we look alike when I git all dolled up in her clothes, she'd have me fired right now."
Ella chuckled, and got up from her chair to give an imitation of herself stepping out of the house. It was a clever impersonation graceful in movement, and an exact reproduction of Beatrice's gestures. She completed the portrayal by representing herself as leaning on the arm of her escort at a midnight ball, just before the unmasking, when all that she would say to her escort, who kept asking 'Black gal, who is you?' was 'Black boy, jest call me Mis' Bee-at-trice!
"Does you dance? Lord, I could jest die dancin'. Give me some of that good ol' swing music. Give me a slick floor and I can shake my feet all night long and never git tired. Our club--we calls it the Twentieth Century--give a dance once every month. But I got to be back here next momin' by six o'clock jest the same. Sometime when I late and maybe the alarm clock didn't go off or I miss a car--I spends the nights with a girl friend the nights our club has a dance--I git a good scoldin' and ehen have to work on my next afternoon off to pay fo' it.
"Mis' Pendleton she scold me a heap. Most the time I don't pay no 'tention. Jest let her talk herself out and then I go 'bout my work. Reckon she knows she couldn't git nobody else to do all the work I do fo' fo' dollars a week. I'll tell you what all I have to do. You see, they's a bigger family now than when I first come. Mis' Beatrice is back from New York. Mr. Edmund come home from college and now Mr. Pendleton'S mama come to live here. She's an ol' lady, more'n seventy, and she been an invalid most of her life. She's rat fretful, and always so particular 'bout her food. Maybe sometime when I take her breakfast tray to her room she claim the coffee too strong, or too weak, and I have to traipse back down stairs and make her a fresh pot. I take breakfast trays to all their rooms, except Mr. Pendleton's. He gits his in the dining room by hisself at sixthirty of a mornin'. On Sunday mornin' he'll eat in his room. I takes up six breakfasts every mornin' and each one is diffunt. Everyone of them has to be fixed fresh soon's they ring the bell. Don't none of them eat at the same time. Mostly Mis' Louise and Mis' Beatrice sleep until 'bout eleven o'clock. Then they don't want no lunch. Mis' Pendleton has hers about eight-thirty or nine o'clock. And Mr. Edmund-well, neither the Lord nor the Devil know what he go' do, evert That boy a plumb sight. His daddy don't know he stays in bed some days till after lunch. I bet some of these times if Mr. Pendleton come home onexpected, and he find Mr. Edmund quiled up in that bed, he take and drag him out by the hair!
"I go over this whole house with the Hoover every day, and dust every crack and corner good as I can. Answer the doorbell and the telephone. Sometimes I have to laugh. Folks can't tell my voice from Us' Pendleton's and they start talkin'. Think in, it's her answered the 'phone. Good thing we got an extension or I'd run my feet off answerin' that 'phone. Specially when all the young folks is at home. Lots of times, though, they git invited out, or they spend the day at the country club playin' cards and golf. And they all have a lot of company here too fo' meals. Mis' Louise's sorority meets here every other week, and Mis' Pendleton's card club meets here every Thursday. That's the day most servants has off. But I can't git off 'cause that's her card club day. She give me Tuesday afternoons. I usually git away around one-thirty or two o'clock.
"Then I do a considerable washin' and ironin'. I like that kind of work. The girls like to have me do up their best things. Sometime I wash shirts for Mr. Edmund, or wash one of his sweaters. Better not shrink it, though! Once I scorched one of the ol' lady's pet handkerchiefs. She like to never got done talkin' 'bout that. Seems like ol' people whine so much and act like they put upon. Why that ol' lady's livin' in clover. But she don't know it. Least she don't act like she do. But they's one Blessed God's truth, and that is she ain't allowed to go monkeyin' with bossin' the house. I don't have to take orders from nobody but Mis' Pendleton.
"Speakin' 'bout handkerchiefs. I do up all Mr. Pendleton's to keep 'em from bein' tore up in the laundry. Once when they was one missin', Mis' Pendleton say she have to take it out of my wages. But then wnen she learn that she jest hadn't counted right, she say she sorry. She's good to 'pologize if she thinks she done you wrong. They's a heap of good in her, 'spite of her bein' so fidgity 'bout things.
"Seem like, since she's so particular 'bout me keepin' my room tidied up she'd learn the girls some such manners. Wish you could jest see their rooms in the mornin with all they clothes on the floor jest where they dropped 'em the night berore. Lipstick paint and powder allover everything and the dressers a-gaum, and hair lert in they combs and cold cream smeared on the mirrors and all that sort or thing. And they shoes! Bet both or the girls has a bushel or shoes all messed up on the closet floor. I have to pick up arter 'em always twice a day.
"Then they's the downstairs lavatory and three bath rooms upstairs to red up mornin's. Mr. Pendleton he don't make no mess shavin', but look out for that Mr. Edmund! He no more thinks to red up arter hisse'f than that little pesky Toodles, down there in the kitchen all time under my feet. And I does the window washin' and washin f curtains ror all over the house. But, or course, not all at at one time. I be dead ir I was to try to do that. Theyfs two double windows in the library, one in the reception hall, two in the dining room, and two windows in every one or the rive bedrooms ups t airs.
"I makes out the laundry list to go with the week's washin f and count everything when they come back. The special dining room linen I does up myself. Clean the silver once a week, too. They's a university student live in the other basement room, which they gives him for firing the furnace. Sometime if he git back late, and the old lady git chilly, I have to go fix the fire. But don't do that much.
"What do I do between jobs? Well, I listen to the radio when ain't none of the family 'round, and read the funnies in the newspapers before they git out of bed. Same thing in the afternoon, when the papers come befo' the family all gits back from wherever they've been. And I talks to my boy friend on the telephone. And I reads the story magazines and looks at the pictures in the style books.
"Tell you the truth! The thing I hate most is takin' Toodles for a walk afternoons. Mis' Pendleton treat him jest like a baby. She talk baby talk to him all the time. But he don't git no sweet talk from me. And he don't like me, neither. He's so mean to run and pull at the chain. Hurts my hand tryin' to hold him. Once he got away from me. Saw a cat and he liked to had a fit. I couldn't hold him. Well, he got lost and they didn't find him for two or three days later. Mis' Pendleton took on terrible. She never said a word 'bout firing me, though.
"I know plenty servants has a harder time than me. They all the time changin' jobs and never seem satisfied. Plenty ladies on this block right now would take me if I'd go to 'em. They tell me any time I quits Mis' Pendleton to let 'em know. Course, Mis' Pendleton, she bossy, but most of the time she don't bother me, as long as I git my work done right and on time. We has a schedule. That makes it easier. That Toodles is my abomination. He my cross. No use wishin' he'd die or git lost for keeps. She'd just git another one. She got to have her pet.
"Yes'm, it's gettin' time for some of the folks to be comin' in now. Them that's comin'. This Mr. Pendleton's night at his Smoker Club, so he won't be home. And Mr. Edmund and Mis' Beatrice is havin' they dinner at the hotel with them friends of hers from New York. We don't have much for dinner nights Mr. Pendleton ain't here. Mostly left overs, and maybe one hot dish and some coffee. I'll go up with you and see if the afternoon paper has come. I got to see what Tarzan's got into today. Saw him in the movies once. But I like the paper pictures best.
"Next time you hear from me guess I'll be rat here. Don't know, though, as you'll hear anything 'bout me gittin' a raise in my wages. Way I looks at it, the two girls'll marry pretty soon, and the old lady may go to California to stay with another daughter, or down to Florida to git the sunshine. And the work won't be so hard. And when I gits married all I learned here will come, in handy to run my own home. Then maybe I'll play like I'm a Duchess, too, and git a girl to work for me. Won't I make that girl step, though!"