Elizabeth Henry
7419 Garfield St.
January 11, 1939
Life History
QUEEN OF FISH FRIES
Elizabeth Henry used to be the belle of her neighborhood. She was, the sparkplug of frivolity, which had no beginning or end. Her friends called her "Queen of the fish fries;" that was because she knew more about frying fish than a monkey knows about "poking his tail at people he dislikes. She could make a cat fish melt in your mouth, and "have the grease of its juice run down yo' belly." What about potato salad? Why Elizabeth had a special seasoning for potato salad. "Had a special seasoning fo’ my tato salad…used onions, parsely, garlic and celery, lil mayonaise made out of vinegar, eggs and salt," she says. Elizabeth will confidentially tell a friend, "I done fried plenty fish to get niggers out of jail." Folks in the neighborhood will verify this; they used to excitedly run to Elizabeth in unsurpressed plea, begging, "Lizzie fry plenty fish. Jim Bailey is in jail and we need two six bits mo’ to git him out." Did Elizabeth fry it Did Grant take Richmond?
Unfortunately, Elizabeth doesn't fry fish anymore. In fact, she isn't doing much of anything save, cooking for Mrs. Fryles who is giving Elizabeth work to keep her from starving. You see, Elizabeth is sixty-six years old and is suffering with high blood pressure. "These white folks is just helping me while I'm hyar. My days is numbered, I reckon. But I'm goin’ to keep goin’ till the Lawd takes my hand,” she softly said, her starry eyes looking at us in awe.
Elizabeth is a dark person; she is as affable as she is dark, which means she is very affable. Her face is wrinkled but open. She blinks her right eye, not in pain but in habit. When the weather is cold water runs out of this eye like a stream. Elizabeth wears a brwon stocking piece on her knappy head as a "skull cap; she also wears a brown bracelet on her left hand. Her clothes, always of conservative colors, and very few, are as wrinkled as her face and have seen better days.
Elizabeth was contacted at the present address where she lives in the second room of a comfortable three rom house with her ex-common-in-law husband, Manuel Hopper, and his common-in-law wife, black Alice Moore whom he calls "dark angel." Elizabeth lived with Manuel five years, when she was in good shape, and "B'fore my joints got crippled." She is in a very strange situation but doesn't seem to mind it. "What can I do? Manuel don't want no messin' around wid no limb hurtin' woman. He wants action. I'm old now now, and I sho can't give him none. Its been two yars since I left Manuel be wid Alice," Elizabeth bashfully says. She sleeps in an antique bed but in a very clean room which consist of two dresser drawers, an armour and two straight-back chairs. Elizabeth is very tidy. She likes to/wear aprons.
Now, just a word about Manuel Hopper who is from Saint John Parish, and his "dark angel," Alice Moore. First, Manuel is a tall, rangy fellow with strong, broad shoulders. He is black but proud, even walks like it, and in most cases very indifferent about things. Manuel started to become a preacher about fifteen years ago, when he was thirty-five years old, but he fell weak to a "yallar" woman and gave up the idea. No preacher can do whats right and keep his mind on a "yallar" woman, especially if he is a black preacher. But, Manuel didn't think about religion seriously. For, as Elizabeth says, religion gives satisfaction of mind but a woman gives satisfaction of ear, eye, mouth, hand, and feet. After some deliberation with himself Manuel figured that his mind wasn't worrying him, but his eyes saw that "Yallar" woman, his ears heard her tender voice, his mouth offered her money, and his feet took him to her house. Elizabeth explains/it this way, with some degree of firmness: " I reckon Manuel used his hands furst, which might er been alright if he had er used nothin' else. Ha! Boy, there aint a yallar woman livin' who can hold Manuel. No indeed! They is too tender. He needs a black woman. That woman changed her mind, thats about it." Manuel hasn't had a "Yallar" woman since that epsidore, according to Elizabeth who insists; "Maybe I can' tvtake him now but I been watchin' that nigger fo’ fifteen yars. His money is long but it sho aint long enough fo’ no yallar woman. Cause when a yallar woman takes on Manuel she knows she got work to do!"
"But old Manuel tickles me. He sho is some proud man. That nigger too. Shucks, Manuel is goin’ get in a wash pan of water fore he leaves the house. He washes himself everyday...can't stand no funk. He makes you bathe yo’ self wid plenty of soap. You really got to wash yo' self if you goin’ be around him. Man, Manuel used to make me wash myself so much I used to say Manuel is you crazy. That nigger would just sit down and roll, laughing. He used to say, 'cause you black don't make yo' self dirty black. Baby, wash yo' self.’ Don't you know I washed myself, I'm tellin’ you. I used to live that man, love him now, but I can't do no good.
"Old Manuel likes to hang around the corners in his shirt sleeves. He aint got but two coats. He likes to brag about what he used to do and talk about base-ball. Thats all he knows. Talks about them Pelicans or whatever you call 'em. There aint nobody in the world who beat Manuel braggin' He sho can talk talk...and aint got a dime in the world, drinks too much whiskey to have sumpin'. Right now, if Saint Peter'd say Manuel give me a dime and I'll get you into hebbin, he couldn't give Saint Peter a dime. He'd be a lost man. What he used to do? Shucks, Manuel worked but he was a pimp too. Wouldn't put his money down less you equalize it. What I means? I mean that when he put down a dollar you had to put down a dollar and a half, he calls that equalize it mamma. He used to around knocking out womens and take their money, used to beat dumb niggers out of their money playing cards. He can play Coon Can now. He met up wid me and got the livin' hell knocked but of him, but he won't tell that though. No indeed! Manuel likes to play checkers too. Thats what he's doin' now, I’ll bet.
"Well, he's a born riverfront man. He used to be a longshoreman but he works on the guvernment fleet now, makin’ eighteen dollars a week, but Alice only sees nine of them eighteen. The Lawd only knows what Manuel do's wid the rest of his money, I don't. He drinks plenty. I b'leives he drinks up most of his money. His whiskey bill was thirty-five dollars two months ago. Dago Charlie says Manuel bought five rounds of gin fo' the house and told him to add. He added alright, and Manuel paid him. Manuel's got a habit gettin' drunk and then tellin' them white folks to add. He means charge it. He nearly dies when its time to pay the bill, and he wants fo fight everybody, but he pays his bills. He swears he aint never goin' to get drunk no more. I don't pay no attention to Manuel. I know him. Cose, Alice don't say nothin’ She better/not say nothin' Manuell 'll knock her damn head off. Her fights her all the time, she's always in the hospital. Them doctors say to her, 'Girl, we is goin' to move over at yo' house, you need us.' The police catches Manuel but Alice drops the charges. Its gettin' so that Manuel don't even pick Manuel up no mo'. They told him it was alright to beat up his woman but don't he never steal nothin' from no white folks. Manuel said he wasn't goin’ crazy. Manuel aint goin' to whup me..better not. I'll fo'get I got sick limbs and bust the hell out him. He tells me all the time he can't figure me put. I stopped that nigger from figurin’ me out a long time ago."
As for Alice Moore, she is a puny black woman weighing almost ninety-seven pounds and about thirty years old. She seems to have come along a hard, weary road. Her eyes are sunk deeply in the back of her head, having her look like she has tuberculosis. She isn't very active but drinks like a fish. Alice has many scars on her face where she has been cut in scraps with women. "Oh, she'll fight about her mens alright," states Elizabeth in marked deceit. Elizabeth calls Alice the "Spirit Woman" because she creeps along, and soesn't talk much. She listens to Manuel as if he were a Hitler. Of course, she has been forced to do this by the timely wallop Manuel packs for her. Alice is flashy in her few clothes of loud colors. She attends church sometimes, but doesn't pray very hard. "All her prayin' is done to keep Manuel from breakin' her black ass," Elizabeth says with a grin.
"Alice don't spend much time in the Streets. She comes in early, cause Manuel ’ll sho fix her up. She can't mistreat me neither," Elizabeth slyly says, explaining, "Manuel calls her his dark angel. I don't know, why, guess its just a word. No, Alice don't work. Manuel don't want her too. He says she is the only woman he ever did have who got biggety when she had money, and Manuel don't like no woman to get biggety wid him. Thats why Alice aint got no clothes, aint got no insurance, thats why she goes around the street in Manuel's clothes, his shoes and things. The condition of her drawers is a wreck. All Manuel tells her is to keep her ass clean, thats enough. I tell her all the time why don't she leave Manuel. But she figures I want him. Old fool. I can't use Manuel. He aint goin’ to kill me in my old age…no indeed."
"One thing though," Elizabeth says, "Manuel and Alice sho pay their rent. I give ‘em whatever I can. That aint much. They better pay their rent. Miss Joh will throw ‘em out. I'm glad Manuel pays his rent, cause I don't know what I'll do. Them white folks give me lil food and a few cents but they sho aint goin' to pay my rent. And I can't get on that Welfare fo' nothin'. I'm goin’ to continue prayin' to Gawd lak I been doin'. Someday things will be dif’ferent. Someday the hebbins is goin' to opens its doors and tickle my hart and give me the things I been longin' fo'. I pray."
Elizabeth Henry's Life History is as spotted as those varigated skies above us. She was born in New Orleans, reared in New Orleans and "raised par'ticular hell" in New Orleans. "I'm strictly a N’Awleens woman," Elizabeth demurely says. "Me? I was born right hyar on Hillary Street. I was born sisty-six yars ago. Member that two story buildin' around there? That was the buildin'. It used to b'long to my grandpa and grandma. My grandma name was Sadie Henry, my grandpa John Henry. He was a bricklayer. Man, he laid some bricks. Used to make good money. What? My grandpa didn't have to work. My grandpa made enough to sit her down. My grandma and my grandpa died when I was a lil girl. My grandpa took wid pneumonia and my grandma died wid de disease of the hart, or sumpin'.
"My ma and pa raised me. Their names was Abraham Henry and Sarah Henry. No, none of 'em was named after my grandma and grandpa. My pa was a tall man. He was some stylish. Used to smoke one of them long cigars. Got 'em from the white folks. He used to be a butler. Had gold shinnin' teeth. People used to like to see him laugh. I don't know how my pa and ma met each other. I used to hyar 'em talk about it sometimes though. Pa said he was waitin’ fo’ a friend of his and the Street Car...them cars was pulled by mules then...and they used to do lak they do now. The ladies get on furst and then the mens. Well, my ma got on the Car furst and my pa got on b'hind her. She looked at him and he looked at her. then they spoke. When they looked around both of 'em was in love wid each other, I reckon. Anyway, they got married. It wasn't no shot gun weddin' neither. My pa was a gentleman and my ma was a lady. My maused to lak to be dressed up and go about seein' her friends She was lak the white folks, went visitin'. My pa used to tell her all the time, 'You do a heap of goin' out. Hope you aint doin' no devilment.' She wasn't doin’ no devilment atal, wasn’t that kind of a woman. My ma loved my pa. She used to tell me all the time, 'I done prayed fo’ that man. 'He's what I want.
“My pa was something of a dude; he lak to dress up too. Wore them pinch-back coats and them high pants. He laks them checko'board color pants. When he stepped out everybody looked at him. Pa used to lak that. Ma used to tell him he wanted to be a dude but ma used to tell him he better be a dude around the mens, cause if he was a dude around the womens she'd break his ass. Old pa used to just laugh. I don't know if he was a dude around the womens or not. Pa did a heap of goin' to church. Pa was plenty fussy with his clothes. You know what they say. When a man is fussy with his clothes he is fussy with the womens. What I mean by fussy? I means that he was plenty tuff with the womens. Tuff means that he was solid with the womens. What i solid? Man, solid means he was what the womens wanted, thats what.
“No, my ma aint teached my nothin' about fish fries. I picked that up all by myself. Let me tell you about fish fries. Fryin' fish aint as easy as people thinks. Thats why everybody can't fry fish. The main thing is you got to know how to make yo’ season slap yo’ mouth. That means you got to know how to get the taste out of yo’ season. Well, I tell you what you do. Furst, you get you some cookin’ meal..cose, I tell you right now. I use a furnace to fry my fish. Don't let anybody tell you that a stove can fry fish as good as a furnace. Now, I get me a piece of meat and throw it in the fryin’ pan I let that grease get hot till its almost smokin’. I put my corn meal right next to my grease and take a fork and pass my fish through the corn meal, and then I let my fish fry in the fryin’ pan till it gets lak a golden brown. Then I takes it out and its ready to be ate.
"Man, I'm tellin' you I could fry up some fish. I aint tellin' you no word of lie when I tell you I was the Queen of the fish fries. I done fried plenty fish to get po' niggers out of jail. Them jail birds niggers used to hang around me plenty and buy my fish, cause they know good and well that I had to get 'em out of jail. Aint you never hyared about Lizzie the fish fry queen? Boy, I could fry that fish and make it look yo color.
"My ma and pa got along fine till I was ten yars old. Then they separated. Pa 'cused ma of goin’ wid the preacher, and ma 'cused pa of goin wid the preacher's wife. There it was! After that my ma started takin' in washin' and ironin'. My pa died when I was in the fourth grade, my ma died ten yars ago.
"Sho, I think people ought to get all the education they can get. But I couldn't get no mo’ then I got cause after my ma and pa broke up my ma wasn't makin enough money to send me further. She had a bundle and didn't make no.mor then one fifty a day. The most they made washin’ and ironin' was five dollars a week. I left school to do days washin’ and help around the white folks house. I was gettin' to be a big girl and I was runnin’ around some. Thats when I met Eddie Lawrence and Charlie Scrivvens. I had two chillun fo' Charlie Scrivvens. I had two. One was named Charlie. He died at five yars old. The other was a girl; she died at child birth. Then I gave up. I says I don't want no mo' chillun. That was enough fo' me. What about Lawrence? Henaint did nothin'. He wasn't no baby maker. How I know: He aint done nothin'. Did he? How can I tell? Didn't i birth them babies?.
"Sho, I members how I met Eddie. I was cookin' fish in Fisher's Row on Cherokee Street. Everything was goin' fine. But up comes an argument. Eddie was in the argument. He was drunk but kept argunin!. He made me mad, so I told him, 'Listen, old nigger if you don't stop that arguin' I'm goin' to kick yo' damn pants whar you sit down.' I was plenty bad in them days. Didn't take nothin' off nobody. Well, Eddie says to me, 'Yeah, if you do I'll knock yo' damn head off.' Fore I looked around I done hit Eddie over the head wid a pitcher of water. His head started bleedin' and he started hollorin. That nigger was hollorin' lak a chicken with his head cut off. He come sayin', 'You black bitch. I'M goin' to get you yet, if its the last thing I do.' He got me alright…got me in the bed the next day. Shucks, that nigger turned a two dollar trick wid me and stayed with me twelve days after that. Did I like him. I aint seen nobody yet who could outfuck Eddie. Yeah, he's dead. Did I kill him? No, he died a natchal death. He had consumption! What I did after Eddie died? I went on sellin' my fish lak I did fore I ever met him. Oh, Charlie Scrivvens? Well, he was comin' around the same time Eddie was comin' around. Eddie was a workin' man. He worked on the riverfront. Charlie wasn't a workin' man. He just hung around me. Sometimes I got lonesome in the day time and Charlie was always around. Was Charlie in school? Man, the only school Charlie had was knockin' me up. That man could sho make babies. Whew! I used to tell him all the time, man, does you think I'm a baby/hatcher? He'd just laugh, but not me, huh!
"Eddie was nice to me. He put me in the Tulane Society. That was twenty seven yars ago. I been in there ever since. Better stay in there now. Whose goin' to bury me when I die? These people don't want nothin' to do with you when you die. They is lookin' fo' somebody else to bury you. When I close my eyes I want my soul to rest in peace. I don't want to be worryin' about who's goin’ to bury me. I members it well. Eddie says to me one day,.’ Lizzie..he called me Lizzie and Pinchey..you got to get me and you in some kind of a society cause we aint goin’ to live fo'ever.' Yes, Lawd, po' Eddie He's gone. But he was a good man. He sho did b'leiv in society. Never did start to disturbment afta I hit him over the head wid that pitcher. Thats what they says. If you want to get a man yo' way jest hit him over the head wid a pitcher, or sumpin!
"I'm a christian woman now..b’long to Zion Traveler's Church on Adam Street. Ekdey Haywood is the pastor. Sho, I remembers when I got religion and started thinkin’ about the Lawd. I was a lady. What about fish fries? I sold my fish. That aint had nothin' to do wid my religion. You can sell fish and be a lady. I had my fun...can't you have fun and be a lady? I did. Anyway, I was sittin' at my ant Emma's house..facts is..I was heqtin’ in her kitchen. Well, I had been prayin' fo' the longest. Askin' fo’ religion. On this day....it was on a Thursday evenin'…all of a sudden my stomach got fu;; and I was hungry. I felt a chill come over my hart. It went whizz! I looked b'hind me and there was the Lawd standin' there. He says, 'thats all right sister .You done just got religion. Go to yo' church and tell them that I sent you.' I was some scared. I went a-runnin’. I told my ant Emma...she told everybody. Everybody was so happy that Pinchey had got religion. I went to the head Stewardess' house, Miss Brown, she told me, 'darling, I'm sho is glad you got religion durin' our drive fo' sinners...now you can fry us some fish.' Then I started fryin' fish fo' the church...aint fried none fo' sinners or to get niggers out of jail. Just fried it fo' the church. Elder was happy, said I was doin’ good by the church. Well, I told my testimonies and got the blessin' of the oldest members of the church.....got the blessin' from everybody. But I figured that I had done done enough fo' the church so I went back to fryin' my fish and makin' some money fo" myself. I found, out that I had done fell way b'hind, I told Eddie I was goin’ to pick it up. He says, 'O.K.' Sho, I made it up. But I took sick and I had to get Doctor Heydell. He treated me fo’ three months..that was er bout 1921. I got better. He told me to take easy. Couldn't get Eddie to understand that. I don't sell no fish fo' the church or nobody else…aint worth it.
"There is an old sayin’ that you reap what you sew...well, I was doin' all right after Eddie died. My fish was goin' good and my bed room money was goin' good. Whats that? My furnish room money...now do you know what I means? Well, I was doin' fine... had gave Eddie a nice three hundred dollar funeral and everything. Lo and behold up pops black Manuel. He had plenty money on him, came hyar from Donaldsonville. Sumpin’ told me not to fool wid that nigger. Well, he says to me just lak this: "Say, what you goin’ do fry fish all nite. I done bought some homebrew and I wants to go to bed with you.' I says you cheaky black bastard...how much you got? He says, 'You name Lizzie?' I says thats my name. You know I got weak fo’ that black nigger. Stayed wid him five yars. I commenced gettin’ old and he started kickin' me around...wouldn’t give me his money no mo’ I couldn't do nothin’ cause I was weak to Manuel. Just lak I hit Eddie over the head wid that pitcher Manuel used to hit me. Sho wid a pitcher! I got rid of the pitcher but what good did it do? Manuel would hit me over the head wid anything he could get his hands on, makes no difference what it was! Used to ask me couldn't I do better than I was doin’…I told him I was an old woman and couldn't do no better. He says he didn't want no old woman. Shucks, when I looked around Manuel was foolin' wid .Alice smack in my bed. What could I do? was I weak? Yeah, and I was old too. Thats worse? You said it son.
"All my people done gone, son. I'm rite hyar on Manuel's hands. He and black Alice is doin' the best they can fo’ me. Yeah, Manuel knows that I did my best fo' him, thats why he won't put me out. Lawd, I'm sho glad I was good to that man when I had my money. If it wasn't fo’ that I'd be right smack in the streets. Good Gawd a-mighty! I'm all by myself. I'm tryin' to do my utmost to get to hebbin’. Whats it lak? I dunno but I'm tryin' to get there!.
"I'm doin' some cookin’..but I wouldn't call it cookin' neither..fo' Mrs. Fryles. She lives on Hillary and Commercial Streets. She gives me two dollars a week and three meals a day to help me, thats all. I eats breakfast, lunch and dinner there. I eats whatever she gives me, but she gives me the best of everything. She aint stingy wid me, no indeed!. If it wasn't for that White woman and Manuel I don't know what I'd do. She says she's goin' tp put me on the Welfare. Hope she does. Do I pay my dues out of what she gives me? Yes indeed! I pay fifty cents every month. Got to, I don't want no corporation to bury me. I wants a respectable funeral. I'm goin' to scrap till I can't no mo'. I done tried to find a better job. But the white folks don't want you when you is old and weak and not able. Wish I could get on the Welfare. When I dies the people aint goin' to say, 'Whars Pinchey at? Who is goin' to bury Pinchey. Sint that a shame’ I'm goin’ to keep myself in a society, son.
"Who me? Whats the matter wid him? Aint Roosevelt/well? He aint sick is he? Son, I don't know nothin’ bout President Roosevelt or politics. Thats a mess!. I aint never read nothin' bad about Roosevelt. No, I don't bother about no radios. I aint no belle now. Them days is done gone fo' ever. All I'm waitin’ fo' is the Lawd to call my name, then I'm gone. Papers? I stopped readin' the papers five yars ago. My sight got bad. Do I shout in church? No indeed! The soirits hits me and knocks me out. Can't shout!. Plans? Aint got none. I guess when them white folks make up their minds to give me sumpin’ I’ll be dead and gone.
"Sho, I’d fry fish if I could make some money. But I sho wouldn't mess wid nobody lak Manuel, A man lak that would kill me just as dead as dead itself.
"Well, let me go now. I got to go back to work. Come around again soon. I hope I'll be hyar when you come back. If the Lawd says the same I'll be right hyar."
