Folklore
Project #-1655
Phoebe Faucette
Hampton County
Mrs. Alice Nettles Britton, 77 years, Estill, S.C.
Mrs. Britton, though pale and wrinkled with age, is apparently in good health. She stands erect, and looks out, brightly and good humoredly, on a world far different from that in which she was reared.
"We didn't have automobiles to ride in in those days", she says. "And when we went to see anyone, we went to spend the day. Southern hospitality was very great. The people were poor, or at least the ones I knew were, but that didn't keep them from being hospitable. No one came to the home without being given a meal or lodging for the night.
"My father used to farm, and at night he had family prayers. My mother cooked in the chimney. She used a griddle, or gridiron as it is sometimes called. It stood on three feet and was placed on a pivet so that it could be turned around. The side next to the fire would brown, and it had to be kept turned toward the fire until all sides were browned. The Dutch oven was used to cook meats, and bread, and cakes. It would cook delicious meat and beautiful pound cake. The sweetest cooking I ever ate was that my mother cooked in the fireplace. She'd put coals on top of the Dutch oven as well as underneath, and the things would just cook slowly and get real done. They just had a better flavor than things cooked in a stove. These electric stoves don't give things the same flavor that the wood stove do even. My mother used to put cabbage, snapbeans and okra all in one pot with some bacon to cook. They'd just cook slowly, and the moisture from the vegetables was all that was needed to keep them from burning. None of the flavor was boiled out into water, that wag later thrown away, as we do now when we boil vegetables on a stove. The sweet potatoes mother used to bake in her Dutch oven were the best I ever ate. She'd just put them in without a bit of water and they'd cook a long time until they were soft and tender. Cooking slowly seemed to give them a better flavor than the vegetables that are cooked quickly over a hot heat. I have a picture of my mother taken when she was thirty four years old. She had seven children then, but I think she looked real young for her age.
"The old people didn't teach their children as they do now. Then, the children were taught to be seen and not heard. It may have made timid children of some, but they were always glad to go to Sunday school and learn the lessons without all sorts of entertainment and hand work and play. They went for what they learned and they were quiet and attentive.
"When I was a girl the revolution (reconstruction) was taking place. The War between The States was over, but the men all had a terrible time until they got things adjusted again. I was too young to remember much about it, but I remember the two parties - the radical and the democratic. The negroes were voting, and continued to vote until the white people got the law passed that no one could vote who couldn't read the constitution. That was the thing that stopped most of the negro voting. And the negroes were unruly, I remember that. The Ku Klux was all about us, but not right in our neighborhood.
"Our house was on what we called a turpentine road. It was just a blaze cut through the pine woods. It wasn't a straight road, but was crooked and narrow and twisted and turned about between the trees.
"The schoolhouse was not so far away, not over half a mile away, but we had to walk there during all kinds of weather. And we stayed at school all day. Often we would go through the snow. It snowed more often then than it does now. Our teacher's rubbers would sometimes get stuck in the snow. We children didn't wear any. The schoolhouse was only one room about twenty five feet one wide. It was made of logs. On the west side one of the logs had been hewn out at the corners and placed down in the room so that it could serve as a long desk. All of the pupils sat along this desk. The opening gave light and fresh air. There was no way to close it even in the coldest weather. There was one small window in the room on the north side. This, toe, had to be kept open for light. The door on the south side also stood open all the time. When the sun was shining it would come into the door during the morning. It would send a shaft of light and warmth that extended nearly half way across the room. Then in the afternoon, the sun shone la the long narrow opening on the west side just above our desks. There was a fireplace to which we would go and warm when we got cold.
"The church was a big two story building. It wasn't ceiled, as well as I remember. The balcony was used by the negro slaves' before the war. It was not heated in the winter. We'd go to church no matter what kind of weather. I've been many a time through a light rain.
"My husband went into the war at fifteen. I was too young to have learned first hand about the war and the slaves, but I've heard lots about it all. The slave quarters I've seen, though. They were log cabins built close together right straight along on a street as in a city.
"Mr. Britton's mother and father had lots of slaves. His mother had a weaver, and one who carded, and one who spun the thread. The slaves all had good strong clothing. They had comfortable shoes, and good eating - as good as could be afforded. Of course all the masters did not treat the slaves well. Just as all people do not treat their children alike. I know some people that are cruel to their own children. And they'd pay a lot for them, too. They'd pay one thousand dollars for a man, or a woman, and yet they'd be hard on them. But as a general thing the slaves were treated well. But if they gave some trouble they were whipped. Mr. Britton's mother would have the children brought up to her yard every morning, and she saw that they were fed and had a plenty to eat. A doctor was sent for if any of them were sick. On Sunday afternoon the children were brought to the yard and taught the Bible. Other than this religious education they had little or no schooling. The negroes' entertainment was similar to that of the white people. They would have their possum hunts, their dancings, and their quiltings just like the white people.
"The ladies' dresses were very different then than they are now. My grandmother's wedding dress was a dotted swiss. The skirt was made of four full widths gathered into a tight waist. It was cut low in the neck with drop shoulders. It had short sleeves and just a little strap over the shoulders. No dress was ever made with less than ten yards of cloth. And they always wore three petticoats, each just as full as the skirt to the dress. The petticoats were gathered on to a binding that went around the waist. The waists were made with a tight basque and very small at the waist line. Bustles were worn with the skirts to make them stick out in the back, whoops were also used. And the skirts were made long to touch the floor, and sometimes trail along on it.
"Mother was twenty when she married. Her dress was similar to grandmother's except that it was made of organdy. My mother always wore her hair parted in the middle and brought in a coil at the back of her neck. The Shignon, which was a French style of hairdress, was a quantity of false hair arranged in plaits that extended back and forth from the forehead to the lower part of the neck until it formed a wide band about the width of a hand. It was a sight. The Waterfall was the name given to the hair arrangement that was a huge ball placed low on the neck. Another style was a simple plait around the head just like you sometimes see now. One of the face powders was the Magnolia Balm. It was a delicate pink, and was a splendid powder.
Source: Mrs. Alice Nettles Britton, 77 years, Estill, S. C.