Monaghan Mill
Greenville, S.C.
MAY IS A LONESOME TIME
Ella and I sat on the small back porch watching the old man plow. A light April breeze wafted to us the smell of freshly turned earth and Ella, for the moment unmindful of my presence, threw back her head and breathed in deeply. "Tain't much ground," she said, "but it'll raise somethin'. I do love a garden."
"Couldn't he plough a row or two more on this side?" I suggested. "That would still leave you a little patch of yard."
"But I hate not havin' no yard hardly," she replied. "Of a evenin' time in the summer this porch, not much bigger'n two flour sacks spread out together, is the only place we have to set. I've got a few flowers planted out there that'll come on in June and July, givin' us somethin' pretty to look at, and if I let him plough any closer it'll ruin the flowers."
The soil turned outward in a flowing brown ripple as the old man pushed his plough and shaggy mule along, and across the cool damp earth the morning sun shone warm and golden.
"I do love April," Ella spoke. "Always I like to see a little ploughin' goin' on when April comes."
"May too is beautiful," I added. "The leaves of the trees are full grown then but still a soft green."
Ella turned slowly toward me and seemed to be considering whether or not to speak. "May is a sad, lonesome time to me," she said finally as if for the first time she was speaking the words.
"Did something happen to you in May which makes you fell that way about it?"
"No," she answered thoughtfully, "nothin' ever happened to me, and I ain't able to tell you just what causes me to fell that way about May. But when the wind's blowin' through the leaves in May it seems to me like the whole world is mournin'. The sight of a weeping willow then is pretty near more'n my heart can stand. Now, July and August, them's precious months life so full and open, and time then is awful sweet. Well, I love all of time 'cept May, and I can't rightfully say I don't love that, but it is sure sad, lonesome time. I'm always glad to see the first day of June."
The little patch was almost ploughed and the old man seeing the end of his task flapped the lines against the back of the mule and urged him into a slightly increased speed. Five tiny sparrows twittered their way to earth and each perching itself on a freshly turned clod pecked daintily in search of food or just for the love of pecking.
"Yonder comes my wash nigger," Ellas said presently, and I turned to see, coming out of the adjacent street, a cream-chocolate colored negro, lean and stooped, who carried a stick in her hand and from whose ears dangled big god earrings. At her side walked a six or seven year old boy whose presence evoked a menacing bark from the spotted dog which had lain quietly and unnoticed under the steps. "Jessie does washin' cheapern' most niggers or else I couldn't hire her," Ella continued as the two came nearer. "A good nigger, Jessie is. If my back was stout I'd never send out no wash, though. There's no work I like bettern' washin'."
The dog renewed his barking and the boy slowed his pace and crept along behind his mother, peering out warily at the barking dog. The woman brandished her stick and spoke disgustedly. "What makes you bark at him lak dat? Ain't I colored folks too, and you don't never throw no fit when I'se by myself?" At that, the dog took on a new andmore thoughtful silence.
"How you Mrs. Cheek?" the woman greeted Ella. "Got de clothes ready?"
"Yes, Jessie. Go on in there and tell Kate to give 'em to you."
"How's Miss Kate feelin' dis week?"
"All right fur her condition, I reckin, Jessie."
Already Jessie, followed by her boy, was entering the kitchen door, and soon her giggly, loud-mouthed laughted interspersed between little jots of talking came to us where we sat on the porch.
"Jessie's right full of fun," Ellas remarked. "Good nigger though."
Presently, Jessie with a bundle of clothes tied in a sheet and swung across her shoulder was on the porch again. Did you hear me laughin' Mis' Cheek? That smart little grandchile of your'n ketched me eatin' a peppermint I found in yall's dirty clothes. It was on the closet flo mongst the clothes and I picked it up and et it. Eyther's sharp little eyes ketched me, though. Whah, whah."
Eyther herself had appeared on the porch, skipping about and grinning broadly over her sleuthing ability. She was around five, pale, with bright eyes and full of energy. She ran to Ella's chair and leaned grinningly against her lap while Jessie made her way out into the yard.
"Jessie, when you going to bring me them okry seed? Your old man ain't likely to charge he too much for 'em, is he?"
"NO'm he ain't likely to, fur I ain't likely to let him," Jessie replied, laughing heartily. "He'll treat you right 'bout dem seeds, Mis Cheek. Good-bye, little sharp eyes. C'mon boy, and keep up wid de pertection of dis stick. They's more'n one dog on dis mill hill."
As we watched Jessie and her boy disappeared behind one of the houses in the street ahead of us. The old man, finished with his task, stuck his plough deeply into the earth, spoke to his mule, and then trudged across the freshly turned soil to the doorsteps. "Well, I reckin that 'bout finishes it, Mis. Cheek," he said to Ella.
"How much, Mr. Spain?" she asked.
"Forty cents I reckin'll do," he replied, shifting his weight to his left foot.
Ella rammed her hands into her apron pocket and drew forth the coins which she handed to Mr. Spain. Presently the old man and his mule were picking their way to the street beyond.
"It don't take long to spend ten dollars," Ella said. "That's what my old man makes down there and he sure works to get that. Sweeps of a nightime and always there's two bossmen tryin' to push him along, faster, faster. Them drawing twenty-five and thirty-five dollars a week doin' nothin' but watchin' others work while my man gets a measley ten dollars a week for workin' hisself to death. Tain't fair but a pore devil's got no way of helpin' hisself.
"The other night Will had a funny sort of dream and in the thirty-tow years we've been married he's never been much fur dreamin' so it wouldn't s'prize me if this one didn't have a meanin' to it. He dreamt that John Spearman, his boss, was under the bed he was la in' on and he was scared to move fearin' he'd hurt Spearman. Now, that dream could mean before long Will's goin' to get a good job of some sort and John Spearman ain't goin' to have his much longer. It could mean that now. Joseph had one with a sight stranger meanin' than that, you know, Joseph of the scriptures. I heerd Charley Courtney preach on Joseph a few Sundays back over here at the Assembly of God church. Have you ever heerd him?"
"I don't believe I have."
"Well you've heerd Harold Smith, shorely?"
"I don't think so," I admitted. "Does he preach here at the village?"
"Well some, but that ain't all. He's on the radio every week. Not over Greenville, no. He stepped on their toes a little too hard and they took him off but Spartanburg put him on. Up town in Greenville is awful wicked, full of liquor stores, and Harold don't soften his words when he preaches against liquor."
The name Harold Smith was sufficient impetus to draw Kate from the seclusion of the kitchen where she had been since Jessie's departure. She came forth heavy and awkward with child, her colorless eyes now intent in her broad insensitive face. Without giving any particular attention to the vacant chair on the porch she found it and sat down, her thoughts still on the man she'd come to discuss. "Harold Smith's the best preacher I ever heard," she declared. "You ought to heard him the Sunday he preached on them six men that was electrocuted for killin' that guard down at Columbia. Him and five other preachers stayed with 'em the night before, pleadin' with 'em and tryin' to save their souls. He said they saved everone of 'em but old man Woods and it was him that really done the killin'. He said so, Woods did, and told 'em if they didn't turn the others loose they'd be killin' five innocent men.
"Wasn't that awful, killin' five innocent men? But the worst thing was what Woods told Harold while he was pleadin't with him to accept Jesus. Harold, he says, 'Don't you know, brother, that the devil's down in hell waitin' for you now, gettin' things ready? Why dont you disappoint him by acceptin' Jesus now and stay out of hell tomorrow.' Woods grinned at him, and said he couldn't wait to have a good tussle with the devil. A man gettin' ready to die doin' such talk. Beats all I ever heard of. Before the night was over old man Woods told Harold he didn't believe in no hell or heaven either. Now wouldn't you hate to be in his place? There he was with a chance to stay out of hell and he wouldn't take it. Then Harold, hevent on to tell about the 'lectrocution. He said he had to stick money in his nose to keep from faintin' because of the stink from burnin' flesh, never in his life had he smelt anything so awful. He sure preached one powerful sermon on them men. There ain't no religion like the Holiness nohow." The child, raising herself from her elbows, giggled at some remembered thought and her laughter lessened the tension which held us "Grandma, I thought a dog had me when I went to the Holiness meetin', didn't I?"
Ella grunted out a little laugh and explained. "They have a awful keen yell, the Holiness do," she said, "and a few Sunday nights ago when I took Eyther she jumped right straight up in her seat and grabbed at her heel. I asked her what was ailin' her and she said a dog bit her. Wasn't a thing but some woman close to us had give a keen little yap and Eyther thought for sure a dog had her. She's sorta nervous, Eyther is.
"Now burnin' must be a awful death," she continued presently. "Once in my life I thought I was goin' to be burned up and it was a awful feelin'." Ella chuckled leisurely, gazed out across the soft Spring day, and returned at last to her story, "Sounds foolish ever time I think of it now but it sure didn't then. Me and Will was both right young or else we might not've been so easy fooled. Seems like we wouldner nohow. Well, we had three children, but we wasn't old, like I said. It was somewhere 'bout the middle of May, I remember, because we was near bout done with the second choppin' of corn. It was awful cool when we went to the field, that mornin' and. it kept gettin' cooler till it was plumb cold. And then somewhere close to eleven o'clock it started a snowin'. I'm here to tell you I felt strange seein' snow in Georgia durin' May. We was livin' in the country not far from Hartwell, Georgia and not more'n three miles from where I was raised.
"A few days later they was tellin' it around in them parts that the end of time was at hand and in less'n a week a comet trailin' fire'd sweep through the world witherin' and burnin' every livin' thing. Folks was pretty near crazy and one family got so frenzy they punched their eyes out, hopin' I reckin to find favor with the Almighty. But me and Will took a different notion of it. We was scared, yes, Lord, we was scared, but we talked it over and made up our minds to get what pleasure we could out of them few days we had left. I says to Will, 'S'posen we have chicken three times a day?' And Will he said that suited him fine I'd took off one early hatchin' and had eight what you might call real big broilers. We et them first. Then I started in on my hens. My aunt lived 'bout a mile from us and I thought she was the foolishest woman I ever seen to keep settin' her hens like nothin' was goin' to happen. She kept a settin' and I kept stewin' hens, makin' a pot of dumplings one day and a pan of dressin' the next. Time passed and the comet come, a comet with a long, fiery tail, but so far as I know it never done no damage. It took me a year or two to get a good start of chickens again."
The child prodded her grandmother with her elbows, demanding attention. "Was I there, Grandma, was I there?" she wanted to know.
"Lord, child, nobody had. ever dreamt there'd be sech a youngun as you," Ella answered, grinning in her toothless way at the child.
Kat arose heavily from her chair. "I better get some beans to boilin'," she said, and went out of the room.
"She's my youngest," Ella said with a nod in Kate's direction "This is her first one and she had to come live with her mammy till it's over. Then her and George'll get out to theyselves, and won't nobody be here but me and Will and Eyther and her brother Pete. I've had thisyoungun since she was two years old. Her mammy took sick like on Tuesday and died on Saturday. She was seven month gone then, and I'd been atellin' her she'd better quit the mill but her man wasn't no manner account and seemed like she had to work. And if you was to see him you'd think he was a lawyer or some such fellow, way up in the world, you know. Fine lookin' and wears Sunday clothes all the time, but keep him to work if you can. He was a foreigner though, and I reckin they're just different. Born up in Pennsylvania, and some calls him Pennsylvania Dutch. I don't know what he is but he sure give Otha one hard life the few year she lived with him. He'd get drunk and raise old Ned, and we'd call the law, and they'd give him thrity days, but once he got off and in his Sunday clothes again, he'd act like a fine fellow for awhile, drinkin' and everything and kept us tore up all the time."
Eythere gave two little skips and came back to prop herself against her grandmother. "Daddy was here yesterday," she said, "and I made him give me a nickel. Bubber did too. Bubber got a nickel too." She skipped her way into the house.
"Otha's the only grown one I've had to die," Ellas said. "The little twins died when they was seven weeks old. Sweetest little old babies. Claude and Maude I'd named 'em Lord, how I did want to raise them babies, but they never had no chance from the beginnin'. Puny from the day they was born. I reckin the Lord thought six was enough for me. Pa and Ma had eleven, though, and all lived to be grown.
"Them was good days back there when I was growin' up. We had everything folks could want for, I reckin. Pa owned a seven mule farm add he knowed how to manage it. There was the orchard with peaches and pears and plums and apples, all the fruit we could use, there was always plenty hogs to kill and chickens too; peas, potatoes and corn and a rup aplenty the whole year round. Pretty near everything we needed to eat we raised. Even to our own vinegar we got right off the place. Pa'd carry a load of apples to the cider press and come back with seven gallons of vinegar, and that done us till apple time again.
"Us girls worked in the field but we never done the heavy work like ploughin' and pullin' fodder.
"Pa kept us in good clothes, went to town and bought 'em hisself. He'd get get us two homespun checks apiece in the fall and two in the spring them was our work dresses. When we come out of the field we had percale house dresses to put on. Then they was always two Sunday dresses a year.
"When we wanted to we had company and that was most of the time. Many's the time we had as high as fifteen to spend the night with us and not airy one had to sleep on a pallet either We had nine rooms and beds in seven. The old house was seventy-five year old when Pa bought it. The first part of it was built out of logs and rooms had been added to it till it was a real big house. Out front stood four of the prettiest walnut trees you ever seen, must've been old as Georgia they was so big, and then two more stood right by the well-house, the shade of one lappin' over to meet the other.
"We worked hard but we had plenty. I never did mind work long as I got somethin' for it.
"You want to know what become of that place? Well, back in 1930, Pa took a notion to sell it. God knows why he wanted to sell it is more'n I can tell you, but he done it anyhow, and he put the money in the Seneca bank. That was the last he ever seen of his money. Bank shut down and he lost every penny. Lord, for a long time I couldn't stand to think of our place goin' like that and doin' none of us no good. I don't know what Pa'd do now if it wasn't for his old age pension. He lives over at Sans Souci with my youngest brother. Gettin' mighty feeble, Pa is, but then he's eighty-four year old. I don't know as he's got a youngun'll ever live as long as he has.
"Pa was always awful good to Ma but no better'n Will's been to me. There ain't never been no better man to live with than Will Cheek though.
"Me and him's had a heap of hard times together, but then we've had a heap of quiet peace too. We've not had money to spend but we've enjoyed bein' with one another. He's never left me no time of a night and I've never left him but two or three nights when Pa was bad off four year ago. The only place he goes without me is over to Trudie's---she's my oldest daughter-and up town to the picture show on Saturday evenin'. Course now and agin when kinfolks comes from Georgia he'll walk up town with 'em to show 'em the city. Will's always liked Greenville, even before we ever moved to the cotton mill. When we was livin' on Mr. Tom Smith's place out from Hartville, him and Mr. Smith come to Greenville, and when Will got back home he told me he'd like to move there. A tornado was what brought us to the mill though.
"A neighbor woman bad sent me word to come over to her house that evenin' but I had some sewin' to do and I said I reckin I wouldn't go. Kate kept beggin' me to take her though so's she could play with Mrs. Jamesson's Dotty Belle, and after while I give in. Well, before we got there come up the blackest cloud in the West, and right soon after we set down on the porch the wind commenced blowin' so hard we had to go inside; and the rain poured. It was bad enough to make you uneasy but not enough to call a straight-out storm. A while before sundown me and the younguns left for home, and I could talk here all day and not be able to tell you just how I felt when I got in sight of my home. The top had blowed off and the fields around it was laid as flat as my hand. Not more'n a dozen stalks of corn standin' and no cotton at all. It was late June then and I knowed there wasn't time to put in another crop; The corn had been so growthy and full of promise it pretty near killed me to look at it beat down to the earth and fit for nothin'. But the real disheartenin' time come when I went inside the house and seen my beds ruint, and the sack of flour in the pantry like a wad of dough.
"Will had went into town to take a load of wood and the first thing he said when he got in the house was, 'Well, we'll have to move, and the quicker the better.' That night we decided we'd move to the cotton mill if him and the two oldest boys could get work. When mornin' come he saddled the mule and rode to Seneca, in South Carolina. On a Saturday we moved to Seneca.
"Now we had a strange sort of time gettin' used to the mill. Specially Will and them two boys that worked. Will would come home of a night and say, 'I don't know as I'll be able to stand the racket much longer. Work I'm used to and don't mind but such a racket is liable to put a body crazy.' I expect if he was to quit the mill now, though, he'd feel lonesome without the noise. Funny how a body gets used to a thing.
"Course, the doctor says Will ought'nt to be down there workin' no longer. His hear's likely to give way on him any day. But what I'd like for the doctor to answer me is, what is a body goin' to do if he don't work? The children's all married and with families of their own. Will lay abed three whole years, wan't able to turn a hand, but Kate and Trudie was still at home and both workin'.
"Now and agin Will takes a notion he'd like to try to get him some land to farm and move to the country. But I know that won't do. He's too broke down to start to farmin' agin and him with not a penny to his name. I wisht it was so we could stay right on in this little resident long as we lived. It's a good quiet neighborhood, no low-down meanness goin' on around us so fur as I know. Then it's convenient too, the mill right over there, the street car line down there, and the shcoolhouse no piece at all over yonder way. I want you to know I seen a sight settin' here on this porch one day. It was back in '34 I reckin, when the Union tried to pull a strike. Here come these biggety folks, called theyselves the Flyin' Squadron, and tried to shut down the mill. Did you ever hear of such a thing? Yessir, come right here by the truckloads and told Mr. Brandon he'd have to quit runnin' his mill. It seemed to me they must've been five thousand swarmin' around down there. I recollect I had sore eyes fur a week from lookin' so hard tryin' to keep up with all they movemints. They run the biggety things away though and they ain't bothered us since.
"Yonder comes Will from Trudie's now. I knowed he wouldn't stay long. I've not got no ramblin' man like some women. He's totin' somethin' in his hand. I bet it's some sort of flower Trudie give him."
Will came into the yard. He was stooped and hollow-eyed and yellow. "Trudie give me these lilies to set out," he said. "They's May lilies, she said."
"May lilies, Will? Bout when in May do they bloom?"
"Little past middle May, I reckin. That's when hern bloomed last year."
"Put 'em in the ground in yon spot, Will. We can see 'em good from the porch then."