There are two versions of the following interview
which are substantially different in content and or
format. Therefore both versions have been included
in the project.
A NEGRO INSURANCE EXECUTIVE
Sam Powell's well-kept yard was enclosed by a low-clipped Lobelia hedge, and several rose bushes near the porch gave promise of blossoms soon to open, when I approached his white frame cottage. The porch chairs and the swing were green, and had apparently been given a recent coat of paint. Receiving no response after I had pushed the button of the electric bell several times, I left. But when I looked back as I turned the corner at the end of the block I saw the man, his wife, and a dachschund leave a car and enter the yard. Retracing ray steps I arrived at the house just as they unlocked the front door, and received a courteous reception.
“Come in, Miss," they invited. "If you had been a few minutes sooner we wouldn't have been here." I accepted the invitation and entered the living-room. When we were all seated I explained my mission. Sam and his wife were silent for a moment, and then the wife asked, “Are you just getting these life histories from Negroes?"
“No," I replied, "we are recording of life <text not clear> people, and although I came primarily to interview your husband, I should be pleased to get your story also."
She considered the matter thoughtfully for a few moments before she replied, “No, mam, I don't think I want to. Sam likes to talk about himself and his business," she said with a smile, "but I don't." Nevertheless, the conversation ran smoothly on, and in a frank and easy manner she chatted about her life and her experiences as a teacher of English, in the local high School.
In the meantime Sam listened attentively to his wife's conversation without once interrupting. When it seemed that she had said all she wanted to say, he began:
"Now, Miss, it occurs to me that since I was not born in this state, you will not want my life history." When I assured him it made no difference, he brought a small drum-top table and placed it by my chair. "It’ll be more comfortable to write on," he said.
"I was born in Georgetown, South Carolina, March 28, 1900," he said, "and I don't remember much of anything that I did until I entered public school in 1906. My parents operated a cafe, and I assisted them during my spare time after school and during the summer vacation periods. I can very well remember that summer, after I was a little older, when I was paid $3 a week on a job of cleaning brick at a plant that had burned down, but I don't remember what I did with those earnings, unless I spent them for my own personal use.
"The year that I was seventeen years old I completed my junior high school work, and that summer I got a job out at Camp Jackson, as a carpenter. That was in 1917, during the World War. I save that money to apply on my first college expenses. I entered Benedict College in Columbia, South Carolina, in the fall of that year, and finished in 1923. While I majored in mathematics, the liberal arts were included in my studies each year of my college life. I worked each summer in order to earn money for my tuition and other school expenses. One year I delivered papers for The Columbia State. Another summer I worked as waiter at the Jefferson Hotel. That paid me well, as the tips amounted to quite a bit.
"For several summers I was in the Pullman service on the New York Central, going east and west. There was real educational value to those experiences as a pullman porter. Those trips took me into Maine, New Hamshire, and in fact, all through the New England states, as well as to Detroit and Chicago. I liked the big cities of the North as a whole, but I believe the South is the best place to live in for more reasons than one.
"Each fall, I quit my job and went back to school until I graduated in June of 1923. The following fall I had my first opportunity to put my hard-won education into practice, for I began work as a teacher in the high school in agusta Georgia at the usual salary of $70 per month. We were not paid for the entire twelve months of the year but only for the nine months of the school term. That's why I meant to try something else.
"When that term of school ended in May of 1924, I entered the insurance world and I have been in the insurance business ever since. My first official insurance job was as traveling representative for one of the larger companies of this state and I was on the road for them from May 1924 until I was made general manager a year later and stationed in the home office in this city. I worked in that capacity until the company I was with merged with another company in 1931, and the newly formed company gave me an appointment as their traveling representative in Georgia, Alabama and South Carolina.
"In 1933, I returned to this city, and then is when the best part of my life began -- I married that year. I had never been married before." He and his wife exchanged glances, and he continued, "I Just waited until the real person for me came along." They both laughed pleasantly.
"We have been married six years now," the wife said, "and I am sure no other two people were ever happier than we have been and still are."
The bell summoned Sam to the front door, and his wife followed him.
"Is Octavia at home?" the visitor asked.
"Yes, mam," Sam answered, "I dropped her by your home on our way here from the office."
"Thought I'd stop by and make sure that she had come, before I went on home."
Sam closed the door behind the visitor, and turned on the lights. "That woman is the mother of my secretary," he explained.
Sam continued his story; "I stayed on in the home office here until 1935, and then became a traveling auditor for the same company. I resigned this position in 1937 to become manager of the Athens District of the company I am now with. My territory embraces Elberton, Washington, Union Point, and Covington.
"Our policyholders pay by the week and the dues range from 5¢ to 25¢ per week. The benefits derived from our policies are paid in the event of sickness or death, or both. The sick benefit on a 5¢-per-week policy is $1 per week. As a rule it these 5¢ policies are taken out on children. A person who pays 25¢ weekly gets $5 per week in ease of illness. Now the rule about this sick-benefit policy is that a person must remain in bed one week, or seven days, before the first claim can be made. In other words, we make no payment for illness that last less than seven days.
“Various ruses are undertaken to secure payment of sick benefit claims that don't comply with the rules of our policies. For instance, a sick benefit claim was once filed in our office by a young woman who claimed to have influenza. A few days later one of our agents happened to be collecting on the street where she lived and he saw her going across the street without a wrap on. His report caused a special investigation, and we learned that she hadn't remained in bed for more than three days of course her claim was thrown out.
"When we first contact a person of our race about insurance, the first thing they usually tell us is, 'We can't carry it. We can't make the payments.' We follow that up with carefully trained sales talk about the possibilities and the good points featured by our policies, and the next thing they know they have signed on the dotted line, and are keeping their payments up with a reasonable degree of regularity. Of course, we do have a good many policyholders to drop out because of non-payment. We carry them as long as we are permitted to before we cancel the insurance. You'll find about one in a hundred will eventually catch up with all payments after having gotten in arrears. Whether or not I lose all my commissions on a lapsed policy depends on the amount paid in is on it before it is dropped. No medical examination is necessary on policies of $250 or less. Above that sum the examination is imperative.
"The most difficult of all our problems is to prevail on the people of our race to read their policies and understand them. Perhaps this is because most of our race are illiterate, and it's hard for them to comprehend the text even when our agents try to explain it in the simplest form. We issue strict instructions to each agent to make every endeavor to see that the insured person understands the statements made in the policy.
"Dealing with insurance is a good deal like dealing with the law. A person needn't try to pull something on an agent and get away with it, for the agent is well informed as to his legal status.
"Illustrative of that, I might tell you about an experience I had with a young man who came to our office to file an application for a policy on his mother in which he would be the beneficiary. I had to have her signature, and when I sent an agent out to her house to have her sign the application, he found her sick in bed and unable to make her signature. A A few days later she was admitted to a hospital and I understand that she hasn't as yet returned home. Of course we rejected that application.
"A number of weeks ago, a young man brought a young woman to my office to apply for a policy on her life. He too desired the policy made out in his favor, that is, he was to be the beneficiary in case of her death. He claimed he was the woman's uncle. Our rules are that the beneficiary, in case of death, must be of blood relation to the insured person, unless it can be proven that there are no living relatives. In that case the insurance can be made out in favor of a friend as beneficiary. A few days later a girl, having the same name as the one for whom the application for insurance was filed, died. On investigation we learned that the girl who had appeared at our office to apply for the insurance was not the girl who died. She had merely given the name of the sick girl, and the young man was not related to either. Also, the family of the deceased hardly knew either of the two persons involved, in the attempt to defraud our company. We had issued the policy, and the man even employed a lawyer to try to force us to pay the claim. I informed them that I was fully aware of the fact that the policy had been written under false pretenses, and they didn't dare come into court with their claim. The deceased girl had a policy in favor of her mother, and it was duly and cheerfully paid.
"We sometimes have trouble with agents conniving to put over some rather subtle schemes. This doesn't happen often, and we weed out that kind of agent as rapidly as we get on to their tricks. Sometimes a policyholder decides to drop a policy, the agent will take it over and have the policy changed to make himself or some member of his family the beneficiary, in case the insurance is on some person who is very old or very sick. We usually find it out quite promptly and then we lose no time in dismissing the agent from our service after we have changed the policy to show the name of the original beneficiary. We are usually able to spot such tricks in the very beginning of their operations.
"You may be surprised to hear me say it, but we have found that women take to insurance more readily than men do, and they are more systematic and regular about keeping up their payments. As a rule men don't believe in insurance. If they are persuaded to take out a policy, they soon forget about it, or give the money for its payment to some member of the family, and never check up to see if the money is actually being applied to pay those weekly premiums, or if it's being spent on the picture show or on something else. After this procedure has gone on until the policy has lapsed, the agent is apt to meet the policyholder on the street and mentions the fact which then proves to be an utter surprise to the man who has so trustfully left his' business in other hands. A check-up usually reveals that the money has taken for the personal use of those entrusted with the responsibility of making the payments.
"Now one of the most peculiar experiences I ever had caused me to do almost a month of investigation before I agreed to make out a policy. It was like this: a woman wanted to take out a thousand dollar policy on her husband, and she didn't want him to know anything about it. The husband had a small policy but she wanted to take out a much larger one on him, making herself the sole beneficiary, and she feared that if he knew of it he would object. Of course, it was a requirement that her husband sign the application for this policy and a medical examination was absolutely essential. Inasmuch as he had kept up his small policy over a period of years, this enabled us to solver her problem. The doctor gave him a free examination, explaining that it was required by his old policy, and the medical blanks were filled in for the new policy and attached to the new policy for one thousand dollars. He signed them all without even noticing any change. That was four or five years ago, and the husband is still living and he has no knowledge of the policy; the payments on it amount to $11.22 every six months, and his wife takes care of them promptly. I had personally sold him his first policy, and knew the family well, so I didn't feel the slightest hesitancy in writing the second policy, for I was confident that he would pass the examination, and that we would collect our payments on this policy for many years to come.
"In another town, we once had a case where a mother was paying the insurance carried in her favor by her son. After the death of the mother, there was no one to keep up these payments except an aunt, and she did this on condition that she he made the beneficiary. At that time the boy was in Jail in another city, so his brother attended to the transfer in compliance with the wishes of the aunt. The boy died in jail, and another relative contested the change of the name of the beneficiary. The relatives of the deceased turned the matter over to a lawyer to investigate the matter. The aunt was perfectly willing to pay the funeral and burial expenses of the deceased, but she was unwilling to divide the balance of the money among the other relatives, none of whom had contributed a cent toward payment of the dues on the policy that she had kept up for a long while. Our company held up payment until a legal decision was rendered that directed us to pay the undertaker's bill, and to turn the balance of the amount due on the policy over to the lawyer who was appointed to divide it equally among the relatives designated by the court.
"Claims for sick benefit bring us more unusual experiences than any other feature of our business. Our policyholders have a doctor fill out and sign their claims for sick benefit, and usually the doctor will tell the patient that he will see that the claim is properly filed in our office. He will carelessly proceed to keep the papers in his own pocket and forget about them. When the patient sees the agent when he comes to collect the next week, he asks about the claim and hears that it has not reached the office. Then there is a howl from the patient when he sees the doctor again. The doctor invariably insists that the claim was promptly filed in the office of the insurance company, but investigation proves that there is no record of receipt of the claim. In order to facilitate matters the company insists that the doctors retain a duplicate of all papers submitted in connection with claims."
Sam paused, "Now, Miss," he said, "I believe that I have told you all that seems to me to be of importance or interest about my insurance business. As I see it now, the insurance business is fast becoming the leading business operated by members of our race, and if my wife and I continue to prosper, we hope to be able to buy a nice home in the future -- and have a a little family. My wife and I have our membership in the in the Baptist Church and attend Sunday School and preaching services there every Sunday. We endeavor to be good, honest, straightforward citizens, and we desire the friendship and best wishes of our white citizens. Not everyone realizes that we Negroes can't live without our white people, any more than the white people can live without us. I believe that the two races were put here with definite obligations toward each other."
<text not clear>