Next to the Hardisons, Eunice, Smith, her husband, Vernon, and their three children live. Eunice, whose father was a renter, tells how the family came to the mill. Her older brother, a tenant farmer who never did see any money from one year's and to the other, left home first to go to the mill. Later, a representative of the company came out and persuaded the whole family to do likewise. "They was for help in them days, "Eunice recalls.
Eunice married at seventeen but she was twenty-eight years old before her first child was born. At the beginning of their married life she and Tom both worked and they had a fairly good living. Then when high wages came they bought things they'd only dreamed of before. "I bought me a piano, "Eunice says, "and I've never played a note on it yet. Tell you how come I think I done it. When I was a child the Johnsons' –they was the ones that owned the place where we lived -- had a piano and I used to think I'd give half my life to have one and to be able to play it. I reckin havin' them thoughts when I was a child was how come I bought one when I got the money. I done e lot of foolish spendin', but who knowed then that these awful times was ahead. Most of us at the mill had seen hard times all our lives and it was such a pleasure to us to be able to buy things we didn't have to have. Then too, livin' was higher than some may remember and they wasn't as much chance to save as it sounds like when just wages by itself is mentioned. Well, we are livin' hard enough now and doin' a sight of work when we do get to make time.
"These three past years have been hard enough to make e body wonder if life is worth life is worth Iivin' a tall. I've fought so hard to stay off relief that I think I cheated myself out of part of my work benefits. Otis wasn't gettin' any time stall in the mill lest winter and some weeks I got one day and then again two. I reckin we could have been drawing work benefits but we hadn't signed up for it. At first I thought it was the same as signing for relief and I wasn't willin' yet to do that, though I wonder now how we kept from starvin'. There was several months when the five of us lived on as little as three dollars e week. When I'd have as much as three dollars at a time I'd buy a twenty-four pound sack of flour and a bucket of lard. We lived off of biscuit bread and what stuff I'd canned the summer before. I reckin it went harder with Musetta than any of us because she was throwed more with them that had than any of the rest of us. Then, too, she don't like living at & cotton mill. Me and Jim have always enjoyed cotton mill life well enough until it got to where we couldn't make a livin' at it. We'd be content to stay on the rest of our lives if we could get full-time work instead of two or three days like now when the work's so heavy that three days wear you out more than a full week did before we got the stretchout.
One of my boys wants to be a policemen and the other one wants to be a farmer. I won't worry about them for awhile yet. Right now I'am trying to help Musetta get fixed up for the kind of life she wants."
Musetta who is sixteen is the only daughter and oldest child. She finished high school in June. Sensitive, intelligent, and appealing, she has struggled through every possible chance toward self-improvement. As a member of the Industrial Girls' Club of the Y. W. O. A. She was sent to a state conference to represent her group. She cherishea the experience she had there. With unbounded determination she went through her last year of high school when each day she felt that she could not keep on.
"Most people look back on their Senior year as a pleasant time in their lives, but I won't, "She says. "I walked the three miles in to high school every morning because I didn't have money for bus fare. The walking wouldn't have been so bad if I hadn't been afraid each day that mu ragged shoes would fall apart before I could possibly get to school. Then, too, walking in the early morning can make you awfully weary when you haven't had any breakfast and not much supper the night before. Without decent clothes and without enough food I went every day and heard my classmates discuss their plans for the future. I didn't talk any because I was afraid even to think what my future might be.
"I worked as hard as I could at my typing and shorthand but I really didn't feel like I knew enough when school was out to start looking for a job. This past month I've been taking a review course under Miss Tenny. It's cost me twenty-five dollars and it had to be paid for out of the little bit Mama earns in the mill. The family had to sacrifice so I could have that money, but then, they got used to doing without most things this past winter. I'll make them proud of me one day, though, when I get a job I'll help the boys and they'll have happier memories of their senior year than I have of mine.
"It won't be so awfully hard to get e job, will it? The other day I asked Miss Tenny if it wasn't time I was sending out applications. She said, why yes, she thought so, and then asked me who my father's business friends were. I told her my father was a hard-working cotton mill hand and he had no business friends. But surely I can get a job on my own. I'll have to. because I can't stand to live all my life at a cotton mill village."