June 28, 1959
L. J. Fulham (white)
Huntersville, N. C.
Farmer
Mary P. Wilson, writer
I Don't Aim to Complain None <text not clear>
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Ruby	Pearl
Oscar	Fred
I Don't Aim to Complain None <text not clear>
"There's no need for anyone to come askin' me questions 'bout how I live. You can look at the place and see.
"I ain't got no education for nothin' but farmin'. I know it ain't nobody's fault but mine. Daddy wouldn't let me go to school long. I cut a boy that was older and bigger than me because he kept tryin' to boss me around at ree-cess. My teacher whipped me till she cut the blood out o' me and that's why my Daddy made me stay at home. I aimed to take my knife back to school and use it on her so I guess it was best for me not to go. I don't claim to be mean but I ain't never yet wanted no one to run over me without a cause.
"Oh, yeah, I've seen where I'm lost without schoolin'. My ignorance has caused me to be a slave for the rich man all my life.
"This is pretty good land I work here but every time the wind blows I wonder if it's goin' to leave this old shack standin'. They ain't hardly enough room in it to cuss a cat and there's three grown people and one child that has to sleep in it every night. The child belongs to my daughter Pearl. She misbehaved herself 'fore she married and had a baby and now she don't want to keep it. She's got another child by her husband and I reckon since it's got a legal daddy she ain't wantin' to raise this one up with it. I'm right glad she don't want it because me and my wife need it to keep us company now that we're gettin' old. I don't never aim to see the child mistreated in any way, because I know she is not responsible for her mother's sin. I didn't treat Pearl no different when she was pregnant and not married than at any other time. Her brother was the only one that had anything at all to say. He wanted to go out and kill the boy that was responsible but his Ma and myself talked him out o' the notion. My wife believes in every word of the Bible and she made us all have faith that everything would turn out for the best.
"The child's father was shot and killed by a nigger while he was drunk, the first o' the year. I never wished him no harm, but God does punish people sooner or later for wrong-doin'.
"I've only got one child of my own here with me. My wife give birth to seven but we only raised four. Two died with the meni'gitis and one was borned dead.
"My father died the same year I quit school. He had pneumonia. Me and my oldest brother had to be the main dependence for our mother and six other children. I learned when I was young what hard work meant. I can't read much, just can write my own name when I have to.
"I ain't never had a home of my own and no automobile, neither. I don't want to fool with no car if I have to drive it myself. I ain't much crazy 'bout ridin' in 'em even when someone else is drivin'.
'"I"ve had a time this year farmin' by myself. Fred stays here at night but after he was twenty-one he decided he was too good to farm. It's a hard matter for me to get him to help me do anything now. He ain't right bright nohow, I don't think, or he'd stay to home and help me so's I wouldn't have to be runnin' down to the old jail every two weeks to get the handout the Welfare gives me. But I don't know what I'd do if they hadn't helped me. I couldn't a lived if they didn't. It's so hard to get any of the merchants to let me have rations and wait till fall for their pay. They know that if the crops don't do better I'll do well to pay my fertilizer bill.
"I've got a pretty good crop but I ain't never known the farmer to get no price for nothin' in election year. I hope I get fooled this time, for me and my wife is both about naked for clothes.
"I used to vote for the Republicans all the time but I done quit that. I can't see anything right in supportin' a class of people politically that never attempts to help the poor man. I was on the wrong side o' the fence a good many years but now I see what side my bread is buttered on. I have been helped in more ways than one by the Democratic party so I intend to stand by it. There's always somebody ready and waitin' to knock the New Deal but I ain't suffered as much as I did before it went into effect.
"There's lots of walnut and persimmon trees on this farm. The man told me when I first moved here that I could cut any kind o' tree I could find except them two. They's a lot of 'em out in the fields and it shades my crop pretty bad but the 'simmons taste good to possum-huntin' dogs, and me and my wife gathers a lot of walnuts to eat durin' the winter. Some city folks don't know nothin' about anything but the English walnuts. I'd rather have the black kind ten to one.
"They's plenty o' little things that poor people work around and get that is good nourishment for them.
"I don't aim to complain none atall. I think I'm well blessed to be a-gettin' 'long as good as I am."
