THE ROUGHNECK
"And so I told the old man I was going to leave. He was fixed all right, you understand, so it wasn't out of his pocket to have me gol I didn't have to leave either, if I didn't want to, but I did. He had a Ford agency, a good one, and he made good money all the time with it, that is, till the depression came and ruined the Ford business and all the other automobile business everyplace. But my dad was one of the first agents old Henry Ford had, and he was one of the best ones, too. And still is.
"But I never did want to get into the car business, even with my old man, who knew all the ins and outs of it. I could have made good money with him, a damned sight better'n I've made sometimes since, but I never did like it, that was all. Too damned much inside work, and I never did want to be cooped up in an office, any place or anywhere. And I didn't want to be dependent upon anybody for what I had, least of all my dad.
"I figured he'd done enough for me as it was, and from then on it was up to me. I went through school as long as I could stand it. Oh, I finished high school all right and got my diploma and everything, but that was plenty for me. I didn't want to open another "book, ever; not till I knew more about real life than I did then. There I'd been, spending my time fooling around with Latin and Spanish, and a, lot of things that'd never get me anyplace that I could ever see, just wasting my time. The way I looked at it, and I thought about it a lot, seriously, was that the more time I wasted in school, the less time I'd have to get wised up, or get any place.
"Well, I'd hit sixteen a while before, so one day I told the old man I was checking it to the rest of the boys, the ones that wanted to piddle around in school, but I was through. I know I don't know much, I told him, but that's the reason I'm getting out now. I wanted to get out on my own, and see what makes things go like they do or don't, and just generally find out what the score was. The boys that stuck in school, by the time they got out they never had a chance to find out what the score was, and they was generally walking around the streets with their diplomas in their hands, hunting a job. I figured that if I got out now, I'd find something and get by on my own, and he a whole helluva lot better off than any of them.
"The old man didn't want me to leave, you understand, but he knew I'd get along all right. Most dads would've raised the roof, but mine didn't; he just kind of figured I knew what I was doing, and if leaving was it, then it was up to me to get the hell on out wherever I felt like it. He always was a good sport. He asked me when I was leaving, and I said in three or four days, as soon as I kind of get my things wound up here. That was in Indiana, where we were living then, sad dad had his business. He said, You got any money? You'll be needing some cash before you get very far, and you better let me stake you. He pulled out his roll and started to husk off the bills, but I stopped him. No, I've got about twenty-five dollars of my own, I told him, and I don't think I'll be needing much more.
"If I had more money, I'd spend it; and then, too, I might as well get started earning my own way as soon as possible. That sounded pretty cocky, maybe, but I meant it. I was sixteen then, and weighed about 140 pounds; but I knew what I was saying. That was seven, almost eight years ago, and I'm five feet six, now, and weigh about 155 but I've never seen a man or a job that could scare me. I went right out to work then, when I was sixteen, and I've kept going every since. I knew I could do it, I knew it then, and the old man knew it, too. He just kind of smiled when I said it --- turning down his money like I did---and said, All right, son; you know what you're doing.
"I told him I thought I did, but even if I didn't I was going to find out what the score was for myself. That was something you couldn't learn out of books or have anybody tell you, and the only place to learn it was right out there balling the jack at some job. That was the way I had it figured out then, and I don't think I missed it very far.
"I didn't know exactly where to start in looking for work, but somebody told me about- the oil boom in the Wyoming fields, so I hit out for there. I kind of wanted to learn the oil business anyway; it was outdoor work, and I'd always liked that, and then there was something darned interesting about it. There was always the chance that a man might make a million at it, or he could lose his wad, and that gambling part was a big attraction. Of course, a man with any sense at all would try to arrange things so that he wouldn't and couldn't lose unless everything went wrong, but lots of fellows went ahead anyway and took a chance on oil being on wherever then slung up their rig.
"That kind of a man was like the fellows who stayed on in school, they didn't know whether they'd get a job or not when they got out, but like damn fools they kept on wildcatting. The way I look at it, going to school was just like drilling a well: if a man didn't use all the geologists and chemists and all that he could find to show him where to drill, then there sure as hell wasn't any use of him sinking his money in a dry hole. And any kid that kept on plugging through school without knowing where the hell he was going and what he was going to do when he got out, well, that kid was just the same as drilling himself a duster. But all the time that kind was getting their diplomas, I was working on a job that paid me more for one month's work than most of them could make in six months. I'd seen how things went with that kind, and I didn't want to wildcat for a job; I wanted it to be a lead-pipe cinch. So I took the job in the oil fields. I figured that if I hit the ball there like I would in school, I could get ahead. If I used what brains I had, I wouldn't need to have a lot of Latin or something like that to help me get along, but I could use just plain old horse sense and make my way all right.
"So I got a job up in the Laney Creek, Wyoming, field. There wasn't a whole lot of men up there in the field, but there was enough for the work there was to do. I didn't let that stop me at all; I just kept at it and got a job. I hired out to a contractor as a roughneck, a helper for the driller in bringing in the well. I wasn't but sixteen then, but I didn't tell them my age; I just asked for the job and when I got it I went to work and worked just like any of the rest of them did, and harder most of the time. I worked there during that winter, $550 a day, and managing to save some, and then I left out and came down into Kansas, where all the oil play was going right then. I hired out to a contracting company at Hays, Kansas, at the same pay I got in Wyoming, and started hitting it heavy again.
"The Wyoming fields averaged about 4,000 feet, so of course it wasn't much of a job to sink a well up there, 'specially since the formations were pretty soft. Down in Kansas the wells weren't any deeper; matter of fact, most of them were some shallower, running 3,500 feet and less, and in soft stuff too. But we'd make a job for a month or two out of each one. We didn't dog off, you understand; but things just came up that we couldn't help, and we had to take our time. And then, too, it was a boom field, you might say, and supplies and equipment and men weren't so easy to get. In Wyoming, when I was there, they were what you might call 'proving up the field', but in Kansas the wildcat wells had already been brought in and the only thing left to do was to drill the producers in and sell the oil.
"While I was up there in Kansas I heard that Carter Oil Company was sending men into South America, and I decided to see what the score was down there. I put in my application for a job, but the foreman and superintendent said I was too young, didn't have enough experience, and they couldn't put me on even though they wanted to. They wanted men that'd had at least ten years experience, drilling mostly, but they'd take roughnecks too. They needed all kinds of hands down there, because so many of 'em burned out quick. I'd made a good hand up in Wyoming and there in Kansas too, and I got my boss to recommend me to begin with to Carter. That's one thing I always do, and always have --- get a letter of recommendation when I quit or decide to leave out. It pays me to do it. You don't find many men that'll take the trouble to stop by the farm boss's shack and get him to write a letter for them, but believe me it certainly pays dividends when a man's trying to get a job with another company.
"But I didn't take "No for an answer from them or anybody else; I made up my mind that if the Carter Oil didn't want to send me, then somebody else or another company was going to have to. And I got to work looking up companies that sent men to South America. My superintendent, for the contracting company, recommended me pretty strong to all the companies, and since he had some special good friends in the Dutch Shell Company, I got a job with them. I'd always been willing to work a little harder or a little longer, no matter what kind of work I was doing or where I was, so the bosses didn't mind recommending me when I wanted them to. I had to lie a little about my age, but it wasn't six weeks after I applied for the job with the Dutch Shell that I was in Port-au-Prince, waiting for orders to go to work, and where.
"They sent me first down to Lake Trinidad in Venezuela, and I worked there for several months. Then they sent me down to another lake --- I don't remember what the name of that one was. I worked about six months on the lakes, doing anything that had to be done. Roughnecks down there have to do just about anything, but they get paid for it; I got $10 a day and all my expenses. The company gave every white man a house of his own, and we all ate at the company mess-hall. The company held out half of each month's check, so that when a man got back to the States he always had a nice pile waiting for him, and he didn't have to take any old job to get hold of a stake.
"Down there the companies have rigged up their own ways of lake drilling; they've got some ideas worked out down there country's never seen or heard of. Take, for instance, the lake tractor that one company had built especially for them. It's got tires about four feet wide and about fifteen or twenty feet in diameter, and they can float the tractor right across a river or a lake and through marshes, That's what they were built for originally, work in the marshes, but it wasn't long until they began using them to cross the lakes and rivers with.
"And rig-building, too. The riggers up here, and I've run across lots of them in Kansas, and Oklahoma, Texas, and Wyoming --- everywhere I've worked --- they think that there's nothing they can learn about their work. But they've never built a rig in the middle of a lake, like the riggers in South America throw 'em up. The way they do it's like this the companies have special lake barges built, big things, about thrity feet wide and maybe fifty to seventy feet long. They float these barges out to where their charts show is a good place to drill and anchor them. They got special feet for the derricks --- forty-foot legs, that they tie on to the barges with steel cables. Then they open up the valves in the bottom of the barges to let the water in, and open the valves in the top to let the air out, and sink the barges on the bottom of the lake. Of course, if the water's deeper than twenty-five or thirty feet they have to use longer legs, but where we were the lake wasn't much over thirty feet, if that much, so that the forty-foot legs left us about ten foot of derrick to begin on. Then the rig-builders, and sometimes we had to help 'em, could begin work and throw up the rest of the rig. When the companies got through with a well they just took down all the top structure of the rig, sent divers down to close the valves, and then pumped out all the water in the barges and floated them to the surface. Then they could float them off behind a tug or one of their lake tractors to wherever they needed them next.
"When the steel was all up, us roughnecks laid timbers across the lowest cross-piece, those nearest the water, and worked on them. It wasn't quite as good as working up here, in some ways, but it wasn't so bad. It was kind of exciting to me to be working out in the middle of a lake; we dropped a wrench it was gone for good. Of course the men we had to use down there, the natives, they weren't much good. They didn't know from hell what to do next on the job, and they caused us lots of trouble sometimes. But once in a while they were lots of fun. I remember one time one of them almost run clean out into the ocean, about a hundred miles away. We had Bessmer engines, you know the kind I mean, big things that we used to drill with; and we had little ones to generate electricity for lights to drill with at night. Well, there was one native down on a well I worked on one time there in Venezuela, that bugger thought he knew everything there was to know. And all the time he didn't even know who was playing, and how many sides there were. He was sort of a foreman; I told him what we wanted done and he sung it out to the natives.
"He was tending to the motor on the night tower one night and it got to missing. When those big devils begin to miss they romp and roar something awful. This bird never had been next to one that was cutting up like this one was, and he was standing there with his mouth open and praying for all he was worth. I came over to where he was and asked him what was the trouble, but I already knew, the motor was bellering so. He shook his head and begin spouting off in his native lingo. I picked out that something was wrong with the motor, but that he didn't know what the hell it was unless it vas cheetah. They blamed everything that went wrong on cheetah; that was really some kind of a big cat, something like a tiger only not very mean, but those natives thought it was some kind of a devil. He kept hollering cheetah, cheetah, till I almost had to knock him down. I finally got made and grabbed him by the shoulder and shook him, and he looked so relieved that I was there going to take hold of things for him he almost began crying. It tickled me and I started to laugh. I pointed to the sparkplugs, and told him they needed cooling. I don't know why the hell, I told him that, but anyway I did.
"There wasn't any water around, none without drilling mud in it, and I told him he couldn't use that or it'd gum up the motor for sure. He shrugged his shoulders and asked me, in native, what to do. I said there was only one thing to do, and used my hands to show him. He didn't believe me at first, but finally, he unbuttoned his trousers and cut loose. Me and the rest of the natives backed off and watched him. Well, when that water hit those sparkplugs, and of course him standing there on the other end grounded the spark — well, you never heard such a commotion in all your life. That native give one big yell---Cheetah!---and jerked himself loose. And then he cut and started running, ninety miles an hour, right through the jungle. He didn't stop for trees or brush or anything else, even through the jungle that we'd had to chop out a path to walk in. He just sailed through there like a cat hunting a dirt road, and we didn't see anymore of him for almost ft week. Them other peons scattered too, and lit out for the trees, and we just about had to shut down.
"When he did come hack, he looked kind of peaked and thin. I asked him where he'd been, but he wouldn't tell me. The other natives finally told me he'd run clean back to his village, about a hundred miles away, right through the thicket jungle, and he was fixing to stay there the rest of his life but his friends laughed at him so he couldn't stand it and had to come back to try and save his pride. But I never did get him to go back close to that engine. That was Cheetah to him the rest of the time.
"Natives are about the same anyplace you go. I know; I've drilled, or rather I've roughnecked, in Canada, Mexico, Venezuela, and all over the United States. The natives back in the hills in this country are bad enough, about stealing and being such damned fools about things and stuff like that, but the ones in foreign countries beat them all. When I was down in Old Mexico several years ago we really had trouble with them. I'd always wanted to go to Mexico, and when I heard a driller I'd worked with was going, I hit him up for the job of roughnecking for him. You see, the way he got to go, the Mexican Government asked him to come down there and drill some wells for them. I don't know exactly what they paid him, but they gave me $15 a day straight time, which is the best wages for roughnecks paid anyplace.
"They gave us our passports and everything we needed to get by on. They even fixed us up some little cards that said: "This man is a Friend of the President, and as such, is to be treated with due Respect." Something like that, and it meant we were important as hell. That little card saved us lots of trouble several times. When you're down in Mexico and get in trouble, you're just out of luck, unless you've got a card like we had or got the money. You get drunk or raise hell or get in a fight or something down there and they throw you in jail and forget you. Lots of men've been throwed in jail and left there to rot; a month, or six months, or ten years even. And usually there isn't anyway to get word out to a man's friends so they can help him out.
"But these cards that President Cardenas sent to us saved us from all that, and we didn't have any trouble. When we got into an argument with a cop down there, we'd just pull out that card and let him read the Mex words on it---and let me tell you, they bowed and scraped when they read it, too. But if it hadn't been for them we might still be in jail. You see, the Mexican Government's got a law that there has to be three Mexes to every white man on the job. Well, that meant that when I was roughnecking there was three Mexicans standing around on the rig floor, usually just standing there and not doing a damned thing either. And then, of course, there was three more to help the driller. With such a mob like that there wasn't any use to try to make hole in a hurry; they was just too damned many there, elbowing a man around, and sleeping just any old place, and getting drunk and fighting. And we couldn't fire them either; we couldn't cuss them, hit them, or even bawl 'em out. We just had to put up with 'em, so we usually just let 'em go to the devil, and we done most of the work. That way, we didn't have to stop and tell 'em how the job ought to be done either, and that was a job in itself.
"But the Mexican Government treated us all right, I'll say that for them. They gave us a house, our food, and it was the best food that they could buy, and all the rest of our expenses. That way me and this driller had all our salary clear, and it sure came in handy after we got back to this country. The work wasn't hard either; the first big job we went on was down south of the Tampico field, about a hundred miles. They had a well there that was down to 7000 feet, and producing good too, but the Mexicans decided that they'd get more oil if they went down to 9,000 feet, and they hired us to start on that one. They weren't real sure they'd get oil, of course; their geologists had just figured that if their charts and things showed there was oil down there, then there was, so we was to go further. We drilled the extra 2,000 feet and it came in good, better than it was in the first hole at 7,000 feet. But that's one thing: about Mexico; they've got so much oil down there they don't know what to do with all of it. It isn't a high-grade oil like we've got up here, because it's got a lot of asphalt in it that they can't refine out, but it's good enough. The only thing is, they don't have any way to get rid of it.
"One thing they're figuring on doing now though, at least they were figuring on it when I left there last year, was to build a pipeline down to the west coast and sell all their oil to Germany and Japan. Those boys have already got their boats down there waiting for the oil; they have to wait now, or did when I was there, for enough to fill their tanks, but they want all that they can get and don't mind waiting. The well that I was on was about 180 miles back from the coast, and the only way to get things in for our rig was to haul them on a little narrow-gauge railroad. It was just 24 inches wide, damned narrow, and the only way to get our boilers and equipment in to the location was to dismantle everything and stack it on the little cars. And if you can imagine tearing down one of those big rotary boilers and hauling it piece by piece, plate by plate, up a steep mountainside, and then putting it back together on the location! And to get it from the railroad siding to the rig we had to pack it on burros, little mules that didn't come much above my knees, and ornery as a drunk Irishman.
"On one job, I remember, after we got the boiler up to the job we didn't have any boiler rivets. We didn't know what the hell to do, because we were in a hurry to get the hole started and get through, but we didn't want to take any chances on the boilers blowing us up. Finally we took some square-head derrick bolts and run them through the rivet holes and tightened them as tight as we could, and then spot-welded around the heads and the nuts. That worked all right, though some of the bolts had to be pulled and new ones put in every now and then. I sure wouldn't recommend that way of putting up a boiler to anybody, not even somebody I didn't like. It don't Day a man to take chances with his equipment, anytime! I'll take a chance on the food I'm eating or something like that, but I'M damned if I want to work with poor equipment or patched-up tools.
"Most people are so careless anyway that even good equipment won't help 'em much. I've seen men take a chance on doing a job that I wouldn't take for love or money. Like just the other day; up in the Illinois field here I was working on a jot, and another roughneck was one of that kind; he'd take a chance on anything if it meant that he wouldn't have to move out of his tracks or do anything extra. He was standing there with a split rope; one end went to the cat-head and the other to the back-up clamps. A man that had something like that in his hands ought to know enough to be halfway careful, if not for himself then for the other men he's working with, but this damned fool didn't. He horsed around until he got one end snarled up in the cat-head --- the loops didn't lay right, one on top of each other, and alone-side each other --- and instead of shutting down his power and untangling the snarl, he walked over and tried to throw the tangle loose.
"Well, I don't know how many revs those big draw-works motors turn up, but it's plenty. Anyway, the rope carried his hand on into the cat-head, jerked it under the rope, and threw him completely through the rig and out the other side. And jerked his left arm clean out of his body! He yelled when he felt the rope grab him and he kept yelling until he hit the ground, about fifteen feet on the other side of the rig. And then he laid there, quiet, just bleeding to death, his muscles and nerves and guts and all just hanging out the hole in his side. And blood s-spouting out of him like a gusher. There was blood twenty feet up in the rig.
"The driller I was working with got sick; he fell over on the derrick floor and began puking his guts out, and then fainted. The boilerman and the rest of the hands just stood there, not doing anything, and I finally got started and run over to where he'd hit and tried to stuff rags in the hole in his side to shut off the blood. But I saw there wasn't any use to fool with anything like that, so I ran up to the house, about a quarter-mile away, and phoned for an ambulance. He lived five or six hours before he finally died, and I've never seen how he did it, with his heart and lungs and everything else sticking right out there in plain sight. His left arm was about ten feet away from the cat-head; it got thrown up and hit the rig and then bounced off, and splattered blood all over us.
"I never did find out if his relatives got anything out of him dying or not; he wasn't married, or his wife would have got insurance on him. But the company raised hell with the rest of us for letting him do such a damned fool thing as he did, and we all took our time working from then on. That one company's all right about accidents, but lots of them don't give a damn whether the men work safe or not. Like I had my driller killed on me a while back because the company didn't have the tools tied down in the derrick like they should have. They were letting casing down in the hole when the clamps swung out and punched his head to jelly. He was a damn nice fellow, too, and was saving ids money to get married. And then, several years ago, when I was driving a soup wagon---a nitro-glycerin car --- the company kept the cars up pretty good, but they didn't give a goddamn if the drivers were on their toes or not. I'd been working around, roughnecking, and I heard that there was a job open driving the soup wagon. I'd never done anything like that, hut I wanted the experience, so I went up to the company office and asked for the job. It was pretty hard to get a driver right then, because a couple of weeks before a wagon had gone up with about fifty quarts of soup in it, and they never did find anything out a few pieces of iron. And the boys around the field steered clear of the job. Most of 'em are superstitious as hell, and wouldn't have touched that job if they was starving. Least not till they'd kind of forgot about him.
"But that didn't worry me any, because I knew I'd come through all right if I just used my head. I got the job all right and went to work and then I got me all the dope I could on soup and studied it. I learned some damned interesting stuff about it too. For instance, most people think that nitro will blow up if it's hit with something. Hell! I can dumpta gallon of It out on the ground, or a concrete sidewalk or something, and hit it with a sledgehammer, and I'll bet a month's check against a cuppa coffee it won't go off. Hot unless there's a pocket of it and I happen to hit that patch of it with the hammer. Soup's got to be compressed before it's dangerous, but let me tell you you want to get the hell away from it then! It won't take much of a jar to set off a quart if it's compressed like it is when a well's being shot.
"Another funny thing, too, is the difference between soup and regular dynamite. Most people think all explosives go off when they're hit --- by detonation. But they're crazy as hell. Nitro will, unless it's like I said about pouring it out on the ground, but dynamite won't; you got to set dynamite off. Even soup's gotta be set off sometimes by something else. Like there's a bridge in a well --- say they've set off one blast and it knocked dirt and shale back up in the hole and plugged it back up a ways from the bottom of the hole; well, then we fix a quart of soup with a detonator fuse on the bottom of it. That's usually made out of fulminate of mercury, which is just about as powerful as any explosive can be. This fulminate of mercury is the same stuff they put in shotgun shells for the cap; well, you know how damned powerful that little bit is, don't you!
"Or, maybe, if the bridge is pretty big, we use dynamite and set it off with a delayed spark. You see, one thing most people don't know, and a helluva lot of oil workers don't know either, and lots of 'em will tell you It's a damned lie but it ain't --- is that soup, nitroglycerin, blows up, and dynamite blows down. I know that sounds funny as hell, but it's true. You just go 'round to where they're shooting a well sometime and see if I'm not telling you the truth.
"The way they haul it is in light trucks; I drove a three-quarter ton truck on my job. The back end, a panel body, has racks inside to hold the jars of nitro; they're just big clips, but they're padded with rock wool and soft stuff so driving over bumps and stuff like that won't accidentally set it off. The soup is in long lead containers, holding about a quart, and they're clipped in the racks where they ride pretty easy. There's enough space left in the containers that the nitro isn't compressed, so that way there isn't much chance of it going off accidentally. But of course a man can't take many chances on having a wreck, or anything like that, because you don't have but one wreck when you're driving a soup wagon.
"So I took this job, even though everybody said I was a damned fool. I just wanted to know how it was done, and get the experience and all. And I got a hell of a lot of it. This company had had so damned much trouble getting hold of drivers that they didn't care what happened to them after they got off work. Why, they even furnished whiskey to the men so that they'd get drunk at night and not think about driving the next day and the chances they took of getting blown to hell. It sounds kind of screwy, I guess, saying that they couldn't get men to work, 'specially since they paid $100 a week, but that's what happened all right. A man had to have some experience in the oil fields, you understand, before he could get on; and one thing that kept out a lot of bums and that kind that would work just long enough to get an eating stake and then pull out when they needed 'em most. But even though there was plenty of men that had experience, roughnecks, drillers, roustabouts, and men like that who had plenty of experience, the company couldn't get enough men all the time.
"One thing that scared lots of them away was signing the contract to work. One sentence in it was that the company guaranteed to bury you if you happened to get it. I thought that was funny as hell, and I asked about it. The guy said that it was right, the company did bury them. I told him that if the wagon went up there wouldn't be enough left to bury, but he said they put that sentence in there so that the fellows' wives would know they wouldn't have to go to the expense of burying them themselves. But as a rule they didn't want married men if they could get anybody else; most of them were fellows that didn't have any relatives at all, or said they didn't, so the company could act like it was being big-hearted in offering to bury them free. But that didn't mean a damned thing to me; all I was Interested in was drawing that $400 a month, so I could add a little to my stake.
"I drove that wagon about eight or ten months, I guess it was, and then I got tired and went back to roughnecking. Mil of us drivers would get together nights and get drunk on company whisky and usually get us a woman apiece, and just generally raise hell all night. It was wearing me out, so I quit for that reason more than anything else, a man can't last forever, living like that, and it didn't suit me anyway. The company wanted me to stay on, because I'd made them a good driver, and they even offered me a $25 a month raise, hut I didn't want it that had. I knew I couldn't get a job driving for any other company, because this company had an option on me for driving for 'em that one time. You see, all the powder and soup companies, all hut maybe one or even two, are owned by DuPont. So if a man works for one company he's working for all of them, and if the one he's working for happens to fire him or don't like him or something, then there ain't a chance of a grain of popcorn in whirlwind of him ever getting on with another company. And if you work for one company, they've got an option on you, and nobody else can hire you if this one don't want to let you go.
"Most things are like that in the oil fields now; all the money-making businesses are sewed up by the big companies. Drill hits, tools, boilers, engines, nitro --- everything, is sewed up. A little man don't stand any chance at all of making a go of it. I found that out the first year or two I was in the oil game; there wasn't a chance of keeping score yourself unless you had one hell of a big stake to begin with, and then, more'n likely, you'd get rooked out of it before you even got to ante.
"And a funny thing about it is that it's the big companies that do all the bellering about hard times, and unions, and things like that. I haven't heard a little man kick yet, and I've been in the fields for more'n seven years. Oh, 'course now and then one of 'em lets off a beef about something or other, but it's the big companies that are always going to court about something or other, or giving out articles to the papers about how the country is going straight to hell unless they get their way about things. You take now the way things have been going down in Mexico. Understand, I'm not holding up for the Mexicans, but after all they've got xome rights too, just like the oil companies have. But the Mexican Government stepped in last year and took over all the oil fields and all the equipment and all, and then sent in their own engineeers to run things.
"Well sire, the Americans and Englishmen and all, the ones that had big holdings down there, they just raised holy hell. They said it was robbery, and that our government ought to send the troops down there and run the damned Mexes clean out in the ocean. I even heard some of the oil men, the big operators and officials down there, I heard them threaten the Mexicans with the U.S. Army if they didn't ease up. But it didn't do 'em any good; the Mexes had been used to being bluffed so long, and they'd give in so much before, that they must've figured they didn't have a damned thing to lose, and just grabbed off the fields anyway.
"The Americans and English had most of the options down there, and of course they were the ones that put up the biggest beller. You 'member reading in the papers what the American oil men said about the Mexican government? Well, you Just ought to hear what the Mexicans say about them!
"The way the Mexicans figure it is like this; they own the land --- it all belongs to the Mexican government now --- and there isn't any use of letting other countries take out what they want to, and have them try to tell the Mexicans what they can do and what they can't, when it ought to be the other way 'round. So the Mexicans just took over things, and waited for the hell-raising to quiet down some so they could work out some way to even things up. Everybody down there, everybody that's got any sense at all, knows the Mexicans are going to pay for what they took.
"But they're going to pay what it's worth, or maybe a little bit less; they're sure as hell not going to pay what the Americans and the rest are asking for their stuff. I don't blame the Mexes a damned bit; there these other countries have gone in and taken all they wanted from the land, and not left a damned penny for Mexico except what they had to pay in salaries to the Mexican workers and maybe a little bit of taxes to the government. These birds don't mind putting the squeeze on somebody else, like another American operator, or another country, but they sure as hell begin raising the roof when somebody puts it on them!
"The Mexicans have tried to make things right with the Americans, but I know from what I've seen when I was working down there that a lot of these American operators are trying to get the United States to send troops down there and take the fields back. That isn't going to help a damned bit either. The operators claim Cardenas and his crew are Communists, and they might be for all I know, but that's no way to get their stuff back, calling names, and it's no way to settle anything. And if they sent American troops down there they never would get the oil wells hack, I'll bet on that.
"For one thing, Germany and Japan and Italy are working like hell down there, trying to get Mexico to sell them oil, and let them develop the fields. You see, lots of Americans have been pulled out by their bosses, or had to get out if they didn't get along with the Mexicans, and these other countries are trying to get on good terms with Cardenas so that they can get the oil. They need it, had; and they're willing to do almost anything they can to get it. Cardenas don't want to get mixed up with any of them, and the country doesn't want to either, but if the operators up here aren't careful they're going to drive them into it.
"But you know, that may he exactly what these birds want --- to get these other countries send in their men and all, and maybe start a revolution or something, and then they'll have a reason to send our troops down there. And then we can make Mexico another state in the United States.
"That's what lots of the Mexicans think the United States is going to try to do --- get something started so they can step in and take things over. I know when I was working down there the American oil men put up the money to get that bandit, Cedilla, started. His headquarters were just over a mountain from our camp, and his soldiers were always parading around in our camp, trying to get our Mex workers to join them. And every damned one of those regel soldiers told us ah out the gringo Americans putting up the dough for them to fight their own government with! They had American guns, and shoes, and uniforms, and even food!
"It wasn't anything unusual for this Cedillo to send his airplanes over our camp, three or four times or even every day in the week, to drop handbills and stuff like that, trying to get our workers to join them. Lots of them did, 'specially when the soldiers would come in camps with their rifles loaded and just itching to start something, and tell the boys that Cedillo wanted to see them, muy pronto. And they usually got, pronto. They'd stay off up there in the hills for a while, and then they'd straggle back and go to work. Cedillo didn't bother us any, the Americans, I mean. He figured we was on his side anyway, more'n likely, since we were Americans; anyway his soldiers had orders not to bother us. But they did anyway; at least they did when they took our teamsters and roustabouts and the rest of the workers with 'em and we had to drill short-handed.
"But Cardenas finally got tired of fooling with this guy Cedillo, and he sent his army up there and run the rebels out. This guy got away, and hotfooted it to the United States. I understand he's still down in Texas somewhere. El Paso or down around there someplace, still trying to get his army together and go back and take over the country. But he wouldn't get to run it long, even if he did win it, which I don't see how the hell he could anyway. The Americans and the British and the Germans and Japs wouldn't let him. They'd be in there thicker'n fleas on a hound dog, and all of 'em fighting to get their hands in the trough.
"The Germans have already got a pretty good thing down there in Mexico, Just in a year or two. Why, in Mexico City the streets look like they belonged to Germany, there's so damned many German flags flying all the time. Every time there's a German holiday the boys break out their flags and hang 'em; and you can always see German officers strutting down the streets just like they was at home, goosestepping along, and hollering Hooray for Hitler. The Japs are getting in there pretty solid, too, and the Italians, but none of 'em as thick as the Germans.
"Looks to me like the best thing the United States could do is try to help the Mexicans out right now, even if we don't happen to like their government because some of the big oil companies up here have lost property in Mexico. If we don't help them out, and pretty soon, too, there won't be anybody to help 'em but the Germans and the rest, and the first thing you know we'll have German flags right up in the streets of 21 Paso!
"I don't shoot off much about politics or things, but sometimes something like that Mexican deal Just hits a fellow right between the eyes. Me having to be on the jump all the time like roughnecks got to, is one thing; that way, having to move from one location to another every few months or weeks, we don't even get to vote half the time. My dad's a Republican, always has been, I guess, hut I think if I was Toting I'd make it Democratic. Those boys have pat over some things I like, such as better pay, and holding 'em down by proration, and things like that, all of 'em to help the man that's too little to buck the big companies. I don't see much in unions, but it's all right with me if the rest of 'em want to sign up.
"If things go right with me I'm going to check it to the boys this winter; I'm going to get out of this kind of work. I've spent seven years at it already, and that's about enough for anybody. I like roughnecking, don't get me wrong, hut it's no job for a man to be in all his life. I've always managed to tuck a little bit away, and now I've got a pretty good stake salted down. I don't want to lose it all at once, but I don't mind taking a chance with It to get hold of some more.
"There's just one thing that'd keep me roughnecking; I've got about a half-way chance of going to Russia and work in the big oil fields there. I know what the score is here; I've worked in every damned field of any size in the whole United States, and in Canada, Mexico, South America, and even got a job once on a wildcat in the West Indies. But there wasn't much to that one; just a hell of a lot of hard work and not much pay, and no oil at all, and I didn't even stay long enough to throw a good drunk.
"But if I got in a couple of years at Roumania and Russia, couldn't nobody tie me when it came to roughnecking. I'd be in line for one hell of a good job, over there or back here in the U.S. The way I figure it, a little more experience never hurt anybody, that is if a fellow'll just figure out what kind and how much he can use; and I figure I've got it worked out pretty good for myself. I've always tried to work at things I wanted to, and that way I learned a lot more than most roughnecks do. Little things, like learning to speak good English, by myself, too; and getting a letter from the boss to help get another job and maybe a better one. That's what I mean by learning, just how to get along better'n ordinary. Lots of the boys laugh at me for doing that, but I know which side I'm playing an all right, and they don't. I'll be wearing out soft cushions when those boys are still out there rupturing themselves on casing.
"Like yesterday and today, for instance. We put in a twelve-hour shift, our regular one, and then we went over and helped out on a couple more locations. Altogether, I've finished up a little more than 29 hours, straight, with just time out to grab a sandwich and a cuppa coffee. Well, I don't mind the work at all, you understand, but it's just the idea of having to do that all my life that gets me. And that's why I want to get out while I can. I'm young, 23 this last spring, and I want out while I can and while I've still got a lot of good contacts with people.
"There's a fellow down in Oklahoma City who's been after me for a couple of years, trying to get me to go to work for him. He's got a lot of stuff, some of it proved up and producing and a lot more of it that hasn't been. He wants me to go to work for him, taking charge of most of it, but I never could quite make out whether to or not. Besides that, the last time I talked with him, last year when I was hustling down on some wells there in the Oklahoma City field, He wanted me to work in his office for him. He's a big bond broker, investments, and things like that, and they tell me he makes a thousand a day or more. He says he'll put me to work any day I walk into the office and tell him I'm ready to leave my duffel there. He wants me to sell bonds for him; says I've got a good personality and can put up a good talk, and that I could make my pile in a year or two.
"But I'm not so sure I know what the score is in that kind of work. I don't know a damned thing about it, in the first place, and then, too, I'd kind of lose my hand in the oil fields. What I'm really figuring on doing is touching him for a wad and adding it to my stake and buying up some leases 'round Salem, Illinois. He'll loan it to me if I ask him, I know; he's told me any time I need some spare cash to let him know and he'll fix it up for me, without interest. Damned white of him, too; not many men would do that for somebody that isn't even kin to 'em. I haven't seen my dad for years, not since I left home, but he'd loan me money if I needed it. But I don't want to ask him for anything, no more'n I have to, and that hasn't been anything for seven years.
"But I figure I can put up enough cash to buy some unproved stuff and wildcat a hole or two. You see, when a man's going to sink a wildcat he goes around to the companies that've got leases next to where he's going to drill, and he gets so much cash from each company; if he brings in his well, then of course the companies that gave him the wildcat money have practically got their stuff proved up. That way, it doesn't cost anybody too damned much.
"If I can buy some stuff that looks pretty good to me, I'll set up as my own drilling contractor, doing my own drilling and tool pushing, and then everything I bring in will be mine. I figure I can put in a bunch of little wells up there, not big production you see but steady, and make a million out of it in no time. Wells up there are pretty shallow --- couple of thousand feet or so; not like Oklahoma, or even Texas --- and we've been drilling them in about ten days or usually a week. That's one reason why I'm getting out of roughnecking, too; it isn't regular enough. A man can get in a week's work, or maybe two if he's working for a big company or drilling contractor, and then he's got to lay off until they want another hole drilled. A man can't figure on what he's going to earn that way.
"But if I get hold of those leases I was talking about and get some holes drilled for myself, I don't see any reason why I can't be worth a million in the next five years. Illinois don't have proration; a man can sell all the oil he can bring outa the ground, so there wouldn't be any trouble there like there is in Texas and Oklahoma. The price doesn't hold up steady, and it's never big enough, but it'd be good enough for me.
"And then, too, the stuff would he mine. That's the biggest thing to me --- having it for myself. All I want is the chance to make my big stake, and the rest of the world can go to hell, I know what the score is in the oil game, and when I hit the oil sands I'll check it up to 'em and get into something new."
