Storekeeper
J. P. Epps and Son
R. V. Waldrep
Red Bay, Alabama
Editorial Department
J. P. EPPS AND SON
Any day you can see J. P. Epps sitting on the curb in front of his store. He is generally propped against the State Highway sign 24 that is planted in the concrete of the curb. Often a farmer or two will be talking, or rather Ples, that is J. P. Epps, will be talking to them.
Ples has a two-story, narrow store, made of rectangles of stone. The J. W. Rogers Grocery Store is on one side and the Morrow Hardware on the other. In the store, Ples has drygoods, piece-goods, shoes, overalls, and notions. His son, Vuin, works there too.
Ples is always willing to tell you about his life, whether on the front of the store or while you are cocked on the counter in the store. He lips his snuff and talks in his whispering, breathless, rasping way.
His wife is Evie, and she comes into the store and works on Saturdays and a little through the week; her voice is soft and almost obviously restrained. She smiles a great deal, and keeps her hands in front, interlaced.
Ples likes to tell how he stole his wife. "I was out at Patterson Chapel at a footwashing. You know where Patterson Chapel is?" he asked with his rushing voice, and before you answer, he is going ahead. "Patterson's is still out there on the Railroad between here and Golden, "but it ain't the same building.
"I was out there and I saw a plump little girl, and I liked her right then. She was a little old thing. She was with two or three other little girls, and I edged over and I ast a feller if he knew who she was. He said he figgered she was a Nabors' girl, but I knew she wasn't; I told him I thought she was one of E. W. Waldrep's gals. I edged around and got one of the girls I knew to introduce me to her. Then I told Cora, that was one of the girls, to go down to the spring with Evie and leave her. I sidled up and we got to talking, and the first thing you know we got us a buggy." Ples jerked his head to one side, he dipped with a knowing, wicked wink. "The boys got to kidding me, and wantin' to know why I was robbin' the cradle. She weren't but 14, just a little old plump thing." He ran his hand through the short gray hair; once that hair had been blacker than any coal.
"I ain't going to tell you how I got her---", he grinned and sniggered, and then he said: "You know already? I stole her. I stole a horse at the same time. I didn't want to steal the horse, but Evie made me. Wash give both the girls a horse, and Evie she was going to have her horse. I argued with her, but I led the horse out. Wash didn't want me to have the girl. But later me and him used to laugh about it."
Evie Epps came in and listened, and she didn't look like the plump little 14-year girl she had been at the footwashing, the little girl that Ples had stole in the night. Now she was an aged woman, with a full-head of gray hair, a sweet, too sweet, smile. She wore gold-rimmed glasses. Her husband was a little imp, hair short, eyes twinkling wickedly.
"I had a good farm around Golden and I had it paid fer; I was doing good. Evie and I went there and stayed three years. I was getting ready to make improvements." He was more serious than he usually is, as he said: "I wish I had never left," he said, as he looked around the gloomy, high ceilinged store. "I wouldn't have left hadn't been for Evie." Here Evie smiled and the lights of her eyes were mixed with the lights of the glinting gold-rim of her glasses. "Wash sent for me and told me he wanted me to come into the store. I told him I was all right where I was. You know, he was out there at Cooper's place. Back then there wasn't no Red Bay, Wash Waldrep's store was the only store there was, and it was two miles from where Red Bay is now. Wash and another fellow <Text Not Clear> Red Bay run it.
"Wash sent for me, and wanted me to work for Mm. Reef was in the store then, and Reef wanted to get married. I told 'em that I had a farm, a good one, and I was figuring on staying and making some improvements. But Archie (Dr. A. C. Waldrep) he come out there--a pretty good piece it was--and got Evie, and carried her over to Wash's place, and she come back and got to arguing with me. I still wouldn't go. Wash told me it would be the best thing for me, and Reef he got me to one side, and he advised me to go. I told Reef I'd go to work so he could marry two weeks early. I'd try it a month, I told Wash. So Reef went ahead and got married, went to Fulton and went in business with his wife's people, I've been in the store ever since." Ples is an old man now, and ever since is a great many years.
He moved to a store of his own, worked with Archie in the Waldrep and Epps store, and in this store in which he was now talking, Archie had his medical office, up there in the second story. "I told Archie to turn the business over to me. Let me buy the goods and sell them. I told him that was the only way we could work together, and he did. I told him he could ask all the Questions he wanted to, and look at the books."
Ples will tell you how he collected money: "Archie was down there where the sugar barrel was, and he was having it 'round and 'round with a fellow about what he owed. The fellow got mad, and was pulling oat a big knife, and two or three other fellows was about to bust in, and it looked pretty bad for Archie. I picked up me a good ax, and I waded in: "Stand back, stand back--we're going to have fair play.' We got the money. "He tells with relish of his collecting money. "One feller came in, and I'd been after him for the longest. He got mad, and begin to shake his pocketbook in my face, and I reached out, slapped the money from his hand, and I counted my money out right before him."
Ples used to buy cotton; in the back of his store he kept bag after bag of samples he had taken from bales. Wagons would drive up to the back end of his store or the front, and he'd swing up with his sharp knife, and he'd have a hole to tear out a sample. Dropping down on the street, he'd pinch at the cotton to get the staple. "I taught Jim Tiffin how to buy cotton. He left here owing me thousand dollars went to Birmingham, and went broke.
I was over at Birmingham, wasn't thinking a thing about collecting my money, and he yelled at me 'cross the street. I told him I didn't have collecting in my mind, but he carried me on to the courthouse where he was having a bankrupt suit. Then we went back to his store, in his office, and he told me that he had $5000 in government bonds--he was keeping that still. And he had a mortgage on a fellow there in Red Bay, and he pulled it out, and give it to me on the debt. I went on home, collected that money when it was due. I had to pay a recording fee or something of about a dollar on it, but when Jim was here he wrote me a check for that."
Ples owns a few farms, but he's been hit pretty hard. He's not as well- to-do as he once was. See, he's got Vuin to keep up. Vuin is about the size of a 14-year old, with the face of a 50-year codger. He is about 38.
His face is small, and unfortunately his nose is so big that he looks ridiculous, even more so when you consider that he has a mouth big as all out of doors, with thick lips and bad teeth. His eyes are small. He keeps spitting imaginary things, spxzz, spxzz! He's always taking aspirins, running home to the storm cellar when he sees a cloud, and going to get his boy when school is out. He's crazy about the kid, who is in the second grade. He carries the kid to school in the morning, tucks him in the desk, glides around the building at recess, and is standing in the hall waiting for the kid when school is out. Before slot-machines were barred he tang around the drugstore dropping nickels and peeping through the show-window to see if a shoe-customer was going in. He's a damn good shoe salesman. The only trouble with Vuin is women. He used to open at three in the morning to meet that Stella Brooks, and once he just jumped into his car and went out West, his mother crying and taking on. He came back sobered and loafing as usual. He paces up and down before the store, spzzing, spzzing, and smoking.
Ples appears to be tolerant of his man-son, apparently not knowing that it is his son who has robbed him of the store's profits, and who has probably destroyed the store's trade. He does not say anything about how utterly worthless and no-count his son is. Maybe he does in private. Maybe he has taken over the calm of age. At any rate he doesn't hop up to wait on customers as readily as once. He uses the curb for a seat, and he often puts talking before business.
Ples never mentions Vuin; Vuin never talks to his father.
Years ago, Ples went to St. Louis with Reef to buy goods. He talks about those trips, the beer that was drunk; for he likes to tell off on Reef and Archie, how they used to drink and carry on. He always talks low, then, talking like a gray-headed imp. He tells how they stole watermelons as boys. And tales are told on Ples too, of his visits to cities, and how he acted. He is not as sophisticated as Reef and some of the rest; for he did not, as Reef did, go to New Orleans on a cattle train, to Iuka in a wagon, and to Texas for the hell of it.
As a young men, before he married, he made a trip into Arkansas, where he got a job as a hired hand on a farm. He liked the work, and saved every dime of salary he made. He came back, and for seven years he lived in one of those farms you find in North Alabama, deep in the waste hills, deep into the frontier-like farmlands. There he was a hermit, plowing, hoeing, and fencing. And he wished he had never left.
On Sundays you can see him going for walks on his farm out in Garrett town. The love of farming and the farmland is in him. He likes farmers, but he is a hard man with them. His tenants don't beat him. He pinches down, demands knowledge of what is being done, where the fertilizer is being used, what the dollar goes for. And like many of the old men of Red Bay, he'll fight the man that owes and doesn't pay. "I can look any man in the eye that owes me."
On the long, dull summer afternoons, as he sits before the store, he talks to Vuin's little son. The boy can't talk plain by or very intelligently, but you can see the earnest and serious way the conversation progresses.
The boy is between Ples's knees, his young face distorted with expression, with seeking for words, with concern for what he is saying. Ples listens. It is told that it is Ples's fault that the boy is a regular devil all over town. The kid fights like a demon, tears in, scratching, biting, and <Text Not Clear>. Other children can't play with him. He whips the Lepard twins both at the same time. Once a teacher slapped him for breaking up a game, and Vuin descended, fighting mad, and even went to the principal with complaint, threatening to sue. But Vuin used to hire a taxi to go home in, out of fear of some boys his own age. Perhaps he and Ples aim to raise the boy up able to protect himself.
There Ples sits before the store, an old man, pert, impish, gray-headed, squatting, his arms locked around his knees as he talks to the farmers, the kid, and just anybody. Vuin comes spizzing, spizzing at imaginary particles, his pants so low on his hips he looks as if he doesn't have a rear. Ples doesn't even see him.
Vuin was a Dixon man, and a legislator got him a job once, but Vuin didn't take it. One hundred dollars a month wasn't enough. He continues to politic, and the town continues to laugh at him. He drinks his beer, and when Arthur Finch, the store clerk comes home from the postoffice he often finds a dozen bottles of beer in his ice-box, a case of beer in the pantry, or wine in his cubboard "Vuin," he laughs. And Ples doesn't even wonder why his store no longer makes a profit.
7/21/39
S.J.
