In an otherwise identical version, additional information is given.
Information on the cover sheet of the deleted version is given below.
The date on the top of page 2319B is "April 5, 1939."
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6--Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6—Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
April 14, 1939
Athens, Georgia
180 Lyndon Avenue
Mrs. L.A. Crane (Negro)
Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby (writer) Mrs. Sarah H. Hall (reviser)
TEE PORO BEAUTY SHOPPE
The sign, PORO BEAUTY SHOPPE, hangs high over a gate leading to the back yard of well kept grounds surrounding a neat "brown-painted cottage. The front yard is encircled by a close-clipped privet hedge. Two wooden crows are on the green lawn near the steps; one appears to be picking up something while the other keeps watch, Nearby, in the branches of an oak tree, nestle two startlingly natural-looking cardinals.
I was about to knock on the front door of the cottage when I noticed a card which read: "Take the drive leading to the hack of the house. You will find me there." Flanking the walk, the evergreen hedge plants were trimmed to form baskets that looked as though they should have been filled with the gorgeous tulips that were blooming in a bed in the back yard. Hear the driveway I passed a rose garden, and regretted that it was too early in the season for roses.
The back yard is enclosed with poultry wire, and as I opened the wire gate I was greeted by the excited bark of a dog that watched from underneath the house. Goldfish, large and small, were playing hide and seek in and out of an elaborate castle in the heart-shaped pool in the back yard. Sea shells of many sizes and shapes are imbedded in the cement rim around the pool, and at one end a miniature fisherman holds his pole over the water. At the other side lilies have spread their pads over the water until they almost conceal the water hyacinths. The water reflected the "blazing colors of the tulips that surrounded it.
Benches and chairs were placed about under the large trees, and here and there were flower beds which showed promise of blossoms. A slatted screen rolled up at the front of the garage revealed odds and ends of furniture.
"Come in," was the response to my knock on the back door. I entered an enclosed porch where I saw a green and cream-colored breakfast suite and refrigerator. "Come on in here," said the operator and I found myself in a room where a mulatto woman was receiving a marcel wave. The room was equipped with two swivel chairs, one for the customer, and the other a much higher chair — was occupied by the operator. On a nearby table was a device for heating the marcel iron, containers holding oils and various lotions, and a lavish supply of hairpins. A small radio and several ash trays were on a table in the opposite corner. Sufficient warmth radiated from the oil heater to make the room comfortable. The end of a shampoo board attached to a tall chair, hung in the lavatory. In the variety of beauty shop equipment in the small room I noticed an electric hair dryer.
When I had stayed my mission the operator said: "Well, bring in a chair from out there on the porch, and please excuse me for not getting up and doing it for you, but I have to keep close watch on these irons to keep them from getting too hot."
I placed the chair in the open doorway of the shop, sat down in it, g-nd for a few moments watched the operator as she busily applied the heated iron to her customer's hair. After every few waves made, she would oil the hair. Her green uniform had cream-colored collar, cuffs, and buttons, carrying out the general color scheme of the shop, and her reddish brown hair was arranged in braids on the back of her neck. She was scarcely more than five feet tall and weighed probably a little more than a hundred pounds. Large freckles were sprinkled over her light brown face, and she wore silver-rimmed glasses.
"I don't like my name," she said, "so I tell everyone to call me 'C.T.' I don't think a half-dozen people in this town know my real name. In school everyone called me 'Moore'. I asked my mother to let me change my name, but she wouldn't do that; she said it would be bad luck, but I know lots of folks who have changed their names and if it ever caused them any bad luck I never heard of it. However, I don't believe in such sayings, because I know that luck is in the Lord. We are either lucky or unlucky as the Lord wills it." Her customer chimed in, "Now you're talking. That sure is the truth, too."
The operator smiled at her customer and continued; "My father owned the farm where I was born. It was not far from Watkinsville, Georgia. I did very little actual farm work because I was only five years old when I was sent to Social Circle, Georgia, to live with an aunt until I was, er, Oh, around twelve years old. She had no children of her own, and I was put there to keep her company. After her death I returned home to my parents. By that time I had outgrown the little school which my father taught in Watkinsville, so he sent me to a boarding school here in Athens. It was known then as Jeruel Institute; now it is the Union Baptist School.
"It was while I was going to school there that I met my husband. He had just come back from the World War, and I didn't wait to finish school but went ahead and married him on Christmas Day after I finished the tenth grade. Oh, we had such a nice church wedding! There were four bridesmaids and four ushers. My father merched down the aisle with me and we were met at the altar by the groom and his best man. I wore a regular bride's dress of white satin, with a veil, and my bouquet was of bride's roses showered with lilies-of-the valley. In the past I have let several use my wedding dress and veil to be married in but it's getting so old and yellowed I don't let anybody use it any more. I always meant to save it for my own daughter to be married in, but I was never 'fortunate enough to have any children.
"My people were owned by the Fulbrights, in Oconee County, before the war. It is said that my grandfather was half white and no doubt that's where I get my complexion and my freckles. My husband's mother lives up in Banks County now and she's whiter than you are. She's an octoroon. Her grandfather was a full-blooded Indian. He wore the regular Indian garments, feathers in his hair and everything. I don't know who my husband's father was, but his father's relatives live in Augusta, Georgia. His mother visits us here each summer and we often go up to Banks County to see her. She has a wonderful assortment of fruit trees in her orchard and we never have to buy any fruit in the summer.
"Now, if it was a picture of the South you wanted, you got it. We are not ashamed of our forefathers, for we know we have some of the very best blood in this country in our veins." To prove her statement about her husband's white mother, she exhibited a picture of an old woman dressed in white standing in the walk before a mountain cottage. Flowers and ferns grew in profusion about the yard and in pots on the railing of the veranda. I would not have known the picture was of a Negro woman had she not told me.
"I was sixteen years old when I married," she continued, "and my husband was in his early twenties. He didn't have the required education to do what he wanted to do, so he took advantage of the government plan to give vocational training to ex-soldiers. Under this plan the veterans received a salary and their wives were given an allowance of §35.00 a month throughout the time the men were in training.
"Hubby decided to take a course in general agriculture through the Smith-Huggins Fund, so we went to Nashville, Tennessee, and entered the government school there. We had been studying there a year and four months when the government officials and the school authorities had a falling out, and the government issued an order for all who were attending college on the above mentioned fund to report to Tuskegee Institute. I studied dressmaking at both planes, and finished at Tuskegee in 1925. All through our college years, hubby and I were in the same grade. No matter what subjects we were taking, all the students recited lessons one day and the next day went to the academic building to give a practical demonstration of what they had learned on the preceding day. That's the way that vocational school was run; study and recite one day, and demonstrate the next. That made us go school three days and work three.
"During our college days we were able to save some money out of our government allowance, and then too we saved the rent we were receiving on this house which we had bought just after we married. It wasn't as nice then as it is now; we have made considerable improvements since then. Just before we finished college, the bank here in Athens that we had our money in failed and wiped us out. When we received our diplomas we decided to come on home, get jobs, and make the best of it.
"Hubby got a job as agriculturist out here at the Vocational Training School, and he stayed there until that was done away with. My first job that summer was selling Pure Food Products, and that safe in my kitchen is a premium I won on that job. That job paid me the first money that I ever actually earned.
"From a child I loved to sew. I learned how by making doll clothes, and all through my school days I never overlooked an opportunity to learn more about sewing. After finishing at Tuskegee I sewed for five years. During those first two or three years after the bank failed, I even made all of hubby's light suits. All my sewing was done at home; I never sewed out. When I first began, I sewed for both white and colored people. Things were booming then, and I received from $1.00 to $3.50 for making dresses and, remarkable to say, I never lost one dime on a customer. I would study the materials brought to me, help the customer select the pattern, and state my price. When they came for the finished garment they brought the money.
"So many cheap shops opened up around town where people could buy readymade clothing at less than they could buy the cloth and have them made up, that I gave up my dressmaking business and opened this hairdressing establishment. Before we leave the subject of sewing let me call your attention to the fact that not everyone realizes that many of the cheap ready-made garments are of inferior material and workmanship, and that they cannot compare with a garment made of carefully chosen material that is skillfully made and fitted to the individual.
"When I made up ray mind to be a hairdresser I decided to be a good one, so I went to Chicago to take the course at a school that deals with methods and preparations for Negroes exclusively. The woman who started that school for Negro beauty operators opened up in one small room; now her school uses all of a building that covers an entire city block known as 'Poro Corner.'
"I have followed this trade for nine years now. I held on to my sewing until I worked up sufficient trade to take up all my time in my beauty parlor, then I dropped my dressmaking business altogether. I maintained a shop downtown for nearly eight years. I have only "been doing my work at home about fifteen months. It's all right for a single person to work out downtown, for when they get home they don’t have a house and family to look after. While there are scores of women who do both, I figured that in my case I would save more in the long run, even if I didn't have quite as many customers, I certainly wouldn’t have as much expense. However, I don't believe that I lost one single customer by making the move. In fact, I think I have gained quite a few, for at the hour I closed my shop downtown the colored women were just getting through their work. How when their work is finished they come on out to my house and lots of times they keep me busy as late as twelve and one o'clock.
"Have you noticed the sign on the wall in front of the chair for my customers? That's my slogan." The sign reads; "Please don't ask for credit. Beneath the sign is a placard listing her prices, including marcels 50¢, croqui-noles 50¢, and curls 25¢. "My customers read that, and they know I mean it, so I don't have a bit of trouble getting my money. I'm fortunate that way for, as I said before, I've never lost on one single person. Had you noticed that motto?" She pointed to a line at the top of a placard illustrating styles of coiffure. The line read, "It blazed the trail and it still leads,"
"That refers to the Poro School of Beauty Culture that I attended in Chicago, and I adopted it as my motto too," she said.
"I wonder if you would be interested in knowing how we go about beautifying the members of my race. Usually, unless they have come with some other definite request, I begin with what I consider a scalp treatment — a liberal application of some antiseptic preparation. Then I apply Glover's Mange Cure as the best thing to get rid of dandruff. Dandruff is just a common term denoting a diseased scalp. After a thorough shampoo the hair is dried under my electric dryer; then each strand of hair is carefully oiled and I proceed to straighten it out with a moderately heated comb. When the hair has been through the straightening process I give a marcel or a croquignole wave as a finishing touch. You can't give a Negro a finger wave.
"One of the prime requisites stressed in beauty culture is care of the skin. I can give facials and manicures too, but I don't fool with them any more for I've never cleared anything out of them, and the city taxes the devil out of us for everything extra we undertake like that. When beauty culture for Negroes first started, we only straightened the hair. In the last few years we have been educating our women to realize the advantages of the other phases of beauty culture. There aren't more than four Negro women in this town who could afford facials and manicures at a price that would enable an operator to clear the expense of the treatment, to say nothing of overhead for taxes, water, lights, heat and things like that. I don't mean that they entirely overlook the care of their skin and nails. They don't; they just go to the dime stores and get those cheap preparations and apply them at home. I wonder if any of them ever have an idea how bad that old nail polish looks to the other person when it's flaking off in spots, leaving the nails streaked and rough looking.
"A recent law passed in this State requires that beauty operators spend not less than six months in training before they are permitted to attempt the State Board examination. Then you have to have two-and-one half year's experience as an apprentice before you are permitted to open your own shop. Of course, the State would prefer that you take the examination right after you finish the course while what you have learned is still fresh on your mind.
"I feel quite flattered to realize that as a result of an address that I gave at the Athens High School during Vocational Guidance week, many Negro children have become interested in hairdressing.
"In the beginning I could do this work in any room in my house, but the State soon changed that. If you have a shop in a residence it has to be kept separate from any other part of the home. That's why I had my shop fixed up out of part of my back porch. Did you notice the electric sign over my gate?
It makes it mighty convenient for my customers who come at night. The sanitary inspector comes out and examines my shop just as regularly as he did when I was in business downtown. I reckon the State decided that if you were going to make money out of anything they might as well get their part of it."
The customer was ready to go and the operator followed her to the door with the admonition, "Now when you get home be sure to put a net over your hair."
"It looks mighty nice and it will be prettier when it's combed out," the customer replied with a satisfied smile.
"I'm glad you like it," was the response, I'll look for you again about two weeks from now. You know, Rose, you have to have hair fixed that often if you expect it to stay pretty."
"Yes, I know. I'll be back," she agreed and added, "Oh, yes, where's that flower you promised me?"
The operator went into the garage and came back with a little shrub that was ready for transplanting and gave it to Rose. "You owe me a dime," she said.
"I can't spare but a nickel this time," Rose announced as she handed over a coin and made her departure.
"Now, Miss," my hostess began, "if you are not through with this interview, you'll just have to come on in the house with me for I haven't had time to make my bed this morning."
I followed her through her modern kitchen, where I noticed among other things a gas stove, a food safe, utility closet, and a sink. My attention was particularly attracted by the design of the green and cream-colored wall paper, which featured pictures of kitchen appliances. The green end cream-colored linoleum carried out the general color scheme.
The beaver boarded bedroom was barely large enough to hold the double iron bed and a dark oak dresser.
"You have a nice house," I told her.
"Thank you," she replied, "but it's not what we would like for it to be. When we bought here we planned to tear this house down and build one like we wanted, but when the bank closed and we lost all of our money it was all we could do to hold on to our home and add a few improvements from time to time.
"Hubby and I had an argument when we were able to add the bathroom. He wanted its door to open out on the back porch and I wanted it to open into our bedroom. We couldn't agree so we arbitrated by cutting two doors, one opening into this room and the other on the porch. I'm glad now that he did want the door cut on the porch, for before I was able to put a lavatory in my beauty shop I could wash my customers' hair in the bathroom.
"Come on in this next bedroom while I straighten it up," she invited.
"I'll build a fire in the heater. It's getting right chilly." In this room I saw a very good walnut bedroom suite that included an attractive chifforobe. A vase of flowers was on a table, and I noticed an electric dewing machine. The floor was covered with linoleum and crisply fresh curtains draped the windows. Several, chairs were arranged conveniently near the circulating heater. A large picture of her husband hung on the gray ceiled wall, and a number of other pictures were in evidence about the room.
"Do you really want to see the rest of our house?" she asked. "You know white people don't pay Negroes much for their work, and as our income is from those of our race who work for white families, we have had to go slow about firing up our place. We are making improvements as fast as we can get the money to make them with." I followed her through a door that led into a little vestibule just large enough for the well-chosen console table that stood beneath a mirror. The green throw rug in the vestibule matched the larger rug that I saw a moment later on the livingroom floor. There I saw among other things, a piano, a cabinet radio, a three-piece livingroom suite, and a coffee table. The square top of the coffee table was fastened to the base of a three legged piano stool that rested on glass balls. Several scuares of tapestry and a variety of photographs and other pictures hung on the papered walls. The windows featured immaculate lace curtains and gold draperies.
"From the livingroom we passed through pongee-curtained French doors to the diningroom where I saw a walnut dining-room suite that included a round table, a buffet, and chairs. Papers filled the pigeonholes of a desk that held a telephone. The draperies, curtains, rug, and pictures in this room were of the type seen in the other rooms, and the entire house was clean and in excellent arrangement.
My hostess seemed to like to talk about her home. "We like individuality," she said, "therefore we must plan what we want ahead of time and stick to our plans. Hubby does most of the work of coordianating our plans and ideas. Let's go out on the back porch where you can write while I fix my beans for dinner. You take that chair on the other side of that table and I'll sit near the kitchen door so I can get dinner as I talk. We are proud of our house, even if it isn't just what we want yet. In the beginning there were just two main rooms with a shed room back of each of them. We changed that and arranged the three rooms across the hack with the kitchen in the middle. At first a hall ran from the front to the hack of the house, but we made the vestibule out of the front part of it, and the kitchen out of the hack hall.
"My hairdressing pays me very well. In good times I take in as high as $65 a month, and don't you think that’s good for colored folks to make in a little place like Athens? Of course when all my overhead expense is deducted I only clear about $30 a month. When my shop was downtown I kept one helper regularly. I didn't pay her a salary for I found that helpers do better work on commission. It encourages them to work harder to get in trade for the shop. Since I have moved my shop to my home I clear about $5 a week, sometimes more.
"I belong to the National Beauty League, and all its members are required to boost the beauty business beginning the week before Easter, We call this National Beauty Week, Throughout National Beauty Week each year we have what we call cut rate prices, which means that every shop belonging to the League gives a shampoo, marcel, and hair-press for $1.00 for that period of time.
"Early in May each year I hold what I call 'open house.' Each of my regular customers brings one or more friends. Before, I have held these in my downtown shop, but this year I'm going to celebrate with a garden party on the first moonlight night in May. It will be in the garden in my back yard. Each customer contributing a dime will have the privilege of bringing a friend. In other words, they contribute a dime for each friend they want to bring to my party. A punch table will be placed just inside the gate, and with the punch I will serve sandwiches or cakes and sweet crackers, I'm planning to have a cute little pantomime put on by the small children of my customers. As a rule I always get some white person who owns or works in a beauty shop to lecture to my guests at these entertainments.
"As I see it, there are two important things in which the people of my race have little or no training. More than anything else they lack the knowledge of how to make the best of their physique to enable them to make a good personal appearance, and in the second place they don't know the value of time. These are valuable things to know, but not many of my race give a thought to either of them. An object of my annual celebration is to illustrate to them the improvement a jam-up job of hairdressing makes in their personal appearance. I plan to begin my garden party at 5:30 and to end it at 9"30 p.m. Most of my customers work out, and those hours will give them a chance to attend.
"Many people who call themselves hairdressers don't know the first word about it. I encourage girls of my race who have talent for this work to plan to take a course, I always tell them that when they have completed sufficient preparation for the work, the work will be waiting for them.
"Just because I did take the course, stood the State examination, and have my license to work, it doesn't follow that I think I know everything about hairdressing. Styles change rapidly and a hairdresser has to do plenty of reading and study to keep up with them. Methods of treating the scalp and hair change as science develops new information on these things, so every other year I take a post-graduate course in Atlanta. I went to the World's Fair in Chicago for a course. That trip enabled me to see the great fair and to learn the newest developments in my profession.
"Many of the northern beauty shops for my race are taking up the systems used by the white race. I had a letter from a white school in Atlanta urging me to take up their system, but I'm not going to fool with it for there are so few colored people in this city who can. afford it, or who would have the desire for that type of work that it would not pay me to set it up. I try to be reasonable in my prices, for I know that my race does not earn much and so they cannot afford to pay high prices for beauty work.
"Don't you think I don't have competition here. Two of my competitors have downtown shops now, but that doesn't bother me, for the type of trade they attract, I wouldn't want to come to my house anyway. They are the class that hang around the street corners to catch a man. One of those operators has had to pay off to the State for the last five years for not abiding by the State's rules. She doesn't have a lavatory in her shop and heats water on the oil stove that she keeps her shop warm with, and she shampoos her customers in a washpan. My other competitor was run out of Hew York because she didn't operate her shop in accordance with the laws of that State. The State law has never caught me short yet, and I don't mean for it to.
"We do have some interesting, as well as amusing, experiences. What happens between me and my customers in my own shop I try to forget and it is my policy never to repeat what they say about anyone else. When you work for the public it's always bad business to talk about those you have to deal with, but there are one or two little experiences that it won’t hurt to tell anybody.
"There was a girl who used to come to my shop regularly every other week to have her hair fixed; that was when I had a downtown shop. She worked for a white woman who had two little children, and she usually brought them along with her to my shop. The little boy was the oldest and he loved pciture shows, so we made arrangements with the manager of the colored picture show to slip him in and keep an eye on him for us. We kept the baby girl in the shop with us. This customer of mine had a certain day and hour to come, and on those days I was careful never to let anyone else in my shop while she was there with those white children. That girl was here last night getting her scalp treated, and we had a good time talking about the old times when we used to slip the little boy in to enjoy the show and close my shop to everyone else for fear that lovely baby would come in contact with the wrong type of person.
"Once a woman came to me to have her hair dyed. It was white as cotton, she said to me, 'if I let you try it how long after you put the dye on my hair will it be before it turns black?
"'It turns black while I'm applying the dye,' I assured her.
"'Do you mean to tell me that when I leave here my hair will be black?' she asked in amazement.
"'Yes,' I affirmed, 'It will be black then.'
Child, the job's yours. Go ahead,' she eagerly chortled."
C.T. finished snapping the beans, put them in water that was already boiling, and lifted the lid over the white potatoes that were almost done. Then she swept out her shop and proceeded to wash that floor with water heavily charged with disinfectant. The last thing she did as she put her shop in order was to drop her straightening comb and marcel irons in a pan of boiling water with disinfectant in it, explaining as she did it, "I never use this pan for anything else except to sterilize these appliances.
"Since I moved my shop out here in my home, I don’t see any increase in my gas and electric bills," she continued. “One reason for that is that I've learned how to read both those meters. Once a young man came cut to read my light meter I had just read it and knew exactly what the reading was. He told me his reading and I knew that it wasn't right. My meter is on the front porch and it's so high that I have to get on a stool to read it. I said to him:
"'Are you sure your figures are right?'
"'Positive,' he replied.
In an otherwise identical version, the last line on page 2335 is; "I thanked her and left her making preparations to marcel the hair of her latest customer."
"'They're not no such darn thing,' I told him, and I climbed right up on a stool and sure enough the figures were exactly the same as they were when I had read them five minutes before. He flashed his light on the meter and said: 'You're right.' You have to be on your guard all the time for people will try to cut your throat while you are looking right at them, but here's one that it's right hard for them to fool too often.
"We try to live right. I joined the church at Social Circle, Georgia when I was twelve years old and I was baptized at old Mount Zion Church down there. After I married I moved my letter to the First Baptist Church here.
"Since we have no children, I'm hoping that we'll be able to save enough money while we're young enough to work to take care of us when we get old. However, hubby is not able to do much now. He was shell-shocked in the World War and he has spells with his heart that frighten me nearly to death. He had a spell just the other night, and I didn't close my eyes until after four o'clock in the morning,"
The dog barked and C.T. said: "Now, Miss, there comes another customer, and I believe I've told you about all there is to tell about me and my line of work. I've enjoyed giving you my story and I'm proud of having the chance to show you my shop and my home. When I give my garden party I'd like to have you bring some of your white friends so they can see what we are trying to do."
