July 12, 1939
Henry Durham, Colored Laborer.
Huntersville, N. C. R. F. D. #1
Mary P. Wilson, Writer.
Original Names	Changed Names
Henry Durham	Harvey Dunn
Mr. McGinnis	Mr. McCall
Gaston County	Gadden County
Belmont	Bethel
"Gee, mule., damn you, gee". It was hard to tell which was the hottest looking, the long-legged brown mule or the long-legged negro who was plowing.
"Name of God, mule, it shore is a good thing for you, you don't belong to me. " Old Harvey didn't seem to mind the heat but the mule tried to stop for a rest at the end of every corn row. "If you want to know what I'd do to you if you 'longed to me? I'll jest tell you. I'd take you down there to a big gully and leave you for the buzzards to eat. You needn't turn yore head around and look at me so hard, ole devil, 'cause I'd shore would do that thing. I'm that tired of arguin' with you that I wish one 'tother of us was dead and in Hell--Yes, I do".
When the whistles began to blow at twelve o'clock, Old Harvey hurried the mule to the end of the row.
"Bless my soul, he said, "I didn't know there was anyone listinin' to me cuss. I guess if I don't do no other sin I'm bound for the bad place for what I say to that mule. I jest know there's two things in this world that something ought to be done about. That's the mule and the negro. I done told you right now, they's the two stubbornest things the Marster ever created. Neither one of them ain't got the sense they was born with. I'se got to have something to eat, I shore hope this white man has some fat meat for dinner. Fat meat is my long suit. Maybe if I didn't eat quite so much of it I wouldn't feel like cussing so much. Some times I'd like to start running and never stop 'till I git to South Africa. I don't feel like a negro has any business in these parts nohow. I git along very well in the summer-time but they's been many a cold day when I wished that I had never been borned.
"I live over on. Mr. McCall's place. He had an old house that he lets me live in. It won't fit for nothin' until I fixed it up. He give it to me free for this year on account of the work I put on it. I couldn't do anything with the kitchen, it was so far gone but I got the other two rooms carpentered on 'till I can 'zist in them pretty well.
"You see there ain't nobody but me. I've been married three times but all my wives died and left me by myself. I've had lot of folks ask me if I killed them wives but they ought to know I wouldn't ever got by with anything like that. I've been a widow thirteed years next month. I gits awful lonesome; but then I ain't able to provide for no woman now, so they ain't no use for me to try to get one.
"I had two childred by my first wife, one by my second and nary one by the third. They are all dead too. I reckon the Good Lord will be asking for me next.
"I'm motherless and fatherless too. My mother has been dead about twenty years and papa died fourteen years ago. There was fourteen of us children. They wasn't but five of us lived, three girls and two boys.
"Yes, we worked on a farm. We was share cropping up in Gadden County. They wasn't no decent livin' to be made, working that way. They's been many a time I've went hungry, barefooted and might nigh naked.
"I got a job with the section force on the railroad when I was sixteen years old. It paid me a dollar a day. That thirty dollars a month as a great help to my papa. He took it all up 'till I got married. I won't twenty-one when I married, but I had to tell the Justice of the Peace I was before I could get my license. I didn't work but two years on the railroad after I got hitched up with a wife. I got a job at the brick yard in Bethel.
"I've been a crook in my life and I ain't been satisfied in one place. I went to West Virginia and went in the coal mines once; I'm one of them negroes that is afraid of them mines. It was too dangerous. I was on a concrete construction job for awhile as laborer. I learned to finish cement after I had been with the job awhile. That paid the highest wages I ever earned. I made $1.25 an hour during war times. I didn't have to go to war. I was too old.
"I've been workin' by the day for white folks now for six years. I ain't able to farm by myself and I am making so much more by working out for the other people. I don't aim to brag but I don't believe anyone can use a goose-neck (hoe) any better than I can. When I get in the cotton field with one of them things I shore make the dirt fly.
"I tries to work while it is hot so I can sit by the fire in the winter time. I don't know whether they is anything wrong with me or not but I est can't stand no cold weather a-tall.
"I ain't never been to school a day in my life but Imlistens to the other folks talk and try to talk like they does. Maybe if I had gone to school I might have not got into so much crookedness as I have. I done and been on the chain gang and in the penitentary too but that ain't nobody's business but mine. I've been gain' to church and tryin' to live straight, nigh on to twenty years, so I don't think my police records concern anyone but me.
"I does fish on Sunday, but then I don't believe God holds that against me. He knows I've got to have something to eat. I'm in the worst shape right now than I've been in all my life. These here clothes I got on is all the clothes I got. They is so slick with dirt I guess I smell like a pole cat, but if I wash them I'se going to have to stay at home and keep all the doors shut. If the law wasn't so hot I'd go to some branch and make me up a passel of loquor to sell, I bet I'd have some clothes then. I has done that many a time in days gone by, but I done seen the inside of them places where they keep law breakers. I ain't hankerin' to go back.
"I walks myself 'bout to death hunting for work but I ain't never asked for no Charity and I don't aim to if I can help myself."
