Harris Thomas
I. FAMILY:
1. Size of family ---- four in immediate family, including one son and three daughters; other members of household include sister of women, with two small children brother of woman.
2. Effect of family size upon financial status ----- very great strain as no member of household has regular work at present. Two daughters in school with special needs.
3. Attitude toward large family ---- indifference on part of man; woman delighted with children and hopes for a large family; was glad when sister's second child came even though had recently been on inmate of insane asylum.
4. Attitude toward limitation of family <text not clear> woman fools that children are an act of God and that it is wrong to limit them under any circumstances; if it is right for children to come they will, otherwise will not be sent, said woman. Feels that it was alright she has just been out of insane asylum about ten months.
5. Occupational background of family ----- common labor in agriculture, mostly on truck farms and in Citrus groves. Man and woman both raised to farm labor, know little else though woman stated that she could do the work of a mid-wife and had delivered a number of babies.
6. Pride in family, including ancestry ---- man and woman both vague as to ancestry other than grandparents. Man rather apathetic, feels there is nothing in life to be proud of or interested in. Woman very proud of daughters who are about ready to enter high school, she is also proud of being a wid-wife though has neither studied ner qualified in any way for this work; makes no charges unless she remains as a nurse. Proud that friends and neighbors send <text not clear>.
II. EDUCATION:
1. Number of years of school attendance ---- both uncertain as to this as attended sporadically. Perhaps four years for man, six for woman.
2. Causes of limited education ----- usually needed at home for work; sometimes did not have proper clothes and sufficient food for school; neither parents nor children realized, necessity and value of and education.
3. Attitude toward education:
a. Educational advantages desired for children ---- unable to see much advantage in an education other than learning to read and write but wants children to finish high school as it seems to be the thing to do, children of friends all go to schools, so her children must go to. Does not consider college of any advantage.
b. whether worker believes school training is of an economic advantage -- <text not clear> real idea of economic advantages of education; wants children to continue in school because others do.
c. Evaluation of school system ------ apparently very little comprehension present day education and its phases and facilities. Realizes a change in system and that it is more complete than when she went to school, but takes little interest in education.
d. Ambitions, ideals ------ woman would like to own a farm as she feels that husband would take were interest in work; would like a good home and especially good clothes for daughters. Wants daughters to finish high school because it seems the thing to do. Would like for both girls to marry very early in life.
III. INCOME,
1. Comparison of present income with first weekly of annual income -------- income has never been regular as man seems unable to hold a job long. Present incase probably as large as at any time in history of family.
2. Actual needs to be covered by income ----- food, clothing, rent, medicine and doctor bills; incidentals for children in school.
3. Extent to which income covers actual needs ----- inadequate family often without food; have most of clothing given them; cannot pay medical bills consequently have very little cars in spite of needs.
4. Sense of relative values in expenditure of income ---- very little if any; little opportunity to develop such a sense, and no reason to study vales as income never adequate.
5. What person consulted considers an adequate income ---- very vague and uncertain as to this, having given the question little thought as there has never seemed any hope of an adequate income -- perhaps fifty dollars a month might do, or it might require a hundred, woman said.
IV. ATTITUDE TOWARD OCCUPATION AND KIND OF LIFE,
1. Pride or shame in work ---- neither -- an apathetic attitude always liven just this way why change except to have perhaps a little better living conditions; but no reason for pride or share its just life. Woman is proud of her mid-life abilities but foods it not worth the effort to quality as licensed mid-wife.
2. Influence of outside attitudes --- father resentful of outside attitudes and influences; wants no interference as own way is best. Yet, fears criticism of friends if children not well dressed for school and Church.
3. Basis of objections to or satisfaction with life ---- always have live in just about present conditions, <text not clear> no hope of a change. Man feels that his work is worth much more than he receives and is rather resentful and does not try to hold a job, woman would like Citrus work for husband better than truck farming, as the Citrus seems more certain and the entire family is net called upon for that work.
4. Attitude toward owners ---- man is resentful of people for when he works, the Grove Owners, as he feels he should be paid a much large wage, have shorter work days, and other points, feels that these with Groves have the money to treat their workers better if they want to do so. Resentful toward owner of house in which he lives, who is also a grave owner, Can't <text not clear> why came people own property when he cannot <text not clear> do so, feels that rent in too large even though he is allowed to pay it in grove work. Woman seems to concur in man's attitude.
5. Advantage or disadvantages of present life in comparison with other types, such as farm life, life in town etc,
a. with farm life ---- woman stated that when her husband worked on truck farms for wagener shares the <text not clear> family was often pressed into service at no extra.
IV. ATTITUDE TOWARD OCCUPATION AND KIND OF LIFE, continued:
<text not clear> comparison of present life with farm life continue page except perhaps a little fruit or a few vegetables. Living conditions pm tenant faras no better than present, often not as good. If could own farm could work to <text not clear> himself. But in employment for vages the <text not clear> work seemed best. If men could held a st<text not clear> position in grave work he could support family and wife and children would have time for other things such as sewing own house work, etc. woman<text not clear> in great fear of daughters being pressed in to farm work.
b. Comparison with city life ---- would not want to live in city as feared could not make proper adjustments. Likes life in country or small town and feels too that it is not as expensive as city life. <text not clear> fools that city life offers too many computations to children and that <text not clear> town or country is the best place to raise then.
V. POLITICS,
1. Extent of voting ---- neither man nor woman take much interest in politics but both vote in National elections.
2. Degree of independence in casting ballet ---- usually, at last minute ask advice of some friend and vote as suggested. Take little initiative in such matters.
3. Preference in choice of candidates ---- Gives the matter little consideration, <text not clear> upon judgement of friends.
4. Party consciousness ---- apparently very vague, fools that best candidates must be voted for regardless of party, and According be friends opinion.
5. Consciousness of a changing trend in thought ----- very little; do not read papers not keep in touch with any news in general. Live mostly within solves with little though or consciousness of outside world and changes in thought trends.
VI. RELIGION AND MORALS:
1. Influence of religion on morals ------- family quits religious and children attend Sunday School regularly when have the clothes to wear. Perhaps benefitted by religious tendencies, though apparently no particular immoral tendencies in family.
2. Attitude toward various forms of amusement ---- woman does not believe in playing cards or in public dance halls; thinks moving pictures alright and lets children attend when finances permit; approves of small neighborhood parties and dances for girls, else various school and church affairs, likes magazines, especially pictorial types and love stories.
3. Relation to Church ---- Children attend Sunday School when able and contribute but me regular contribution made by family as finances don not permit. He active workin Church, <text not clear> averse to church aid however.
VII. MEDICAL NEEDS:
1. Money expended for hospital and doctor bills ---- very little if any County has helped recently with some expenses of ill <text not clear> of son, and sister. Child still needs additional and regular medical care but finances do no permit. Other members of family need <text not clear> medical attention and dental work.
2. To what extent is health protected by adequate medical care --- to very little content as me adequate care has been available recently. Sister had doctor's care when baby was born but need other care at present which is not available.
3. Effect or work upon health --- apparently little adverse effect, troubles of physical nature probably not engendered by work.
VIII. DIET
1. Knowledge of <text not clear> diet ---- very little but <text not clear> has recently been trying to learn come thing about diet and has studied diets under a neighbor she is a nurse.
2. To what extent is knowledge applied ---- to a very alight extent for woman stated that she did not believe all that she had learned of diet, recently, and thought it best to eat what one liked.
3. To what extent is balanced diet possible on present wage --- to a very limited extent, but could be augmented with citrus fruit which in left to <text not clear> on ground under trees about the home and by gifts of vegetables from neighbor-nurse.
IX. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS:
1. Cleanliness and order of house and number of rooms ---- house a square, small, box-like feet high forming four small rooms. Reuse very dilapidated and dirty, rags replaced one window pane in side window, screens <text not clear> runty, and hanging at angles, front and back perches rotting and reefs in poor condition. Floors of reams grimy and dirty, furniture <text not clear> Meagre and grisy. Several beds, a few old chairs, a home-<text not clear> table and benches in kitchen with a ruaty old wood <text not clear>.
2. Cleanliness of person ---- women's face and hands were clean but clothes were dirty and head was bound with a called head cloth. Men was grimy, clothes were soiled and hair disordered. Smaller children very dirty, but two older girls very clean and dressed nicely with hair in order, tinted finger nails and <text not clear>, rouge and <text not clear>. Sister sick bed in <text not clear>and bed clothes.
3. Furnishings of home -------------- included in 1 above.
4. Sleeping accommodations --- <text not clear> beds in one <text not clear>for man and woman and two year old daughter, other bed for elder daughters, pallet on floor for young son and nephew; cot in hall for brother, and separate bed room for sister with new baby.
5. Bathroom facilities --------- <text not clear> shelf an back perch held basin and bucket, pump sons ton feet from house and about twenty feet from old-fashioned open outdoor toilet, and en a downward slope from toilet, supplied water for house held.
6. Pride in possessions --- very little to engender pride.
X. USE OF TIME,
1. Routine, etc' ----- no special routine. Family cries with sun, retire at <text not clear> unless something special prevents. If man is working he starts to work at six o'clock as must walk quite a distance. If not working usually <text not clear> on front perch. Children <text not clear> to school early too as must walk as are off the school bus route.
No special plan or routine for day, just do whatever comes <text not clear> hand as the day advances.
Girls sometimes have a small party with marshmallow roast on like share, and each guest bringing <text not clear> part of refreshments. Sometimes take <text not clear> with friends.
