THE OLDEST BARBER IN TOWN
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
April 4, 1939
March 28, 1939
Mr. R. M. Davis (white)
510 Nantahala Avenue
Athens, Georgia
Barber G.M.
THE OLDEST BARBER IN TOWN
In spite of its cracked and peeling paint, there was sufficient color left in the red and white stripes of the little pole to indicate that it marked a barber shop.
"Come in,” a man’s voice answered my knock on the closed door. As I opened the door and entered I was confronted by a large, shaggy dog who looked me over carefully, wagged his tail in a friendly manner and went to the back of the small shop and stretched himself out on the floor.
Three men were in the place; two were in overalls, and the other apparently the proprietor - wore a dark blue business suit. He appeared older than his companions, was of medium height, and slightly inclined to stoutness. He smiled, "Come on in, now that frank - he’s my dog - has approved of you,” he invited, adding, "for he didn't growl even once at you."
”Does he meet all of your visitors?” I asked.
”Well, yes,” he replied, ” but of course he knows most of my customers and seems to be right fond of the ones who come here regularly. But just let strangers come to the door and if he doesn't like them he will look at me and growl a little. No, he never tries to bite anyone; it’s just his way of showing his likes and dislikes. But what can I do for you?”
"Well," I explained, "I’d like for you to tell me about some of your experiences in running a barber shop, for I’ve been told that you are the oldest white barber in town."
"I guess I am at that," he answered, "for I’ve been at it since 1893 and 46 years is a long time. Yes, a good many years, years that have brought many changes in this business, as well as in the business world in general. And do you know," he laughed, "I don’t know that we are so much better off after all. What do you think about it?”
"Well, I can’t say," I replied, "for I can’t remember back quite that far."
His two companions laughed, and one of them said, "Get all of Dan’s life and you will have to write a book. Still I wouldn’t say that it would be a good book."
Dan, or Mr. Dawson retorted, "Don’t you worry. I’m not going to let anybody have a complete history of my life. It just wouldn’t do. And then I don’t want to lose my wife. If she knew just how rough I’ve been that’s just what would happen. And all of you would tell her just to get me in hot water, if for nothing else."
The men laughed, and one of them said, "Not your wife, for she’s got plenty of sense, but now, my wife! Boy, she sure would tell me about it." They all laughed at him, and for a few minutes there was a good-natured discussion of what their wives would say if they knew of any of their departures from the "straight and narrow" path.
"Oh, well," Mr. Dawson said, "it’s plain to be seen, this lady is not going to take up for the women folks."
"What is the use?" I asked, "Haven’t all of you just admitted that you are afraid of the women? I do not think you will find more than a very few women who will say that they are afraid of the men."
"Well, at least, they will not admit it,” Mr. Dawson you argued, and then he asked, "But just what to know? I’ve seen so many of you folks going around from the different bureaus end agencies. Scarcely a day passes but what someone from some of those places comes in here to ask me about something’ or other. I don’t think there’s much new information left for anyone to get. But," he laughed, "I believe that you are the very first one that has just come right out and asked for a history of my life. The others just pick around in a sort of mysterious way until they get what they want without a body knowing what they are after. Still if it will do you any good and would be fit to record, I might tell you about myself. But, as I said, I don’t want to lose my wife."
"It will not be that had," I consoled him, "as your name will be changed in the story, and your wife probably will not recognize it."
"Well, if you will change my name to this man’s, then I will be sure to give you a good story," he suggested.
"Oh, no you don't!" The man who was resting so comfortably in the large barber chair came to his feet exclaiming excitedly, "I will not stand for that I know you too well and I can just guess what sort of stuff you'd tell. Hot water would be nothing compared to what I'd be in when my wife learned about it." Turning to me he said, "Don't let Dan get you. He's one of the worst teasers that I've ever seen or run up against."
Mr. Dawson laughed and said, "Now that you have told on me, I guess that all I can do is tell her my story myself. I've been working all my life, for when I was small, children were made to work. Times were not like they are now. I think the first work that I ever got paid for was when I was about eight years old and went to work as water boy in the old Check Mill at $1.50 a week. Lord, how I did have to work to earn that money; I thought when night came that my arms had just about come out of their sockets, but you have no idea how rich I felt when I collected my first wages. And I guess I've done just about everything that a body can do about a mill, from water boy and sweeper on up.
"We didn't know what it was to go to a barber shop for a haircut when I was little, for our own mothers cut our hair. At least mine did, and Oh, Lord, what a haircut it would be. Sometimes it looked like a roll of cotton - my hair was so light colored. She would just get a firm hold on them old scissors and, believe me, she could whack away.
"The way I learned to cut hair was, the boys I worked with let me practice by trying to cut their hair. In those days we could work and barber too, for no one thought of getting a haircut except on Saturday nights then.
"The first shop that I ever worked in was down on Broad Street, where the Seaboard Air Line Depot is now. My brother and his partner opened up the shop, and I think they were the first white men to open a shop here, for up until then all the barber shops were run by colored barbers. Anyway, I worked for them on Saturdays. At first I just helped around the shop, but I was soon cutting hair as good as any of the others.
"In those days cutting hair was just about all a barber did, for most every man shaved himself. I was simply in heaven when I got to use a barber chair for the first time. It was a sight, that old pedal-lift chair. I guess you never saw one of them. This one had notches in the side of the chair and it was raised up and down by a pedal or foot lever.
"Oh, I did have great times in those days! I did some rooster fighting along then. No, we didn't call it 'cock fighting,' it was always rooster fighting with us, and it was lots of fun.
One reason I enjoyed it so much was that I had a rooster that won every time. We had to do our rooster fighting on Sunday, because we were at work all during the week.
"At that first barber shop run by white men here, we had lots of laughs over one customer. He came as regularly as Saturday rolled around, just as soon as he finished dinner after he got off from work, and had my brother cut his hair. The minute that hair was cut he made a bee line for the old dispensary, which was just up the street a little ways from our shop. There he would get good and drunk, and then straight back to our shop he would come for me to cut his hair. I had to do it too, for there was no way of getting around him. If you didn’t do just as he wanted you to be would get mad and want to fight.
"Haircuts then were 15¢ and when people finally did start getting shaved at barber shops they paid a dime for that. Haircuts advanced to a quarter, but shaves remained a dime for many years. I worked with them in my spare time until some time in 1894 when I left here and sowed my wild oats, and I guess I did a very thorough job of that too.
"Things wasn’t as high then, as they are now and it didn’t take so much to live on. You could get board at a right good hotel for $2 a week, and in a private home $1.50 would pay for a week of mighty good fare. I went around from place to place, sometimes just working on Saturdays, for I could make enough that way to have all I needed for the next week.
"I was always a man that could see a job ahead, and if I wanted it for myself I would go ahead and learn the trade so I wouldn’t have to depend on one thing for work. That was why I went to work for a company of plumbers from the North when they were building the old Exposition mill in Atlanta. I was making good there, for they had started me in at $1.50 a day, and in less than two months had raised me to $2 a day; but I was young and it was the first time I'd ever been away from home and I got so homesick I quit and went back home. Those plumbers begged me to stay and said that they would pay me $5 a day if I would just stay on with them, and if I had I might have been better off, at least in money matters; but worse off in some other ways and things, I guess, for I would have missed the best woman in the world. I have sure got that. I tell you I've got a mighty good wife.
"I was not intending to work one time when I went to Virginia, but they got so busy in one of those barber shops up there, that I agreed to help them out. A customer came in there just about drunk and he was certainly shooting off his mouth. It was up to me to shave him, for that was all he needed, as he was baldheaded. When I finished shaving him he said, ’I'm going to ask you a question that I guess I've asked five hundred barbers and none of them have been able to tell me. Can you tell me what is good for a baldhead?'
"’Sure,' I replied, 'I will tell you for $5.' He didn’t utter a word until he had pulled out his pocketbook and handed me a five dollar bill, and then he eagerly said, ’Here it is. Now tell me?'
"'Hair, was my reply, as I put the money in my pocket.
"Well, he couldn't speak and his eyes looked like they would pop out of his head. He got up out of my chair and went over and sat down on the other side of the shop. I finished with another customer and then I went over to him and handed him his money hack. 'I shouldn't do this,' I told him, 'but you asked for it. You were shooting off your mouth too much, but I don't want your money. He took the money and left the shop without a word.
"One time when I was in Alabama, I went to a barber shop to get a shave. How, I had always thought that my barbering work was rough enough, but that man liked to have pulled the skin off of my face. I asked him if he had anything to sharpen razors with. 'Yes,' he said, 'But we do not lend our sharpeners. They are only for our own use here in the shop, and we do not sell them either.
"'Well, you might try using them on your own razor,' I told him, ’for it sure needs it.’"
A car drove around the side of the shop and Mr. Dawson said, "That's my car. I left it in the shop to be washed and greased, so I guess I'd better go on out and pay the man." He and his two companions hastened out to the car and while they were gone I looked about the shop.
A mirror extended across the side of the wall facing the two barber chairs. Beneath the mirror small cabinets held towels and other supplies and the faucets of the lavatory adjacent to the chairs showed that they were provided with running hot and cold water. The large quantities of hair in the white-painted metal wastebaskets at the side of the chairs indicated that the barber bad been a busy man before my arrival. A large basket held soiled towels shoe polish and brushes were in a cabinet beside a shoe-shine chair,' and everything was neat and clean. Crisply fresh chair cloths were on each chair and the hat rack in the corner was equipped with a supply of brushes to be used in whisking the customers’ clothing. Heavy brown portieres partially concealed another door, and an inviting row of comfortable looking chairs against the wall Indicated that the barber was accustomed to having people in his shop. The only sound in the room was the ticking of the large clock and just as it struck five, the dog arose, stretched himself and looked around carefully as the men came back into the shop. Apparently the animal had been sound asleep since a few moments after sponsoring my admission to the place. As Mr. Dawson and one of the men entered, the dog came and lay down beside my chair again.
Mr. Dawson laughed. "I knew you’d be here when I got back, because I left Frank in the shop."
"Do you mean that he would have prevented my leaving?" I asked as he reached down to pat the dog's head.
"Well, I don’t know,” he replied, "for you seem to have made friends with him. I was really just teasing anyway, for he is nothing but a pet, not a watchdog. Everybody around here pets Frank, and he is friendly with 'most everybody. Still, if you had tried to bother anything in the shop, I don’t know just what he might have done when I wasn't here.
'I guess I'd better get back to our story. You see bow small and plain my little shop here is. But even it is a fine one compared to what was customary around here when I first started cutting hair. There was no such thing then as having to have a license, and if they had told people then that we had to have blood tests before we could cut hair and shave people, well, I don't know what might have happened.
"Lord, but we have to keep everything clean and sanitary now, and we wouldn't be allowed to do business without running water. Just think, in the old days we usually had a can or perhaps a bucket of water on the stove and that was used for everybody, and we went from one customer to another with the same old comb, scissors, razor, and brush. And would you believe it, there wasn't half the diseases then that they have now? That's the truth, I paid $45 for my first pair of clippers, and they were just plain old hand clippers. Them old clippers would pull like the devil, I've got 'em yet. No, I don't use them any more for I have modern electric clippers, but I like to keep the old ones just the same. I'd soon lose all my trade if I tried to use them.
"One day a man came in our shop with his head all full of tar. No, just stop right there. Don't ask me how it happened, that he had the tar on his head. That's one tale I'm not telling, out of school, or any other time. I never saw such a mess. There was nothing for us to say or do, but to get his hair off, for there was no way to get the tar out of the hair. We broke several clippers and after a long time we managed by shaving his hair off, but we mint several good razors trying to get under that tar.
"After I left here and come back again, I worked with another one of my brothers; he had a grocery store next to his barber shop. I run the shop and helped him in the store too. When the State passed the law that all barber shops must have running water, he said he wasn't going to do it, for it would cost too much for him to install plumbing fixtures. That is when I opened my own shop and I've been right here since 1924.
"I've worked real hard, and this business is mighty confining, but I've made a good living. My really busy time is on week ends. I very often make more on Saturday than all through the rest of the week. lust like every business that shows any signs of prosperity, too many barber shops have sprung up over town, and ever' once in a while someone will cut prices to try to get customers away from the other shops. That does not affect me here, as I conform with a standard low price and do not just change prices every time the wind changes.
"We are all tied up with red tape now. First, we have to pay for our license to operate a shop in this city, and then arrange for our State license and conform to all its regulations; then once a year we have to submit to a blood test to determine whether or not we have any diseases that we could transmit to our customers. Of course, they say that just lots of the barbers manage to get by without paying for all these licenses and test a, but I've always gone ahead and paid mine ever since they passed that law. Anyone has to serve three years under a licensed barber before he can get a license to work as a barber,"
"Do you hire someone to help you on busy days?' I asked.
"Not now," he replied, "I used to pick up someone to help me on week ends, but now the laws are so strict that I cannot afford to pay the very few available men, who have passed all the tests, so I just go ahead and do all the work myself. It does get rather hard on me at times.
"My first work as a barber was done on a commission basis, and if I had to work in a large shop, I'd prefer that plan now. Of course you couldn’t very well operate a shop on that basis in a little place like this. My expenses are not so high here as they would be in some of the larger cities, as rent is very much cheaper here, and other things are in a corresponding price range, so it does not cost me so very much to operate my business. I am getting old enough now to like it better here because it’s quieter out in the suburbs than it is in a big city.
"I can remember when we could buy chickens at from 10¢ to 15¢ each, and eggs at from 5¢ to 10¢ a dozen. Just look at what they bring now Well, plain old haircuts have advanced in about the same proportion, and from beginning with just cutting hair we advanced first to shaves, now we give shampoos and do massaging, and in some barber shops they even do manicures. Oh, yes, some of the men like to have manicures, but out in this section they don’t care about ’em.
"Giving credit has caused me to lose over seven hundred dollars since I’ve been in business here. It's all on my books, I’d rather let a man work it out if I had anything for him to do, any day, than to have him promise to pay me and then not do it, I took care of these folks around here when they were out of work while the mill was closed down. Now, the majority of them have made a practice of going somewhere else to get their work done since they are back on the job, rather than pay me their back debts.
"I did one man’s work for a long time when he was out of work, and in addition to cutting his hair and shaving him I helped him in various ways in his struggle to get on his feet. Finally he got his bonus of something over seven hundred dollars after he went back to work and do you think he paid me?" He chuckled, "Why, he will not even come down this side of the street. But if he can live with it, I can live without it. Sight now, there’s some of the big city employees that owe me plenty and will not pay.
"One of my friends came in one day to get a shave and a haircut. While I was shaving him, he said, ’Why don’t you use that razor on your own face? You need a shave yourself.’"
"’Well, I’d rather use it on someone else,' I told him.
"’I thought so,’ he said, ’for it sure is awful.'
"’It don’t hurt his,’ I replied.
"The worst trouble this quick tongue of mine ever got me into was one time, when after cutting a girl’s hair, she asked me if her neck was dirty, and not wanting to tell her a story, I told her it was. And do you know what she did? Well, she made me get a towel and soap and wash her neck for her. Since that time when girls ask me if their neck is dirty, I am mighty quick end glib to say, 'No.
"I try hard to treat all my customers right and to keep my shop nice and clean, and I keep order in my place too. I do not mind my customers coming in when they are drinking, as long as they behave themselves, but I do not allow cursing. I have regular customers among the ladies that come to get their hair cut, and I know they wouldn't come back if they had to listen to profanity a few times. So if people can't behave in my shop, out they have to go.
"How times have changed since I was young courting fellow. When I went to see a girl then, I walked up on her porch and knocked on the door. I was invited in, and if we wanted to go anywhere, we had to ask her old folks. If it was all right with them we went, but if they did not give their consent, we stayed at home. But if we went we had to get in by ten o'clock sure. We'd better not be any later than that either for if we were, we sure did get a raking over from the old folks.
"Now, a boy will drive up in his car, blow the horn and the girl will come running out, jump in the car and if her parents call to ask her where she’s going, this is what they get, ’None of your business, and away they go.
"There is just my wife and me. We have no children. We own our little home, and a very happy and pleasant little home it is. She has her tailor shop in town, and I have my shop out here in the suburbs. We have our flowers, chickens, and our garden, and if you look close enough you might find more flowers along with the vegetables in the garden. Sometimes we play cards, but I guess I am still too old-fashioned at that, for I prefer set-back to bridge.
"When the weather is good we often pack our dinner and go off for the day, just rambling around and lots of time we get up in the mountains. Do you like trips like that?" he inquired.
"I certainly do," I told him, "It has been a long time since I had the pleasure of taking a trip like that, but I used to enjoy them often."
"Well, you'll have to go with us some Sunday, and if you are like most of the women that I have ever known, I know you like fortune tellers, so we'll take you to see Aunt Jane."
"Does she tell fortunes?" I inquired.
"Oh, yes," he said, "and they say she's good. Anyway we'll try her, and then we'll know. Do you like Jokes?" he asked.
"Yes," I said, "I do enjoy a good joke."
"Even if it's on you?" he teased.
"Go ahead, I can take it," I assured him.
"This is only one of a lot of the jokes I have heard about you government workers, and I think you could laugh at it.
"There was a bunch of them WPA workers out on the road and one of them was sick with a cold and couldn't talk above a whisper, so they stationed him up at the crossroads to keep people from driving over the part of the road they were working on. I man come along in a big car and started down this road. The man who couldn’t talk stopped him, pointed to the detour and in a hoarse whisper he told the driver he couldn’t take his car over the main road because WFA men were working down there. The man in the car just leaned out of the window and whispered back, ‘That’s all right. I won’t wake ’em up.”
To please my host I joined in the laugh that followed this successor to many other WPA jokes.
As the clock struck six, Mr. Dawson said, "Well, how the time has passed! Now, I’ll have to go after my wife, and if you are going my way, I’ll be glad to take you home.” I had other business in the neighborhood, so declined the invitation, and thanked him for his story. As I made my departure, he reminded me, '’Don’t forget, you’re going to the mountains with us some Sunday before long, and I’ll just bet Aunt Jane will give you some surprising things to think about when she tells your fortune,”
<text not clear>
