WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION
F. C. Harrington, Administrator
Florence S. Kerr, Assistant Administrator
Henry S. Alsberg, Director of the Federal Writers' Project.
Date of first writing	February 28, 1939
Name of person interviewed	Sarah Howard
Address	Drury Avenue
Place	Macon, Georgia
Occupation	House-maid
Race	Negro
Sex	Female
Name of writer	Annie A. Rose
Address	356 Cherry Street
Place	Macon, Georgia
Drury Avenue is a short street in a suburb composed of homes owned and occupied by white families of moderate means. The only house on this street, and indeed, in this community, occupied by negroes, is the one in which the Howards live. It is an old, dilapidated, loosely-built, two-room shack, set in a grove of pine trees a short distance from the "white folks' houses." Here Martha lives with her husband, James, and two children by a former marriage. The oldest child, Annie, is married and lives in a nearby town. Alfred and Florence, the two next in age, live at home. Alfred is occasionally employed as a delivery boy for one of the local grocers but on account of shiftless habits is usually without work and spends most of his time in the company of other idle negro youths. He contributes nothing toward the expenses of the family, though he is eighteen years old, and is a constant source of worry to his mother.
Florence, though very much the modern flapper in appearance, seems to feel her responsibilities and gives practically all her slim earnings to her mother. For the past several years she has been a nurse maid in a small family. Recently she has undertaken the work of cook for the same family and now makes three dollars a week. This is more then she has ever made and she is very much encouraged over her success.
Martha is frail and works only three days a week, cleaning house and cooking one meal for a widow in the community. For this work she is paid thirty-five cents a day. James seems to be nothing but a luxury. He seldoms works at all and when he does the dollar he gets for cleaning a yard or mowing a lawn is spent for tobacco or soft drinks. On Florence's three dollars and Martha's dollar and five cents the family has to live end pay the rent of six dollars a month. And that rent has to be paid whether there is food or not. The rental agent calls regularly on the first day of each month and accepts no excuse for failure to pay. Six dollars is a large sum for the negroes to save and Martha has to endure the ever present fear of being evicted. On several occasions it has been necessary for them to ask aid of the white ladies in the suburb. This was grudgingly given. In speaking of helping the negroes in their midst one lady said: "We wouldn’t mind lending them the money for the rent if James would work it out, but he’s absolutely no good. When I give him fifty cents or a dollar, I know I'll not see him again for some time. Martha is good and as honest as can be but she is not strong enough for regular work. However, I help them whenever they need it because they are quiet negroes and don’t bother anybody. If they had to move some family that would be a nusiance might move into that old shack."
Being unable to feed and clothe the two youngest children, Martha sent them about a year ago to live with an aunt of hers on a farm. "I sho hated to let ’em go," she said, "It jest made me sick. But there warn't nothing else for me to do. They was hongry all the time. My aunt’s good to 'em, I know, and there's 'taters end buttermilk a plenty for ’em. I always said after their daddy went off that I was gonna keep my chillen together till they married or lef’. But James is so lazy he jest won’t work and me and Florence can’t make enough for all of us. If I was more hefty I could git me a better job, maybe. Then I could take keer of Katherine and Louise. I sho wants ’em with me. I couldn’t even send 'em nothing fer Christmas. I reckon they feels like their Mama don't love 'em none.”
As she spoke of her absent children Martha's eyes were clouded with tears. Her emaciated body was insufficiently clothed for the wintry weather in garments much the worse for wear that had evidently been planned for a much stouter figure. Beige colored silk hose that were more holes than hose and run down high heeled black shoes completed her costume.
"Come in, lady, and rest a spell ifn you has time," was her greeting. "I don’t mind talking ’bout my life, I worries 'bout it all the time. Yessum, I'll talk and thank you for lissening but I sho don't know as it will do any good." Her utter despondency increased the gloom already caused by the dreary, poverty-stricken room into which I was invited. An unmade bed, covered with dirty, ragged quilts stood in one corner; two rickety chairs were drawn close to the fireplace in which three sticks of damp wood sent out fitful flames but very little heat. Two sad irons stood near the fire, ready to be used on the rough-dried garments heaped on a board placed between the bed and a chair. No rugs covered the wide, rough planks of the floor to keep the chilly winds from coming through the large cracks. A few calendars with highly colored pictures were the only decorations on the walls. A door stood ajar, disclosing a room very similar to the one in which Martha and I sat and talked.
"I wish I could leave James," she began. "Maybe it’s sinful fer me to talk that away cause he's my lawful husband, but I’se jest plumb wore out with him. He's the slowest, laziest, triflingest pusson in the whole world. He's so slow I calls him 'Christmas'. And he jest won’t work. Mrs. Dorsett sent up here for him two days last week, wanting him to trim some shrubbery in her yard. He sent word back to her, 'yessum, he'd come,' and he ain't gone yet. I say to him, 'James, you oughts go, she’s 'pending on you,' and he says, 'I don't feel so good to-day, I'll go to-morrow.' That's jest the way he is. White folks round her has jest 'bout stopped sending fer him, too. You can’t put no ’pendence in him ettall. He was sick last fall, but he’s all right now; says he feels jest as good as he ever did but he jest won't work. Lord, I wish me and Florence could git enough together to move off and jest leave him and Alfred settin' here. I don't know what would happen to 'em and I don't much keer. I'm plumb wore out with both of 'em."
Martha was born on a farm in an adjoining county and was reared by an aunt who now has the care of the youngest children. Speaking of her early life she said, "I've always worked but my uncle and aunt was good to me. I used to pick and chop cotton, do most everything on the farm, and I went to school, too, when they was time left over from the work. I had a good time, but I sho was a fool. I got to sneaking off with boys and first thing I knowed I was gonna have a baby. I was so skeered I didn't know what to do. I knowed my aunt would sho whip me ifn she was to find it out, so I run away and come up here to Macon. I wasn’t, but fifteen and I got me a job nursing for a lady. 'Course, it wasn't long 'fo she knew what was the matter with me. She asked me if I wasn’t gonna have a baby and I said I aian't know cause I was skeered she'd fire me. But she didn't. She taken me down to the hospital and told 'em ’bout me and they said they'd take keer of me when my time come. She let me work on fer her as long as I could and when I had to stop working in the house she let me take her washing. She sho was good to me. She give me some old baby clothes and some new things, too, and she made two new, white nightgowns fer me. Every Saturday when I'd take the clean clothes in she'd have a big bundle of cold bread and things fer me to take home and eat. I sho don't know what I'd have done without her. Annie was the baby that was born and I named her fer the lady. Jest as soon as I was able to go back to work she let me come on back. The colored lady I was living with taken keer of Annie fer me whilst I was at work. I stayed with that lady till they moved off from Macon. She sho was my friend. She used to talk to me and tell me that I mustn’t let no man never do me that away no mo. She was a good woman; I wish she was here now.”
Martha's kind black face broke into a smile of gratitude as she spoke of her white friend and then continued: "Well, you knows how boys is, and 'twarnt long fo' they started pestering me again. But I wouldn't have nothing to do with none of 'em. They tells me that a burnt chile won't git close to the fire no mo and I sho stayed from it. When Annie was 'bout two years old I got married. Tom was his name and he was right good to me in most ways, I reckon. I didn't mind having the other chillen cause they had a daddy but my health ain't never been much since they come. Them doctors up at the hospital said that Tom had some kind of sickness and I got it from him and my chillen is liable to have it too. They give the sickness a name but I disremember what it was; it wasn't consumption, though. The chillen is kinder puny but they ain’t sick much. It worries me some. I had to take some kind of shots onct and I keeps better now.
”I stayed married to Tom till Louise was 'bout a year old. Then he up and lef’ me fer another woman. Didn’t say nothing to me ’bout it, jest up and lef'. He's here in town now, still living with her, I reckon. I sees him sometimes but I don’t keer no mo. After he had done lef’ James come along and I married him.”
Did you get a divorce, Martha?" I inquired. “No'm,” was her reply, "divorces cost so much money, and Tom had done lef’ me, so I jest married James. I married him--we went and got a paper from the City Hall and then we went to a preacher and he married us. I wasn't gonna live with no man less'n he was my husband. James ain't never been much good 'bout working, but he’s good to the chillen, ain't never whipped none of 'em, and they likes him. He's good to me, too; I mean he don't cuss or drink liquor or nothing. Sometimes I think he's too lazy to be mean. I reckon I fusses a heap but if he’d jest work regular I wouldn’t gripe none. I tried to git him to git on the WPA but he jest kept putting it off and now I hears they’s laying ’em off ’stead of putting 'em on.”
After being asked about her church or lodge activities Martha said: "I ain’t been to church in 'bout seven years. My clothes jest don’t look fitten. I joined the church out there in the country when I was a little girl but I ain’t never joined this here one in town. I used to send the chillen to Sunday school when I was able but Katherine and Louise is gone now and Florence has to work on Sundays, and Alfred never did want to go, so don't no body go now. I reckon we oughter, but it jest don’t seem worth the trouble.
Florence and me both has a straight life policy. We pays the man 10¢ a week and it’ll bury us. We don’t keep no sick policy. Them kind cost so much and you has to have a doctor befo’ you can git any pay from ’em and then the doctor gits 'bout all of what you git. So me and Florence jest don’t bother with them kind. Annie lives over in Thomson, you know, well, she had typhoid fever last summer; was sick ’bout two months. She had two sick policies and she never got a cent from them cause she hadn’t had ’em but three months. They’s always some kind of way of them gitting out of paying you. No’m, I ain’t gonna fool with no sick policies--anyways, I ain’t got the money fer ’em.”
Martha sat ther dejected, depressed, in the firelight, wrapped in her own thoughts while I searched unsuccessfully through my mind for some ray of hope to offer. As I rose to leave she followed me to the door. ”Thank you, ma'am,” she said, "for coming to see me. You all white folks is mighty good. I gits kinder lonesome here by myself since Catherine and Louise ain't here no mo’. We moved up here in this house ’bout ten years ago. It ain’t much but I wanted it cause they ain’t no other colored folks living close to us. Down yonder in Stinsonville where we moved from, my chillen was always gitting mixed up and having fusses with the other folks' chillen living so close to us. I likes it here better cause we'se kinder to ourselves and they ain’t no squabbling going on 'mongst the neighbors.”
Still looking for something cheerful to remark upon, my eyes fell on the few flowers growing close to the door, and I spoke of their beauty. "Yessum, thank you, ma'am,” Martha replied. ”I likes flowers and James brings 'em to me from the yards he works in sometimes. When the ladies wants 'em thinned out he brings the plants on home. Is you got any place you could set out some larkspurs? They's coming up as thick as hops. Wait a minute; let me git you some. They'll sho be pretty out in your yard and when you gits a stand of ’em they keeps coming up every spring.”
