Josephine Petterson,
Federal Writers' Project
Clark Grammar School
Conception Street,
Mobile, Alabama.
Josephine Petterson,
Mobile County, Ala.
LIFE STORY OF A SWEDISH-AMERICAN
Along the southeast coast of Sweden lies an island, long and narrow; in fact, so narrow that at certain points the sound is visible between the land itself, and on the east side, the deep blue Baltic sea. In later years the island has become popular with tourists. The scenery is fascinating, the land being higher in the middle and gently slanting on both sides towards the sea, making a panorama constantly changing from desolation to almost tropical growth. In the background is always the sea. What natural phenomena cut off this little strip of land from the other part has never been ascertained.
My grandparents told me that hundreds of years past, the island was so closely wooded, that in wartime the people in the villages killed all dogs and roosters to eliminate noise, so the soldiers, who did not know the pathways, could not find the villages. Many beautiful legends survive and frequently, when digging in the ground, people find implements and ornaments dating back as far as the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
On this little island of sun and wind, I was born sixty-seven years ago. My parents were Karin and August Peterson. My home was in a village named Skogsby (Forest Tillage) where my brother still lives in the old home. From our windows we could see the city across the sound, with its beautiful castle that dates back to the thirteenth century and that has played an important part in Swedish history as it is a point coveted by most of the surrounding nations.
My father and mother taught me reading, writing and some arithmetic. At five years of age I could read fluently. I was told my maternal grandfather died in 1876, and my grandmother then undertook the problem of teaching children to read, and I and a cousin, who was of the same age as I - just seven - were teaching others who were much older than we. Schools were few and far between, and children who because of bad weather or because living fax from schools, were kept at Grandma's house for weeks at a time. Later mother needed me at home, as several children had been added to the family, and being the oldest, I had to look after the little ones and go to school, I made rapid progress in my studies, to the provocation of the older students.
Public school and Confirmation school finished, I felt that I must earn my living, as there were four younger children at home. I wanted to be a school teacher, but at that time people who did not have plenty of money did not have a chance, so I had to take what I could. One of my girl friends, two years older than I, married, and wanted me to stay with her. This I did for a few months, but the work was too hard for me and my friend's mother took me home ill in a bed made up in a wagon. It was a long time before I regained my health, and that was the end of my first venture in independence.
When well again, I learned dress-making, and for several years worked at home, but it did not pay enough to live on, so I decided to try to improve ay position in Stockholm and in 1889 I left home, with many admonitions of the old folks to be "careful"; as a big city was very dangerous for a young girl. After making several unsuccessful attempts to get work I found a position in a small dressmaking establishment, where we made gowns for ladies of the court, and other prominent people. Here I remained until the latter part of the 1890's.
I had been an active member of the Young Women's Christian Association for many years. I had always longed to become a missionary, and among others I volunteered and was sent to take a preparatory course in a Bible School in 1898. After conclusion of this course I was examined by physicians, and although my health was good, they said I was not physically robust enough for the strenuous work of a missionary and recommended that I should take a position in one of the charitable institutions in the city until I became stronger.
Through my friends at the training school I then was sent to an institution for crippled children, as head of the department for making children's clothes, nurses' uniforms, weaving and teaching fancy work. We were seven and called "Sisters" in that department. In the same department was also about ten of the girls of the home, who were taught handiwork, sewing and other work. It was a difficult task as the tasks must be adjusted according to the ability of the children, of whom some had lame and misshapen hands, fingers missing or were crippled in other ways.
There was a renowned institute for the blind near the children's home, and those who were able, were sent there for lessons in reading Braille, music and other things that could not be taught at the home. One boy about eighteen played the organ beautifully, although he had but two or three fingers on each hand, and was blind, deaf and dumb. The last I heard of him, through a Swedish paper, he was editor off a newspaper for the blind in one of the largest cities of Sweden. Another boy pumped the organ with his crutches. Most of these older children, who were very intelligent, grieved a great deal over their handicaps, and they often begged me to sing to them in my leisure time because they said, it made them forget their troubles.
The home was a beautiful place, just north of the city, with ample grounds all landscaped. The "Mother"! of the home, was truly a mother to the children. Six school children trained the youngsters, and if any of the children were unusually bright, opportunities were made so they could continue their studies.
There were at the home a tailor, a shoemaker, and a woman who made the steel supports, leather straps and bandages for the lame. The boys could choose the trades they preferred, so with the help of the boys, all clothes, shoes and other necessities were made there. Every other afternoon, I taught a class of boys to make their underwear such as was not knitted. One of the older girls was presented with a knitting machine and she made all the stockings.
There were at that time about one hundred and seventy-five children to be taken care of. Three of my co-workers, who took the samd Bible course as I, and worked at this home awhile, later were sent as missionaries, two to Africa and one to India, - but I was not considered strong enough.
I had been in this home about three years when a letter came from an uncle who was living in Mobile. Two of his children had died after they were grown up, and the third was in the Government service, so my uncle and his wife were alone, and I was asked if I would come to them to take the place of their daughter. I had no thought of America at that time, so I left it to my mother to decide for me, thinking she would refuse, as she bad done once before, when another of my uncles wrote for me to come, but her answer was that she thought it "my duty" to go.
Mobile was a familiar place to us as one of my mother's brothers came here as early as 1855, another one about 1859. The first one died from yellow fever, the second served in the Civil War, from which he returned to Mobile, where he lived until 1902. The third of mother's brothers, left Sweden for America the 17th of September, 1871, on my birthday. He married a Scotch woman and his three daughters are still living in Mobile. Another uncle, a sailor, had been in Mobile at intervals for years, and about 1887 sent for his family and his mother, who at that time was seventy-eight years old. She and the two children who died, are buried in Magnolia Cemetery.
It was very hard for me to break up. Leaving the children at the home almost broke my heart. From Stockholm I went to spend a few days with my parents, and on September 17, 1902, I left my home, as it seems, forever. Mother and an old friend followed me to Kalmar, the nearest city, where I took the train for Gothenburg. Both of us had the feeling that we saw each other for the last time, but it was too late to change. I did not think it would be for all time, as I intended to stay some years and then come back to get married. However this was not to be as my fiance died a few years after I came to Mobile. I think it was a great deal harder for mother to go back home alone than it was for me to go on as I had some business to attend to, and various things took my attention; but, when I was alone, I felt terribly sad. However, I was not left to my thoughts very much, as new acquaintances were made, and every turn of the train revealed new beauties of the country I was just leaving, so to a certain extent I forgot my misery.
We arrived in Gothenburg the following evening. There were two other passengers from Kalmar. One was a man who had been in America and had just been home to marry his sweetheart, and take her with him back to America, and he took charge of me as well as his bride. We stayed at an emigrant hotel in Gothenburg the following day, and the next morning were taken to the boat that was to carry us over the North Sea. About eight hundred people came on board, from Denmark, Finland and Norway. The boat was small and the sea was, as usual, rough. I and my companions kept on deck most of the time. If we had gone down where we were supposed to sleep, we would have been sick. Conditions were very disagreeable and the smell was terrible below deck. The strong smell from the mattresses, horseblankets and disinfectants, almost stopped my breath.
We had provided ourselves with lunches as we anticipated to some extent what we would find. Dinner was dished out in a soup kithcen below deck, and each one must bring plate and spoons and stand in line, those who only looked out for themselves elbowing and pushing aside those who did not push, and it was not unusual for someone in the crowd to get a plate of soup on his back, as I noted when I went downonce to see what was going on.
Sunday morning we arrived at Hull in England, and went on shore to look around. I liked the city, and as I had heard much about it from sailors who had been there I was interested. Many of the passengers who had gone ashore, came back to the boat drunk, some of them so wild that they had to be handcuffed, others were put in the "jug". One man who had made a beautiful prayer at the Sunday morning service was so drunk that his friends put him in a straight-jacket and stayed with him all night, so that the certain would not put him in silitary confinement with the others. It made a terrible impression on me, as he was a highly educated men, and when sober had most excellent manners. The following morning he was perfectly sober, but he grieved so terribly that his friends watched him closely fearing he might harm himself. (It was said that some of his companions put something in his drink). The last glimpse I had of him was when leaving for Liverpool.
Monday mornings we were "herded" to the train which left for Liverpool. The little cabins on the train nearly square in shape were so overfilled that some had to sit in the lap of other persons. Of course these were only for the third class emigrants. What would have happened if there had been a collision can only be imagined.
We arrived in Liverpool in the afternoon, and were taken to an emigrant hotel, where our only washing facilities were the faucets in the yard for both men and women, but there was not much washing done by most of us.
Later we went out to look at the city. I had seen many fine horses, but never such big ones as I saw in this city, and I never can forget what immense loads were carried. When I remember this I am thankful for the modern motor trucks. Neither had I ever seen such wretchedly dirty and ragged women and children, some women reeling through the streets, carrying big bottles of gin.
The following morning we were taken by coach to the revenue offices, where we showed our credentials and opened our hand baggage for inspection. The trunks were sealed when we left Gothenburg, and were not opened until we arrived at Philadelphia. After the inspection by Revenue officers we were taken by ferries to the boat for America, the "Westernland", which was lying about a mile away from the shore. More emigrants, mostly from southern Europe, came on at Liverpool and the struggle and turmoil getting on and off the ferries and up the gangplanks on board the Westernland, is something one would like to forget.
On board the boat, it was orderly and pleasant and after we had been assigned our cabins we felt quite lighthearted. I, another Swedish, and two Norwegian girls, were in one cabin, toward the stern of the boat. Opposite was the steward's store room, and we were glad to have no close neighbors.
The personnel did all that could be done for us and seemed to take special care of "those Swedish girls," and if we were at home when the steward came to his storeroom for anything, he always gave us something good to eat.
We had a delightful time, were not sick, the food was good, and we were hungry almost all the time. The weather could not have been better, but one night the fog horn blew continually, as the fog was very heavy.
We also had our fun when a young, nice-looking Swede fell in love with a beautiful Irish girl. Neither could understand the other, so one of our friends who had been in America, was asked to translate what they said to each other. There were many sweet words said, but they did not always get things straight, as the translator was a practical joker. However, they caught on and laughed with us. What became of them when leaving Philadelphia I do not know.
We were on the ocean between Liverpool and Philadelphia, the destination of the boat, about nine days, and landed in Philadelphia on a Sunday morning. It was a gloomy day, and we had to be ready early, as the Revenue officers were to come and ransack our baggage. There was a great commotion when one of the revenue officers found some green coffee in a trunk that belonged to a Polish girl. Everything was examined and put at the side of the trunk, and then the trunks had to be packed again, but the Revenue officer did not worry about that; he went on to another trunk to repeat his search. However, he must have had some faith in me as he only stuck his arm down in one corner, smiled at me and said, "All right."
One of the British girls made her escape from the boat during the forenoon, and about four P. M. two policemen brought her back. I think the girl wanted to get away from her associates. They seemed a disagreeable lot to me.
Early Monday morning we were escorted from the boat and taken through one office after another for questioning. This continued almost all day. Fortunately I knew a few words in English, so I got through very well. Finally I came to one office where a man spoke my own language. We had a nice little chat, and when I left he shook hands with me and said, "Oh, you will get along."
About six o'clock we boarded the train and when we were settled a doctor came along feeling the pulse of everybody. We had been examined on board the boat time after time and when we left it, I estimated this was the ninth time we had been looked over.
There were many stops as the emigrants changed trains for different destinations. My Norwegian friends were going to Minnesota, others to Chicago, and two young men to Indianapilis. As far as I knew I was the only one going south. I had to wait in Louisville, Kentucky, from ten A.M. until ten P.M. for the train. There was a colored waitress who was very efficient and had the best of manners. It was night when I passed through Kentucky, but when day came I do not know exactly where we were, as it was hard for people to understand my questions, but in the morning we passed Decatur, Alabama, and at five o'clock on October 8, 1902. I arrived at the Louisville and Nashville station in Mobile.
I had always heard that Mobile was a very nice place through letters from relatives and conversations with others who had been there; but I was disappointed when I saw the little dilapidated railroad station of the L. & N., which was rebuilt in later years into a long brick station. My uncle was not there when I arrived, but he had left word with Martha, the Negro attendant, to take care of me if I should come in before he returned, which she faithfully did. It was not long until my uncle came.
What appealed to me as we were on the street car going up Government Street, was the group of stately old oak trees.
At my uncle's home I did not find things as I had expected, and I was told by his wife that very evening that I had to "get out and earn a living" as her own daughter had done, but she added that I could stay with them until I was rested. Of course I did not want to be a burden to them, so in two weeks' time I became house girl at Mrs. S. J. Lawler's home. My uncle protested, but I did not want to cause trouble. I had never been a servant and was not physically strong, but my work was not hard, and there was nothing else to do until I could master the language, so I read, listened and tried to talk. If I said "much abased" when I should have said "much obliged" I just laughed with the others. I will always gratefully remember Mrs. J. W. Whiting, Mrs. Lawler's daughter, because she was so kind to me, and I could understand her better than the others. She spoke beautiful English.
In the Spring of 1903, my uncle sold his home, on the northeast comer of Washington Avenue and New Jersey Street, and left for Sweden. His wife's health was bad and she was not satisfied until she could leave. She said to me that she was sorry they could not spare the money that would take me back, so what could I do? I probably could have made them take me home, but I had not seen enough of America then.
I spent the first Winter in Mobile with Mrs. Lawler. The following Spring she went to Coden to spend a while at the Rolston Hotel, and when she left later to go to her summer home in Orange Vale, near Talladega, I remained with the Rolstons for the summer. They had many summer guests and all were nice and friendly to me. I treasure the memory of that summer as one of the most pleasant I have had in this country. In the fall I came back to Mobile and became house girl at the Moraques' home until in the winter Mrs. Lawler was taken sick and wanted me back. However, I could not get used to all the heavy work that is associated with a house, so I decided to take a course at the Mobile Business College, at that time operated by Professor Meux and his wife. In order to learn stenography, I had also to study the language. It looked hopeless for a while, but I was determined to fight, if I failed, I had at least the comfort that I had done what I could. I kept on plodding, working in the daytime and going to college from seven to nine P. M. and midnight often found me nodding over my books. Then I got up before six to have breakfast ready for someone who must be at work at seven o'clock. It was not all fun, but I so wanted to learn.
The Winter of 1905 I had my first office job, at the Mobile Dye Works, 462 Dauphin Street. When my work gave out temporarily I worked at the Peerless Laundry, meanwhile keeping up my studies at night. After awhile the owner of the Mobile Trunk Company, J. H. Wienand, offered me a job in his office, my salary at the beginning to be $5.00 per week. I stayed there for ten years. Mr. Wienand's children were then large rough to help, so I was not needed. After being idle, and also trying some work in which I had no experience, I was forced to give up. I got a position, however, as bookkeeper in the office of R. O. Harris, Company. This was after the death of Mr. Harris, and Mr. John S. Shaw was manager. Later Mr. E. B. Marshall took over the business. After being in this office nearly three years I was taken sick, and it was months before I was able to work again. In November, 1920, I took a position at the People's Ice Company and stayed until 1929, when I married.
During the time I was at the trunk factory my hands were affected by rheumatism to such a degree that I feared I would lose the use of them. I had studied music because I loved it better than anything else, but was forced to give up both the piano and violin, as my fingers were too sore to move. Meanwhile I took up vocal study, as I had a fairly good voice, thinking that I might have another resource if my hands failed; Also I took a course in bookkeeping from the La Salle Extension University by mail, as I could hold a pen or pencil in my stiff fingers, although even that pained me.
After some years of intense suffering my hands became more pliable. At the People's Ice Company I did not have much typing to do, so I made out very well. Later, I became acquainted with an old homeopathic doctor. Doctor Duffield, from Citronelle, Alabama, and through the combined treatment of osteopathy and homeopathy my hands were considerably imprived, and at present are doing good work, although not strong as they might be.
My husband had been in the U. S. Lighthouse service for nearly thirty-five years, and at the time we married was pensioned. We were married nine months, during eight of which he was sick. He died from cancer in February, 1930.
After my husband's death I went to work again for the People's Ice Company, serving about a year, but my health was completely broken down and I had to give up. The property left by my husband was willed to the daughter of his first marriage, and of what cash he had saved I agreed to take one-third, amounting to $3,000.00. Of this sum I lent two-thirds to a business man, thinking it would be a good investment, but business failed, and by accepting some stock as part payment and some cash, I recovered about one half of my loan.
Nearly two years passed before I was able to look for work. The first thing I did was re-enter a business college to renew stenography and typing, but I could not get work when I applied, as the depression had come and my answer when I asked for it was "we have too much help now." Meanwhile I had to live, and as I had spent a good deal on doctors during my breakdown in 1934, I applied to the Works Progress Administration and since then I have been on some WPA project and thankful to get ray daily bread.
I have tried to fill in my time beside the working hours where I could be most useful. Singing in church choirs has been my recreation. Translation of the Scandinavian language into English has been another of my hobbies, Reading to the sick and blind in any of my four languages has also been one of my self-appointed jobs (although it does not bring in any cash) and I have greatly enjoyed it. I always feel that I am an amateur as I have had no one tell me if I am right or wrong. However, if I have failed, I know that I have done what I could.
2/11/39
S.J.