
Approximately 3,000 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LITE HISTORY
TITLE: WINDMILL ORCHARD
Data of First Writing January 12, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed  Emanual Schumpert
Fictitious Name Ed Leightsey
Post Office Address West Columbia,
County  South Carolina Lexington
Occupation  Farmer & Market Gardener
Name of Writer  John L. Dove
Name of Reviser State Office
It was just before Christmas of 1938. The Columbia curb market was thronged with shoppers who were making choice selections from the limitless assortment of poultry, fresh vegetables, fruits and other things for holiday tables. Under a sign marked Windmill Orchard stood Ed Leightsey, proprietor of that stall. He was a stocky old gentleman of about average height; his hair was thin and gray; and his face, rather pallid, was lighted with a smile. It was not just a business-getting smile, but one that expressed the warmth of genuine human kindness. And those stopping act his stall, or even looking his way, were greeted with that smile and his beat wishes for their holiday season.
"Good morning, and a merry Christmas to you," he said to the writer, who was standing near the neatly arranged piles of fruit a and vegetables under the sign. "What can I do for you today?"
"Give me your money or your life story, Mr. Leightsey," the writer responded with mock gravity. 'Which shall it be?"
"A hold up, eh?" the old gentleman said, his smile changing to wonderment at the peculiar order.
"Nothing less, Mr. Leightsey, with the Market Master aiding and abetting. He has just told me of the great success you've made of your business on this market and said, 'See old Ed Leightsey, if you want to get a good story of a good man and a good farmer.' That's a rather heavy charge, Mr. Leightsey. I'm asking you to prove to me your innocence or your guilt."
"I plead not guilty," he answered, his smile returning as he caught the significance of the request.
"I'm from Missouri, Mr. Leightsey. You'll have to show me."
"Oh, well," he said, laughing good-naturedly, "you kind of had me on the dangle. I'll be glad to tell you what little there la to tell, but I don't think it will excite you much."
He turned to his wife, a small brunette of around sixty, who had arrived within the last minute or two and was listening to out conversation. "Minnie, where'd be the best place to start telling?"
"Just anywhere, but don't forget our school days and our trip to Charleston."
Minnie then proceeded to serve the wants of the numerous shoppers who stopped to look at the display under the sign and left Ed or "He", as she frequently refers to him, to tell the story.
"Give the story in your way and in your own words, Mr. Schumpert," the writer suggested by way of making a start.
"Well, all right, here goes," he began. "I was born in Lexington County, South Carolina, on January 3, 1871. So you see I'm past my sixty- seventh birthday. I want through what they would now call, I reckon, the seventh or sight grads at school. Anyway, I studied the old blue-back speller, the dictionary, Reed and Kellogg's grammar, history, arithmetic, through stocks and bonds, and the big geography that had the pictures of wild animals and big snakes living among the trees in the jungles. I quit school at twenty years of age and got a job with the Danville Lumber Company at Dixiana, South Carolina.
"After working with the sawmill at Dixiana for two years, I used my savings and bought a mule and a few farm tools. And, like the callow youth I was, I pitched my tent in that God-forsaken sandhill community around Dixiana and started to farming. The land in that community was, and still is, so poor that the only use we Lexingtonians can find for it is a sort of space filler, or just so much poor sand put there to hold the world together. Yes, sir, Dixiana is one of the few places in the world where you can be out of sight of land and water all at the same time.
"Well, of course, I had no trouble in renting enough land at Dixiana for a one-horse farm. And I got down to work with a vim in the spring of 1894. Soon I had the land prepared and crops planted. The seasons were very good that year, and my cotton and corn, my punkins and potatoes, and my other crops bloomed on those fresh acres. But as luck would have it, the bumblebees and caterpillars found those lowly blossoms and admired them so much that they charged upon them, wearing themselves, and the crops, out against the ground."
"Pardon the interruption Mr. Leightsey, but I have always understood that bumblebees do no harm to crops. In fact, I have been taught that bumblebees are quite helpful to crops, in that they assist with pollination."
"That's just it," he agreed. "You see, we old-timers used to speak of the poor dwarfy cotton stalks which produce no more than one or two blossoms as bumblebee cotton. You know, a bumblebee is a rather heavy insect, and, in our imagination, we could see the puny little cotton bend to the ground under the bee's weight,'
"Oh, yea, I get the meaning now. Hr. Leightsey. Won't you please go on with the story?"
"After my failure at Dixiana, my daddy, Jacob Laightsey, persuaded me to return home near New Brookland, now known as We at Columbia. So I swallowed my pride, mounted my little mule, and returned, like the prodigal son, to the land of my father. At the beginning of 1895, I went to work as a one- horse sharecropper for daddy. I slept is the back room of a little commissary store, and cooked and ate, my scant rations in the same room for two years.
"In 1897, I bought, mainly on credit, twenty acres of my daddy's land. On this land, I built a small four-room cabin for my use in my future operations and ambitions, or troubles, I should say."
Just then he winked an eye and shook his big corny fiat at Minnie. This done, he went on telling the thought in his mind concerning the four-room cabin.
"In the fall of 1897, I married that old battle-axe standing over there on the opposite side of the counter, and then my troubles really began. I once thought she was pretty Minnie Berry. My! how she could always manage to find A seat by the aide of me when we were in school and sat on the slab benches placed around the fireplace in the old schoolhouse."
"Look out there old man!" some one was heard to yell, as 'He' was seen backing away from a threatening piece of packing case held by the belligerent appearing Minnie- All of this was, of course, a demonstration of the good- humored badinage frequently exchanged between Ed and Minnie.
According to Minnie, who by this time had joined Ed in the discussion, the years 1898 to 1908 were critical and eventful ones for them. While Ed continued to "pull the bell-cord over his mule," Minnie cooked and washed and "nursed Ed and the children." He explained how he had developed his land to a high state of cultivation by a judicious combination of crop rotations, home-made fertilizer and liberal plantings of cowpeas and other legumes.
"And just as fast as we could produce fruits and vegetables, eggs and chickens, and other things sufficient to pay the coat of one block of twenty acres of my daddy's farm, we obligated ourselves to buy an adjoining twenty acres of the old farm. I found, all the while, a ready market for our produce among the people living in the city across the Congaree River, six miles away.
Ed Leightsey has the reputation of being strictly honest and fair in all of his dealings, and they say he has always given and demanded the full pound, down to the "twentieth part of one poor scruple." Gossip among his neighbors has it that on one occasion, when he sold a load of produce to a Columbia buyer, he figured all the way home, balancing his accounts. Finding a mistake of twenty cents against his favor, he hauled in his reins and drove back to town for the difference. Nobody would question the fact that he would have done the same thing had the "boot been on the other leg."
"Yes, Minnie and I worked hard during those years, and luck was with us," Ed continued after a number of pauses in order to extend the season's greetings to a group of his friends and customers shopping at his stand. "Our acres increased rapidly, as did our family. After ten years of work and 'penny-pinching', we owned my daddy's entire farm of 135 acres Minnie and I then agreed that the time had come for us to take our long delayed honeymoon vacation, the trip to Charleston she mentioned act the beginning of our conversation. Well, maybe I'd better let her tell about that, for I believe she got more out of the trip than I did."
Here he had Minnie take over the telling of the belated honeymoon.
"You see, it's like this," she began. "He has never wanted much said about that Charleston trip. Well, I finally persuaded him that he needed to get away from the farm for a few days. So during the winter of 1908, he agreed that we should go to Charleston, and to Charleston we went. Everything went lovely until we reached the city by the sea; then trouble, as well as fun, began for me. Neither of us had before seen the ocean, and, of course, we were not familiar with boats and boating. When we looked out upon those rolling waves of water, I decided it would be nice for us to take a boat ride around the bay. I wanted to get a close view of Fort Sumter and other places we had read about. But when I told Ed of my desire, He bucked like a stubborn old mule and said: 'Why Minnie, the very idea! I have always felt there was just about as much water in Congaree River as I would care to undertake to pull you out of in case of an accident to us in crossing. I just can't risk your life out there in that pond.' How do you believe he really cared so much for my welfare?" she leaned close and asked in a subdued tone.
At this juncture, friend 'He' stalked over on the opposite side of the piles of produce and, facing Minnie with his shaking fist, barked the following good-natured banter: "And I've wished many a time since, that I had carried you out there in the Atlantic Ocean and thrown you overboard."
"Yes, and then I could have caught a better fish from the sea than I caught out of it!" she hurled back at him.
The short vacation over, Minnie and Ed returned home. The old ancestral farm and home had been paid for and was now their property. It was explained somewhat in detail by Ed Leightsey how he and his better half went about making improvements on their property. New barns were built for the livestock and poultry in accordance with plans furnished by the Clemson College Extension Division. Improved breeds of hogs, cows, and poultry ware installed in place of the scrub and mixed breads formerly kept. A new peach orchard, a grape vineyard, and a flower garden were planted. Later, the pastures were newly fenced and sodded to adapted clovers and grasses. And, finally, the old log residence was remodeled and painted, and a windmill, with which to pump water into the horns and to the barns, was installed. Thus it was the farm became known as windmill Orchard.
It is said that Ed Leightsey never lets up in his search for ways and means of making improvements at Windmill Orchard. And his marketing methods are much superior to the average method on the curb market. His description of his marketing experience was as follows:
"I've found this curb system a great improvement over the old street peddling system we once had in Columbia. I sort (meaning grade) every pound of my produce; then put it up in even weight boxes or basket a before offering it for sale. There are no little potatoes at the bottom of the basket and big potatoes at the top. They are all alike in sixe, color, and quality in the pack. I've been in this business long enough to know that I must give my customers what they want and that which they feel they have bought. In this way, one satisfied customer generally makes another customer for my stand here. My gross sales from this curb stand amounts to around $3,000 a year."
It is claimed by Mr. Leightsey that he has crossed and re-crossed Congaree River for forty-one years, with loads of produce for the Columbia market. He now makes weekly, often semi-weekly, end sometimes daily deliveries of produce to his stand on the curb market. Long before the newsboys begin their chant, "Morning State," on the streets of the city, Ed and Minnie can be seen driving up Gervais Street in their flivver, loaded to its gunwales with potatoes, turnips, chickens, melons, peaches, grapes, and other things in season - all ready for sale when the market opens at an early morning hour. "I never let the grass grow under my feet," la one of his ways of expressing his stirring habit a. Ed, they say, never walks to his work; he runs.
"Mr Leightsey, I understand you Dutch farmers of Lexington County have fed the people of Columbia since the Civil War. Is that correct?"
"You bet I have furnished my share of the eats," was his answer. He then went on explaining how his ancestors, and the grand-parent a of other Lexington farmers, had been pushed back into the poorer sandhills by the old landed aristocracy in the early days of the State. With the old smile, which seldom leaves his face, he concluded with the remark; "Well, I guess 'every dog has his day." I'm having very good luck with my sales of produce among many of the descendants of those splendid old aristocrats."
While Ed Lightsey says you can bet on his having helped feed the people of Columbia, you can bet your "bottom dollar," with safety, that he has fed those eleven children of his at the fountainhead. Judging from the hale and hearty appearance of the ones seen by the writer, they must have been "buttermilk fed chickens."
Yes, Ed Leightsey claims that he and Minnie have reared eleven children, six sons and five daughters, at windmill Orchard, and that each has been given a high school education. "They are all married and gone now," he said, apparently with a feeling of regret. "Iris la a building contractor; Vernon, a lumber dealer; John runs a garage; Arney is a textile worker; and Charles is a farmer. The girls are now Mesdames, Sturkey, Williamson, Jeffcoat, Senn, and Sharpe."
Even though the songs and cries of the Leightsey children are heard no more around the old home, Ed and Minnie keep the home fires burning. And they say they have no desire to "let up" in their work of gardening and marketing. They continue to cross and re-cross Congaree River each day, except Sunday, on their way to and from their produce at and on the Columbia curb market. And there, under the sign Windmill Orchard, they carry on, side by side, as was their wont in their childhood days at the old backwoods school.
With an expression on his broad face that bespoke emotion, Mr. Leightsey said: "We are looking forward to the Christmas holidays, when we hope to be able once more to hear the voices of children singing the Christmas songs we loved to hear in the years gone by." These, he meant, of course, would be the voices of his grandchildren.
Having so often heard of Windmill Orchard and its well kept environs, the writer had many times felt the urge to visit the farm. The opportunity came during the past year. He found it, in truth, a well-kept farm. It is located on a county road, six miles west of Congaree River bridge - the concrete a pan that separates the city of Columbia from the town of West Columbia. There are the 135 acres which Ed and Minnie had bought in the early years of their married life. Some of it is on the streams, where there is the choicest of grazing for cattle, sheep, and hogs; other portions of the estate contain forests of the lordly long loaf pin: and others again are the well-cultivated fields, orchards, and vineyards. In close proximity to the modern livestock and poultry hams is an old well-preserved two-story residence, built of logs hewn from rich yellow pines - timber known through the ages for its ability to withstand the storms and ravages of time. There, too, a windmill slowly turned in the gentle breeze of the morning at its task of raising and lowering the long pump shaft over the well.
Despite the fact that the place, like Ed Leightsey, is showing signs of age, the look on Ed's face that morning was in keeping with the day, bright and sunny- When he was informed that his visitor wished to familiarise himself with the farm's many interests, it apparently gave him pleasure to conduct the tour of inspection and to tell of his methods concerning the conduct of the farm- In addition to the flock of pure-bred poultry cackling in the barnyard, the place was alive with the birds of the air; even the rat-a-tat-tat of a woodpecker, tearing at the bark of a nearby pine in machine-gun-like precision, was in evidence- The rattle of cow bells, the grunt of pigs, and the hum of bees were heard; and the odor of flowers filled the air- Joy, too, was abroad in the land; for in the mulberry tree near the pig lot, a number of happy greasy-faced pickaninnies were heard to yodle, 'hi-le-i-la-he-hoo.'
Ed Leightsey, progressive in his farm management methods and of a practical turn of mind, had no particular interest in legislation or politics- "Farm legislation can have but little meaning to me," he said- "I have always lived and boarded at the same place."
By that, he means that he produces his fruits and vegetables, bacon and hominy, milk and honey, and, in short, his living at Windmill Orchard.
