"I MAIDS FOR THE CO-EDS"
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athena
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
March 27, 1939
 
March 14, 16, 1939
Odelia Lester Anderson (Negro)
190 Lyndon Avenue
Athens, Georgia
Maid - Coordinate College
S.B.H.
"I MAIDS FOR THE CO-EDS"
Odessa was sitting on the edge of her small porch, her feet on the top step, when I arrived. Her elbows rested on her knees and her chin was cupped in her hands. Her whole attitude implied utter weariness. The last rays of the afternoon sun revealed her unpainted house as the "tumble-down shack" type, about which so much of fact and fiction has been written. There were many gaps in the privet hedge that was supposed to enclose the corner lot, and the windswept yard was barren of flowers and grass.
"Odessa, you seem to be tired," I said.
"Yes, mam, I is tired," she replied. "I'se been workin' hard all day, cleaning out the dormitory, and gittin' the house mother off to that corn-vention."
"Do you feel like talking to me a little while?" I asked.
"Yes, mam, but what does you want to talk to me about?" she inquired.
"I don't expect to do the talking," I informed her. "I want you to tell me all about your experiences as a maid in the dormitory, and the story of your life prior to the time you began work in the dormitory," I told her.
"Oh!" she cried, "Be you gwine to put it in that there book you'se got with you?" She stared at my notebook.
"Yes," I told her, "for the time being."
After a little persuasion and some explanation, Odessa agreed to talk to me. "Well," she said, "if you'se gwine to write, you better come on in the house where you can see how to write for it's gittin' dark and cold too out here."
She slowly arose and led the way through the front door into a bedroom that also served as a living-room. There were two battered iron beds, one single and the other double; one small and worn rug was on the floor; a dresser, a washstand, a porch rocker, and several split bottom chairs we placed about the room with no apparent idea of arrangement other than that they might not touch the laundry heater that glowed in the twilight. Odessa lit a coal oil lamp on a table in the middle of the room. A young Negro woman, sitting near the heater, was rocking back and forth in a straight chair as she crooned to her nodding baby. Every time her chair bumped on the floor it caused the house to shake.
The dim light of the lamp revealed that Odessa was wearing a maid's blue uniform, a white apron, and black hose and slippers. She is of gingerbread color and weighs about 135 pounds.
"And you wants me to tell you a story of my life?" she began, in a puzzled tone. "Miss, I don't have no story that's much diff'unt from t'other folks 'specially. You know colored folks all has hard times anyway you takes 'em. Of course, some has more trouble than others. I reckon the Good Lord intended it to be that way so all of us would have somethin'. If he hadn't, there's some would never have nothin' t'all. I says we are put here to holp the white folks, and them to holp us. We are like the white folks in some ways; some of them have 'most everythin', and some don't have nothin' much.
"'Most all the colored folks about my age, that I knows, was borned in the country. I was next to the baby in a fambly of eleven chillun that was all borned on a farm a little piece out of Eatonton, Georgia. I come along in 1902. The year one of my brothers went off to the World War, all my brothers and sisters had married and gone to they own homes 'cept me and two brothers, and when one of them had to go to war, it left just me and my youngest brother to do all the work on that farm, and we wasn't nothin' but chillun. We used to hitch our mule to the wagon and do all the haulin'. I'se hauled many a wagon load of fodder to the house, and that ain't tellin' about all the cotton and peanuts I'se brought to the barn in that old wagon. I had to take the place of my big brother when it come to farm work.
"Chillun these days don't know what a easy time they has gwine to school. When I went to school I had to walk 5 miles to a one-room schoolhouse at a place called Half Acre. I made it through the 6th grade. One Sunday momin' when I was chasin' a chicken for my ma to have for dinner I fell down and stuck a piece of lightud about three inches long into my foot. The doctor thought my foot was broke until he rayed it and found the big old splinter in it. The first day I was able to go back to school after my foot was hurt happened to be the first day of April, and the school chillun all tried to pull a fast one on the teacher by runnin' away. I started with 'em, but my foot hurt so bad I had to turn back. The teacher and me waited all day for the chillun to came on back, but they didn't show up, so we locked up the schoolhouse and went home. Next momin' them chillun found that April fool frolic wasn't so funny as it had seemed whilst they was playin' hooky the day befo'. Our teacher lined 'em all up and whipped the last one of 'em. I woulda got a beatin' if it hadn't been for my lame foot. I was sho glad my foot had kept me out of mischief.
"We had a big time on Easter Mondays in them days. First we said a few lessons at school; then we would have a spellin' match, and would sing a lots, and would end up with a Easter egg hunt. The professor would hide the eggs. He always hid the gold egg in his wife's lap, and the one who found it would git a prize. Chillun don't ack lak they has as good times now as we had in them days. They's always so restless now; always wantin' to do somepin diff'unt.
"When I was a young girl, folks married a heap younger than they does now. I wasn't but 14 years old when me and Jim got married. I met him when he boarded with my ma and worked at the sawmill. We lived in Devereaux after we married. We hadn't been in that little town long 'fo' my husband got a job as butler with a rich lady what lived on a big farm a little ways out from Devereaux. Her place was called Breezy Hill Farm. They sho was rich white folks. They paid my husband a straight salary of $16 a month. I holped with the farm work and whenever they had company they put me to work in the big house, and that was sho 'nough often. At any sort of holiday times they always had lots of special company, and then there was plenty for me to do holpin' with the cookin' and cleanin'.
"When they had the fambly reunion, they put up two long tables out in the back yard under them big old oak trees. It was decided to push them tables together. They put the food on the table and just as the folks gathered 'round ready to eat, one of them tables fell down and scattered that good food all over the ground. Them folks had a good old cook that was about eighty years old. They called her Aunt Sook. Her husband, Uncle Will, was nigh a hundred and three years old. When that table fell, Aunt Sook said: 'Dar, bless God, dar goes all the good somepin' t'eat, and us is got to do all dat cookin' over again.' All that stuff what hadn't teched the ground was picked up and put back on the table when it was stood up and braced, and they brought out plenty more from the kitchen. Everybody had plenty to eat and a good time in the bargain.
"Old as he was, Uncle Will nursed my chillun whilst I worked in the fields, and he helped in the house some too. We stayed with these folks a little over two years and then moved off to another farm.
"About six months after we moved, me and my husband separated. We had got to the place where he wouldn't take keer of us and was drinkin' up everythin' we made. I had to work when I was sick to git somethin' to feed our chillun, and it wasn't long 'fo' I was in bad need of a op'ration. We 'most starved tryin' to save money to move to Athens and to pay for that op'ration.
Soon as I had saved up a little money we struck out and come here where my pa and ma was livin' with my two married sisters. Pa's health had done got so bad him and ma had to come live with their chillun.
"Soon as I got here I went to work cookin' and cleanin' house for a white lady for $2.50 a week. I saved every penny I could for that op'ration I needed so bad. When I finally did go have that tumor cut out, my white lady didn't like the woman I had sont in my place, and she made me come back to work befo' I was well. What she was payin' me wasn't enough to support me and my three chilluns, so I sont my two boys to live with my sister in Shelby, North Carolina. I thought it would make better men of 'em to be brung up on a farm than to be jerked up in a place the size of Athens. Folks in cities gits in so much meanness these days. I kept my only daughter with me.
"Whilst I was workin' for that white lady, a janitor at the Georgia State Teachers' College promised to git me a job. It wasn't long 'fo' he told me about a maid's place at one of the dormitories. They give me the place 13 years ago. I was tickled to death when I found that the matron at that dormitory was from Eatonton, not far from where I was raised.
"When I started maidin' for the co-eds I made $16 a month. I'se got 49 rooms to tend. There was two girls in each room at first and they was 'sposen to clean they own rooms, but lots of 'em would ruther pay me a dime to brush out a room. I cleans three parlors, one recreation room, three halls, four bathrooms, two porches and the matron's suite.
"There's been heaps of changes in them 13 years I'se been workin' at the Hall - They don't call it the dormitory, no more. It's the 'Hail.' - In the beginnin', there wasn't but one little parlor and one phone; now there's three parlors, three outside phones, and two house phones. At first I had to walk upstairs to tell the girls to answer the phone on the first floor, but first I had to tell the matron and she would have me ax who it was callin', then if she said it was all right, I could go upstairs and tell the girl. The matron would take her cheer and set right down by them girls and listen to every word that they said over the phone. Now there ain't no questions asked; they can talk to who they please, as long as they please.
"There was another funny thing the matrons had to do them days. When the girls was goin' to church or Sunday school or any other place, 'scuain' classes, the matron had to take a cheer and set at the foot of the stairway with a yard stick and a towel. She measured the dresses to see if they was long enough. If they was too short they was sont back to they rooms and made to put on clothes the proper length. If they had too much paint or powder on they faces - they calls 'em lipstick and rouge nowadays - she would wipe they faces off with that towel.
"Them girls wasn't 'lowed to go to town lak they does now, not even just down to the Teachersville corner stores about a block away from the Hail. The matron forbidded me to go for 'em, but they would beg me so pitiful and would offer me such nice tips, that I'd slip off and go atter things for 'em. Time and time again the matron caught me and blessed me out, but they would beg again right pitiful like and show me the tip money and I'd slip off and go again.
"I could always tell when the girls had gone and done somepin wrong, 'cause I couldn't turn for 'em in the Hall, axin' me what to say when they had to go to court. When a girl gits a call to 'port to the dean's office they calls it 'gwine to court.' I'se seed girls from all over the world come and go from the Hall.
"We've had three girls to lose their minds. The first was a senior. The first thing wrong that I noticed was when she got a nice box from her mother and give it to me without even openin' it. I 'ported the matter to the matron, but she never paid me no 'tention. That night the girl started talkin' to herself and didn't pay her roommates no mind. She took all they clothes out of the closet and started packin' 'em. The other girls was so seared they wouldn't stay in the room with her that night and they set out in the hall 'til mornin'. Then they 'ported it to the matron. The matron then told me to take the girl to the infirmary, but she wouldn't go with me, so the matron had somebody call her over the phone. When they told her to take her phone call she screamed out: 'I can't! I just can't talk over the phone. The dean will restrict me!' Then they called her mother and asked her to come take the girl home. The reason she lost her mind was that she was a senior and was sho she was flunkin' her studies. The thoughts of missin' that diploma just run her crazy.
"The next one got nervous from the 'citement of 'rush week,' She was a sorority girl and she was out all the time with girls and boys goin' to parties. All she would say was, 'Keep on talkin' to ms. Don't stop!' She kept me runnin' back and forth to the stores for somethin' for her to eat, and when I got back with them sandwiches and things she would just set 'em down and send me straight back for mo'.
"The third girl what went crazy seemed all right ontil she started tryin' to slip off home. She packed her suitcase, but she couldn't finish it. Then she jumped on it and started stompin' it with her foots. She went downstairs then and phoned to find out when the bus was due to leave. Instead of the bus station she got the taxi place and they didn't give her no satisfaction, so she just up and yanked the receiver off the phone and throwed it in the parlor. She run upstairs and snatched up her suitcase and left. The matron ordered me to catch her and not to let her leave, but she had already stopped a man, got in his car, and was gone 'fo' I could git to her. Some of the other girls hopped in a car that was on the campus and rushed down to the bus station ahead of her. They told the ticket man not to sell her no ticket, so when she come he just told her that the bus she wanted had already gone, but to set down and wait awhile and pretty soon there would be another bus goin' her way. In a few minutes the dean was there. Re took her to the infirmary, and there they kept her 'til her father come and got her. I hears that she's done got all right and that she's in a boardin' school some place.
"The first girl that lost her mind is still in a sanitarium, and the second one is in a padded cell in some asylum or sanitarium. The college folks wrote and kept up with all three of 'em for a long time; that's how I know so much about 'em. After they went crazy the others was all skeered of 'em, but I loved 'em and sorter felt lak they b'longed to me, and somehow I never was a mite afeared of any of 'em.
"In the old days when the girls went to town or to church they was lined up and the roll was called. If one was missin' the matron had to go back to the Hall and look for her. Atter she had done looked ever'where but under the bed she would call for me to come look under there, for she was so big and fat that she couldn't do no good gittin' down on her knees. If she found the girl that was tryin'to skip church or Sunday school, she sont her to the dean first thing Monday mornin', and he would usually restrict her from havin' any fun for a certain length of time. The girls was all so good to me that I couldn't tell on 'em, even if I did see 'em doing the things they shouldn't oughta.
"The Buzzards' Roost was two rows of seats with a cover over them to keep the sun and rain offen girls when they was waitin' for the streetcars. How them seats ever got that name, I never knowed.
"One time, three girls slipped off from school and went to a party at a friend's house. Of course it was nighttime and all the girls had dates. The girl's mother wasn't home and the girls all stayed longer than they meant to. When the lady got back home she called up the matron and axed if she had missed three girls. The matron told her she would check up and see. When she found them three girls was missin' she hurried out to the lady's- house and brung 'em back to the Hall. Them girls was shipped. Once two girls was found smokin' and they was shipped for that too.
"Mondays and Wednesdays was shoppin' days. The girls was lined up and the roll called, and when they started marchin' out there was a matron at each end of the line. Girls was shipped for just any offense they was caught in. Now they does pretty much as they pleases. They even provides smokin' rooms for 'em.
"When I first went there the girls all had to wear uniforms. They had blue yarn dresses for Sunday in winter and in warm weather they wore white on Sundays. The everyday dresses was light brown with dark brown collars and cuffs. All them uniforms was made prezac'ly alike. They wasn't 'lowed to wear no other shoes but low-heel black slippers. If they was caught with any other color shoes on, whoever was chap'ronin' 'em would send 'em back to the Hall and them that broke that rule wasn't 'lowed to leave the campus for two weeks, 'cept to 'tend classes and chapel.
"It was happy days for them girls when they was told they could git out of uniforms and wear what they pleased any time. Out went the matrons and in come the house mothers. It ain't been lak the same place since then. Sometimes I wishes we had them old days back again, for I used to make as much as $3 in one week in tips when the girls couldn't git out and do for theyselves. Now, if I gits a dollar in a week in tips, I'se made big money.
"Once a university boy brought a 'possum up to the Hall and turnt 'im loose in the livin'-room. Next mornin' one of the girls saw his tail under the davenport and thought it was a snake. She yelled for me. I thought it was a snake too when I first saw it, and I hollered for the janitor to come holp us git that snake.
We was sho' 'sprised when we moved that davenport and found that old 'possum. The janitor had that 'possum for Thanksgivin' dinner.
"The girls at the Hall used to go on picnics. They fixed the lunches at the Hall and sometimes they would walk out as far as the Country Club for the picnics. One of the matrons made and sold sandwiches to the girls, and she made enough money to buy a livin'- room suite for one of the parlors at the Hall.
"'Most all the things I'se been tellin' you was in the first years I was at the Hall when the matrons ruled the girls. Now since they's been turnt loose to do as they please I don't see and hear the things that takes place no mo'. The girls used to set on the grass on the campus on Sunday atternoons and watch the university boys pass by. Girls knowed better'n to wave back at the boys that waved at 'em. They would just pat they hands on the ground.
"Once a girl left to go home. At least, she told the matron she was gwine home. That was on Friday. Sunday night her folks called her up, and they was told she had gone home. Soon as she got in Sunday night her roommates told 'er 'bout that call from home. That girl packed up her things right quick and slipped out of school and her people didn't find her for 6 months. When they did find 'er, she was married and livin' in a little town nigh to where her mother lived. Her two roommates was restricted when it was found out that it was them that told her about the phone call from her folks.
"If a girl was caught talkin' over the phone to a boy, right quick she would call him by some girl's name. 'Well, I'll be seein' you,' she would say and hang up quick.
"I works at the Hall in winter, but in summer my work's over on the main campus. Some summers I 'tends to the diff'unt rest rooms for ladies in the classroom buildings. One summer we had all ages of teachers in the dormitory. 'Most of the summertime scholars are teachers that come back here to school. One of the young ones was havin' herself a good time goin' out with the boys, but she was caught up with and restricted. She got her mother's permission to go home ever' week end, and that boy she dated with went to see her at her mother's home. I saw her downtown the other day, and she still blames me for tellin' on her, but I didn't do it it was one of them old maid teachers. I knowed that all the time but I had to take all the blame. A student got married one summer and the college made her quit and go home.
"The college furnishes my uniforms and has 'em laundered in they own laundry on the main campus. I works from seven 'til five o'clock durin' the week and gits off at twelve on Sundays. I eats my breakfasts and dinners at the Hall. They gives the help the same food as the white folks eats. We have two kinds of cereal, bacon, eggs, toast, and coffee. Sometimes we has steak or creamed beef on toast. For dinner there's always three kinds of vegetables, and some kind of meat. Fridays we has fish and a salad. Sunday is the day for chicken, either baked or fried, and we has ice cream for Sunday dinner, and the girls has it for supper Friday nights.
"I gits $2 a month more than I did when I first went there to work. There are seven of us maids on our campus. I used to have nigh a hunderd girls in my hall when I first started to work, but now they only put eighty of 'em in there. A boy comes in on Mondays and holps all day. He does all the heavy work. The yardmen cleans the rooms when the girls go off for the holidays. We maids are off then too, but we don't git no pay for that time. Some of the girls keeps their rooms nice and neat, and others of 'em lets 'em git in a awful mess.
"No, mam, I sho don't own this here old firetrap me and my daughter lives in. I just has two rooms and a woodshed, and I has to pay 50¢ a week for each room. I used to live up the street a piece with my sister. It's been about a year since we moved in these here rooms. Soon atter we come here a girl come and wanted to stay with us. Well, we took her in, and she was to pay me 50¢ a week. She didn't have no job. I found two for 'er but she wouldn't keep 'em; then I fetched her some washin's from the Ball. She done that work, but she got the money and she never give me a cent in the 6 months she stayed here. I found out she wasn't the right sort of girl. She was spendin' ever' cent she made on whiskey, so I got the law to put 'er out. I never intends to take nobody else in as long as I can do without it.
"I b'lieves in goin' to church. I jined the church in the country and was baptized in a cemented pool back of the church. It was a nice church if it was out in the country. The pool had steps leading down in the water. When I was baptized the congregation sung: On Jordon's Stormy Banks I Stand. I brung my church letter when I moved here and put it in Hill's Baptist Chapel."
My visit had evidently caused considerable curiosity in the neighborhood. Every few minutes during the entire time I was there a knock would be heard at the door, and when Odessa or her daughter opened it, one or more Negroes would stare at me, mumble something to my hostess, and retire. The last visitor was a small Negro boy about eleven years old.
"Sam," said Odessa, "Does your ma know where you is?"
"No, mam," he reluctantly admitted.
"Well," she snapped, "Don't you know t'aint right for you to slip off lak that? Go straight back home, this minute."
"Ygasum," he meekly replied, but stood around for awhile before he quietly slipped out.
"Now, Miss, I b'lieves I'se done told you 'bout all I knows that seems worth the tellin'. Does you know its nine o'clock at night, this minute? Well, ten o'clock ain't gwine to find me still out of my bed, for I'se got to git up early in the mornin'."
I thanked her for the story as I hastened to gather up my notes and leave. "You'se welcome," Odessa said, and closed the door.