Kast Durham Cotton Mill
East Durham, N.C.
August 23, 1938
I.L.M.
FOUR FAMILIES ON RESERVOIR STREET
Reservoir Street leads into the village where live the people who work in the East Durham Cotton Mill. In the first three houses on the east side of the street four families make their homes. Of the sixteen people comprising these families only four are willing to spend the remainder of their lives in a mill village. Two of the dissatisfied ones have endeavored to prepare themselves for work outside the mill. One girl of sixteen is struggling over almost insuperable difficulties to equip herself as a stenographer. One man took a part of a correspondence course in architecture during a few months last year.
The man is Arthur Hinson. He lives with his nineteen-year-old wife, Mae, in one half of the first house on Reservoir Street. Three years ago Arthur had a thousand dollars. He was the successful contestant in the Raleigh Walkathon. As he tread circle into circle around the Walkathon floor he often sang into the microphone such numbers as "They Cut Down the Old Pine Tree," "Mountain Music," and "Birmingham Jail." Arthur became a hero among a growing circle of friends. In less than a year his thousand dollars was gone. "He didn't have a cent of it when I met him," Mae says. "We've been married a year now and they's been many ways we could of used it. He spent a sight of it foolish because he drank right bad before he was married," she admits. "But he helped his family out some, too. They was ten of them and only him and his papa working."
To begin housekeeping the Hinsons bought nearly $300 worth of furniture on the installment plan. They made a down payment of twenty-five dollars and now make weekly payments of three dollars. The three-piece modernistic bedroom suite cost $79 and the five-burner oilstove cost $80. For the kitchen cabinet' which is Mae's particular pride, the Hinsons paid $60. The breakfast room suite of fancy design and inferior wood cost $35. If the installments are met regularly for the next six months the furniture will be entirely paid for.
Arthur is ambitious to get along in the world and he has tried various schemes of self-promotion. Over a year ago he signed up with the International Correspondence School of Scranton, Pennsylvania for the course in architecture. When his wage was reduced and his time out he could not keep up the payments and the course was discontinued. He still owes $107 of the $200 fee. He receives letters regularly reminding him of his obligation.
Arthur wants to use the knowledge he acquired from his course in the carpentry trade. Mae says that he has tried on two or three occasions to get himself fired from his mill job in order that he might be eligible for a carpenter's job on the WPA. He hates the mill, particularly since his work has been almost doubled and his wages out. He is considered the best doffer in the mill and the superintendent keeps him on. When he gets full-time work he makes $12 a week. During the past winter and spring he did not average over eight dollars a week. Arthur hopes to supplement his wage this winter by taking orders for men's and women's suits and raincoats.
Mae has great confidence in Arthur's abilities. She believes that once he breaks away from the mill he will be able to make a good living. She does not think the mill will ever offer him that advantage.
Mae has never had an adequate living herself but she takes pride in the fact that some of her relatives are property owners. She likes to tell you that her Grandfather Suggs owned a huckleberry farm in Johnson County and that Suggs Mill Pond took its name from her mother's people. She says that her grandfather's huckleberry farm was the largest in North Carolina but she is vague as to reasons shy her mother did not share in the money obtained from the property when it was sold after her grandmother's death. She likes to tell you, too, that she has a cousin in Fayetteville who owns a store and several barber shops.
Mae, the second child in a family of four children, was fix years old when her father died. "My mother shrubbed ditches and cleared new ground, working as hard as any man, for a dollar a day to raise us children," she will tell you. "Sometimes she picked beans by the day and then us children could help some. My oldest brother started to work in a fish market at Mt. Olive for e dollar and a half a week. We lived on what him and Mama made, getting', some clothes now and then from the Red Cross." Mt. Olive stands out in her mind as a place where the people are extremely kind because none of the children in school ever ridiculed her for wearing Red Cross clothes. It was there too that her mother was awarded several prizes for her well-kept yard.
Three years ago Mae's mother, worn out by many years of digging in the earth for a scanty subsistence, moved her family to Durham in hope of finding work in the cotton mill. For weeks she could secure no work of any kind except sack-tagging. Her family lived from hand to mouth on the small wages and what help they could get from the welfare department.
Mae got permission from the superintendent of the East Durham mill to learn to fill batteries. For two weeks she worked without a wage trying to do the job so well that the superintendent would hire her. "I was one happy soul," she says, "when on the third Monday morning the superintendent come around and said he was going to put me to work." A month later her mother also secured a job in the mill.
Mae worked for only a few weeks after she was married. Her health has never been good and it became worse after she went in the mill. While she was working she smoked a package of cigarettes daily. Arthur thought that was not good for her health so Mae quit smoking, only to pick up a few weeks later her old habit of snuff-dipping. Mae says she has had a craving for snuff as far back as she can remember. "Mama marked me with the snuff-craze before I was born," she explains. "When I was a little bit of e baby I'd stand at my aunt's knee and reach for her toothbrush. She started giving me a little dab of snuff on her finger when I was two year old."
Pale and listless, Mae sits through most of her days hoping for the time when Arthur will have secured the job which will provide then with the things they want. "I don't have but four dresses and two of them is about wore out. I get so tired of wearin' them old clothes I don't know what to do, Sometimes I've thought about goin' to the relief to see what kind of dress they'd give me." Without enough housework to keep her busy and without any recreational interest of any kind she simply sits and waits.
In the afternoons this summer Mae has helped Arthur a little in the garden. That garden has been of real benefit to them. They have had more butter beans than they could use and they have shared them with the Bensons who live in the other half of the first house on Reservoir St.

