June 29, 1959
Mrs. Rosa Kanipe
Newton, N. C.
Housewife
Ethel Deal, writer
Original Names	Changed Names
Rosa Kanipe	Annie Lacy
Laurence	Henry
Beryl	Ransom
Pauline	Molly
Fred	Jim
Marvin	Lucius
Overcast place	Turner place
Dootsie	Toots
Newton	Whitesboro
Peggy	Shirley
May	Hannah
Ed Bacon	Ah Newcomb
Edna	Lillian
Mr. Lylie Reinharet	Feenie Bumgardner
Baker's Mountain	Sunny Hill
Callie	Jennie
Jim Garrison	Ed Lambert
Jones	Allen
The gate was set in a green hedge and large maples along the front made the place cool and inviting. On each side of the brick walk were two great chestnut trees in bloom. The trees were beautiful but the scent from the blossoms was almost sickly sweet.
"Come in,” Annie said. "I'm afraid I'll have to take you to the back. I'm just fixin' dinner.”
She was barefooted and I noticed a large white bandage wrapped around one leg. She was a tall, angular woman weighing close to a hundred and seventy-five pounds.
"Hope you'll excuse my appearance,” she said. "I just got in from the washtub. What with the chickens and two pigs and a cow to feed, it keeps me trackin'. I declare to goodness, this is the first I've set myself down today. I got up before six this mornin’. About the time I got my washin' on the line, here the calf got out. I had to run it all over the place to get it back in the lot. I declare, it takes work to keep things goin'. Sometimes I wish we didn't have a thing to look after. But then I guess we'd just perish. The old man's not had much work for a year. It almost killed him at first. He's always worked so hard, and me too. I tell him we've earned some rest. Neither one of as is so young any more. Now he's kinds reconciled to it. He's gene fishin' today. He's had a bad heart for years. The doctor has talked to him time and again about his hard work--the mill is so hot inside. He's a loom fixer, makes good money when the weave shop rung but it's closed down now. I've got a good man. I don't have to do the outside work when he's here. I urged him to go fishin' so's to have a little reaction. Land of the livin', hope my beans ain't burned. Henry does hate scorched things.”
“You have a pretty garden." I said.
“'Tis pretty," she answered. “I have ripe tomatoes for dinner today, besides onions, cucumbers, and okra. My green beans will be all right too. They're fried down just right. Just sit still while I go bring in my cottage cheese for dinner. I hung the bag on the cherry tree to drip. Now I'll mix it."
From the electric refrigerator she brought out a glass pitcher of yellow cream. The cheese she took out of the white bag, putting it in a glass bowl. She sprinkled it with pepper and salt and over it poured the rich cream, mixing it with a fork.
"Do you like cucumber salad," she asked.
"It's my favorite salad," I told her.
"I'll make some for dinner. You can eat with me. I don't like to eat by myself. Ransom and his wife went to theirselves last week. He's my baby boy, been married a year, and only eighteen years old now. Seems like younguns don't know when they have it good. We got four. The other three is married, in homes of their own. That's Molly's place right in front of us, the new bungalow with the pretty yard. Jim lives two houses above us, in that white house you see yonder. Lucius bought the Turner place on the other side of the street. His is the prettiest place on this street, everybody says so.
"Set up to the table. Lay your things on the sideboard there. The biscuits are just right. I never take out biscuits till the rest set down, they're not so good if you do. I baked a pan of cornbread too. The children always comes in through the day and likes to eat a snack. None of 'em's workin' since the weave shop's closed. We all manage to live, though, on what they draw of that Social Security. You can manage when you're not in debt. I'm proud to say we don't owe anything. We got sixteen acres of ground and raise feed for the cow and all our vegetables. We did have three cows but sold two. Now just help yourself, it's all on the table.”
Annie seated herself across the table from me. I don't think I ever ate a better prepared meal. While we were eating a little boy of about four years came in.
"This is Toots,” she said by way of introduction. "He's Molly's oldest child. Stays here more than he does at home.
Come eat your dinner, Toots.”
"No, I don't want no dinner,” he said. "I want the hatchet and hammer. I'm goin’ to build a rabbit pen.”
“You can’t have the hatchet, you night, cut yourself.”
All the time Annie was denying him she was up hunting the hatchet and hammer.
"I declare,” she said, Henry has got that youngun ruined. Ha gives him anything he wants. Now here it is, and if you cut yourself I'm goin’ to tan that little setter of yourn.”
"Aw,” Toots said. “Paw lets me have it."
After urging me to drink more buttermilk, sweet milk, or coffee, Annie poured herself another cup of steaming coffee and sat down to finish her meal. About that time a tall, good looking boy of about twenty-five came in and leaned on the door.
“This is Jim,” Annie said, "who lives up the street in the white house. Come on, son, and eat some dinner.”
He seemed a little shy but spoke nicely.
"No thanks, ma’m,” he said. "I have to hurry back. I left the baby asleep.”
"Jim's keepin’ house,” Annie said, "since he's laid off at the weave shop. He's a loom fixer too. His wife is workin' in the hosiery mill. Wait a little, son, while I give you some of these good beans and cornbread for your dinner."
A blue bowl was filled with the beans. A plate of hot biscuit and cornbread was wrapped with a white napkin, and Jim went out. A yell from the outside told that the worst had happened to Toots. Annie jumped up, overturning her chair, and said, "Lord, if that youngun has cut himself Henry will be to bury.” Grabbing him as ha get to the door, she said, "Didn't I tell you not to take the hatchet!”
“I didn't cut myself,” he said, “I mashed my finger.”
"It's as broad as it's long,” she said. “I have a notion to wear you out.”
In the meantime she was applying iodine and wrapping the finger up.
“Now you stay in this house where you won't get hurt.”
“I’m goin' to get my rabbit house made 'fore Paw comes from fishin',” Toots said. She let him go.
"I declare, my coffee got cold again.” She pulled her chair from the table and poured another cup.
"Now I'll tell you about my life on the farm if I can set still long enough. No, set still,” she said as I offered to wash the dishes. "We'll just talk awhile first. Somebody else will be in to eat toreckly."
"I've been livin' in Whitesboro,” she said, "ever since I was eighteen years old” I’m fifty-two now. I was born in this county on a farm. My mother raised twelve children and all of 'em didn't give as much trouble as Toots out there does. That youngun has had more spent for him since he's been here than I had for clothes till I was married. No sirree, there was no money spent for foolishness when I was comin' up.”
Annie hooked her bare feet over the rounds of her chair and began to sip her coffee. As she sat there hunched up in the chair, her arms folded across her ample stomach, there was something beautiful about her, strangely enough. Her toothless gums showed she had not even bothered to have her teeth replaced. Pride was not one of her shortcomings.
"I'll tell you..... Now, what in the very dickens is that youngun up to now."
Toots was screaming and hollering "Maw!" at the top of his voice. We rushed from the kitchen, thinking the hatchet had done its work. When we got to the woodshed he was laughing.
"Oh, Maw," he said. "Look what I done."
In his hand was a mouse.
"I killed it myself," he said, "with the hammer.”
I laughed in hysterical relief. Annie said, “If you ever skeer me again like that I'll tan your hide.”
“Uh,” he said, "I'm goin' to keep it and show it to Paw."
Her threats only amused him.
When we got back to the kitchen Molly had come in with the new baby and was helping herself to dinner.
"What was the rukus about?" she asked. Her mother told her.
“You just run your legs off after that boy," Molly said. "Why don't you let him go and learn to take care of himself?”
"A good way to get him killed,” said Annie. "No youngun four year old is able to take keer of hisself.”
Molly said, "Mom, will you keep Shirley while I go to town?”
"Of course I’ll keep her. But why don't you leave her with Hannah?“
"Oh, I'm afraid she won't tend to her good. I don't trust no nigger with my baby when I'm out of sight."
"I declare,” replied her mother, "you pay that nigger four dollars a week and I have to tend to Toots and the baby myself.
"I don't know what my younguns would do without me,” she continued. "Last summer I thought my time was come. This leg," she said, pulling up her dress and showing her bandaged leg, "was about to do for me. I have had it treated ever since Lucius was born. He's twenty-seven years old. Twice the vein has busted and I most bled to death. Last summer the doctor thought I'd loss my leg. But I'm still here and it's lots better since the doctor dried up the blood in the veins. Hundreds of dollars Henry has spent on my leg. I've got a good man. I want you to stay and meet him. Now we'll go over to the house where I can match the baby asleep while we talk.“
The table had been cleared and the dishes washed while Annie had been talking. An extra piece of wood was put in the range to keep Henry's coffee hot. She let herself down in the big easy rocker with a sigh. "I’m so stiff,“ she said, "when I do a washin’.
“I told you I was born on the farm. My mother and father were both good Christians. Whatever my mother said went in our family but she was not bossy. Father respected her wishes just like us younguns did. Our farm had about, seventy acres in it but with such a crowd it was hard to make a livin'. We went to school three miles from home. I carried the geography, lue ack speller, arithmetic and reader. Schools warn't graded fifty-two years ago. I don't know what grade I'd a been in. We carried out dinner in a big market basket. There was eight, of us--four had died--and we took turn about carryin’ that market basket. It was heavy. At dinner time we all gathered around and eat from the basket. No little peanut butter sandwiches or cakes or little doodads like my children carried to school. It was filled with fried plea (made from dried fruit), jam, jelly, butter, biscuits with lean meat between 'em, sometimes blackberry pie, or a jar of cold beans, and it was good. If we had cake it was made from the molasses on the farm.
“My job at home was to cook dinner after I was old enough. The rest of the family was in the field by six o'clock in the mornin'. I stayed at the house and took care of the little ones not big enough to work. I had to cook enough for dinner and supper. After dinner was over, I hitched a horse to the wagon, piled the younguns in, and drove to the field. I'd take an old quilt along, take my hoe, dig out a round hole under a shade tree, spread the quilt over the hole and set the baby in it. That was to keep the baby from crawlin' off. It couldn't get out of the hole.
“I always hoed till seven, then I'd hitch up the horse, put the small children back in the wagon and start for home. The rest worked long as they could see. Supper would be ready to eat when they come in, and the milking done.”
“It seems to me,” I said, “you had the bad end of the bargain.”
“I did,” she said. “I'd lots rather take my hoe and go to work in the field and hoe till dark than to do all the house work. Maw always trusted me," she said simply, "and I liked to please her. Saturday evening we always quit work in the field earlier so's to have everything spic and span for Sunday. We'd no more missed goin' to preachin’ and Sunday School on Sunday than nothing.’ Three miles we had to walk to the Methodist church. We wore our everyday shoes till we got close to the church, then we'd set down beside the road under a tree, take 'em off and put on our Sunday ones. This was to save wear and tear on our good shoes. On the way home we changed again. I don't know what caused it but new shoes used to squeak when you walked. The proudest I think I ever was in my life was when Maw had been to town and bought me a new pair. I'd pulled up cotton stalks and peeled the roots, dried it and sold it at the herb store for medicine. It brought a cent and a half a pound when dry” I made a dollar to get my shoes that winter. When I put 'em on they was a pair that squeaked. My sisters had new shoes too but they didn't squeak. Come Sunday mornin' we all went to church. As we filed down the aisle in a row to oar places my shoes went squeak, squak, squeak, squak. Of course everybody turned to look at me. I was prouder'n Punch.
”I'll tell you,” Annie said as she hugged her arms a little closer and rocked, “It's very little some people knows how clothes comes now. The last hat I bought on the farm, I picked up shattered corn on the ground, one grain at a time, carried the corn to the store, and sold it for chicken feed. The hat cost twenty-five cents, bought in town. Paw always give us the shattered corn if we'd pick it up after the corn shuckin’. Fifty cents a bushel was all it brought.
"It took lots of twistin’ and turnin' then to make money. We dug snake root, peeled cherry bark, cotton root, and dried catnip leaves to sell at the herb store. Our everyday shoes was brogan with brass tips on the toes. We wore linsey for Sunday, jeans cloth through the week. My mother wove this cloth on the loom. After we moved to the cotton mill she quit weavin’.
“On the farm, when a neighbor took sick and was unable to work, the farmers went in and took a hand. They'd set a day to go and work out the sick man's crop. When he got well his crop was clean and doin’ fine. We knowed nothin” then about diets and itamins and all this stuff you hear of high blood pressure. People died, of course, with cramp colic and other things. But you won't skeered to death of appendicitis every time you got a pain. Maw had twelve children and never a doctor come near. A midwife was called in and when it was all over she was proud if you could pay her one dollar in cash. I had a doctor with all my babies. Molly, my daughter, who was here a while ago, had the doctor every week, most, before this baby come.
“In our old kitchen down on the farm, nailed to the wall was a medicine cabinet. In this cabinet was castor oil, salts, liniment, a bottle of good whiskey for snake bites, cough medicine made from cherry bark and whiskey and sugar, a tonic made from Sampson's snake root. Bitter tansy tea growed in the garden, boiled down with whiskey to preserve it. The tansy was bitter as quinine. Maw give us this for monthly periods.
“One day when I was about eighteen year old a man come ridin’ up to our gate in a rubber-tire buggy. He knocked on the front door. Maw straightened up her hair to go. I followed to see who it was. His name, he give it, was Mr. Ab Newcomb, Super of the Whitesboro Cotton Mills. He was out hirin’ hands for the mill. To hear him talk you'd think all you'd have to do after movin' to the mill was to collect your money. I'd never seen a cotton mill in my life and had never dreamed of workin’ in one. Maw invited him in. I could see she was kindly took with his nice ways. We was poor but my mother was always a perfect lady.
"Paw was in the field plowin’. Mr. Newcomb was invited to stay for sapper and talk with him. My sister Lillian and me was sent to the kitchen to get supper for the company. Never did we try so to outdo ourselves on a meal, we made hot slaw, candied yams, ginger bread, and hot biscuits. We eat a ham and fried a big platter full, not askin’ Maw. There was stewed fruit and butter brought from the cool spring house, with two kinds of milk from the same place. Paw come and supper was ready. If I do say it, Mr. Newcomb done justice to that meal.
"It was settled before he left that Lillian and me should go to the mill and board till spring. We come to Whitesboro a week later. Maw come with us to see us settled. We boarded with Mrs. Feenie Bumgardner. We worked at night from six till six for fifty cents, twelve hours. No time off at midnight for lunch.
“Next spring my folks moved to Whitesboro. Maw bought six acres of land and built us a six-room house out of our money we worked for in the mill. That's it out there. My sister Lillian got it when Maw died. The old farm and the other one at Sunny Hill was sold and the money divided among us. Maw and Paw both had some money. Jennie, my oldest sister, run away from the farm and married Ed Lambert. They moved to Memphis, Tennessee. My oldest brother, Allen, run away when he was fourteen and went to them. We never saw Allen no more till he was thirty-six years old. Ed Lambert is dead now. Paw and Maw didn't want Jennie to marry him "cause he drunk some, but he sure left Jennie wall provided for. She owns sixteen houses and hundreds of acres of ground in Memphis. Allan has never married. He lives with Jennie and owns lots of property. Last summer he spent three months with us. My other sisters dead, died the first year of the Flu.
"After all, we've prospered at the mill. When Henry and me got married he was working for a dollar a day. We had tan dollars between us. Now we own this home, about sixteen acres of ground, and several lots scattered around. He has helped the children get a home. We have some money put by for old age. Henry carries twelve thousand life insurance. We've always tried to help them that's down and out. I don't get to church much on account of my bad leg but Henry goes regular. I do declare, I don't know what's keepin' him at the river. And that baby sleeps like it had a dose of somethin'. I hate it you must go before Henry comes. I want you to see my garden and flowers.”
Taking me to the back of the house she showed me coleus, geraniums, ferns and begonias of all kinds. "I keep them at the back," she said, "where it's handy to water them."
Next we looked at the large cement basement. The shelves along the wall were neat and clean. Some of the glass jars were already filled with cherries, strawberries, blackberries, and vegetables. Two big hams and side meat hung from the ceiling on hooks. A five-gallon can of home-made lard stood on a shelf. The woodhouse was filled with wood, ready cut for the big range. In the barnlot <text not clear> cords of dry oak slabs ready for winter.
"Henry has his own wood saw," she said. "He made it hisself. Likes to tinker with such things."
"You have lots of fruit here," I said.
"Yes, more'n we can use. So many grapes, pears, and figs. But what we can't use somebody else can. Like Henry says, you can't have so much but what you can give it away.”
As Annie stood at the gate bidding me goodbye and insisting that I should come again soon, I saw her eyes shine with pride as she looked up and saw a big stocky man walking swiftly down the street.
"That's Henry now," she said. "I'll bet his coffee's cold.”
