Concord, N. C.
September 18, 1938
M. L. W.
THE TABERNACLE
(Formerly the Four-square Gospel Temple)
Location: On the Concord-Kannapolis highway near the Forest Hill Section.
Building: A long, low brick shell without a steeple. Inside the sawdust covered floor slopes toward the front where there is a large stage with curtains. A newcomer to the Temple would probably gasp at the first sight of the walls. They are covered from front to back with lush scenes of palm trees, castles, lakes, deserts and lighthouses done in vivid blues, greens, and purples with touches of white, yellow, and red. At the back of the stage a series of white-capped intensely blue waves wash the feet of the lighthouses on either side. The yellow shafts of light streaming from the tops of the towers represent the light shed by the Four-square Gospel, as Miss Olive once pointed out. Whit, the local signpainter, labored long and lovingly over these murals which are undoubtedly unique.
The Service: At the front of the long sweep of auditorium an insignificant looking man in a black suit was pleading with several dozen listless souls. "And I promise you, friends, if as many as twenty-five of you -- jest twenty-five that's all I'm asking for, not thirty or forty -- if twenty-five of you come out next Wednesday night to our prayer service here why I promise you a surprise. I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll get Mrs. (his wife) to make you something good; oh, she can fix the best lemonade or something good to drink like that, and I'm sure sister and sister and sister will be glad to help her make it. Won't you he here friends, all of you here tonight, and bring somebody else with you? Don't you want to have some of the surprise we'll have for you? Now all of you remember that -- Wednesday night, right here. Come and get your share of the treat.
"Now before we close this brief prayer service I'm going to ask my wife, Mrs., to pray. And while she's praying I want you all to keep your heads bowed. If there's anyone of you that has something on your heart that's troubling you and you want Mrs. and I to pray for you before we go to sleep tonight, just raise your hand. Nobody is going to see you except me, I'll be watching for your hands and oh friends, we'll remember you when we kneel tonight."
The woman prayed rapidly in a faint, colorless voice which harmonized with her appearance. Her husband walked back and forth in front of the benches, throwing out an occasional "Amen," "Yes, Lord," "Yes," and watching for hands. I peeped and noted that half dozen or more hands went up while the prayer rambled on and on.
When it was finally over, we were told that would be all until Wednesday night, and as we walked up the long sawdust slope to the door at the back, the voice of the man in black kept shouting to be sure and come back Wednesday night for the surprise.
I had been late to the service, but had missed only a few opening prayers and remarks since there was no sermon and no singing that Sunday night. My purpose in going was not so much to observe the details of the service as to see in general what had happened to this church which had once been such a moving force in that section men had stayed out of the mills to help put up a building.
Willie Laura Olive and The Four-square Gospel
Back in the middle 1920's Willie Laura Olive pitched her tent on a meadow near the Locke Mill and began to astound the inhabitants of Concord with her Four-square Gospel. From the surrounding mill villages, from the county, and even from "downtown," people flocked to listen to the buxom, full-voiced woman who could preach and pray so fervently and sing with hearty abandon while she beat out the syncopated time on the tambourine in her hands. Nor was this all, Willie Laura could heal -- with prayer and with the laying on of her hands which had been touched with what she called "Olive oil."
The people from "downtown" watched the spectacle a time or two, laughed with their friends about it while it was new, and then forgot it; the people from the country had seen the show; but the mill people had found something to make life more exciting. Hundreds of them became ardent followers of the woman whose husky voice became tender when she called them "Dear ones," whose wonderful power could make cripples walk off the platform without their crutches.
When Willie Laura went away her followers were not satisfied until they brought her back again and had started building a temple for her. The men used all their free time and even stayed out of the mills to help build a simple frame structure. When the outside was completed and only a little more work would be needed to finish the inside, tragedy befell. A moderately high wind came one day and blew the Temple over because the inexperienced workmen had not braced the walls. It was a dark moment for Willie Laura's followers, but she carried them through with enough courage to build the brick Temple which stands today. In those days, however, a sign ran the length of the building saying "Elizabeth Temple, Four-square Gospel, Willie Laura Olive Paster," and a beacon light flashed from the roof in the manner of an airplane searchlight. I was present the night the beacon was dedicated. Willie Laura, kneeling by her drum on the platform, prayed long and fervently. "Oh Lord," she said in the midst of the prayer "we want to thank Mr. and Mrs. of Street, Orlando, Florida, for giving us the beautiful beacon light for the roof of our Temple. We wish it could have been larger..."
From all the mill sections people flocked to the Temple, many of them abandoning the churches to which they had formerly belonged. The Temple bustled with activities. There was a children's church with its own services; young girls were appointed as "ambassadors" to serve in the church -- a cherished position because ambassadors always wore white dresses and bright green capes with an insignia; there were meetings of all kinds, revivals, parties, picnics, bands, singing, and one Easter a sunrise service in the cemetery. For this a trainload of Four-square followers came from Spartanburg, South Carolina. They were met at the station by the members of the Concord Temple and the combined congregations marched a mile through the streets to the cemetery while the bands played.
One of the greatest attractions of the Temple were the "illustrated sermons with living characters" that Willie Laura put on every other Sunday night. Undoubtedly these supplied drama to many people too poor to go to movies, and gave dozens of people who had never set foot on a stage, an opportunity to act. While Willie Laura paced up and down the front of the stage, reading the story from her Bible elaborating and commenting on it, the cast of characters acted out the story in pantomime.
I shall never forget the two illustrated sermons I saw. One was the story of Ruth, the other Nebuchad nezzan and the fiery furnace. For the gleaning scene in Ruth the stage was realistically set with numerous shocks of wheat, while dozens of maidens in vari-colored cheese-cloth robes wandered between the shocks gleaning. Boaz, in a short cheese cloth robe and boots watched from the sidelines. In the other sermon a very pleasant looking Nebuchadnezzar wearing a gold paper crown and a red cheese cloth robe, watched the goings- on in his court from a throne at least four feet high. While the men' of God stood calmly in a pit of rosy flames, the king looked on with interest and continued to chew his gum. (The rolling waves at the back of the stage were the background for all performances.)
There was no lack of interest in the services at the Temple, but Willia Laura had a hard time getting any money from the people -- probably because they didn't have it. She pleaded, prayed, and scolded; sent the ambassadors out again and again with collection plates while the band played, the choir sang and she herself sang lustily, beating a large drum with her foot and shaking her tambourine vigorously. After counting what was brought in, if she were still dissatisfied, Willie Laura herself would leave the platform to walk up and down the aisles and plead for more money -- usually without success.
After Mrs. Olive left the Concord Temple to become a regional director, that was the end. The pastors that succeeded her did not have the same personality and talents, so the people lost interest. Many went back to their original churches.
The building, taken over by its creditors, was leased sis a garage, a skating rink and finally again as a church building to the people who now have it. But I fear the glory of the Temple is lost.