Names of persons and places changed.
Date of first writing:	Feb. 10th, 1939
Name of person:	Sam Slatkin
Address:	122 W. Main St. Gastonia, N.C.
Occupation:	Merchant Tailor
Name of writer:	John H. Abner,
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 6,000
Tam Levine Tailor
"I was born in Russia," said Tam Levine, "in 1892. My father was an interior decorator. At that time, in Russia, stenciled walls were more popular than papered walls. I can still remember seeing my father out designs in long strips of paper. He would then hang the paper on the wall and paint over it. That, of course, would make a pattern on the wall of that room. When that coat had dried he might then go over that wall again, with a different color of paint, and another stencil. That could be repeated as many times as desired, and beautiful designs, in many colors, could thus be transferred to a wall.
"I started to school when I was five years old. I had already learned to talk my native tongue, Jewish, and in school we studied both the Jewish and Russian languages. I continued in school until I was twelve, and by that time I had the equivalent of a grade school education.
"The Jews always begin teaching their children at an early age, and my mother had taught me before I started to school, and when I was twelve years old I was able to pass an examination as kindergarten tutor. I was then given a job in a little village some distance from where I was born. I cannot now recall the name of that village. I had about twenty pupils, small Jewish boys and girls, who were yet too young to start to school. I lived with one of the Jewish families in the village, and I was paid about twelve dollars per month. I taught the children for a part of the day; and I attended night school, and thus kept up my own education.
"The village was located in a farming section. The houses were built of clay, with straw thatched roofs. It was very cold in winter, and the houses were heated by the oven, in which was also baked the bread. The ovens were built of brick, and they were sometimes as much as ten feet long, by six or eight feet broad. They were much like the old style baker's ovens, and, in fact, I guess that is what they were. Sometimes a family would spread a bad on top of the oven, as that was the warmest place in the whole house.
All the walls of the houses, and the walls between the different rooms, were double, with an air space between them. The air space might be two feet in width, and the chimney of the oven was so built that the draft was drawn over the whole inner top of the house. That was so that the heat could circulate between the outer and inner walls of the house, and between the walls that separated the rooms from each other. There were openings in the outer walls, and in severe cold weather the householder would sometimes pack straw in between the walls and burn it that the house might be warmed. As all the air spaces in the walls were connected with the chimney of the oven, the smoke would pass out through the oven chimney. The chimney was built with a trap for sparks, otherwise, the straw roofs would have caught fire. I cannot explain exactly how the chimney was built, except to say that it was arranged to circulate heat between the walls and to catch the sparks so that they would not fire the roof.
"Great logs were stoked into the ovens at night. The fire was never allowed to die down. There was nothing about the house to catch fire, except the wooden doors and windows, and the straw roofs. The houses had earth floors. The clay for the floor was packed hard and smooth. Then it was given two or three coats of paint, or a special mixture; and it soon became almost as hard as cement.
"The people in that village took great pride in their houses, and they would often give the house a coat of kalsomine, sometimes white; sometimes colored. While I was there in that village some high government official was to pass through the village. Just a day or so before he was to arrive, the peasants got out their kalsomine pots, and gave their houses a new coat of kalsomine. That made the village look very spick and span. But during the night there was a hard rain, and the next morning the houses presented a very streaky appearance.
"That village was located in an agricultural section. All kinds of grain grew there, and the peasants lived well. They raised sheep and cattle also. Their farm work was done with little horses. That is the best name that I can think to call them. They were not so large as the American horse, but they were larger than ponies. No doubt I have heard the native name for them, but I cannot now recall it. Little horses is the most descriptive title of which I can think. They were tough, wiry, little animals, with great shaggy coats, well suited to the work and climate. They could draw a heavy load, and they could pull a sleigh over the snow for miles and miles without apparent fatigue. I liked the life in that village, but it was not to last long.
"In 1905 the Russo-Japanese War broke out and soon after, my kindergarten class was disbanded. I don't know why that was done. Perhaps the war so increased the taxes that the people were unable to keep up the school. At any rate, it was closed, and I returned to my home. My father had not been called away to war. He was already an old soldier, a veteran, and in 1906 he died. That left my mother a widow with several small children.
"Soon after my father's death my mother's brother, who owned a butcher shop in America, wrote my mother and asked her to let me come over here. My mother agreed, so my uncle sent the money for my passage. He had adoption papers fixed up, and in 1906 I came to America, as his adopted son.
"My uncle owned his own butcher shop and was, I imagine, prosperous; not rich, but earning a good living. My uncle and aunt were good to me. They treated me as well as they did their own children, but I wanted a job. My uncle did not want me to have a job. He was content to have me help around the butcher shop a little. My uncle did not make me work hard, nor was he cruel to me. I just did not like the butcher business. My uncle was a bluff, hearty man, a great beer drinker, and he would take me into saloons and urge me to drink with him. I did not like beer, and I did not like the butcher business, so I went over to New York and got me a job in a clothing factory. At that time a boy of twelve was considered old enough to work, and I wanted to make my own way. I was paid $6 a week, and my job was to sew on buttons. My uncle did not like it because I had a job. Perhaps he thought it reflected on him for me to work. However, he did not forbid me to work, so I kept the job. I was old enough to work, and, besides, I liked the work.
"While I was working in the clothing factory, a distant relative of my uncle came up from Bowman for a visit. He was a ladies' tailor, and I had already made up my mind to be a tailor. The relative offered to take me back to Bowman with him and teach me the tailoring trade in his shop. I was delighted at the opportunity to learn to be a tailor. I told my uncle that I would never like the butcher business and that I did like the clothing trade, so he consented for me to go to Bowman.
"I returned to Bowman with my uncle's relative. As I had already learned a little about the tailoring business in the clothing factory, I was paid $12 a week on my new job. I found a place to board with a Jewish family, and my room and board only cost me $2 per week. As I did not smoke, I had few expenses, so I saved my money. Such clothes as I needed could be made in the tailor shop, so I was able to save about nine dollars per week. I put my savings in a bank, and soon I had $100.
"About that time I got a letter from Russia. Things were none too well with my family, and my youngest sister wanted to come to America. I sent the $100 home so that she could come over here.
"Soon she arrived in America, and soon I was out of a job. The man who owned the tailor shop got to speculating in real estate, and he went broke. The tailor shop was closed, and I was out of a job and about broke myself. I stayed around Bowman for a couple of months looking for a job, but I did not find one. I knew a good bit about the tailoring trade, but not enough to hold down a job in a union shop. I watched the want ads in the newspapers, and one day I spotted an ad in the Sun. Someone wanted an experienced boy to go to a small town, work in a store, and make alterations. I applied for the job and got it. The firm was the Bottle Tailoring Company of Bowman. They had a store here in Brooks, and they sent me here. The orders were taken here, and then sent to Bowman where the suits were made in a factory. The customer then came to the store and tried the suit on, and I made such alterations as were necessary.
"The store was in charge of a manager, but unfortunately, he was crooked. I was paid $15 per week. Both our checks came from Bowman, and the manager would borrow about half my salary every week. I was just a boy; he was my boss, and I supposed that he would repay me. But he never did. His accounts finally got in such bad shape that the firm sent a man down from Bowman to close the store. The manager had skipped out. They closed the store, and once more I was out of a job. The firm offered me a job in the clothing factory if I would return to Bowman, but I wanted to stay here. However, I could not find a job, and it began to look like I would have to leave.
"At that time, Ban Lefkowitz ran a clothing store just where the dime store is now. He told me that I could go upstairs over his store, and do altering and pressing for his store, as well as for others. I had no capital, but I was glad to go in business for myself.
"For the first three months I had little to do. In fact, I had such little to do that I decided to close out my business. That was very easy. All I had to do was to pack my suitcase, so I did. I packed my suitcase, went over to the depot, and bought a ticket to Bowman. I left my suitcase outside, and waited for the train. When the train came my suitcase had disappeared. There was little in it, but that little was all I had. So I rushed around looking for my suitcase. While I was hunting my suitcase the train left.
"After the train had gone, Timothy Apple, who was then city attorney, came up with my suitcase. 'Tam,’ he said, ’you are the only tailor we have here, and we can’t let you leave. We want to keep a tailor here.’
"’I wanted to stay,’ I replied, ’but it looks like I can’t make a living.’
"’Sure you can,’ he said. ’Go on back to your place and see if business don’t pick up.’
"So I changed my mind about leaving. I went back over to the store. As I walked along, I wondered if I had made a mistake. This was a pretty small town then, and the streets were unpaved. As I plowed along through the mud, I wondered.
"I went back to the store, though, determined to make a success if possible of my little business. I ordered some samples from a tailoring firm, so that I could take orders for suits of clothes, as well as to make alterations and press.
"Samuel Hall was my first customer. He came in and ordered a twenty-five dollar suit of clothes. As I would only make $2 if I sent the order to Bowman, I decided to make the suit myself. I ordered the cloth for the suit; it cost about twelve dollars. I had to order it c.o.d., as I did not have $12. When the cloth came I went to Mr. Hall, and he let me have the money to get the cloth out of the express office.
"I knew that I could make the suit all right, but I was a bit uncertain about the cutting. But I cut all the pieces bigger than they needed to be; then hung them on Mr. Hall and trimmed them to fit. It took me about four days to make that suit, but it was a fine fit, and Mr. Hall was well-pleased with it. My reputation was made. In a few days Timothy Apple came in and ordered a suit, and from then on my business grew.
"I was a good enough tailor, but I had to do my cutting somewhat by instinct, and then trim the cloth into a fit. I always cut the suit larger than it needed to be, and then fitted it to the customer. By that method, I always got a good fit, but there was a waste of time, as well as of cloth. However, business was good; I worked long hours; and by 1917 I had some money in the bank, and I also owned a car. In 1918 I went up to Bowman and took a thirty-day course in cutting.
"That course was of great value to me. I could now cut the cloth to an exact fit, from the customer’s measurements. I also saved both time and cloth, as well as trouble for the customer. He did not need to come to my shop and be fitted. I took his measure, and the next time he came he could try on his suit.
"Along about that time the military post was established at Victoria, and I bought some army cloth, and began to make uniforms for the officers. There was a good profit there, because I got from $100 to $125 per suit; just blouse and trousers. Everything was high then. I had a good business, and worked six people in my shop, but, of course, I did all the cutting and tailoring.
"I was making good money, but I spent it as fast as I made it. I was young and unsettled so I just threw my money around. But I had took some building and loan shares, and left my bank to keep up the payment on them, and charge it to my account. They did so, and I kept my money pretty well spent up, as fast as I made it. Sometimes, in the busy season, my bankbook would show a balance of as much as $1,000; but then would come a slack spell, and having little to do I would soon spend it down. The pressing and altering just about paid the shop expenses, and most of my profit came from making suits. I would do a good business every spring and fall; and not much between times. During the busy season I worked long hours, so I suppose that it was natural for me to let up when business was slack. I usually did most of the winter tailoring before Christmas; and a man will usually order his summer suits before the Fourth of July. January, February, July and August, are the slack months in the tailoring business; but from 1918 till 1920, I did a progressive business.
"In August 1919, I went on a visit to Bowman, and there I met a girl. I fell in love with her at first sight. We went to a show together, and I asked her to marry me. She was really shocked and surprised, for I had only seen her twice, so she did not give me a favorable answer. I went on up to Newberry and spent a few days. On my way back I stopped over in Bowman to see my girl. I told her that I was coming back at Christmas time and marry her. Her answer was more favorable, and I was very happy.
"I returned here to get ready for the fall and winter rush. I corresponded with my girl from August until December. I had never seen her but three times, but I knew her parents. I did not know the girl very well, but I knew her well enough to know that I loved her.
"At Christmas I went up to Bowman and we married. We dame down here and registered at a hotel. My wife did not like living at a hotel. She wanted to start in housekeeping. I suggested renting a house but she did not want to do that.
"'You are making good money,' she said. 'Let us buy a house.'
"'But I have no money on hand,' I returned. 'I spent about all the cash I had in coming to Bowman, and in getting married. I have about eight hundred dollars on my books, but I have almost nothing in the bank.'
"'Well, see what you have in the building and loan. No doubt with that and with what you will collect in the next month, we will have enough for the down payment. We can pay the balance like rent.'
"I went to the bank and found that I had $900 in the building and loan. I was surprised at that, for I had no idea it was so much. I could expect to collect $600 in the next month, so I bought a house costing $5,500, paying $1,500 down. That used up all my building and loan, so we bought a big bill of furniture on credit.
"Business continued good, however. We lived on a very expensive scale, and what with the payments on house and furniture, I did not save anything. We were both young and inexperienced, so we spent too freely.
"On January 19, 1920, Doris, our first child, was born. My wife's mother and father came down from Bowman to visit us, and to see the baby. They began to talk my wife into urging me to move to Bowman. They knocked this place as being a small town, and told me that I could do ten times as well in Bowman.
"But I did not want to more to Bowman. I was doing all right here; I had a good small business. It was bringing in a good living, as well as enough to keep up all the payments on house and furniture. Also, I like a small town better then I do a city. The people are more friendly. I had many friends here, but none in Bowman. My business was already established here; in Bowman I would have to start in and build up a business. So I did not want to move.
"But my wife nagged at me to move and I did so to please her. It seemed extremely foolish to me to give up a good business here and move away to a strange, unfriendly city to start all over again. I explained all this to my wife and tried to get her to see my side, but she could not do so. She was set on moving to Bowman where she could be with her father and mother. We wrangled and argued over this till I was very unhappy.
"One Sunday we went for a ride in the country. We took along a lunch, and a blanket for the baby to play on. We are our dinner out in the open, under the wide canopy of the sky. Then we looked into each other's eyes and forgot our petty bickerings. We saw that we were still young and in love.
"Then, quite suddenly, it was spring! The sun was shining brightly on a fresh washed land, and the good earth smiled and put forth fruits and shrubs. We saw that we were young lovers, and we were young parents, tending and nursing our first-born. We were very happy that day and in the few months that followed.
"In July 1921, we made a visit to Bowman, and there it was the same old thing. My wife and her parents talked moving to me until I was dizzy in the head. My father-in-law was well off. He owned a hardware store and did a big business. He said that he would help us out if we found the going tough at first, and he made all kinds of good promises. It still seemed foolish to me, but I wanted to please my wife; so I finally agreed to move.
"My father-in-law knew of a house for sale and he took me to see it. The house was a bargain, and the owner was anxious to sell. He was asking $4,500 for the house, and it was worth $1,200 or $1,500 more. I had little money with me, but I bought the house on the advice of my father-in-law, paying $50 down and agreeing to pay $500 more in the next two weeks. It was understood that I would have to return to Brooks and sell the house here before I would have the money for the down payment. The owner of the house was so anxious to sell that he agreed to make a return of the $50 at the end of the two weeks if I could not at once find a buyer for the house here and call it a 'no sale.' My father-in-law assured him that would not be necessary. If I could not sell the house in two weeks, he, my father-in-law, would pay the $500, and I could repay him when I did sell the house. That was the agreement between myself, my father-in-law, and the owner of the house. My wife was well-pleased with this arrangement.
"I took the next train for Brooks, and arriving, I at once put my house on the real estate market. I had a lot of valuable furniture, and we had decided to sell most of that. I found a buyer for the house here, and we made the deal. I sent the check for the $500 to Bowman, but it was four hours late. It was due to be paid by noon of a certain day, and it did not arrive till four p. m. Worst of all, my father-in-law welched on his promise and did not make the payment himself. Instead, the house owner gave the $50 back to my wife, as he was entitled to do, for my check was four hours late, and my father-in-law would not make the payment as he had agreed to do; and then he sold the house for $1,500 more than he had asked me.
"When my father-in-law went back on his agreement, my wife was bitterly disappointed in him, so she wired me not to sell the house here, and that she was returning at once. But I had already sold the house and part of the furniture and was packing what was left, getting ready to move to Bowman, when I got the telegram. I tell you, I was dizzy in the head from such business. And then my wife and baby arrived. She was angry at her father and had given up the idea of moving to Bowman, but we had no home here or anywhere else, for that matter.
"I had promised immediate possession to the buyer of the house; so we could not live there. You cannot step out and buy a house as you do a pack of cigarettes, so we had to rent a house. We rented a house and bought new furniture, but still my wife was not satisfied.
"’Why rent?’ said she. ’You have the $3,000 from the sale of the house. Let us buy another.’
"Well, I did. My equity in the house had brought $3,000, so I bought a smaller house on Queen Street, paying $2,800 cash. I never did like the idea of having a big debt hanging over me. I would rather live in one room and operate on a shoe string than to have debts to worry about. That left me about broke, but I was satisfied as I owed nothing.
"But my wife was not satisfied. From the very first month she began to nag me for a bigger house. There was only the three of us: my wife, the baby, and myself. The house was plenty big enough, but she wanted more room. Wanted to live in more style.
"On January 19, 1922, Barney was born, and in order to please my wife, I bought a larger house on Haywood Street. The price was $6,500. I traded in the old house and agreed to make the down payment equal $4,000 in six months. That left a balance of $2,500, which was to be carried by an insurance company, and to be paid off at the rate of $300 per year.
"In May 1924, David was born. Business was still good and I kept up all payments, but we were spending all I made. I tried to get my wife to economize but she would not.
"In 1927 Eugene was born, and in that same year my business began to go down. My business was largely credit, and my collections were very bad. Actually, we were poor people, but we were living like rich people. We took no thought for tomorrow, but we should have been doing so.
"Business got worse and worse, and then my wife got sick. I took her to the Mitchell Hospital, in Bowman, for examination, and they said she would have to have an operation. Trouble had overtaken us. In the meantime, my wife’s mother had died, and my wife came back from the hospital with a firm, fixed belief that she must soon die. She had numbered her days and found them few.
"After that, life was miserable. My wife was sad and gloomy all the time, and she kept me unhappy. My wife was tired of life and she made me miserable. Also, business was very bad. I was making very little money. I urged my wife to buck up that we might pull through the hard times, but she either could not or would not.
"'I have only a short time to live,' she would reply. 'Why should I care? Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow I die.'
"She still thought that she would soon have to die. She would not try to help me through the depression; she continued to spend more than I made. In 1929 I was broke, but we were still trying to live like rich people. In 1950 I just did make a living. My wife was firmly convinced that she would soon die, and I finally came to believe it also. I got so that I did not care. My life was over and my business was shot. I lost my nerve and courage, and I began to lose what little trade I had left. Life got so hard it was almost impossible to go on. I could hardly meet the payments on the house.
"Business was so poor that I was not taking in enough to pay my bills; so I borrowed $1,000 on the house, and deposited it in the Eureka Security Bank. Before I could even draw a check against it the bank closed. I lost the entire $1,000.
"Business was still going down, and it looked like I could not pull through. The $1,000 that I had borrowed and lost increased the amount of the payments I had to make on the house, and I could not meet them. I got the payments reduced to $300 per year and once more tried to talk economy to my wife. She would not hear me. She said that she did not want to hear anything about depressions as she was going to die soon. Things went from bad to worse. Everything I touched went wrong. I suppose that was partly due to my unhappy condition and to domestic difficulties. I got behind with the payments on the house, and both my wife and myself were very unhappy. We might have pulled through by working together, but we could not do so. My wife insisted on spending more than I could make, and that probably discouraged me from doing as well as I could. We struggled along in that fashion till 1936.
"In August 1936, my wife sold as much of the household furniture as she could and returned to Bowman, taking the children with her. I let her have her way, so she had what was left of the household goods loaded onto a truck at two o'clock in the morning, I had exactly one dollar left.
"Suddenly my luck changed! I got my courage back and began to do a pretty good business. I sent my family fifteen or twenty dollars every week, and, besides that, I saved $450 from August 1936, to January 1937.
"But I was mighty lonesome for my family. A man cannot live with a woman for years, fathering many children, and then give them up without pangs. Despite the fact that I had prospered in a small way, I was lonesome and unhappy. Also, 1936 bad passed. That was the year that my wife had set for her death, and as she had not died, I hoped that she would get over her foolish obsession.
"In January 1937, I had $450 cash. I decided to go to Bowman and try to make a new start, hoping that my wife would be more amenable to reason. So I packed up my tailoring outfit, loaded it onto a truck, and went to Bowman.
"I carried a present to each one of the children, but I carried no present to my wife; she had treated me too harshly. But she seemed glad to see me, I had $400 when I got there. Soon she pressed some bills into my hand. She had run up a debt of $200. I paid the debts, and then my daughter had to have a fur coat.
"I tried to get a job as a tailor there in Bowman, but could not. I was afraid to try to start in business for myself there, for rent was high and I had little capital. I found a small place down at Johnstown. My wife took a job as saleslady in Bowman, and I tried to establish a little business in Johnstown.
"But I could get almost nothing to do there. I lived on one dollar per week and slept in the tailor shop, giving my family what little I made, so, of course, I went broke. My wife grew so cool toward me that I was not even welcome to visit my children, but still I was doing all that I could. I gave her practically everything that I made. It was not much, but it was all that I could do.
"Finally, I went plumb broke. I could not even pay the rent on the shop, so I had to store my tailoring outfit. I went back to Bowman. There I found a job in a sweatshop. The pay was $7.50 per week.
"But I could not stand that. I worked two weeks and earned $15. It was not yet due to be paid to me, so I sold it to a fellow in the shop for $10. I was going to hunt something better, for we could not live on $7.50 per week, and there was no chance of earning more.
"I took the $10, all I had, and went around to see my children before leaving Bowman. My wife would not let me in the house. She asked me how much money I had. I told her that I had $10, and at that she slammed the door in my face and said:
"'Don't come around here any more.'
"That was on Saturday. I spent that night with friends. I still had a car, and on Sunday morning I got in my car to ride, ride, ride. No doubt you've heard that old song.
It goes something like, 'When a man gets blue, when a man gets blue, he gets on the train to ride! When a woman gets blue, when a woman gets blue, she hangs her little head and cries.' Well, that's the way I felt. I was blue, and I wanted to ride. I drove down to Johnstown. I spent Sunday night with friends there, telling them my troubles.
"'Go back where you are known,' they said. 'A man has little chance to establish a business in a strange town when times are hard. It is better to be where you have friends.'
"That seemed like good advice, so I decided to act on it. I got one of my machines out of storage and loaded it into the car. Then I set out for Brooks. I only had $3 left when I got here, but I had friends.
"I borrowed $10 from a friend, rented a little place, and put my machine in it. My luck came back and I began to do business, but I was still lonesome for my family. In two weeks I wrote them and began to send them money.
"My wife would not answer my letters, but the children did. In about six months I had saved $350. It was then in August; business was slack, and, having little work to do, I decided to visit my family.
"My wife received me with such welcome that I forgot the past. She told me that she was willing to start over again, and that she would help me make a go of life and the family. She asked how much money I had. I showed her the $350 and she got out her bills. They came to $175. I paid the bills and gave my wife part of what I had left. I got the balance of my tailoring machinery out of storage and shipped it to Brooks. That cost me $75. I only had $25 left. I told my wife to stay on in Bowman for the next few months. I had all my outfit back in Brooks. Soon the fall tailoring season would begin, then I would earn more money and move the family back to Brooks. My wife was agreeable to everything. She would stay on in Bowman until about the first of the year. There she would run the house on a budget so that we could live within our income. I returned to Brooks happier than I had been in many years.
"I got all my machinery set up and began to get ready I or the fall rush. Just about the time I began to get under way, here came my wife and family, with all the household goods in a big truck. She had decided that she could not wait until the first of the year. She must move then so that the children could get a full session in school.
"Well, there I was. I had made a little money, but I had not yet collected it. So I had to borrow money to pay the truck bill and to pay rent on a house. We started out to housekeeping. One thing my wife was still in favor of: she would run the house on a budget.
"She did for two weeks. That was something new to her, and she delighted in trying it for two weeks. Then she found that the budget would not cover her wants. She said that her mother had worked herself to death for her father, and that she did not propose to work herself to death for me. She would have to have a bigger allowance. I told her that the business could not stand any more right then. I was paying all expenses: lights, water, gas and car expenses, and giving her $3 a day just for the table. It seemed to me that we should get along well on that, and anyway, that was all that the business could stand.
"'In that case,' she said, 'we will have to do more business. Rent a larger place, and I will come down and run a pressing club.'
"I did. I took a larger place and let my wife have a part of it for her pressing club. She opened the pressing club in my name and hired a solicitor. She kept all the money that she took in, but I paid all expenses, including the increased rent. I furnished a car for delivery and also gas for the car. The first month four suits of clothes were lost or stolen, and I had to pay $100 for them. I closed that pressing club up, right quick! Then I moved back to my old stand where I would have less rent to pay.
"For the next five or six months business was good. I made some money, but I had to pay it all out on debts that were owed; so I saved nothing. I forced my wife to economize. I had to do so, because the debts had to be paid. My wife did not take kindly to economy. She turned against me, and our situation became impossible.
"One morning I could not give her as much money as she wanted, so she came down to the tailor shop and started breaking up machines. She just went crazy, I guess. She said that she would break up every machine in the shop and break out all the windows, unless I gave her a separation. She demanded that I give her a separation and $20 per week. I agreed, but I told her that I might not always be able to pay the $20 on a certain day because right then business was off and I had no money saved.
"We separated on those terms and had the papers drawn up. A few days later, on Monday, my wife demanded the $20. I did not have all the $20 just then, and I told her that I would pay it in a few days.
"But she was not satisfied to wait a moment. She gave me no chance to get the money up. She must swear out a warrant, charging me with non-support. She had me arrested and thrown in jail. My friends made bond for me and the case came up for trial.
"I was so shamed and scandalized at being charged with non-support that I could not say a word when the case came up. I just choked up and could not speak. There were my wife and children, as well dressed and as well fed as the rich people of Brooks, and there was I charged with non-support. So I said nothing, made no plea, and was found guilty. Then I became annoyed and aggravated, for I was not really guilty of nonsupport; so I appealed to a higher court.
"Then an offer was made to me that I should withdraw the appeal and pay my wife $15 a week. I had cooled off by that time, so I agreed. Every week I pay $15 to the clerk of court, and he turns it over to ray wife.
"I guess that is the best way. We could not agree and live together in peace and harmony, so I guess that it is better for us to live apart. I see my children about town and give them small sums of spending money. I guess we are all better off under the agreement than we would be trying to live together."
