
Winnsboro Cotton M
No 710 Main road
Winnsboro, S. C.
Jan 9, 1939
G. L. Summer
MRS. HATTLE HUDSON (white)
A sligtly uphill street, on the first approach to the mill village, discloses many tenant houses in this modern village, that are attractively painted. There are no fences to mar the beauty of the smooth, green lawns that surround each home, which are closely surrounded with, evergreen bushes and other shrubbery. Inquiry discloses that the grounds and shrubbery are kept up by the mill company. Most of the side walks and streets are paved with concrete, and their forms show expert planning of the village.
Outside of the pretty lawns and shrubbery, there is nothing to attract your attention on this main street, except one house which shows the front porch to be a kind of place for hanging bed clothes to dry, for twines extend from one post or column to another, on which are several bed spreads and quilts hanging out in the sunshine. Another house shows the back yard to be filled with clothes lines that are filled to capacity with underclothes, overalls and dresses, hanging out to dry. However, your particular attention may be called to the Community House which sets back on a small elevation on the right of the street, all of its yard showing a freshly mowed, green lawn; and surrounding There are many evergreen bsuhes, shruberry and small trees. It is a one-story building, one end being constructed of tea brick and the other of frame, painted white, around which is a long porch which lies on the ground and supporting the roof by several square white columns. In the center of the building in front is a tower which runs up to a point at the roof, not much higher than the house roof, giving a done-like appearance; the roof being spotted with small gables that stand out from it, in each being a small window. The Baptist Church, just beyond the community building gives also an English setting, in style and architecture. It is built of rough concrete, very wide, with a few gables and steeples of moderate proportions. It too, is surrounded with beautiful lawns and shrubbery.
Other churches in the same counnity show attractive designs, though smaller. They are constructed of rough concrete. The Church of God, which is a Holiness church, is located farther away, as also the Nazarene Church, a kind of Holiness church, too, though retaining much of the Baptist forms.
A one story four-room house near the front street shows the front door open, apparently to air out the building, even though it is a comparatively cold Winter day. Going up to the door and knocking twice upon it, a middle -aged woman of middle size comes out and greets you. She has on a house apron, and some old dress that looks like it has been worn for sometime around the house. She asks you to sit down, amidst a combination or variety of furniture. A bed is in the corner, well made up and covered with a clean pink bed cover. One come a trunk is seen, a black, though soiled, stemer 1/2 trunk.; then you see what looks like a new radio near the side window; in another corner behind the door being an old out of order and out of date phonograph, looking much like small chefferole. Two large, plush chairs, the color of the seats and backs being a blend with the pink bed cover, The unpainted floor is nearly covered with a large, new rug, which, too blends with the chairs. The walls which are of rough plaster, brown in color, seems rather bare, except for one or two small pictures.
Mrs. Hudson says she lives with her husband and two children he is a 72-year old super-annuated Methodist preacher, having just quit preaching about a year ago. She says that she is only 57 years old, and his second wife. Her husband had 14 children four by his first wife and ten by her. All are married except one who is dead and the two of hers who live with them. She says that her 21-year old daughter works in the mill and draws about $12.00 a week as a spinner, and that her son, who is just a little younger, works in the card room as a spare hand and gets about $14.00 a week when his departemnt is running full time. My husband, she says, is too old to work; he has tried to get a pension from the government, and also has an application in to the Methodist for a <text not clear> for super-annuanced preachers, but has not yet heard from any of them.
They do very well now she says if the children worked full time all the time, but it cost lots to get along after paying $2.00 a week rent, doctor bills and other bills each week. But they havnt had any sickness lately. Some of the families around here, she says, have cows that they pasture over in the pasture that the mill company has provided, and some keep hogs; but they havnt any of them, as they don't have time to look after them. She says the mill company won't allow chickens kept on the house lots; but will alow them to have small gardens, though they don't have one.
She says that she was born and raised in Florence county, South Carolina, a Broach before she married. Her husband, she says, was born and raised in Sumter county, S. C. Their parents were farmers; that they were both raised on farms; went to the country schools when they run about two or three months in the Winters, and listing all day long. She says that her husband has preached for 40 years, in different places, with regular charges, and that this is his first year he has been without a church. She hopes that since he is now placed on the super-annuated list, that he can get an old age pension. She says that her husbands parents were Baptists, but he went over to the Methodist church, the church of her people.
"The chaps got it good now", she says, "going to school in the buses, free, and dont have to pay no tuition charge." It seems that her daughter went to the high school in Camden, S. C when they lived in the mill village of that place; but after coming over to Winnsbo, she started working in the mill, which was five years ago.
She says that her job is to keep house, cook, and wash and iron; but she says that she has lately had to hire a servant to do the washing and ironing. She has just finished putting her butter milk in her churn to churn butter, she says, but she can do it anytime. Her husband is too old to work now, she says but goes around and does what good he can in the village.
She says that her son likes base-ball, and goes to lots of the games, but none of the rest of us like it, she says. We got an auto but don't go out in it much, only up town or on Sundays. She says they don't go for much amusements, only the young ones a little.
"We don't take any part in local politics, "she says, "my husband just votes, and that is all".
She says that there are some good grocery stores in the village, one a large chain store that gives good prices, and they buy most of their supplies from them. They also have a good drug store. They are mighty convenient, she says, because it is so far from town, nearly 1 1/4 miles.
If you walk down one of the streets towards the mill plant, over some of the boulevard-like paved streets, you come to a building that looks like some old church, with cement exterior of rough design, and it's peculiarily arrenged doors and roof. Somebody will tell you, though, that this is the old community house which is now being used as the boarding hall and is run by some local family. Across a small stream that runs through one side of the pasture, you see many cows near the edge of the thick woods, grazing on the scattered grass. Following the street further down you see the two small streams come together near the concrete bridge in the street, and on the other side they form a wider street which is walled up on each side with rough, gray stone blocks, in maonsry fashion, making the surrounding area sanitary; and the full stream flows around the circular bends of the walls with an even force.
Beyond one end of the mill plant, a small brick building projects out from the main building of the mill, in front of which is a cement walk that leads from the stream to the door. This is the office. The walk is lined on each side with a variety of evergreen bushes, china berry trees, small cedars, and other shrubbery; and running pararell to the walk is an automobile drive.
A triangular shaped front yard is shown to the left of the branch, elevated so that cement steps to lead to the narrow walk from each side street. The paved walk leads to the front door which is shaded only with a narrow alcove. This one-story concrete building is used as the local clinic or hospital. Since there is no local surgeon there, it is called an emergency hospital or clinic. In it the community nurse lives with her helper. Around one side of the building, a side entrance presents a door which is evidently the entrance for patients, with its cement, square columns, and alcove, over the roof of which trails a bunch of ivey vines. They will tell you around there that the building is equipped with all necessary supplies for surgery.
