IT'S A FAMILY AFFAIR
Original Names	Changed Names
Wake Forest	Cameron
Aunt Hassie Fletcher	Aunt June Mason
Charles	Johnnie
Olive Branch	Pleasant Branch
John Carden	David Meadows
Arthur Burchum	Stanley Lowe
Rob Fletcher	Archie Maynard
Charles	Buddy
Net	Ted
Date of first writing:	May 16, 1939
Person interviewed:	"Aunt Hassie" Fletcher (white)
Address:	R-4, Durham, N. C.
Occupation:	Housewife
Writer:	Omar Darrow
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 2,750
IT'S A FAMILY AFFAIR
To the right off the Cameron Road, a dirt road, not well-maintained, leads on without a trace of habitation for several miles. To the right of this road is a wagon path which leads through a native pine forest of original growth. It zigzags through this forest and ends in the front yard of “Aunt June" Mason.
The house is old but not dilapidated. There is sensitiveness of home and home comforts. Perfect cleanliness exists even in the out-of-doors about the entire place. A mass of colors radiate from plats of well-arranged plants and flowers. Window boxes gleaming with red geranium in full bloom brighten the old building that has never known paint.
Aunt June is very stooped and thin, although her hair has never lost one bit of its black color. She was chewing very lightly on a piece of sun-cured tobacco.
"Come in!" she invited cheerfully. "I sorter felt like we was going to have company, and then it sorter looked like rain and I didn't know. Me and Johnnie--he don't feel any too well lately--just come in from the garden where we planted some more beans. Some say that beans should be planted on light nights and some say it don't matter, but I notice that mine do better if they are planted on light nights and I notice too that peanuts, potatoes, and such as grow in the ground do better when the nights are dark. Johnnie's tobacco always turns out better if he sows his seeds on light nights. I don't exactly know whether or not the moon does control such, but it always works out better to plant according to it.
"So you want my life history? I don't know as there is very much to tell. I've heard Ma say I come into the world with the first snow of winter, December 4, 1870. In them days folks didn't fix and all for new babies like now, and I've heard Ma say that Pa had a time with the other children, the fires, and getting the doctor the night I was born.
"I don't remember much about my childhood. I carried water to the field to the older children, for my pa had an accident when the mule ran away with his foot hanging in the stirrup. The mule drug him a long ways, and his foot never got well. So we children had to raise such crops as we needed for home use and stock feed, and Pa kept to the mill almost as long as he lived.
"I went to school off and on until I was about grown, but in them days most of the schools was subscription schools and they didn't last no long time like the terms do now."
Aunt June smiled, showing a well-shaped mouth. Her teeth are false but fit well. "I was said to be a mighty pretty girl in them days," she continued. "I never did think so though, but it was kinder funny to me afterwards when I thought about that time at the revival meeting at Pleasant Branch. Me and David Meadows, my first sweetheart, was going on up to the arbor--they built an arbor of brush, for the meeting was held out o'doors. Well, me and David got out o' the buggy while the crowd was singing and walked on to the arbor. I noticed that the singing didn't seem so strong as when we first drove up, but I didn't know what it was all about until I found out later that folks was looking at me. I knowed that my dress was pretty. It was to me, but I just won't thinking that a white lawn dress could stir up such at church. I remember like yesterday just how it was made. They wore hip pads and bustles in them days and my dress was shirred at the waist, and there was a lot of fullness about the hips and skirt. My dress was made on the basque style, and I had on a big black hat.
"I don't believe young folks have as good a time nowadays as they did then. I don't know what's the matter, whether it is that they go so much that they get bored and can't enjoy it or whether it is that they don't work as hard as we did when we was young. The mechanical age, as some calls it, seems to have made most of them slow up in energy, or sum'p'n', for when I was growing up I worked mighty hard at any task so that I could get finished up and go somewheres and we did have more fun when we did have fun at all. I guess folks are just living too fast, for one thing."
There was a pause, and then Aunt June continued: "It was at an Easter picnic--they always had a picnic at Easter, and folks went from far and near. Most of the times there'd be some musicians along, and they'd make the music. The crowd would dance the old 'Virginia Reel' in the grove.
"It was at this place in 1888 that I met Stanley Lowe, an Englishman. His pa taught school in the graded schools. I had never heard of work of Stanley's kind before he told me that he was interested in landscape gardening. He said there seemed at that time to be very little need for people of his profession.
"Pretty soon after, for I was seeing him right often after the picnic, he got work. A man had a lot of property and liked to improve and beautify it, so Stanley was employed to take care of it all. We was married in the fall of the year following the Easter picnic.
"We rented a cottage, but Stanley had a room at the other place. Some days when his work was so hard or he was so late getting through he just stayed overnight, for he knowed if he didn't get home by a certain time I would stay all night with some of my folks.
"It happened that Stanley started home about his usual time, and he always walked down the railroad tracks for a good way to save distance. The next morning a messenger came bringing me a message that he was hurt. I hurried to him but it was too late. He and another fellow had both been murdered, according to what a doctor said, and their bodies had been placed on the railroad track to cover it all up. There was one man suspected of murdering them, but the law was light in those days. They never did arrest him.
"Three years after, I married Archie Maynard. He was very kind to my little Stanley, and when we started having children of our own I noticed that he treated him better than he treated his own, but Archie was a strangely peculiar sort of person. He never allowed the children to go anywhere. He didn't want them to know anyone but their kin, and he won't any too anxious about that.
"I always thought that was the cause of them all marrying like they did. The oldest Maynard children married their first cousins. Then the next one married her double first cousin. The youngest boy didn't quite do so bad, but still he had to have someone who was a little kin to him. One of the girls did marry out of the family, and it most killed her pa. Archie never let him come in the house, and the girl could never see him only at church. What the youngest girls will do, I don't know, but they will most likely marry some of their kin.
"Archie bought this farm here, and he was a hard worker but drank a lot. Every chance he had he drank into plain drunkenness, but he had his good points, too. We both worked hard and as the children growed up they worked on the farm. I got no reason to complain about any of them and there was nine children in all. Stanley stayed here until he was grown, then he went to work with an insurance company.
“Johnny lives here with me and works the farm, but his health is so this year that he had to give up his crop even after it was started. His health ain't never been much good. He has that bad head trouble. He will get out and do a little, too much, I tell him. I hope that he can soon be better for it worried him so to be unable to work. He ain't never been just right since his pa come in one day drunk and mad and kicked him under the chin. He certainly is a good boy. Says he ain't never seen a woman he'd leave me for.
“Ted has been working in town, stringing bags since February. We need a little more money besides chicken and egg money at times, and we have had a little bad luck, too. Last year our best work mule died just when the crop was started and we had to buy another to carry the crop along. Then this year our cow died at about the same time of year. I hated that, for she was such a fine cow.
“There are no two people just alike. They can favor and seem kindly like, but we just ain’t, that's all. Now, my first husband had dreams even no longer than we were married and talked of wanting our children well-educated. He was proud, educated, and he had traveled a lot with his parents and went to good schools. But Archie, although he had enough learning to show decent manners when he had to, never had any aspirations for his children and if they wanted to go to school they went and if they didn't want to go he didn't make them go."
Aunt June gazed about her a little.
“I have lived here so many years now that I don't feel I could ever leave it. Johnny built a house up on the road. It's a very pretty little house, and when he got it finished he wanted us to move in it. I just couldn't live there, I felt like, so we stayed right on here. It looks lonesome and most people couldn't stand it, but I love it.
"This big room here is the only room we have of much size. We ain't ever bought no real living room furnishings for it, for we have to sit in here all the time and the overstaffed things just wouldn't suit."
This is a very large room with windows for sufficient light and ventilation. All of them were curtained with dotted swiss curtains. The floor was bare but for a few scatter rugs. A table stood beside the front door on which rested a giant bowl of goldfish. An old-fashioned chest of drawers over which hung a mirror stood in one corner.
Aunt June's and the twins' room contained beds covered with heavy rayon and cotton spreads, both alike. A large rag rug was in the center of the floor, and there was an old-fashioned dresser and wardrobe. Two windows curtained with dotted swiss served as a source of light and ventilation.
Johnny sleeps upstairs, but the steps are mighty steep if you ain't use to 'em," she explained. "And our cookroom and dining room is all together."
The kitchen had a highly polished wood range, an enameled kitchen cabinet, a side table, an old-fashioned kitchen safe, and an old large hand-made dining table. This floor, as all of the others, is made of wide oak boards that have been kept scrubbed almost to whiteness. There are three windows in the kitchen-dining room, each curtained with cheap but neat white scrim curtains.
It was growing late, and Aunt June discussed the evening meal. The family had all assembled, and she was placing the food on the table.
"We just have to have some boiled victuals," she said. "Some don't want nothing but fried stuff and little knickknacks but it just wouldn't suit us." Aunt June had collard sprouts, boiled with a huge piece of ham, corn bread, country ham, biscuits, fresh butter, pickles, and strawberry preserves.
"It's nice to have good food like this and a good comfortable home," she remarked. "We don't have a car, for we ain't never felt we had enough money ahead to use that way. We just own wagons for use here on the farm, but two of my sons close by own cars and they, one or the other, carries us where we want to go. Johnny don't like to go much. He is much more contented to stay right at home or walk about the farm. During the week, if he ain't got nothing else to do, he works on the yard. It's him that plants the flowers and such."
The meal was almost finished, in fact, all had left the table with the exception of Aunt June. She could no longer praise the members of her family in their presence, so she changed her discourse. "I ain't never voted as I remember. Of course, I guess it's all right for women to vote. I read a lot about important women doing lots of things and if they know enough about what they are doing it's all right. I'm not sure, though, that I would know just what would be right in the matter. I'm kinder like, in the matter of women voting, I feel about women preaching. The Bible says, 'Let the women be silent in the churches.' When we are faced with the problem of searching these things out in our minds, I feel that both places could, with the right sort of thinking, the right sort of doing, and the right sort of praying, be mighty well filled by the men of our country. Our American men give us our free country. It was bought by our forefathers in exchange for much of their blood. Yes, I do feel that this is, and should always be, an American man's home, and I think that no man can have a home unless a woman stays there and makes it for him. But these things are only my way of thinking.
"Everybody has their own way of thinking; everybody has their own way of doing things, and it's no business of mine just what that way of theirs is. I never fall out with anybody 'cause they don't think like I do. But if I do ever vote I shall vote for the man and it don't make no difference to me if he stands for one thing and me another so long as I would feel like he was the best man for the people.
"Most of the time I walk to church," she said as she took her seat in the living room. It ain't bad and when I feel all right it don't take me long. There's a through way that's no more than a mile and a half. I've been going there regular since I was a girl, and I have been a member there ever since before I was grown. My folks was all Baptists before me, but I also go to the little Free Will Baptist Church."
She took another big chew of tobacco and spat graciously over into one corner of the fireplace.
