MAMMY
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Athens - Area 6
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Athens - Area 6
and
John 17. Booth
Area Supervisor of
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
January 6, 1939
Mrs. Annie Grady Emerick
157 First Street
Athens, Georgia
December 20, 1938
G.M.
MAMMY
A brisk walk down Broad Street and across the bridge over the Oconee River lad me to the plant of the Athens Manufacturing Company. In the neighborhood across the river this factory is known as the "old check mill." Its buildings were erected to house the manufacture of munitions for the Confederacy during the War between the States.
The mill village is scattered over the long red hill that rises at the back of the plant. I walked up the hill, stopping at the houses along the way, but was unable to find anyone at home. I crossed the road a little girl came out Of a store. "Can you tell me where I can find some of the women that live around here?" I asked the child, "Or are they all at work?"
"Mammy’s at home," she replied, with a shy smile. "Where do you live?" was ray next question. "Oh, I live ‘way up on the hill, and my mama is at work in the mill, but Mammy, she lives in that white house by the store. The store’s in her yard." Thanking the child, I made my way to the five-room frame structure that she had pointed out. The house sat on a high red clay bank, surrounded by a spacious yard with A expanse of grass on one side and a flower garden where many large rose bushes and various kinds of other flowering plants showed the effects of the winter weather. A large water oak spread its limbs over part of the yard.
As I ascended the steps a woman came out on the porch, looking back to talk to someone inside the house. "Thanks so much, Mammy, for the use of your phone. It sure saved me a long walk to town, and anyway I was too tired to go." As she turned after closing the door she saw me. "Did you want to see Mammy? Mrs. Grayson, I should have said. Everybody around here calls her Mammy. I just don’t know what we would do without Mammy." Opening the door again, she said, "Mammy, somebody wants to see you." Mrs. Grayson came to the door and invited me in. As she led the way to her bedroom, she said, "I am sorry I didn’t hear you but I stay in the back most of the time, and the folks around here just come in without Knocking."
Just as she was placing a comfortable chair near the fire for me, someone in the hall called, "Mammy!" A very small boy opened the door and came in swinging a bucket, which he handed to Mammy. "Mama said could you let her have some milk for her dinner?" he asked. "How’s your mother?" I heard her inquire as the door closed behind them. Soon they returned and the little fallow thanked her and made his departure. "His mother’s been real sick for some time," explained Mammy.
Mrs. Grayson leaned over with the poker and stirrad the fire in the grata until it glowed and burned very bright, and as she straightened up to a more comfortable position, she said, "It gets real cola up here on top of the hill, and I just know you must be cold if you walked all the way. ‘Scuse me, and while you are getting warm, I’ll get dinner."
I looked about the simply furnished room with its iron bad, golden oak dresser, trunk, small tables, not less than four large rocking chairs, and a radio which was turned on just enough to make it audible. As my hostess returned to the room some one knocked at her door. This time it was a little girl. "Mama wants to know if you will let ‘er have some collards outa your garden, Mammy?" she inquired. Mammy said she didn’t think there were any good ones in the garden, but started out with the child to see what they could find in the way of collards, and invited me to accompany them. We want through the kitchen where the tempting aromas that came from steaming vessels on a wood-burning range indicated that a good dinner was in process of cooking. From the back porch there was an interesting view of Athens. Mammy’s place spread over several acres and in the small space that had been set aside for a garden a few collards were found that she thought her neighbor might be able to use. When the little visitor had gone away with her arms well filled, we walked around a bit before going back to the house. I saw the strawberry bed, and five or six large paoan trees that Mammy said were "fairly loaded down this year." She continued, "Over there is the hog pen. NO, I haven’t any in it right now for we have already Killed, but we are going to get some pigs about the first of the year. Now, over here, this is my cow lot. Yes, I’ve got two cows. I can have most anything I want here; we have so much land, and are not too near anyone else." The long structure, near the entrance to the cow lot, was divided into several compartments, and in the each separate room of which was ‘ A known as a house, except the two cow stalls. Next to these was the "feed house," where the feed for the cows, hogs and chickens was stored. Then came the "wood house," and the "coal house." Pointing to the well filled fuel bins, she said: "We try to put in plenty of coal and wood in the summer to last through the winter."
"If you will look over this way, you will see the old breastworks that the soldiers used during the war." I did not think it was necessary to call her attention to the fact that there was no actual fighting at this placed during the War between the States. The breastworks had been thrown up as a precautionary measure for defense of the munitions plant and the town of Athens, at a time when it seemed likely that some of General Sherman’s forces would attempt to seize this place.
Standing there in the yard of her hilltop home, Mammy surveyed her domain. "I don’t know what I would do if we had to leave this place. It belongs to my daughter, and we’ve been here for years. My daughter lives in town now, but she stayed here until her children Were ready for school."
Approaching the house, we stopped to watch her husband cooking the tar he was planning to use to stop leaks in his boat. On the edge of the yard around the other side of the house, just beyond the large water oak, was the store. There are no other stores nearby and this one apparently attracts considerable trade. It was operated by Mrs. Grayson’s daughter until she moved in town, and then Mammy and her husband ran it until the mill closed down, and they lost heavily trying to take care of the people who were out of work, as long as the stock of goods in the store lasted. Mammy’s daughter rented the store to Jacob Levine, when the mill started back to work, and he is operating it now.
Mammy suddenly remembered the food on the stove that had not been tended for several minutes, and hastened to the house. When I asked for an appointment in the afternoon she very hospitably replied, "Why do you have to go now? I would be so glad for you to have dinner with us. Of course you may not like what we have, but I can’t see why you can’t try it for once." I was very glad to accept her invitation, for I knew that I was going to enjoy that meal.
She refused my proffered help, and I was glad to get back to her fireplace for I was shivery and cold after the walk in her hilltop garden. The telephone in the hall rang. Mammy answered, and a moment later she opened the door to tell me that she was going to the store to tell Jacob to come to the phone. "May I go for you?” I asked. “I wish you would,” she replied, and added, "Sometimes I get so tired running around so much."
I delivered the message and when I returned to the house Hammy announced that dinner was ready.
We ate in the warm Kitchen. Jacob was invited to share the meal with us, and he did not refuse. He said to me, "Nobody ever refuses to eat with Mammy." I thoroughly enjoyed the repast it was a typical. southern dinner consisting of green snap beans, creamed Irish potatoes, boiled backbone and spareribs, crackling cornbread, hot biscuits and fresh butter, jellies, pickles, milk, coffee; and for dessert She served prune whip.
The conversation during the meal was, for the most part, about the people of the neighborhood. Everyone at the table at one time or another while we were together expressed the hope that the mild would continue to run, at least during the winter, for it was always so hard on people when they were out of work.
After I had helped Mammy with the dishes, we returned to the good fire in her room and were ready to proceed with the interview when someone called, "Mammy!" There were two visitors this time, girls who wanted to use her phone.
Mammy must have been tired, but there was nothing to indicate that, as she rocked in her chair before the fire. Her pretty white hair, stylishly bobbed, was held in place by a gray comb, she had been busy all day, but her neat print house dress looked as fresh as though she had just donned it. There was a glint of amusement about her eyes as she said: "I’m afraid to tell you much of my younger days because I was rather bad, I guess. At least, that’s what the folks said about me."
"My mother was a Scott, and she was born and raised near Princeton. My father, Henry Freeman, came from Elbert County. His folks moved to Princeton when he was just about grown. That was where he and mama first went to housekeeping when they got married. Father was a brick and rock mason, and his work kept him away from home most of the time. We were a large family: four girls, Jane, Virginia, Lucy, and myself, and seven boys, Sam, Wallace, Ed, Luke, Martin, Frank, and Dan, and our family was as happy as it was big. We did have such good times there at home together.
"We want to the Methodist Church in Princeton and one of my aunts was ray Sunday school teacher. We always call her ‘Aunt Sis.’ She had a sister named Emily. I loved them both. They taught us our A-B-C’s in Sunday school in those days, and Aunt Sis would get so mad at me when she would be trying to learn me mine and every time she got as far as ‘S’, I would say ‘M’ next. I don’t know why I did that unless it was the way their names sounded. ‘S’ for Aunt Sis, and ‘M’ for Aunt Emily. Anyway. Aunt His gave up trying to learn me, as a bad job.
"I suppose I was about six when they started me to school. The first place I went to school was in the old Baptist Church at Princeton. They used it for a schoolhouse during the weak and a church on Sundays. Mr. Harrison our and as a church on Sundays. Mr. Harrison, our teacher, was the father of Mr. Jim Harrison of the Herald, and he boarded at our house. That made it hard for us kids for every little thing we did at school ha would tell to mama, and then we would get a spanking. I never will forget the time Mr. Harrison whipped me. This is how it happened: the bench where me and Virginia had our seats was under a window and there was a bench up over the window where we kept all our books, on this day, when we went out for recess, we put our books on the shelf. When Mr. Harrison called us back from recess I could not reach my book without climbing up, so I took Virginia’s book. She tried to take it away from me and we fussed about it. Mr. Harrison called me up to his desk and asked me what was the trouble that I couldn’t behave myself. I was scared to death for I knew he would tell mama. But it was worse than that for I never dreamed he would give me a whipping before the whole school. Of course the whipping didn’t hurt for he just used a large broomstraw instead of a switch, but I felt disgraced for life, just to think of getting a whipping in school. I cried until I had, to be sent home. That made it worse of course for I had to tell mama what had happened. I told her I just never would go back to that old school again. I would just die first. Wall, I didn’t die, and I was the first one of the children ready for school the next morning, Yes, mam, I had my old Blue Back Speller, and was waiting for the others. Mama had changed my mind about going back to school, and she didn’t use a broomstraw either. When she said go, we want.
"Our school hours were different from what they are now. We went at eight o’clock in the morning and stayed until four in the afternoon. We went home for our dinner, but the ones that lived too far off brought theirs with them, Small children had recess in the morning and afternoon. These spelling bees we had then were lots of fun. All of us stood up in a row, and when you missed a word, you had to go to the bottom of the row, and I guess I was at the bottom more than anywhere else.
"There was a large spring, not far from the schoolhouse. It was boxed up, to keep it nice and clean and make it convenient, and that is where we got water for the school. Soon as school was out every day we made a bee-line for the spring to play in the branch that run from it. I had a good many whippings about that for I usually managed to slip down, and went home with my clothes all just dripping wet.
"On the old Bobbin Mill road, not far from where the radio station is now, the old mill race was pretty deep, and little children were not allowed to play in that, but the older ones did. We went to the school out near the old paper mill when we got older. Miss Alien was our teacher there at first, and the last year of my schooling there kiss Fraser was the teacher. I liked it out there for we didn’t have a man teacher. A man teacher had given me the only whipping I ever got in school. Our family had five children in school at the same time, and I know they must have had a time with all of us.
"Judge Ed Sanders, father of the old Judge Sanders, who died not long ago, lived at Princeton in a big two-story house, and we lived just a short way from them. My grandmother lived on the other side of the Sanders, and she ran a boarding house. In addition to her regular boarders she fixed meals for some of the folks that worked in the mill. Mama raised hogs so she could have her own meat, and grandmother saved all the scraps of cold bread. Mrs. Sanders didn’t think biscuits were good for children to eat, and made her children eat light bread, out they sure aid fight for scraps of cold biscuits and would eat every bit they could get from us. Of course, the scraps were clean and just bread, for grandmother didn’t save nothing but bread for us every day. Whenever Mrs. Sanders or mama caught us fighting we all got a whipping, us for fighting, and the Sanders for eating biscuit bread. My, but them were good old days.
"Children loved to gather at our house to tall riddles. Crowds of them would sit about on the floor and tell riddles to see who could think up the biggest one. Children wouldn’t call that a good time these days, but I really think we enjoyed life then more than our children and grandchildren do now.
"Our first real trouble came to us about that time. My father and his crew of men were building the dam at High Shoals, Georgia, and somebody that didn’t know he was on the dam set off some dynamite, and the explosion blowed him fifty feet in the air, and he was broken up awfully bad. For a long time we didn’t think he was going to get well. He couldn’t bear for anybody to move him, not even to touch him. After a long while he got able to Work again and he kept busy for several years before he died. When he did die, it had to be away from home. He had just finished a big building in Chipley, Georgia, and was measuring up the work and getting ready to come home. The men said he started down a ladder and was near the bottom when they saw him fall. He was dead when they got to him. That was a sad time for all of us. There we were looking forward to his coming back home and planning things to please him, never dreaming he would be brought home in a casket.
"Most of us were grown-up when we moved into Athens to work at the lower mill of the Athens Manufacturing Company. I went back to the spinning room but I still made my 75 a day. After a while I was moved into the card room there where I made 85¢ a day. After quite a while there, Mr. Myers got me to come to the check mill where I worked in the weaving room. After I had learned to run them well enough they gave me 4 looms to tend and paid me according to the work I turned off. We made two kinds of cloth. They paid 30¢ a bolt for weaving the kind they called ‘light.’ The heavy-Weight kind paid 40 a bolt. We were paid once a month. I don’t remember how much I made in a day. Some days we could turn off more work than others, but I imagine it would run from $1.40 to $1.50 a day. It is hard to remember much about it for we would draw money all along until pay day.
"The company store sent a wagon loaded with everything they had to eat around to each house every morning. Folks would pick out what they wanted and have it charged. Then they would take it out of our pay. All the mill people aid their trading at the company store. Everything they needed was kept there, even to cloth and threads.
"We went to the Methodist Church at Princeton, and after we moved up here in town we went to Oconee Street Methodist Church. Then it was where the Atlantic Ice Company’s plant is now, just below the new A & P store. I don’t see why they ever moved the church away from there. I liked it so much better, and it was so much prettier and better than the one they have now.
"While we didn’t have so many places to go for fun - no picture shows and no automobiles - we had mighty good times then. Our riding was done in buggies and wagons, and we had our churches and church sociables. All Sunday schools had picnics every year and everybody went, old and young. We used to cook for a week getting ready for one of those Sunday school picnics. Cakes, pies, chickens, and whole hams were cooked and most always we had barbecue. But go to one of the picnics they have these days and sea each one coming up with a little box of sandwiches. It ain’t like it used to be. Nothing is.
"We had our parties and candy pullings. I don’t look now like I was ever able to do it, but I’ve danced all night many a time at those old square dances and not be tired even, then I’d work all the next day and think nothing of it. I don’t like these new fangled dances. Customs and pastimes have changed with the passing years, and some folks say the young folks are going straight to the devil. I don’t quite approve of all the things they are doing, but I don’t suppose the things they do seem any worse to them now, than it did to us when we made candy and danced all night.
"One of our funniest sports was to dress up and go bagging. We’d get up a Crowd and dress up and fix our faces so nobody would know us. Then we’d start out begging, but we never went together. Why, I even cams home dressed up as an old man, and mama gave me enough to eat to last any man a week. She even gave me most of my brothers’ clothes. That was one time the joke was on me, for after I left our house one of the other girls in our party came around there fixed up like a little old woman and asked mama for something to eat and wear. Now, mama hadn’t suspicions! anything when I was there, but when the old woman came soon as the old man left, she knew there was some kind of devilment up and she decided to fix that. So she invited the girl in, cooked a good hot supper for her, and made her eat there, and insisted on her spending the night. Of course, the girl couldn’t do that, so she began making all kinds of excuses to get away. Mama let her go, but gave her one of my very best dresses. That got me. There was nothing I could say without giving the whole thing away, and the girl couldn’t wear my dress or give it back to me either. I stood it long as I could and than I just wanted my dress back so bad I told mama all about who the beggars were that night, but she wouldn’t let me take my dress back, and I would have to do without my dress. I didn’t beg any more.
"We had many good times at the old fair ground place between here and Princeton. My father was a member of the Masonic order, and his lodge used to have dinners and speakings at the fair ground, especially before elections. Henry Grady and his wife never failed to be there, and that is where I got my name. I was named for Mrs. Grady. (Note: Henry Grady’s wife was the former Julia King. His mother was Mrs. Annie Grady. The interviewer did not argue the matter with Mrs. Grayson.) Mr. Grady’s family used to beg mama to give me to them. They were the finest sort of people. After those dinners were over they had games of all sorts, and prizes for the winners. Those were big days in town and ‘most everybody went.
"There was tough times at our house when the first one of my sisters got married. She ran away and didn’t tell mama. For months and months mama wouldn’t let her come home and just cried nearly all the time. Lucy, that was my sister’s name, went to the country to live, and how we girls did enjoy going to see her. Every Saturday when we stopped work we began getting our crowd of boys and girls together and ready to go out to Lucy’s. We went in a two-horse wagon that was piled with hay for us to sit on and we would sing all the way. We made candy and danced most of Saturday night, and sometimes we didn’t leave for Athens and home until Sunday night. We just had the best times out there.
"But, Lord Child, I’ve got back in them good old times, and clear forgot I’ve got to churn this milk or it will be ruined. I’ll just bring the churn in here to the fire so we can talk while I churn." While she was getting her churn ready, someone called "Mammy!" A little child was at the door with the message that her mother wanted the doctor called. Mammy phoned for the doctor, then asked, "What’s the matter with your mother? How long has she been sick?" The small caller replied, T’ain’t her that’s sick. It’s granny. She’s got a bad cold and sore throat. Mama said for me not to forget to thank you.’
As Mrs. Grayson started churning, she said, "It might seem to you that I’ve had an unusually busy day, but it’s just the same as ‘most every day, except that some days I have to get out more to deliver phone messages. That tires me out mighty bad for I can’t get about like I used to.
"I worked right on in the check mill until I got married. Since then housework and other work around the yard and home place have been enough to keep me busy. We lived in town for a while after we married and then bought us a place out on Nellie B. Avenue, out in the edge of town. There we did a little farming, and Harry kept his job in town. He was running a soft drink stand then, and we kept cows enough at home to furnish all the milk he needed for that, and from that time on we have always kept at least one cow.
"Our only two Children, a son and a daughter, are both married and have children of their own. My daughter has two girls and one boy living. She lost her first child. He didn’t live but a few days. Our son has two girls. We managed to give both of our children the chance for education, but I’m sorry to say our son didn’t like school, and it was a job to keep him there as long as we did.
"Since our daughter moved in town, we are here by ourselves, and I sure do miss her and the children. Most of all the children. They started calling me ‘Mammy’ when they were little, and after all these years it just don’t seem right to be called anything else. You’ve already noticed that the folks around here calls me ‘Mammy’ too. Me and Harry are getting sort of old now, but we do pretty well. We plant all our ground, in season, and sell a good many vegetables. The store, out there in the yard, uses most of our garden stuff, and I give the folks in the neighborhood quite a lot of it, for they have to work and don’t have time to work gardens, and some of them are not able to pay for vegetables and milk. They are the ones that need these things the most, and so I share with them.
"We raise our chickens and hog neat, and have fruit and pecan trees. In vegetable tine I can enough of what I raise to last through the winter. I canned more than I generally do, this past summer, and have not lost a can. Those that have tried my vegetable soup say it’s fine. I sent several cans of it to sick folks, and gave them some milk and butter too, for it’s our duty to look after those that are sick or in trouble."
It was getting late when Mammy finished churning, and I knew I would have to walk fast to get to town before dark. As I bade her good-bye after thanking her for her hospitality of the day and her invitation to return, a small boy came in the door. "Mammy", he called. "Granny said could you spare her just a little milk for her supper?" As I walked away, I heard Mammy tell him to wait a few minutes, and she would send his granny it some fresh butter, as well as milk. It was easy to say why the villagers love her and call her "Mammy."
