SOME PEOPLE ARE DESTINED TO NEVER HAVE ANYTHING
Original Names:	Changed Names:
F. B. Brewer	Johnny Capps
Lottie	Bessie
Date of first writing:	June 28, 1939
Person interviewed:	F. B. Brewer, (white)
Address:	Route #1, Wilson, N. C.
Occupation:	Tenant farmer
Writer:	Stanley Combs
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 2,500
SOME PEOPLE ARE DESTINED TO NEVER HAVE ANYTHING
Johnny Capps and his wife were enjoying the shade of an old apple tree in their front yard. It was shortly after the noonday meal, and Johnny, appearing all hot and tired, was leaning against the trunk and dozing. But his eyes opened wide as the car stopped.
“Howdy, howdy," he greeted. “Light and come in. I believe it's cooler out here than it is in the house where the rest of the family is. Bessie and me decided that we could rest better out here in spite of the flies. We always rest awhile in the afternoons and let the teams rest awhile, too. It sure was hot out there in that field this morning, and it's going to be hot for a time this afternoon."
Johnny weighs about 165 pounds and is a little above six feet. He has thick, black hair, dark eyes, and is stooped. To see him dressed in his overalls, somewhat soiled, and his work shirt all damp from perspiration, one would gather the impression that he is a hard working farmer.
"A farmer has a lot to put up with," he continued, "but I believe it is about the best life that a man can live. There is plenty of hard work to it, but there is a lot of freedom also.
"I was born on a farm. My father was poor and had to earn all he could get by the sweat of his brow. There was five of us kids, and we all had to work. It won't long after I was born before I become familiar with the hoe. We had to fight weeds all summer, but we do now, for that matter. And it always seemed like such a short time between tobacco barning time and cotton picking time. I dreaded the cotton picking worse than anything else.
“After the crops was housed my father worked in the woods all winter. He made shingles for sale. I had to cut the timber, and I had to do that nearly all winter. That is the reason I never went to school. Of course, I can write my name and count, figures, but I can't read a bit. No one can beat me out of anything.
"I've had to work all of my life, but I don't reckon it ever hurt me in any way. I get so little for it at times, though, that it is downright discouraging."
Two boys, almost grown, came out of the house and started for the barn to get the mules to go back to work.
“Boys," called Johnny, “let's see if we can start that engine and cut some wood before we start for the field. We're plum' out."
A saw, powered by an old engine was the equipment they used. As usual with those old things, the engine needed a good little bit of coaxing before it would start, but after it was started the job was soon finished. The boys then made their way to the field, but Johnny returned to his seat under the tree to wait for the weather to become cooler.
"We have thirty-five acres of land here on this place," he continued as he took a chew of tobacco, "and work two mules. Me and the boys has about all we can do. Two of us use the plow and the third uses the hoe.
"I've farmed every year of my life except one, and I never found anything as hard to get rid of as wire grass. There' sea right nice sprinkling of it on this place, and we're trying to destroy it.
"I've got six acres of tobacco this year that is right pretty. That is all the money crop that we have, with the exception of six acres in cotton, but I don't count that as anything since cotton sells so cheap. I hope tobacco will sell good this year. So far we have no debt on us, and I hope to be able to run that way from year to year. Last year my part of the crop was only $450, and I had to pay for my part of the fertilizer out of that. You see, we're bound to be living pretty close. We've not been able to buy any clothes, and some of us don't even have a shift of clothes. Of course, we have had other things to help us out a little. I got a little parity money, and then there are the other things like vegetables and hogs. We have our own corn, potatoes, and Bessie and the girls do a little canning every year. I also have twenty-one shoats now, but I'm waiting to sell some of them when the price goes up. Our cow and chickens help us a little all through the year.
"Our landlord never bothers us. We ain’t never asked him for anything, and he seems just satisfied to let us alone. I had rather work like I am this year. We furnish ourselves, and the landlord gets a third of what is made on the place. Last year the landlord got half of what we made. Tenants have a pretty hard life as a usual thing, but I am sure that I like it more than I would living in town. I tried town one year several years ago, working in lumber mills, but one year was enough for me. I had plenty to do, but it seems like every cent that I could get had to go for bills. It cost too much to live in town. Out here we don't have to worry about being laid off if the mill closes down or not getting paid if one gets sick.
"A fellow like me has no chance of getting a decent job in town. It's the fellow with the pull that gets those kinds of jobs. If you're a friend or a relative of someone who has a good job then you stand some chance of getting on. Politics enters them jobs too much, too. Your boss can tell you how to vote. You don't have to vote like he tells you to vote, but he don't have to work you the next year if he don't want to. And he don't usually want to if you didn't vote his way. Out here everybody is his own boss, or his wife is, and he can vote or not as he pleases."
Bessie, who had been sitting under the tree all this time, got up and went to the house.
"My wife was raised in a smaller family than me, and she had a little better chance in life. She got a little more learning. She went to school long enough so that she can read and write a little. She has been a great help to me. Looks like she always wanted things to run for my benefit. We've had it in our minds for sometime to get us a piece of land, but it seems that we'll never be able to do it.
"Time has been when we made more than we do now. Seems like we made more when we paid cash rent, but you can't find a place that rents that way now. The landlord figures if there is a lot made he's, going to get his part of it. Well, you can't blame him for that. If I owned a piece of land I would have the same attitude as that. We felt like we was gaining a little each year up until four years ago when Bessie's health broke down on her. Since then it seems like it takes all that we can make to pay doctors' bills. At the present time we owe some over $400 in doctors' bills. I paid them a lot last year, and that is what has made it so bad on us this year.
"Bessie has been in five times during the last year. They say that her system is full of poison. Her teeth is bad and some say that the poison is coming from them. They also say that her kidneys are blocked a good part of the time, and she also has heart trouble. In spite of all the work the doctors has done on her, she don't seem to be much better off."
Bessie is a small woman with black hair, blue eyes, and a sallow complexion. She weighs about 120 pounds. She wore a faded cotton dress and had her hair tied in a small knot on the back of her head. Regardless of her maladies, she keeps going but always complains that she is hardly able to put one foot before the other.
"Bessie is a good housekeeper and a good cook, too," Johnny praised her. "I guess she does kinder like her ma done before her. I reckon she don't know nothing about cooking all them new kinds of dishes, but she cooks the kind of food that we all like. She can cook as good beans, corn bread, fat back, and cabbage as anybody, and there ain't no better farm food than that. Some folks eat so much of that fancy food that I don't see how they get along.
I just have got to have something solid to work on.
"We have four children at home now. The oldest girl is married and left. There are now two boys and two girls. The two oldest are boys. They have had a little better chance going to school than either me or Bessie had. The oldest girl is only twelve, and she is in the seventh grade. The two boys got to about the ninth grade and then quit. When we was coining along they didn't run schools by grades like they do now. You just went till you finished what was there for you. Bessie never did get a chance to learn any of that domestic science stuff, and she didn't study other things like they do now. I can see where children now have a lot more than we had a chance to have, but I can't see, to save my life, where in the world it does much good. I guess they must know more about such things than I do. If one learns how to farm good he has gone a long ways in learning, and I know that you can't learn that out of books. You have to have the real experience.
"The farm and home agents do a lot of good, and so would the crop control if it was done right. Things are changing now. Wars, good roads, telephones, and such things change things, and we have to change our ways to fit in with things or get so far behind that we can't do anything.
"Even religion has made a change. I don't have any idea that it is like the religion that our fathers and grandfathers was used to. Seems like too many people are going to the bad now. I wouldn't be caught at one of these beaches or swimming holes that they keep open on Sunday, but I have heard talk of them that has been caught there. It ain't so good. When I was a boy they got along without so many amusements that they think so necessary now. I guess the car is the cause of it all, for with that they can go so much farther. The old mule and wagon kept them pretty close in at home.
“I have a old car out there, and it is mighty handy. If something breaks on the plow we can hop in it and go to town and get the part fixed in no time, and the old mule can be resting. I don't see how we ever got along without it. During harvesting time it comes in mighty handy. When tobacco is to house we can get on the car and go around and pick up some help."
The farm on which Johnny lives is one of the many tenant farms in this section of the state. The house has five rooms including a cook room which is too small to be used as a dining room. It is painted white, and the yard is spotted with a few flowers here and there. A few fruit trees in the front yard afford some shade. The spot at which the family wash was done was a drawing place for flies.
The kitchen was clean, small, and crowded. Clean pots and pans hung near the stove which had been polished until it was shining. There were two windows which served for light and ventilation, but they had no screens to keep out the flies.
The other rooms had simple but neat furniture in them. The beds were iron, and one room had to be used for a dining room as well as living quarters for the family. The other three rooms are used as bedrooms. The two girls occupy one room; the two boys, the other; and Johnny and Bessie, the other. There are no accommodations for guests.
The yard and the barns showed evidence of being used by a tenant who took pride in his work, for all the trash had been cleaned up and every piece of harness and every tool was in place.
"I have to try to keep everything clean," Johnny explained. "I live here, and I just can't bear for things around where I stay to always be in a mess. I have thought that someday I would be able to own a farm, but it looks now like I never will. I will just have to go on and be contented with my lot in life, keeping up the other fellow's property. Some of us are destined to never have anything anyway. I guess I must be one of those."
