Approximately 3,450 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE: THE LEVINES IN THE MELTING POT
Date of First Writing	Jan. 20, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Rlizabeth Rubinowitz
Fictitious Name	Mrs. Levine
Street Address	West
Place	Beaufort, S.C.
Occupation	Merchant
Name of Writer	Chlotilde R. Martin
Name of Reviser	State Office
Levine's store has long been an institution in our town--and its pair of short, plump, rapidly-speaking Yiddish-accenting Jewish proprietors among our most interesting characters.
I want to try to make you see Levine's store. It is located on one of the back streets of the town, so as to be easily accessible to the clientele which it originally intended to attract--the Negroes and poorer whites. Its long-unwashed windows, plastered with fly- specked placards advertising tobacco and various brands of cigarettes, display a jig-saw puzzle arrangement of junkety articles and afford a perfect index to the interior.
When you enter Levine's store for the first time, you automatically stop dead in your tracks to get both your breath and your bearings. For the first thought that occurs to you is that you are in a labyrinth of great, overshadowing trees and the second is that if there should be an earthquake you would be hopelessly buried beneath innumerable bolts of cloth before you could even move to escape.
Three of the four walls are hidden clear to the ceiling with dry-goods, which have spilled over head-high onto the three counters which parallel the walls. Another counter running down the length of the building holds the remainder of the over-flow, beyond which you cannot see unless you happen to be a giant, and above this counter staggers an amusing row of cheap, ready-made garments. The two aisles are decidedly One-way passages, so narrow that if two customers wish to pass each other, one of them is obliged to flatten himself against a counter--in which case he remembers to be very careful lest he bring the whole precarious arrangement down upon his head.
In Levine's store you are likely to find yourself sandwiched in between your color'd washer-woman and the town's society le der. Here, of all places, the town's most notorious prostitute and its most elegant aristocrat are most likely to meet--for the clientele which the Levines sought to attract is only a part of what it enjoys.
At first, people used to meet each other a little shame-facedly at Levine's. If your cook saw you there, she graciously pretended that she was blind. If you stood next to the town's bad woman, you pretended that she did not exist. But that sort of behavior can be rather strained when both of you are rummaging in the same remnant box and come up with opposite ends of the identical piece of cloth in your respective hands. Now, it's got to be that you smile and say good-morning to the people you meet at Levine's, regardless of their color or social standing, and some-times you oven chat.
Levine's must have something unusual to offer, you are't inking? Well, you are right. If it's something different in dress goods or slip-cover or curtain materials that you are looking for, Levine' has it. If it's an unusual buckle, or card of buttons or piece of ribbon or lace, Levine's has that, too. But, above all, whatever it is you are can buy it cheaper at Levine's than on Main Street. In others smacks of a bargain house and few women, no matter how much money they have, can resist the chance to pick up a bargain.
I want to try to make you see Mrs. Levine, too. Although she has always been the dominating note of the establishment, there was a time then Mr. Levine played a good second to her lead. But the little dark, chunky, greasy-faced, spectacled mate of Mrs. Levine is fast becoming a legend, for he has been gone, these five years, to Palestine and the town has even ceased to speculate as to whether or not he is coming back. The children are all gone, too, and Levine's is not the source of amusing interest it once was, although it is still good enough.
Mrs. Levine looks like nothing so much as a plump little partridge wearing spectacles--a cheerful, cooing little partridge with bright blue eyes and dark hair pulled tightly back from her face into a knot behind. She has a round face and a round, corsetless body with scarcely an indication of a waist-line, and she goes flop-flopping about the store in shoes with heels so badly run over that it's a marvel she can keep her balance.
"Feefteen cent a yard--twenty-five cent anywhere else--" she describes the material in which you are interested. "Gaarantee fast color, or your money back--it's a bargain. How many yards you want?
If she sees that it doesn't suit you, she darts unerringly to another pile of goods and with a dexterous flip of the wrist, which would be practically suicide to anyone. else, yanks out the twentieth bolt from the top. "Thees is even better. Twenty-five cent a yard--cost you t'irty- five on Main Street--but I let you have it for twenty cent--best bargain, yet--eh? How many yards you say you want?"
You haven't said and Mrs. Levine knows it--but she also knows that the sale is practically made. So, while you hesitate, as prospective buyers always do, so as not to seem too anxious, she is inquiring into your affairs. How is your pappa? Is you mother over her sciatica yet? Have you heard from your sister since she went away? It is not a curious inquiry, for Mr. Levine keeps up with the lives of all her customers and is interested down to the last detail. This warn-hearted interest, plus her sales ability make her hard to resist.
You say that you will take five yards of the material and Mrs. Levine begins to measure it off, keeping up a rapid conversation all the while. A note of cajolery creeps into her voice towards the end. "Seex and a half yard left on the bolt! I tell you--you take all seex and a half yard and I give it to you for the price of five and a half." She smiles ingratiatingly. "Yes?"
You shake your head, consciously hardening yourself. "But I can't use a yard and a half extra--it would just be wasted!
"Wasted" Mrs. Levine cries increduously. "Never! Make a dress for the Chillen."
You stiffen your spine. "It wouldn't be enough."
"Look," Levine warms to the attack. "I show you how--you make a leetle skirt out of this clot', see? Then I show you a remnant that for ten cent you can make a leetle waist, see? Then, you have two dress for the price of one?"
But you are determined not to be wheedled. You set your jaw. You brace yourself against the counter. "No," you announce firmly, 'I want just the five yards."
Mrs. Levine's bright eyes have never left your face. She smiles even more ingratiatingly. "Look, I tell you what I do--and I'm not making a penny--but I give you thees whole yard and a half for the rice of one half-yard. Now, that's a bargain for you, eh?"
You pretend to consider, but it is just a pretense and both of you know it. You have no intention of making a "leetle skirt" and you still know that the extra yard and a half will be nutter waste--but what can you do?
During all the years in which I have known Mrs. Levine, I have regarded her as an amusing character in a continuously delightful play-- and her store the stage upon which she played her part. But, suddenly, I saw her as an individual detached from her stage; as a woman, who had known happiness and sorrow and hardship, even as you and I. What kind of happiness, I wondered; what kind of sorrow and hardship? For years, she had been as familiar to me as the ancient live oak tree in my yard, but now the thought came to me that of the mysterious workings which had made Mrs. Levine and the oak what they are, I was equally ignorant, "Where had she come from and why? What did she think and feel and aspire to? What motivated her?
But you can't just ask people questions like that, especially the people with whom your only contact has been across a bargain counter--they would think you had suddenly lost your mind. The best you can do is to ask other questions and from the answers, speculate and interpret to a limited extent.
So, I dawdled about the tore until all the other customers had gone. Then I leaned across the counter. "Mrs. Levine," I began, feeling a little awkward, but practicing her own ingratiating smile, "tell me something about yourself, the country where you were born, what your life has been like."
She looked startled, then she laughed. "You write about re in the newspaper?"
I shook my head. "No, in a book, maybe. You see, you are an interesting person. You have educated four children out of the little store--I would like to knap how you did it."
She laughed again, but she looked pleased. She shrugged her shoulders and made a quick, expressive gesture with her hands. "I work hard--hard--that's how I do it." Her eyes searched my face uncertainly. "You don't put my name in the book--no?"
I assured her that I wouldn't and she shrugged her shoulders again. "Well, why not--sure. I tell you." And she did. It was a long story, frequently interrupted by a steady trickle of customers. Practically everybody likes to talk about himself and Mrs. Levine was no exception. In fact, a so absorbed that it was with obvious reluctance that she was obliged to stop from time to time to wait on her customers.
She was born in Vilna, Poland, fifty-nine years ago in March. The date of her birth he does not remember, although she explained that she had it written down on paper somewhere. She was Sara Lipsitz, one of four sisters whose parents owned and operated a dyeing establishment in Vilna. There was a half-brother, for the mother had been married previously, who had gone to America to make his fortune. The dyeing business was successful, furnishing employment to each of the girls as she grew old enough. But when Sara Lipsitz was fifteen years old, the plant was destroyed by fire. She had been intrigued by the glowing accounts of America which her brother had written in his letters and now she obtained her parents' permission to join him there.
This brother, who had married and was living in Newark, N. J., had a job in a hat factory and it was Sara's ambition to have a job, too. She had had four years of schooling in Poland and although she knew the meaning of a few English lords when she saw them printed, she could not speak the language. Realizing that she could not hold a job in America until she learned the language, she lived with her brother and attended school for two years, getting as far as the sixth or seventh grade. She then got a job in a factory in New York which manufactured children's and infant clothing. She began working at five dollars a week and was gradually increased to eight dollars, which was her top Salary. She lived with her brother all this time and when he and his family moved to Brooklyn, she went with them, continuing to go back and forth to her work in New York City.
It was in Brooklyn that she met Sammy Levine, a young Jew from Lithuania, ho, with his parents, had come to America at the age of fourteen. The Levines, father and son, were in the dry-goods business and were prosper and Sammy Levine. In 1900, when she was 20 and he 24, Sara Lipsitz and Sammy Levine were married. The young Mrs. Levine quit her job in the children's clothing factory and went to work in her husband's store.
Rents were very high in Brooklyn, however, and the young couple found that they were "just working for the landlord," for most of what they made went to pay rent. They began to work extra hard with a view to buying some lots and putting up their own store. They did succeed in buying several lots and then they were offered a proposition which eventually brought them South. Two of Mrs. Levine's sisters had come to America and one of them had married and was living in a coastal town in South Carolina. She wrote that there was an opening for a store in the town where show living and urged them to move, even offering to help finance a store for them.
The Levines decided to look into the situation and Mr. Levine came to South Carolina, while Levine continued to operate store in Brooklyn. He found that his sister-in-law had already opened up the store, but that it was a grocery store, in which line of work he had no experience. He went to work, how ever, and the family moved down. But, after a time, Mr. Levine was convinced that he did not like the grocery business as well as he did dry-goods. He also preferred to work for himself rather than for some one else. After moving his family down he had only a couple of hundred dollars loft. With this he rented the building which he now owns, moved his family upstairs and set up a small grocery business, since he felt that this was the quickest to get start.
The Levines worked hard getting this little business established. They kept the store open every night until after midnight- and all day on Unable to afford a servant or a clerk, Mrs. Levine did all her own housework, looked. after her children and helped her husband in the store every spire moment. The only luxury she allowed her self, she the twenty-five cents which she said a Negro woman to do her washing each week. The ironing she did herself.
By dent of hard work and grueling economy, the Levines had saved enough at the end of three years to complete the payments on the building which they occupied, having $200.00 for it on the installment plan. It was very small, however, and they began to enlarge it, increasing both the size of the store and the living quarters. A line of dry-goods was added on one side of the store and was at once successful. With no rent to pay, the Levines were able to offer rood' much cheaper than could the merchants on main street with their higher over-head. Their trade came first from the class which they had intended to reach, the Negroes and poor whites of the back-street section. However, the fame of Levine's soon spread and before long peoples ere coming from all over town to take advantage of its bargains.
It was the dry-goods which attracted more and more to Levine's, so the grocery side of the store became less and less important. The opening of a chain-store grocery on Main Street drew most of the cash grocery business in town and now the grocery section of Levine' has dwindled to a ore cubby hole where are sold only such small items as bread, soap, matches, cigarettes and a few similar necessities and these are carried mostly for the convenience of their customers in the neighborhood.
The Levines thought that they had at last arrived on easy street when they were able to sell the lots which they owned in Brooklyn for five thousand dollars. This money they put in a local bank until they could decide how best to Invest it, but before they had made their decision, the bank failed. What they were able to salvage, they bought a large house across from the store. The rent from this house brings in a small but steady income.
The bulk of the earnings made by Mr. and Mrs. Levine has been invested in the education of their four children, for that has been Mrs. Levine's chief ambition in life. The ambition has been realized at last and all of the children are now well equipped to make their own ways in life. The two sons are physicians, both having been educated at the south Carolina Medical College. The older son, now thirty-three yards old, first entered the public health service and later, after doing special study at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., specialized in diseases of the spine. He is now a highly esteemed member of his profession in one of the large cities of the state. The younger brother, who is twenty-four, is interning in a hospital in the same city.
The older son married a nurse, a Jentile and a Baptist, and his mother had no objection at all to the marriage. While she says she is an Ortodox Jew, she makes no claim to any strong religious feeling.
"What's religion?" she countered when asked how he felt regarding her son's marriage to a Jentile. "If they love each other--why not? Besides, he doesn't go to church and neither does she, so they get along fine."
Mrs. Levine admits that she goes to the synagogue only once or twice a year "Our Sabbath is on Saturday, she explained, that is my busiest day. I can't close up the store and go to the synagogue, can I? Ha!" she pursed her mouth, hunched her shoulders and gesture with her hands. 'The Synagogue don't make a living for me, Huh?
The other two children are girls and since the Levine children seem to have chosen their professions in pairs, the girls are both teachers of high school commercial courses. Both of them were graduated from the state college for women at Rock Hill, The older girl, who is thirty-five, teaches in Albany, N. Y. She has traveled abroad and studied at Oxford University during a summer session. The younger daughter is twenty-six and teachers in one of the high schools in the same city where her brothers are located.
Her object in life accomplished and Mr. Levine in Palestine with no livelihood of returning any time soon, Mrs. Levine is tired and would like to sell her business and retire. This she intends to do as soon as she can dispose of her affairs profitably. In this event, she planes to go and live with her children.
In the meantime, however, she is still obliged to work hard in the store, although she now is able to afford a servant to look after the house and a clerk to help her in the store. The clerk, however, is of little service to Mr. Levine and is employed more as a companion than a clerk, for Mrs. Levine's customers will allow no one to wait upon them except Mrs. Levine. They will wait patiently until she has finished serving those who have come ahead of them rather than have someone else serve them. It is an odd sight to see a clerk standing around helplessly, while the proprietor does all the work--but this is the situation at Levine's. The truth of the matter is that a clerk at Levine' should have to devote the rest of her life to learning the stock and then probably she would never learn it, for it is composed of such a bewildering array. If you ask the clerk for a certain article, nine times out of ten she has to relay the question to Mrs. Levine, who, after futile attempts at directing the clerk as to its location, has to stop what she is doing and find it herself. Moreover, if the clerk tells you the price of a piece of goods, she has no authority to lower it or throw in a yard and a half extra for the price of a half-yard. It is, therefore, easy to understand why a clerk at Levine's merely adds to the crowded condition of the shop. But Mrs. Levine considers that the present one, because she is young and enthusiastic, earns her salary by just being around to run errands during the day and help carry on conversations in the evening.
Clerks in the store were no good even when Mr. Levine and the children were at home to help. Nobody wanted anybody but Mrs. Levine to wait on them for neither the father nor any of the children could accomplish a sale without the aid of Mrs. Levine, anyway. And none of them could put half o; the pep and excitement into a sale that she could. It was the private opinion of the public that Mr. Levine was lazy, Certainly, he seemed utterly helpless when it came to serving customers and gradually he got to the point where he didn't even try, but spent most of his time sitting on a box beside the door apparently lost in a newspaper printed in some foreign language.
At least he would sit there until a sharp Yiddish command brought him grumbling to his feet. Sometimes he would talk back and the conversation would wax faster and louder until Mr. and Mrs. Levine would be shouting at each other across the amused heads of their customers like a couple of angry parrots--one hoarse and the other shrill.
One Saturday afternoon when the store was crowded with Negroes, Mrs. Levine, disgusted at her husband's obvious indifference to making sales, set him to watching the Negroes to see that nothing was stolen, An unobserved person, so minded, could have easily secreted a piece of goods beneath her coat and walked off with it. On this occasion, Mr. Levine's attention bad wandered back to his newspaper and Mrs. Levine looked up just in time to see a Negro girl going out of the door with a tell-tale piece of cloth trailing behind her. She shrilled a warning Mr. Levine dropped his paper and gave chase.
Mrs. Levine was so excited that she left her own customer and dashed up the crowded aisle to the door. She stood in the doorway, arms skimbo and eyes snapping, watching her fat, puffing mate being gradually and surely loft behind by his more fleet-footed quarry. And then, unable to bear her wrath in silence any longer, shouted at the top of her lungs. I hope you fall down and break your neck!"
He didn't break his neck, but it is possible that, in the light of later events, his spirit was broken by this and similar incidents, for when the, opportunity came for him, to leave home, he grasped it--and he has never come back.
Mr. Levine's father, according to Mrs. Levine, accumulated a comfortable fortune in Brooklyn and, being a deeply religious Jew, invested eight thousand dollars in property in Palestine with the view- of going there to live when he retired. He died before he was able to realize his ambition and the duty of going to Palestine to dispose of the property devolved upon Mr. Levine, when he reached Palestine, he found that the property had increased in value to around forty thousand dollars. He found also that squatters had taken possession of it and that time-consuming and expensive law suits were necessary to remove them. It later developed that money invested in Palestine cannot be transferred to any other country so Mr. Levine had one of two choices--to walk off and leave his property, or to stand by it. He chose to stand by it. He asked Mrs. Levine to go to Palestine and look things over with the idea of settling there. She went, but she didn't stay.
"Didn't you like it? I inquired.
She made a face and hunched her shoulders high in the air. "Bah!" she exploded. I wouldn't live there if they give me the whole country--the Arabs will never let the Jews live in peace in Palestine!"
So, there the Levines are.
But Mrs. Levine apparently does not pine over the situation. Her busy days leave her no time for pining and at night she is too tired to' do anything more than sit in her comfortable upstairs living room and read the daily paper or listen to the radio. She is very fond of the radio, her favorite programs being music and lectures, and she also has a radio in the store, both of them being gifts from her older son. Of later years, since she has more leisure, she likes to mingle with other people and attends the band concerts and all public 'Meetings. She reads very little, aside from the one daily newspaper to which she subscribes. She also likes the movies and goes frequently. She has an automobile and when the children come home for their vacations, she accompanies them on trips to the beach and other places.
Mrs. Levine has never been back to Poland since she left it as a girl of fifteen and says she has no special desire to go back, although she still has one sister living, there. She thinks she is very lucky to be living America and says she could not trade places with anybody in her native lands.
She is very proud of her children and her face lights up when someone inquires about them, for she likes nothing so much as to talk of them and their accomplishments.
"Your children are very good to you, aren't they? I observed when she informed me that her son had given her both radios.
She lifted her shoulders and threw up her hands, "why not! If it hadn't been for me, they wouldn't be where they are now!"
She takes all the credit as a matter of course--and perhaps justly. But one is reminded of Mr. Levine with Ids sullen, closed face -and one wonders.
THE END