"ALL I DO IS JUST HEADS"
Written by: Miss Grace McCune Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah. E. Hall Area 6 - Athens
and
John N. Booth Area Supervisor Federal Writers' Project Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Ga.
May 4, 1939
April 26, 1939
Daisy M. Johnson (Negro)
1262 W. Broad Street
Athens, Georgia
Hairdresser
G.M.
"ALL I DO IS JUST HEADS"
April showers had drenched me and my feet were encrusted with red mud before my long walk ended at Mary Smith's dingy five-room cottage. Just as I entered the little hedge-enclosed yard the sunshine broke through the clouds and I paused to look at a solitary red rose bush that was a blaze of beauty. Several other rose bushes scattered about the yard were just beginning to bud, and the buttercups had almost finished blooming.
Flower boxes edged the narrow porch that extended across the front of the house. The white cushion covers, scarves, and "tidies" that covered the tables, the chair backs and the swing were immaculate. Despite its crowded state, the porch was an inviting place that would become even more attractive with the blossoming of the rose vine that rambles over the end.
The neatly-clad young Negress who answered my knock at the door was hardly light enough in color to be called a mulatto, "Yes, mam," she said in answer to my questions, "this is Mary Smith's house, but she’s sick in bed this morning. I’ll go ask her if she can talk to you."
She promptly returned to the door with the announcement, "Mary says will you come in? She don’t feel like gitting up." As I followed the girl I noticed the gally-patterned linoleum floor covering and the only hall furniture which consisted of a small table over which a mirror was suspended.
Coming in out of the bright sunshine Mary's room seemed very dark. "Have a seat!" I heard her say before I could distinguish the outlines of the bed upon which she lay, "I'm sorry I can't git up."
The girl, who had admitted me to the house, raised the shades to let in a little light and placed a rocking chair by the bed for me. "Does you want anything else, Mary?" she inquired.
Mary's reply was negative and the girl left us alone.
"Did you want to see me about anything special?" Mary asked.
"Yes, I did," I told her, "but I don't want to worry you while you are sick."
"Oh, I ain't that sick," she said, "Just tell me what it's all about."
"I just wanted you to tell me of your experiences as a hairdresser, for I feel sure they will be interesting," I replied.
"Well," she said, "I've been doing that kind of work for around ten years. But first, tell me what it is you want to discuss about my work, and why you want to know it?"
After a short conversation it became evident that she would have been disappointed if for any reason I had declined to record her story.
"Well," she said, "I just have to stay in bed and the doctor won't let me up, and I do get so lonesome. I was just thinking the other day about how times have changed since I was little. Everything has advanced and improved so fast. The greatest blessing that has come to our people has been the education that we are getting. It is a help to us, as well as to the white folks that we work for, for it makes us able to give them so much better service, in the many ways that the people of my race work for them.
"Now, one way to prove that I am right about this is like this: suppose I am hired out to you and you give me a recipe to make something by. If I can’t read that recipe, what good will it do for you to hand it to me? If I can’t read, you will have to stand right over me and tell me what to do, until I have learned how to follow the directions by heart. All that time you might be wanting to get out, maybe to church, or a club meeting, or perhaps to a picture show, or to go calling on your friends. When you do go out, if I am your servant, you leave me in charge of your home. What if the telephone rings? I have to answer it. If I can't write, then I can’t take down the name of the person who called, or the number that someone may want you to call back, and by the time you get home, I am apt to have forgotten it, People of our race need good educations to be able to do satisfactory work for white people now.
"And again, when white people need someone to take care of their children they want someone who can read and write. It is natural that they prefer someone that can help train the children, for there is no end to the influence that the nurse has on the child, and to be able to be a good nurse, education is a necessity. Now, we have to go clean, and wear good clothes. It is not like it was in our grandmother’s day and time. Servants of that generation had no education and never thought anything about it. They only knew how to do what the white folks told them to. Then, everyone did their work the same way and most of the cooking was done on the open fireplaces, often in the same room where the family spent most of their time. Yes, my dear, times have changed.
"I was reared in the country, and had but little education, but today there is no excuse for anyone not learning if they want to. The young and the old are provided with day schools and night schools too. Most of our people are taking advantage of this great opportunity, and I find that even I am not too old to learn, and so I am trying to learn all that I can.
"Up to a few years ago I had worked for white people all of my life, and I only stopped when my health got so bad. I enjoyed working for them, and loved the people I worked for. And you can realize that my work was satisfactory from the fact that I can ' go back to them any time. I have worked for some of the best, as well as for some of the wealthiest families in this town, and they don’t forget me now since I am sick. I don’t know what Negroes would do without the white folks for they have to depend on them for their living. They give us our Jobs. Of course, you know that many of our people have their own businesses now, but none of it would last if it wasn’t for the white folks. If they didn’t give us work, none of the businesses could stand. We even have our own insurance companies now, run by Negroes on the same order that the white people run their insurance companies. But if we couldn’t make our weekly or monthly payments how long do you think our companies would last? Not long, I am sure. And we couldn't pay them long, if we did not have our work with the white folks.
"I don't think the white folks have ever realized that every advantage that has come to them has been a help to the Negroes too.
"There is one thing that I don't think white people have ever given enough thought to, and that is the smallness of the wages paid cooks, maids, butlers, and in fact, all servants. You know, as a general thing house servants don't get over two or three dollars a week. And while it's true that the most of them do get. one or two meals a day where they work, yet we do have to have a place to stay, and that calls for house rent; we have to wear good clothes and shoes and be clean, to hold our jobs, and all of that costs money, oftentimes more money than they pay us. What self-respecting white people would be willing to have us working in their kitchens and all through their homes if we were filthy, ragged, and barefooted? But how many of them are willing to pay enough to provide the things they expect of us? Now, don't you think for one minute that I'm knocking my good white people: I Just don't think some of them have ever looked at it in just this way, for if they did they would pay better wages. After all it would be an investment for it would go right back to them, as all of us Negroes love to buy things, and the money-would be quickly spent in the stores and other places of business.
"Our mothers and grandmothers went, to church in everyday calico dresses and if they wore any shoes at all, they had on heavy old work shoes. They were not ashamed of the way they looked, for they didn't think they needed anything else. Standards have changed now. While they may not have needed better clothes then, they surely do now. White people did not require so much in the way of appearance of them then, as they do now.
"We have gone far since the day freedom was declared. We were turned a loose with nothing in the world to start on except what the white people gave us and that was not much, for at that time our white folks had but very little left with which to provide for themselves. No matter though, how little they might have, it has always been our white folks that have helped us to get started on the way to being self-supporting.
"Now we have our schools, churches, doctors, nurses, drug stores, insurance companies, and many other things. And they are just some of the blessings that have proven what education can do for Negroes. Now I’m getting down to the subject you came here to talk about: one of the greatest blessings that education has given to the Negro race is the hairdresser.
"I didn’t have enough money to take the complete course in beauty culture when I started out to learn my trade about 10 years ago, so all I do is just heads. And it cost me $25 to learn how to do them. Of course if I'm ever able I'm going to complete the entire course. You may have heard before that many of the principles of beauty culture originated from the old home-made preparations and crude methods used by our grandmothers in their efforts to improve their appearance.
"First, consider our hair. It is very different when you compare it with your hair. Ours is hard, harsh, and nappy. It is said that condition is the result of centuries of work under tropical sun. It is impossible to do anything with our hair without the use of oils. In our grandmothers' days, they boiled heart leaves, that they gathered in the woods, with hog lard to make their hair oils. The heart leaves gave it a nice spicy smell. They had to use iron combs because there wasn't anything else that could go through that nappy hair. Just before church days, work with their woolly hair went on fairly by the wholesale. They first washed and dried the hair, and then oiled it, using plenty of oil. After that the iron combs were heated in the fire. You may not know it, but our combs have to be heated before our hair can be combed. After the hair was combed, it was parted into what was called 'twists.' And then the work was really started. Each twist of hair was wrapped so tightly with cords or string that sometimes blisters formed on their heads. You know the Bible says that a woman's hair is her crowning glory and that everyone should take care of their hair, and what I have just told you goes to show that even in slavery times Negroes did what they could to follow that teaching from the Good Book.
"People that couldn't get the iron combs, used forks to untangle their hair. Even in slavery times Negro women dreaded to see their hair turning gray, so they followed the custom of their white mistresses, by rinsing their hair with sage tea. In those days, powder for Negroes was unheard of, but care of the face was not entirely neglected. They very carefully saved beef tallow and mutton suet from the home-cooked meats, and used them as we use our face creams today. These things were more necessary for Negroes then than for white folks, for as I have said our hair and skin are very different from those of the white race. If we do not oil our hair it comes out, and if we do not grease our skin it dries out and cracks and then sores and infections have to be dealt with.
"Vaseline, or petroleum Jelly, had come into use among Negroes in my mother's day but not all Negro women were able to raise the cash to buy it and many of them continued the use of the old home-made tallows and suets. I was grown before I ever knew anything about any face bleach other than borax. That's just the plain old Twenty-Mule Team borax that's advertised so much in the papers and on the radio, and I still say it's a fine face wash, and is mighty good for the Negro skin. According to my good old grandmother, cleanliness is the first principle of beauty culture. She always did say that if folks would keep their skin clean with good pure home-made soaps, and then not eat so much meat and greasy food, that they wouldn't have bumps and pimples on their faces, and that they would be healthier looking. And she was mighty right about healthy looks being good looks. It is true that when folks had to depend on home-made soaps they never had so many bumps and pimples on their faces as they do now. But, I would just like to young see anybody make these young folks take their baths with that old homemade lye soap. They just won’t do it, for they say it burns their skin."
A knock on the bedroom door interrupted us. "Come in," called Mary, and a tall, very feeble looking old Negress entered. Her faded but clean print dress was a few inches longer than the heavy coat that was buttoned carefully as though she might be expecting cold weather on this warm April day. A ragged felt hat was pulled down over her almost white hair, and in one hand she carried a long heavy staff on which she leaned; in the other was a bulging flour sack which she was handling with the utmost care.
"Why, Aunt Julie I" Mary delightedly exclaimed, "How did you ever get way over here? Sit right down in that chair and rest, for I know you’re tired."
The old woman sat down in the chair indicated and placed the staff conveniently at hand. Opening the flour sack she brought forth a large bunch of flowers. "I heered you was sick," she said, "and I just hadda come to see ’bout you and fetch you some of my flowers. Dey ain’t so fine, but dey’s all I had to cheer you up with."
"They are lovely," Mary assured her. "Susie," she called, and the girl who had admitted me responded. Seeing the old woman, Susie ran to her. "Well, Aunt Julie, it’s so good to see you. How does you feel today? I know you are tired if you walked all the way over here. Let me have your hat and coat.”
"Never mind 'bout my hat and coat. Just take dese here in flowers and put 'em  in water for your maw. Course she didn't really need no more flowers with all dem others folks is brung her, but I didn't have nothing else that I thought would help her to feel better.”
"Why, Aunt Julie, these narcissuses are lovely,” Susie exclaimed, "Did you grow them?”
"Course I did. Who else did you think done it? Dere ain’t no man 'bout my house to do nothing,” was the rather sharp reply. Susie looked at me and grinned as she went out of the room with the flowers.
Aunt Julie now turned her attention to me. "I didn't know company was here,” she queried. "Who am dis? She looks pow'fuly lak somebody I'se seed.”
Mary explained my presence after she had introduced me to her guest. ”We were just talking how times have changed in the last few years, Aunt Julie," she said.
"Tain’t only de times dat's changed,” the old woman retorted. "just look at de folks! Dey ain't no ways lak dey was in my branging-up. Never seed no sich going-ons in my young days.”
"Why, Aunt Julie! What's wrong with our people now?” Mary asked innocently enough, but the merry twinkle in her eyes betrayed her desire to provoke a sharp reply.
"Dey's all headed straight for predition, dat's what’s de matter," Aunt Julie snapped, "Just you notice how dey's all of 'em dancing, smoking, and yes, fighting. Dem common, triffing Niggers next door to me fit all night long and I didn't git nary a wink of sleep." Evidently considering that she had covered her subject thoroughly, she turned to Mary, and with a searching look, said, "Mary, what's de trouble wid you dis time?"
"Well, Aunt Julie, the doctor says it’s my old gall bladder trouble come back, and that my heart is acting up again."
"I knows from my own self dat tain't no use to be paying so much 'tention to what dem doctor-mens says," Aunt Julie orated, "I done quit taking dat medicine for my high blood presser, and I ain't taking a single thing now but salts and lemon juice, and my presser ain't a bit higher’n it was. I knows dat by my feelings. But, say! Do dat 'oman erost de street here, still sell milk? If she do, I wants Susie to run over dere and buy me some."
"Yes, Aunt Julie," Mary replied, "she still sells milk and Susie will be glad to git it for you. But surely you are not thinking of going home so soon. I was so in hopes you'd come to spend the day with me."
"No, child, I ain't staying no whole day," the old woman said, "'cause I'se gotta git on back."
In response to her mother’s call, Susie came in, and Aunt Julie carefully reached down into her flour sack again and brought up a half-gallon fruit jar which she handed to the girl, giving her the coin with which to pay for the milk. Susie left on her errand, and Aunt Julie began questioning Mary to learn in who had sent the many bunches of flowers that were in vases and fruit jars about the room.
As they discussed the merits of the different flowers, and their donors, I looked about the room. Mary’s double bed, a dresser, washstand, chest of drawers, trunks, tables of various sizes, and five large rocking chairs, comprised a partial list of the contents of the small room. The lace curtains that draped the windows were fresh and clean, and containers of flowers rested on practically every available space. A large bowl of pansies was on a table near Mary’s bed. The room was crowded with furniture, but it was clean and tidy, and Mary’s bed was especially fresh and clean looking.
"It sho looks lak you’s got plenty of friends, jedging from all dese flowers,” Aunt Julie said, "and you’d better stay in dat bed till you gits good and well dis time," she urged as she made ready for her departure.
Susie had returned with the jar of milk and offered to put it in the flour sack. Aunt Julie stopped her.
"Never you mind ’bout dat,” she said, ”tain't nothing in dat sack for you to see.” She carefully placed the jar in the sack, and declining to accept their invitation to spend the day, she left, with the final admonition, "Now Mary, you take keer of yourself.”
Mary watched through the window as Aunt Julie went slowly up the street, leaning heavily on her staff. She did not speak until the old woman had passed out of sight, then she turned to me and said:
"Poor old soul! She is really a dear, and she's everybody's 'Aunt Julie.' She lives by herself. No one knows just how old she is, unless it's the folks who recorded her application for an old age pension, but she really gets about pretty good for one that seems so old. She made me forget what we were saying."
"We were discussing the use of home-made soap to prevent pimples," I said.
Mary laughed. "Well, it would really get you clean, I know, for I have had many a bath with that old home-made lye soap. Still, I'm just like the rest of them now: I don’t like to use it either. I guess the main reason we like the commercial soaps is that they are perfumed. And there are enough varieties of soaps in the stores now for 'most everybody to satisfy their particular choice.
"As far as the pimple problem is concerned, we eat yeast cakes now, and use the various remedies that are on the market. And let me tell you - in case you don’t already know it - there are many, many patented preparations that claim to get rid of pimples.
"One thing that I hate to admit to you, is that all of our folks used to be lousy; at least, most all of them were. Our old nappy hair was just a breeding place for lice. Nothing has been found yet that is a better de-louser than tobacco and hog lard boiled together. I'm telling you, there are no lice left after a thorough application of that old hog lard-tobacco ointment. Still I'll have to admit there are several patented ointments on the market that will kill lice very nicely.
"I firmly believe that none of the advancements made by end for our race have been of more blessing than the trade of hairdressing. No Negro can properly care for her own hair without help. That is, when she has successfully washed and combed it, she cannot press her own hair, or dress it very well."
"Tell me something of how you came to choose this work as your trade," I requested.
"Well, I hardly know, unless it was from my desire to go into business for myself. I didn't see how I could get ahead working on the small wages paid by white folks, and it did seem to me I could make a good living and maybe get something saved ahead, if I could get started as a hairdresser."
"Do you have much competition?" I asked.
"My dear, it's just as bad as it is among your folks. So many women are trying to do hairdressing who really do not have the training or the ability, and they have cut their prices down to 10¢, 20¢, or 25¢, just anything they can get, and that makes it hard for anybody to get a living out of it. The most of our people really can't pay very much, and they are apt to go to these places where they can't get it half-way done. Most of the women that do these cheap jobs never had any training except what they picked up in having their own work done. It is pretty generally true that a cheap price usually pays for mighty sorry work.
"I don't know of but two licensed shops in town. One of them is run by a New York woman who hasn't been here very long. It's said that she will rent her operating chairs out at $3 a week to local operators if they want to work in her shop, but that is entirely too much rent to charge in this place, for sometimes an operator don't take in that much in a whole week. In the other beauty shop here, the owner does all of her work. However, there are a number of others, who like myself have had the course, and do our work in our homes to save expenses.
"My instructor was well qualified to teach. She was also hired to give the agents who sold the cosmetics and other beauty preparations, instructions as to how to use them. Before you begin your course, you are supposed to have lined up thirteen customers, who will let you do their work. If they stuck to that rule, they wouldn't get to teach many operators, and if you can't prove you have thirteen customers ready, you can go on and take the course anyway.
"I'll never forget my first customer. She had hair about one inch long, and it was so coarse and harsh, and it had never been treated before. To begin with, she was a most peculiar woman and I was scared of her anyway. I didn't know what to do with that short hair, but I went ahead and washed it, and as we didn't have such things as dryers, I dried it with a towel. While I was rubbing it dry, and wondering what in the world I would do next after it was dry, she said:
"'Miss Mary, you can't do nothing with it, can you? It’s just too short, ain't it?'
"'Don’t you worry,’ I assured her, ’we won’t cross that bridge till we set to it.’ Well, at last it was dry, and there was no use to spend any more time rubbing. But, Lord! How it did look! The madame - that was my teacher - was watching, so I got out the pressing cream and went to work, and it was a job sure enough. I pulled end I stretched with those hot combs till I wondered if there was danger of my pulling her skin off. When I had finished pressing her hair the madame said, ’Give her a treatment for growing hair.’ I made that all right too, and when I had finished, after several hours of work, my customer was thrilled with her hair, and from then till now, she is still my customer. From its scant one inch of length, when she first came to me, her hair has grown to eight or ten inches and it’s so easy to dress now."
"How long does it take to do an average job on a head?” I asked.
"At least two hours," she replied, "and you have to work mighty fast if you finish a good job in two hours and do not slight anything.
"I love my work, and I’m mighty proud of the way it has progressed from the days when practically our whole equipment was heart-leaf hog lard ointment and maybe an iron comb or a metal fork. As I told you before I only took the hairdresser course. Well, any way, there is not much use in giving facials for not many of our folks want them, professionally done, and they do most of their own manicuring.
"Negro hair just won't take permanent waves, so we have but few calls for them. Our hair is entirely too harsh and woolly to be practical for a wave. We have hairpressers now that are much better for straightening hair than those old hot combs.
"Our procedure is to begin with a thorough shampoo, then to apply pressing cream, and block the hair off into small tresses; next we use the pressers, or the hot combs. My dear, you really do work when you press hair. After the hair is well pressed, it is oiled again - this time with a special oil; we use one special oil for waves, and another oil for curls. It takes all of this to do one head. And after we dry the hair following the shampoo, we can't use water at all, for one drop of water would ruin all our pressing and stretching. The problem of setting hair for white folks is so much simpler, because water can be used.
"We have to use every precaution to keep things sterilized for the protection of the customer as well as for our own safety. Nobody knows better than I do how easily diseases can be spread in a beauty shop if you are not extremely careful, and none of us are willing to risk infection. I am not really afraid to handle diseased heads, if I do my own sterilizing and have entire charge of the treatment of the head, for then I know what precautions are necessary. However, I do not claim to be a first class operator, because I do not operate a downtown shop. I had to buy all my equipment myself, and I have not been able to clear enough, profit to finance the initial expenses of a shop. In fact, I don't yet make enough to support us - there's nobody but my daughter and me; my husband has been dead several years.
"We take in washings, and with the money from them and with what I make with my hairdressing work, we manage very well. If there were not so many women doing this work so cheap, we could make more. While I do not make as high charges as those asked by the downtown shops, I am, in a measure entitled to, for all of us have to have an operator's license, and prove our qualifications to do the work, and that gives us the right to make the same charge.
"I don't think I told you that treatments vary, for almost every head of hair differs from the one you worked on last. A head of hair that is not so awfully harsh will go for two weeks on one dressing and still look nice, and that is as long as anyone should do without a shampoo. But on the other hand some of these heads of real harsh, nappy hair, can't stay fixed pretty for more than a week at a time. From that old custom of washing your hair with sage, has come a preparation that is widely sold on the market today, for the purpose of restoring the natural color of your hair. I have used that on some of my customers with good results, but I do not like to use any kinds of dyes, and won't do it if I can help it. However, there are some customers who just cannot bear the idea of gray hair, and others that have the idea they want to be blonde-headed. And what a customer insists on I might just as well try to do.
”Do you make up any of your preparations?” I asked.
”Oh, no! Our madame does all of that. Her preparations are sold all over the world. I also have the Poro system and it is good too. It has never failed me. Perhaps you have heard about it!”
"No, tell me about it.”
"Well, Madame calls, it a dream come true, for she says she dreamed one night of a way to make pressing cream that would straighten out Negro hair, and she started out to make it according to the way she dreamed of it. At that time she was living in one very poor little room. Now she has millions and lives in a mansion. She has agents and instructors all over the world, selling and using her preparations, and you know it must be good to earn all that for her.
"After all is said and done, I still love my white folks and nobody ever hears me say anything against them. For if it wasn't for them we would sure be lost. They are my friends and when I am in trouble I go to them, for their word goes farther than mine any time. They are the ones that makes the laws that all of us has to obey.
”Our people do not stick together as the white folks do. I guess that has come down to us from slavery time when our people could not manage their own affairs, and something of it is still in us - that dependence on them. I wish we were different. Maybe we will change in the future generations, for our folks are advancing so well in everything else.
"After all it is a grand old world and I am happy to be in it. But I have learned that it doesn't pay to lay up all of your treasures on earth. Something or somebody will come along and take them every time. It is best to lay up treasures in heaven by taking care of widows, orphans, and the sick, and all the others that are in sorrow and trouble. Treat your fellow man right, and you will feel like saying honestly, that it is a grand old world that we live in. Unity is the thing. United we stand: divided we fall. We can’t stand long when we are divided among ourselves.
"Now I think I'll have to rest. But let me tell you that you have made me feel better, and I am glad that you came this morning, and I'm hoping you will come back, for it has been a real pleasure to talk with you."
When I had thanked her for her story and for giving me so much of her time, and was expressing the hope that she would soon be well, there was a knock at her bedroom door. As I left, an insurance man entered, and I heard him tell Mary that he had come to arrange about her claim for sick benefit.
<text not clear>
