There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project. A third version entitled "The Rev. R. J. Everett" can be found on pages 14775-14795.
January 31, 1939
Rev. J.R. Everett (white)
Washington, N. C.
Minister
W.L. Vaughan
Edwin Massengill & N.B.
NC-486A
THE BACHELOR PREACHER
"I was born January 11, 1892, in a little tenant farmhouse in Edgecombe County, North Carolina. I am the oldest of a third marriage on my father's side and of a second marriage on my mother's side. Younger than I were three sisters, one of whom died in infancy, the others now living. My father had four children by his first wife, and a girl child by his second. That girl married at sixteen, when I was about five. The only child born in my mother's first marriage died in Infancy.
"My father was a tenant sharecropper, very poor and entirely uneducated. He could not write his name and made no effort to learn. As long as he lived he made his mark on checks and legal papers. He was without ambition. He could and did work, but he was a poor manager and seemed not to care whether he made anything more than a bare living.
"My mother was also uneducated. However, at one time she had worked as housekeeper and cook in the home of a prominent family in the county, and there she had learned some appreciation of the courtesies and social graces and of the better ways of living. She was most industrious, and she had some ambition for herself and for her family. She did learn to write her name and to read a little by spelling out each word as she read. She was handicapped because of lack of opportunity. She had been left an orphan when a small child and had been reared by a cousin who, according to her, made a slave of her.
"When I was about one year old ray father moved to another farm where he used his own team and simple farming implements but still farmed on shares. Six years later he moved again. He had got in debt to a 'time merchant' with whom he traded, and this man having a mortgage on all his feed, team and farming implements foreclosed on him and came and carried away almost everything he had. The few things that were left he and we children carried off to the woods and hid. Then with the help of the landlord he bought two sorry mules and some old plows and began his crop. That year he managed to pay his expenses and to clear about $100 to pay to the 'time merchant.'
"From that on he managed to make a frugal living and to pay his expenses until he gained a reputation for honesty and became able to get credit without giving crop liens or mortgages, as most other farm tenants of his class were forced to do. After four years on this farm, he moved again to a farm where the family remained for thirty-four years until his death. The houses in which I lived as a child were of a very poor sort, with no ceiling or paint and with cracks through which one could see, and through which the chill winds blew, in winter, as I well remember.
"We always had plenty to eat of a sort, which was mostly plain pork, and the few vegetables that we grew in our garden. Often we had to buy 'white side' from the store before the year was out and hog-killing time came again. I believe we really looked forward to hog-killing time more than we did to Christmas. We kept no cow and no milk was used by the family. Yes, we had plenty to eat, but not always the kind of food we needed. I know now that even in my college and seminary days I did not have a balanced and proper diet.
"When I was seven years of age I began school in a one-room, unpainted schoolhouse without ceiling or plaster, and furnished only with homemade desks and benches. It was a four month's term with one teacher. I attended there for four terms. In the spring my father would have me stay at home sometimes for two or three days at a time to help plant corn or do some other farm work such as a child of my age could do.
"I cannot remember when I did not have an ambition to rise above my childhood environment and early station in life. I always thought the best way to do this was to get an education. As I grew older, though unable to go to school, and with no prospects in sight for the future, I was determined to do so in some way, regardless. I fully believed it could be done if I remained willing to make sufficient sacrifice. I am now at forty-seven years, still striving to improve myself and to learn and grow, probably working harder toward that end than in any period of my life. I am the only one of the seven children of our family to reach maturity who had any ambition for an education, or desire to accomplish anything more than to make a bare living. None of the others went even as far as the seventh grade. Just how and why I was different, and why I was imbued with this ambition, is more than I have ever been able to explain. But I believe that God in his infinite wisdom and mercy laid His hand upon me and called me to a work he wanted done.
"I was not a robust boy, and I have never been husky. In fact, all my life I have had to fight delicate health. To what extent this has effected my early handicaps and tendencies, I don't know. For the past several years I have not been entirely well, which I believe is the result of worry and mental and nervous strain during my college and seminary days, especially the latter. Since I left home I have always had adequate medical care. Before that, such things as dental care was neglected.
"When I was eleven years old, my father became ill of rheumatism and for a whole year he was bedridden. From this trouble he never fully recovered. He was never able to work to any extent afterwards and walked with difficulty by the help of a walking cane, sometimes having to use two at a time to get along. He took me out of school to work, regularly, and I plowed every day, doing almost all kinds of farm work. I would go to school after the cotton was picked, which was usually about the first of December, until we began to break land for the next crop, usually about the second week in January, or if the weather was bad, the first of February. Thus I was in school from six to eight weeks each year, with the exception of two years when I did not attend at all.
"My boyhood days were probably not what one would call happy. I did not have the freedom of play and the advantages of normal childhood. After my father's illness, when I was eleven, I shared the responsibility of the family and continued to do so until I was twenty. At that time my father gave me my freedom, telling me that I might have that year to go to school since I had always wanted an education. I knew then that I had been denied school life during early years when a person should go to school and laying the foundation for a well-rounded life. I, therefore, became very serious minded and have never been able to get entirely away from it. I have worried a lot and often thought everything was against me. I have always felt I had to fight for all that I ever had or gained.
"I was denied opportunity to develop the social graces and amenities so necessary to a full and well-rounded career in any vocation, especially mine. Therefore, either from nature or because of early environment and lack of opportunities, I developed an inferiority complex, and I have always been, and still am, rather timid. I have not had sufficient self-confidence. But I have had great determination, and would never give up or admit defeat.
"For eight years I have been pastor of the First Baptist Church here. When I came here the denomination had just emerged from a serios split, and the church membership was torn by dissensions. The conditions were not unlike those which usually prevail under similar circumstances. I had Just returned from my second stay at the seminary. The church was burdened with old debt, and contributions were inadequate to meet current expenses. A few of the members and regular attendants were either lukewarm or sullen. Most of those who were loyal were either poor or of very modest means. Many were unemployed. The picture was by no means attractive. Thoughtful members told me they needed a man of poise, judgement, assurance, and extreme patience. They did not minimize the difficulties, and my decision was based on a full knowledge of the conditions. Had I followed my own inclination and natural judgement, I might have declined. I knew I had none of the qualities outlined, unless it were patience. The growth and present harmony in the church has been the reward.
"Perhaps I am what psychologists call an introvert; I am certainly Introspective. How much came from environment, I am unable to determine; anyway, it makes no difference. Certainly my early surroundings and habits did not lead me toward the Baptist Church and the ministry. My early aim and ambition had been to go into business and make money, for I had always been deprived of advantages more money would have afforded me. But I surrendered that ambition, or rather substituted for it, to what I believed a higher one -- that of serving humanity in the highest possible way, and I feel that I have made some small success in my chosen calling.
"But to go back to my story, when my father gave me my freedom, at twenty, I rented sixteen acres of farm land on half-shares from our landlord and roomed at home, paying $5 a month board. I worked hard and practiced extreme self-denial in order to save money, and I cleared $500 from my part of the crop.
"The next year, Just after Christmas, I left home to attend a boarding school, the lowest-priced school I was able to find. While there I attended for the first time a Union Sunday School, and later Sunday School in the Baptist Church. My parents were not professing Christians, neither of them having been church members In their own way, they were devout, holding to the doctrine as taught generally by the Primitive Baptist Church. They attended church about once a month and took me with them. But they did not believe In Sunday Schools, and I never attended one until this time. At a revival meeting in the Baptist Church, the same year, I professed faith, though it was two years before I Joined the church. However I did form the resolution of serving humanity in a religious capacity as a teacher in the Sunday School. I still Intended to go in business, make money, and as a layman give my life and service as best I could to the Church.
"By working on the farm during the summers I was able to attend school there for two and a half years. Then I secured a position as a clerk in a general mercantile store where I worked for fourteen months, and this, together with $175 I borrowed, enabled me to go to Mars Hill College. At that time Mars Hill was just a high school giving a few college courses. During my studies there I managed to pay all my expenses by working around the school, mostly in the kitchen and dining hall, together with what I had earned on the farm during the summers. For three summers I rented four acres of tobacco, leaving someone to prepare the land and plant and take care of the plant beds while I was away at school, and having someone grade and market it after I had returned to school in the fall. Thus I cleared on ray summer work from $150 to not anything. One year my crop had been an entire failure.
"It Was at Mars Hill that I joined the church, fully determined to become a minister. And I became one of a group of ministerial students there. From a purely natural standpoint, I cannot now explain why I came to feel that I should preach. I had never had the least thought in that direction and it all came upon me without any known natural influence or reason, but I have never regretted the change and have never since that day felt the least doubt, or inclination to change.
"During the summer of my first year in college, at Wake Forest, through the influence of a minister friend, I was appointed pastor to some mission churches. This work I did through the next two years. I was twenty-six years of age when I entered Wake Forest. I only had $200 saved and owed $175 and some interest, which I borrowed to finish 'prep' school. With another student I batched. We did our own cooking and dishwashing and kept our rooms. We had sent to us, from home and from friends, some food, and the Sunday School at home sent me $16 per month for eight months of the first year. All my school days were a fight against poverty, and extreme frugality was always a necessary. At the same time, I was doing extra work to help make expenses. All this, no doubt, had a lasting effect on my health, as well as on my disposition and ultimate outlook on life.
"I finished at Wake Forest College in 1921, with a Bachelor of Arts Degree, after three years of attendance. By frugal living and with the help I received from my churches, I had been able to pay all my necessary expenses and save up $400, besides. I was able to pay what I owed from high school, and have a surplus of $200. From work during the summer as missionary and as assistant to a local pastor, I saved $100 and with the total I entered the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary at Louisville, Kentucky, that fall. Here I studied for the following two years, after which I accepted a call to a field--one village church and two country churches. This paid me $2,000 annual salary. During this time I paid for an automobile and saved enough money to pay all ray debts -- money I owed to the seminary loan fund, and a note at the bank for $200 -- and had about $400 left.
"Again in September 1925, I returned to the seminary to finish work on my Th. M. degree. Just before graduation in May 1926, I was called home on account of my father's serious illness, which resulted in his death. On graduating, I was called to Plymouth, North Carolina, a small full-time county seat pastorate, where I remained for two years and seven months. But I was not yet satisfied with my education. I resigned and returned to the seminary for post-graduate work. During that time my health was not so good and my money was insufficient, so I left without finishing my degree work and accepted my present pastorate.
"As a minister, my salaries, while modest, have always been adequate for my needs. I have never been able to save anything except the accumulated reserve on my $6,000 of life insurance. As I have not married, and have no dependents, I have usually been able to live comfortably and enjoy some cultural advantages that I could probably not otherwise have afforded on the small salary I have received. My annual salary has averaged about $1,700. For a pastor with a family this is far from adequate. I think a pastor should receive at least $2,400. With less he is undoubtedly handicapped in his work, and unable to provide education for his children and make the necessary protection for age and disability, even with such help as may be provided by Ministers Old Age Pension, or Relief and Annuity of the Denominations.
"In politics," he said in response to a change of subject, "I followed my father and brothers and registered as a Democrat, which I have always continued to be up to the present time. However, I am an independent democrat and feel that I should vote for the best man, and for principles rather than party. In recent years I have voted for a number of Republicans when I thought they would better represent my ideals.
"My attitude toward so-called worldly pleasures for others is not harsh. I refrain from criticism and sermons of bitter denunciation. I spend most of my time in doing something pertaining to my work. I try to follow a daily schedule of study, reading, and visiting. Occasionally I play a game of golf, or go fishing. While in school I neglected proper exercise and recreation. I usually have two weeks vacation in summer, but spend most of it at some religious assembly.
"You might say that I have lived a life of hard work and suffered many privations, but it has not been without certain advantages. Having been myself an under-privileged boy, I have had a more sympathetic feeling for, and understanding of others of like kind. This attitude and lack of a feeling of superiority has enabled me to better minister to the poor and the unfortunate in my churches, and in communities where I have served. In spite of such success as I have been able to enjoy in securing an education, and regardless of my college and seminary degrees, I feel that there is something lacking that I have never been able to supply. Because of it, perhaps, I feel the better able to mingle with and minister to all classes in a way I might not have been had my early life been otherwise."