POCKETS IN AMERICA
CATAWBA INDIANS.
On the banks of the Catawba River, nine miles East of Rock Hill, the only State Indian reservation in the United states extends over 652 acres of poor land in the hills of York County. Here, in wretched poverty, live the Catawbas - the last remaining tribe of the countless red men who were once ruled Carolina fields and forests. Once a powerful people, numbering in 1682 as many as 6,000 souls with 1,500 warriors, they have dwindled to 215.
Only 15 or 20 of this number are of full blood and of these, their chief and two others alone can still speak the Catawba language, though before the civil War, Catawba children were not even taught English till 10 years of age.
The entire aspect is one of hopeless misery and abject poverty. The 34 frame houses are ill-furnished, dilapidated abodes into some of which three of the 40 families are crowded and live in squalor. Inhabitants of the surrounding community attest their liking for the Catawbas, but are continually impressed by their silent resignation. In front of their pitiful homes, their clothing bespeaking their tragic state, they sit, gazing into who knows what dreams of past freedom and plenty.
Through T. C. Flowers of Rock Hill, State Indian agent, South Carolina distributes an annual dole of $7,500 to the Catawbas, which amounts to about $30 apiece. There is little additional income. Timber was stripped from the area years ago; hunting and fishing, the rod man's natural sources of food, are things of the past. Encroaching civilization has devoured their former means of livelihood - the sale of deerskins.
Catawbas were always noted as hunters rather than farmers, delegating largely to their squaws the tilling of fields. But even skilled farmers could raise little on these barren acres where broomatraw is the only crop that flourishes. Each family is given the empty privilege of planting what ever land is neceassary, provided there is no infringement on the adjoining home site. There is no equipment owned, however, and no effort is made by authorities to give modern agricultural instruction. The only livestock on the reservation consists of three mules and a couple of cows.
There is little to mark this handful of survivors as Indians. Their clothing and speech, their mode of living are those of the poor whites. Only the complexion of the full-bloods, the high checkbones of the mixed breeds indicate their race.. They are still proud of their Indian ancestry, but also of the white blood which has been infused into their veins, and they resent any insinuation that Negroes have ever been absorbed into their number.
Chief Sam Taylor Blue is their intelligent, 64-year-old, half-breed leader, who acts as their spokesman and is accorded universal respect by his people. He was elected by popular acclamation to remain chief for life, but can be deposed at the pleasure of the tribe. His office is honorary and advisory. In the event of civil or criminal offenses he is powerless miscreants are tried by local or State authorities. In former years a chief was elected every four years. There was no tribal government and Catawbas were described as an ideal nation, with no laws needed, no crimes committed.
Though he himself can neither read nor write, Chief Blue was largely instrumental in securing for his people the two-room, State-supported, two-teacher school where white teachers now instruct fifty-odd pupils through nine grades. Due also to Chief Blue's efforts, Catawba children are admitted in white schools and a few of them attend Rock Hill high schools upon finishing their own grades.
The chief's house presents a little less depressing appearance than most of the two-room shacks. Its interior walls are plastered with small linoleum rugs in somewhat picturesque effect, and before the front porch staadsone of the few trees of the settlement. Chief Blue shows a childlike pleasure in being photographed but his efforts to do credit to the Nation are a pathetic travesty. Hurriedly he will rush into his cabin to garb himself properly for the event.
His re-appearance shows him far from the authentic Catawba chief, who originally wore only apareely draped skins, his hair in a top-knot and with one or two eagle feathers stuck through. Now Chief Blue walks proudly forth in a cheap khaki Indian suit such as children love to don. His store-bought headdress is that derived from the Dakotah Indiana, in the style made cheaply familiar.
Chief Blue has what he calls the first American flag, with which he poses, for his photograph. It is evidently some Indian emblem and consists of a pole to the top of which are attached turkey feathers, in place of former eagle plumes.
Even their religion Catawbas have borrowed from white people. Formerly the tribelworshiped Wariwe, the supreme spirit in the sky, believing also in Wisi, a great evil spirit, and in many lesser spirits which inhabited trees, animals and almost everything. Apparently no missionary efforts were expended upon them before the Revolution, but Christianity was gradually adopted. In more recent years Mormon missionaries persuaded all but 15 or 20 Catawbas to accept that faith and in 1928 erected a Mormon chapel, of which Chief Blue is leader. His home is near the church.
Lost now are the arts of feather weaving, the making of typical Indian clothing, ornaments and ceremonial paraphernalia. Forgotten, the tribal dances, most notable among which was the "fire dance." The beautiful Indian myths are no longer preserved in the telling from parent to child. Tribal customs, long preserved, were gradually abandoned as each younger generation proved more indifferent toward old traditions than the preceding. Of the colored mats and baskets once skilfully woven of straw and strips of wood, nothing remains but a few old relics of the former craft, though basket fish-traps ("yewasap") are still occasionally made for service. Only one ancient art is perpetuated to help sustain the group the making of pottery.
The Catawbas are the only eastern Indians who vigorously pursue this primitive industry, using almost entirely prehistoric implements and methods, never having adopted the potter's wheel. Their only modern compromise is the substitution of a flat disk for the old rounded bottom of vessels. The notable excellence of Catawba pottery partly explains its survival. Cherokees in North Carolina make a little, having been taught, it is said, by Catawbas.
In the Waxhaw Swamp, which lies in and near the reservation, are three mines of pipe and pan clay from which clay is dug and used, after being cleaned of trash, without tempering material to make pottery. The moistened, blended clays are pounded with a pestle on a board and are afterwards pugged by hand. The bottom disk is first farmed and the walls of the vessel built up in sections as one successive ring of rolled clay is placed upon another and made fast until the desired size is obtained. Thinning and smoothing are accomplished with a wet mussel shell or piece of gourd and the rim is bent and leveled to suit. After two days drying the vessel is further thinned and smoothed, polished with a damp rag, a water-smoothed pebble and bone smoother.
Decorative designs are then traced on the moist surface with a cane knife; edges are marked with a rolled coin in place of the old toothed wheel; cord patterns are produced with twisted wire instead of the former bark twine. Life forms on relief are sometimes selected, but little of Indian character or design remains.
Burning for two or three hours usually takes place in front of the open hearth before direct heat for an hour or two or more is applied by inverting the pots over hot coals and covering then with dry pine bark. According to the degree of heat, a polished black or the typical reddish-yellow is obtained.
Pipes, pitchers and pots of various size and design are made - fragile but graceful. The Catawbas use little of their own pottery, peddling their craft in surrounding towns in exchange for clothing and to tourists along highways for small sums.
There are conflicting theories as to the catawbas' history and their degeneration.
In the office of the south Carolina secretary of state there is an old document which says that the catawbas were driven from Canada in 1650 by the conewango and the French: that they migrated to south Carolina where they were resented and fought by the Cherokees; that a peace patt resulted in the catawbas' settling Northwest of the Broad River, the Cherokees west.
Bearing out this theory is the Indian name, East Huppeday or Line River for the Broad, and the fact that no Indians settled on the neutral ground after the supposed pact between the catawbas and Cherokees.
Mooney, of the Smithsonian Institution, says that the catawbas were in their present locality in 1567 when the Spanish made an expedition from St. Helena and may have been the cauchule tribe of Desoto's chroniclers.
The Bureau of Ethnology collected 1500 words of the Catawba vocabulary in 1881 and classified the tribe as Siouan, originally from the upper region of the Ohio River.
After 1743, a number of smaller tribes were incorporated into a confederation known as the Catawba Nation, including the Wateree, waxhaw, Eno, Cheraw or Saraw, Congaree, Natchi, Yamasi, coosa, and others. The Catawbas sometimes called themselves "river people" and their present name was not applied until the 18th century. They were formerly Issas, Usheries, or Esaws.
The Catawba Path, which may have used by whites and Indians as early as 1650 as a great trading route, extended 400 miles up to the falls of the James River in Virginia. It was also known as the Occoneechi Path and the Virginia Path. The main trading route of the catawbas, however, was up from Charleston along the rivers. The catawba Nation was the junction for interior trade routes.
Though fiercely warlike toward other Indians, the catawbas proved a powerful ally of white settlers, taking their part in the French and Indian War, the Cherokee War, the Revolution, and various Indian uprisings. Their warriors later enlisted in the Confederate Army. The only instance of their antagonism toward whites was when the Spanish incited them for a short period to join the Yamasees in the massacres of 1711. The same year more than a hundred Catawbas accompanied Colonel John Barnwell to quell the Tuscarora uprising at New Born, North Carolina.
In the French and Indian War, Governor James Glen, of South Carolina, was opposed to the Catawbas' taking part, as contrary to their tradition of peace, but Washington, then a colonel in the British Army, urged that the Indians were needed to cope with Indians.
About this time King Haigler was the Catawba chief. The only recorded instance of a white man's being killed by a Catawba occurred during his reign. An itinerant Frenchman fascinated the Indians with his fiddle playing so that some of than were tempted beyond endurance and killed the violinist to break up his instrument and see whence came the music. For their crime they were summarily put to death by king Haigler.
As early as 1743, James Adair noted how quickly Catawbas assimilated the customs of whites, adopting their clothing, domestic animals and medicines. Haigler, a great and intelligent ruler, was distressed by the increasing drunkenness among his people since the whites had introduced them to "fire water". Assisted by his friend, samuel wyly, leader of the Quaker settlement at Camden, Haigler petitioned carolina in a touching appeal to help him stamp out the evil which was rapidly causing the deterioration of his tribe. Unfortunately, Haigler's temperance efforts were unavailing. In 1763 he was killed by Shawneer in ambush.
The next year a treaty was signed at Augusta, Ga., between the catawbas and South Carolina which confirmed to the tribe 15 square miles on both sides of the river. The plat was drawn by Haigler's friend, Samuol Wyly.
Smallpox began its ravages among catawbas in 1783 and their treatment of the disease was usually fatal. After drinking hot stimulants to produce profuse perspiration, they plunged naked into cold forest streams. From several epidemics, from losses in the war and from the effects of drinking, the tribe was sadly depleted after the Revolution.
Among the most interesting of recorded visits to the Indians is that of J. F. D. Smythe, an Englishman, who toured this country in 1784. He called the Catawbas' condition even than "a striking and melancholy example of ruin to Indians caused by the vicinity of white settlements." Squaws were described as hiding weapons when whiskey was in the wigwam, but in spite of their efforts, crimes were frequently committed by intoxicated braves, who were afterward for given and their deeds laid to evil spirits. Slaves to the pernicious habit, warriors neglected their hunting, squaws their agriculture, mothers their children. The cold baths to which Indians resorted as the close of a debauch sometimes resulted in death.
Another cause of depopulation among catawbas described by Syythe was frequent abortions. There was no ban promiscuous sex relationships before marriage nor was the girl's success in acquiring a husband thereby affected, but the use of Indian simples to destroy "the fruits of illicit unions" made squaws prone to miscarriages and they selfom bore more than two children in their entire lives. After marriage Indians were faithful, though mutual dislike ended in immediate divorce, leaving each party free to remarry without censure.
The visit of a white man, even for a few months, generally meant his establishment with a squaw, either courted by him or presented by her parents for the duration of his visit. The half-breed offspring of such alliances were cared for by The Nation. If the white man's squaw was the daughter of a chief and if the man decided to stay with the tribe, he was given a tract of land in a trust for his child who, like himself, was formally adopted into the Nation. The first white man to settle in catawba country (1755-1760), was an Irish trader, Thomas. Spratt. The Catawbas gave him lands and called him Kanawha (Friendly Brother). Spratt fought with his red brothers against the Cherokees and they demonstrated their devotion to him by breaking into the Charlotte jail to release him when he was confined for some midemeanor.
So completely did the Catawbas feel themselves part of the American people that after the Revolution they no longer called their rulers "king" but "general." "General" Peter Harris, who served in the Revolution and was afterward pensioned, had been adopted by kanawha spratt when orphaned by a smallpox epidemic Harris who died at the age of 70 in the spratt household, was buried by his own request in the family graveyard.
In a park at Fort Mill, York county, a monument was erected to Catawba Indians by capt. Samuel Elliott white and John McKee Spratt, a descendant of Thomas Kanawna spratt. Inscriptions outline the traditional history of the tribe, its part in various wars, treaties with south Carolina, and lists some of the outstanding warriors and chiefs.
The Catawbas were forced to leave possession of lands deeded them in 1764 by cherokee massacres, under colonel Williamson, a British officer. In 1782 they appealed to congress to secure them their tract and prevent forcible intrusion and congress recommended that south Carolina accede to their request. At Lancaster, May 27, 1791, Washington recorded in his diary that the scattered catawbas feared attempts were being made to take part of their acres.
Later historians described the sadly degenerated and depleted catawbas as the only Indians left in the State. Mills' Statistics (1826) described their rich lands as largely disposed by them to the whites with 99 year leases, renewable, on which the total rents amounted to $5,000 annually. Catawbas were said to dun for the rent before it was due and live in poverty and misry.
General Peter Harris, the catawba chief adopted by Thomas Spratt, appealed to the legislature for his people. His words, in part, follow:
"Our graves will soon be our only habitation. I am one of few stalks which still remain in the field after the tempest of the Revolution is passed .... I pursued the deer for subsistence; the deer are disappearing and I must stareve...In my youth I bled in battle that you might be independent; let not my heart in my old age bleed for want of your comiseration."
This petition resulted in a commission being appointed to ask that the Catawbas cede their lands to the state. The commission reported that the lands were all leased, the Indians wandering without homes or income, possessing only a few worthless horses and dogs, but that they seemed anxious to settle. The report recommended an appropriation of $5,000 to purchase land in a thinly settled region for the tribe and that the grant be so worded as not to permit leasing or selling unless the entire tribe desired to move to a distant place.
Following this report, a second trcaty was signed between the catawbas and the state at The Nation's Ford on the Catawba River. Terms were that south Carolina in return for the 15 square miles deeded catawbas in 1764, was to invest $5,000 in Haywood county, N. C., or some other hilly, sparsely populated area for the tribe, who, if not pleased with their land, were to receive the money instead. In addition the catawbas were to receive $2500 on their removal to the new reservation and $1500 annually for nine years.
South Carolina did not carry out the terms of the tresty, but instead gave back to the catawbas 800 acres of their original grant-the poorest land in the tract, in a thickly settled district.
The opposing view as to worthiness of the catawbas is that the tribe was spoiled, petted, and pauperlized by south carolina's bounty. Adverse critics of catawbas estimate that between 1749 and 1750 Indian affairs cost the colony some so, as pounds, exclusive of gifts. When Carolina, in protest, decided to give only to Indians coming to charleston, catawbas are described as crowding into the old capital, even king Haigler begging there of the governor. Between the chorokee war (1760) and the Revolution, the begging of the catawbas is said to have extended into North Carolina and virginia. In 1722 the Iroquois reputedly refused to go on a mission to the catawbas when requested by Governor Hunter of New York, fearing that catawba treashhry would and in the cutting of Iroquois throats. Adair said that catawbas killed the whites' livestocks, committed many petty offenses and were great rogues.
Viewing the tragic plight of the former proud catawbas today and reviewing the story of their valiant aid as allies of early neettlers, however, it is not easy to clear the state of gross injustice toward a privative and imitative people.
The catawbas were clearly dissatisfied with their reservation after the treaty of 1840. They migrated into North Carolina and tried to minglo with the cherokees. It was during this period that they are believed to have taught the Cherokees their art of pottery making. But they were not welcomed by the Cherokees and they were themselves homesick for their former rich river lands. Later efforts to move them to cherokee settlements West of the Mississippi met with the refusal of the cherokees to permit their coming.
H. Lewis seaife wrote of an interview with "Uncle Billy George," described as the oldest Catawba living in 1896. The old Indian summed up the bitterness of his people in these words: "When the Revolutionary War was over, George Washington gave us 15 square miles. We have been cheated out of it."
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Smythe, J.F.D.: A Tour of the United States of America, containing an Account of the present State of That Country, Customas and Manners of the Inhabitants with a Description of the Indian Nation. 2 vol. vol.1.
Bailey, the Rev. John C.: History of Ebenezer Presbyterian Church. Pamphlet.
Seaife, H. Lewis: History and Condition of the Catawba Indians of South Carolina. Philadelphia, office of Indian Rights, 1896. Bulletin, 24 pp.
Lesesne, Joab M.: The Catawba Indians from Earliest Times to the American Revolution. M. A. Thesis, University of S. C., 1932.
Legislative Manual of South Carolina, 1937.
Consultants: A. S. Salley, Jr., Secretary of the Historical Commission of S.C.T.C. Flowers, State Indian Agent.
Chief Sam Blue, Chief of the Catawba Tribe.
N.B. Some of this article is based on the essay on Catawba Indians which will appear in the S. C. Guide and which has been approved by Washington.
THE STAT'WHAT IS THE MATTER?'
The News and Courier quotes a Charlestonian who has been attending state fairs in Columbia more than fifty years as saying The State's praise of certain Lexington county farm exhibits is well deserved. The fathers and grandfathers, mothers and grandmothers of present day Lexingtonians, this Charlestonian says, placed exhibits at state fairs equally as impressive as those on display last week. "In the 'eighties and 'nineties," The News and Courier quotes him, "there were no colleges with departments of domestic science and no accomplished ladies called at the farm houses in the Little Mountain neighborhood to tell the women how to do things....The last fifteen, twenty years, or longer, mighty effort has been made and money spent in teaching horticulture, agriculture and domestic science, yet The State seems to think that in all South Carolina are not 20,000 farms like those of Lexington that had the exhibits last week in Columbia. What's the matter?"
A complete answer to that question would involve one in a discussion of historical background, folk ways educational philosophy, social philosophy and other subjects, and would be much too extended for a daily newspaper. The State, therefore, in its effort to suggest a part of the answer will merely touch a few high spots, and first of all it will say what has not been the matter in Lexington. The Lexington "Dutchmen" came to South Carolina with a background of thrift, with inherited respect for personal labor, and love for the soil. They never possessed or hired a numerous servant class, preferring to do their own work. They never developed dependency on any one crop. They lived in erosive territory, but their lands did not erode disastrously because they owned those lands, thought of them as their own homes, and as the homes for their children. The "Dutch" farmer's ambition was to make good as a farmer, not to dally with it halfheartedly, while forever seeking a chance to get a job in town. Those Lexingtonians, too, are among themselves the most co-operative people in South Carolina. They have community beef clubs. They take stuff to town for their neighbors. When a neighbor is sick, they work his crops for him, and sell them for him. When his house burns, they assist him to rebuild.
 As important as any of this, perhaps as important as all of it, the "Dutchmen" have not fallen for a purely money economy, nor for the American standard of spending. They are proud of thrift, of enterprise, of ingenuity. Therefore they are prosperous.
That, briefly and imperfectly, suggests what is not wrong with the "Dutchmen." What is the matter with thousands of other farmers is they are not enough like these "Dutchmen." The education of which the Charlestonian speaks has not taught them simple farm economics. It, and many other factors in American life have instead urged them to seek away from the farm the luxuries that can be bought with money. Too many farmers have been taught to be discontented with what they have, but have not been equipped to get more. Desires have outrun capacities and opportunities. What is the matter? Many things, as the balanced thinking News and Courier knows. But one thing is this: while there has been more education, it has not been sufficiently practical in the rural schools of South Carolina. It has tended too much to appraise learning as an end in itself, not as a means to earning a livelihood. The State, of course, is in favor of purely cultural education, also; but first the practical. Culture must be founded on some degree of economic success and that, in its turn, must be based on knowledge of how to work, on respect for work, and on willingness to work.
WHAT IS THE MATTER?'
The News and Courier quotes a Charlestonian who has been attending state fairs in Columbia more than fifty years as saying The State's praise of certain Lexington county farm exhibits is well deserved. The fathers and grandfathers, mothers and grandmothers of present day Lexingtonians, this Charlestonian says, placed exhibits at state fairs equally as impressive as those on display last week. "In the 'eighties and 'nineties," The News and Courier quotes him, "there were no colleges with departments of domestic science and no accomplished ladies called at the farm houses in the Little Mountain neighborhood to tell the women how to do things....The last fifteen, twenty years, or longer, mighty effort has been made and money spent in teaching horticulture, agriculture and domestic science, yet The State seems to think that in all South Carolina are not 20,000 farms like those of Lexington that had the exhibits last week in Columbia. What's the matter?"
A complete answer to that question would involve one in a discussion of historical background, folk ways educational philosophy, social philosophy and other subjects, and would be much too extended for a daily newspaper. The State, therefore, in its effort to suggest a part of the answer will merely touch a few high spots, and first of all it will say what has not been the matter in Lexington. The Lexington "Dutchmen" came to South Carolina with a background of thrift, with inherited respect for personal labor, and love for the soil. They never possessed or hired a numerous servant class, preferring to do their own work. They never developed dependency on any one crop. They lived in erosive territory, but their lands did not erode disastrously because they owned those lands, thought of them as their own homes, and as the homes for their children. The "Dutch" farmer's ambition was to make good as a farmer, not to dally with it halfheartedly, while forever seeking a chance to get a job in town. Those Lexingtonians, too, are among themselves the most co-operative people in South Carolina. They have community beef clubs. They take stuff to town for their neighbors. When a neighbor is sick, they work his crops for him, and sell them for him. When his house burns, they assist him to rebuild.
As important as any of this, perhaps as important as all of it, the "Dutchmen" have not fallen for a purely money economy, nor for the American standard of spending. They are proud of thrift, of enterprise, of ingenuity. Therefore they are prosperous.
That, briefly and imperfectly, suggests what is not wrong with the "Dutchmen." What is the matter with thousands of other farmers is they are not enough like these "Dutchmen." The education of which the Charlestonian speaks has not taught them simple farm economics. It, and many other factors in American life have instead urged them to seek away from the farm the luxuries that can be bought with money. Too many farmers have been taught to be discontented with what they have, but have not been equipped to get more. Desires have outrun capacities and opportunities. What is the matter? Many things, as the balanced thinking News and Courier knows. But one thing is this: while there has been more education, it has not been sufficiently practical in the rural schools of South Carolina. It has tended too much to appraise learning as an end in itself, not as a means to earning a livelihood. The State, of course, is in favor of purely cultural education, also; but first the practical. Culture must be founded on some degree of economic success and that, in its turn, must be based on knowledge of how to work, on respect for work, and on willingness to work.