November 9 - January 2,
1938-39
Eldon Graham, (white)
First Deputy, Henry County.
Paris, Tennessee.
Writer, Nellie Gray Toler.
Revised by Aswell.
ON THE ROAD TO SHERIFF
"All I ever study about or ever want to do is to be kind to all in every way and do my duty as First Deputy of Henry County.
"Well, in some ways deputy work jist can't be beat. You git to go so many places. It ain't. confining like mill work and they's not any hard hand labor, day in and day out, to wear a man down. You git a better salary than farming and it's stiddy money, too. Dry spells and wet spells and smut and rot will set a farmer back. But a deputy don't have to worry none. His business is always good.
"When you're in deputy work, you have some drawbacks, though, Look at my hours! May git a call any hour, day or night. Never know jist when the county will need me. It seems like it needs me mostly when the weather's the worst. I don't know why, but I git a sight more calls in cold rainy or sleety times than in good weather. And don't let nobody tell you the. work ain't dangerous. You risk your life every time you make. an arrest, every time you serve a warrant or raid a still. That's I what I go through all the time to keep this county peace-abiding.
"Far back as I can remember I always wanted to be on the side of the law. I'm the only one of my family ever went. into this. business. My father was Charles Bennett Graham and my mother was Jennie Rebekah J. Henchy Graham. All of my people has been farmers. all the way through and that's the way they started me out. My brothers farmed and I guess I'd be messing with farm work right. this minute if they hadn't. been that. little certain something in me that put me on the side of the law.
"I always had a lot of patriotic feeling. So when the war come along I was right ready and was glad to go when they drafted me. The government then trained me to fight. and sent me overseas. Well, I sure. done my best. in that war. I stopped a bullet and got wounded. Stayed in a hospital till she healed and went back. at them Germans. So they laid for me and give me a dose of gas and I was out for good that time. Government sent me home and I spent two years in hospitals. That old gas is sure hard to clear out of a man's. system. But they finally got me shet of it and I come home to Henry County.
"Well, I Jist. knocked around for a couple of years. Didn't feel like fooling with farm work. It was Jist. One thing I wanted to do--deputy work. But I couldn't. git on. Then in nineteen twenty-four I got a place. Served my county and its. good people every since except between nineteen thirty-two and nineteen thirty-six. In that time they had a sheriff that him and me couldn't noways git along. So I jist knocked around until we got a good man in here again and he give me my job back.
"Here's how I make my salary. Well, I don't guess you'd exactly call it salary, either. It's commission work. I mean, I git my money all according to how much arrests and subpoenas and warrants I do. So, you see, it keeps. a man hustling on his toes to make a go of it. You've sure got to hit the ball. If business is. dull, go out and look some up, I say.
"Now whenever they's. a funeral. anywheres in this county, like as not you'll find me there, specially if its back off the road somewhere most unually they' s. lot of drinking goes on at country funerals. The family drinks so's to drownd their sadnesa. Them that comes out of respect for the deceased drinks so's they won't git too low in mind from watching the women folks carry an. And then they's lots of young bloods comes. jist. for the pure fun of it and gits lit up. You can look for a fight before it's all. over. If. nobody gits fighting, then you can grab somebody for having likker on them or in their car or wagon. Any which way it is you carry them before a justice. of peace and he fines. Them and you git your fee. If they can't pay the fee, If. They can't pay the fee, it's the county road for them and then the county pays you your fee. You can't lose on a funeral.
"Next to a funeral is a political speaking and a barbecue. Always drinking then and fights. Almost any gathering where people git. together many mean you can pick up a fee. Auction sales where they're selling off a mortgage due farm is good. The man that's being sold out way git ugly and try to start something and then I can step in and put it on him. Lots of times you can do business. at a revival meeting when somebody makes trouble over what they believe. oh. they's a heap of ways to do if you keep hustling. But I wish they'd give me a regular salary along with my fees.
"I keep right at it doing my duty. I aim to rise in this work. Right now I'm on the road to Sheriff. If I live and nothing happens you will call Eldon Graham sheriff before many more years.
"The largest raids or work we usually have now is stills. They's several we've got spotted now to gather in. we'II be going in again in a very few days. Usually we get our tip-off when it's least expected and have to go in all kinds of weather. We almost never find anybody there, but they's always signs of them. The still worm still hot and the mash boiling. But they have time to see us coming and run, no matter how much we try to slip up on them.
"We raided a still a short time ago and found it directly on the Benton County line, we. thought. But we found after we had busted and shot it all. up that it was all in Benton County territory. You jist don't seem to be able to make people quit making liquor. They'll go to jail for it and come out and go right back at it. But still raids. is gitting to be pretty tame. The birds is flown usually.
"We haven't had a mob since the time they got the nigger that killed Dick Caldwell. The nigger had always worked for Mr. Dick and knew him well. well, he had a sudden spurt of gitting drunk. Thay wasn't no living with him, that's all, when he got drunk. Bad nigger then. So he got. in a lot of trouble and hid in an old house on Mr. Dick's place. Mr. Dick was then sheriff of the county, you remember when that was. Well, we tried after that nigger. He shot a lot of men when we tried to run him out. Mr. Dick says, "l'll go git him my own self." He walked right. toward the barn. The nigger shot. him before he got to the door, in cold blood murder.
"They gathered a mob and went after him. Practically everything in town joined it and shot it out. with him. He as holed up in the barn and with plenty of ammunition and it didn't look like we was ever going to get him out till. all the ammunition had give way. But some of us got enough of that. We got together and rushed him on all sides at once. He hit a few of us, but none serious, and we got him that time.
"Well, he got such wounds he soon died without living to be hung. The mob come pouring in when we'd disarmed him and jist riddled his body when they got to him before we could stop them. Niggers was in on this hunt as well as white's for they all loved Mr. Dick, a friend to black and white alike.
"About the hardest shooting scrape we've ever had or the toughest customers is the Gallians. Them Gallions is into everything happens and always gitting out, too. They was caught cold-handed, almost, in the robbery of the Mayfield Postofflce sometime ago. But they got out of it. Some of Gallion girls has served time in prison for stealing and various things. Well, they jist don't. seem to be anything much they haven't done, though no prood of murder has ever been put an them.
"One time the boys, Ernest. and Buster, refused arrest and after a great amount of ammunition in the town had been shot, they hid in this log barn with the rest of the family and shot it out. It lastest several days. We'd finally captured them all but Ernest and he jist wouldn't. give up. He shot two or three deputies and city officers. Finally though, his mama see he would be riddled by bullets if he kept it up. She run in front of our men to the barn begging him to give himself up for her sake and the girls. So he did or otherwise we wouldn't. never have taken him alive. He already had a bunch of wounds, but he as a crack shooter and fought it out to the bitter end almost.
"We've caught them Gallions several times since then. They's always wanted for stealing in other counties. We've found the goods on their land, but they always worm out of it somehow.
"Once I let. a man git away in a still raid. I was new on the job and kind of skittish of shooting at a man. Well. this was down near the Tennessee River. I went down there and was watching. We slipped up on them and they had their backs turned and we didn't. see their faces. They all run jist as we yelled at them and we shot over their heads. One run and jumped in the river. He stayed under so long I thought he was drawnded and when he swum out right almost at my feet I was so happy that he wasn't drownded I jist stood there and didn't ever recognize who he was or say a word to him. Jist stood with my mouth hanging open, a stone' a throw from him, and let him go walking off down through the woods. The other deputies was chasing the others and I let him. git clean away. Could have caught him if I'd tried.
"One time Tom Barnes shot. Josie Pryor. He was a high yellow and so was she and she was a cook here in town. They accused him but couldn't find the body. Finally I went to his place and searched and seeing a fresh looking place in his barn, he told me that it was a hog bad died. with cholera and he'd buried it there. I become suspicious and made him dig there. Well, he uncovered the hog right straight. I told him to keep on digging. And It wasn't long till I soon saw the body of the woman. So I forced his confession there. We put him in jail and he hung hisself with his belt.
"Another branch of the deputy work is this. Lots of cold checks is passed and we have to run them down. we serve subponeas and warrants and arrest people for failure to pay debt. All in all, it's a pretty hard day's. work. It's hard to serve a warrant on or arrest a man who is your personal friend. Have to do it, though, even when it's your own neighbors and friends. We must do our duty by so doing.
"About the only criminal assault case in this county by a Negro and a white was a porter at the hotel. We got him for assault on a white girl here. But it later come out showing she was crazy and only trying to git some money out of the management of the hotel.
"Well, I like my work here among the fine people of Henry County. They's. nothing I'd rather do than serve them as. their sheriff and I aim to run in this next coming election. I never was. blessed with no children in my married life, but if I had a boy I would tell him, 'Git on the side of the law, work for the good people of this county, and they will gratefully reward you some day like they done your Dad when they made him sheriff of this fine county.'