"DE LUCK IS IN DE LAWD"
MINNIE DAVIS
247 Billups Street
Athens, Georgia
Written By: Mrs. Leola T. Bradley
Athens -
Edited By: John N. Booth
WPA Area No. 6
August 29, 1939.
 
August 23 & 28, 1939
Minnie Davis (Colored)
247 Billups Street
Athens, Georgia
L. T. B.
Despite the sweltering heat of the August day, Millie Dawson's gaunt form was enveloped from neck to ankles in a heavy black coat whose numerous patches evinced a long period of hard service. As she cautiously opened her door in response to my knock, I greeted her: "Good morning, Aunt Millie!. I hope I find you well and happy this fine, warm morning."
"Yes, Miss, I'm feelin' well dis mornin', but de days just don't get warm enough for me," she replied. "I'm gettin' old and my blood is thin; anyhow, my health in general is not so good. Come on in and sit down and rest yourself." Looking around for a chair, I failed to find one with a bottom. I looked at Aunt Millie, and she at me. Breaking into a cackling laugh, she said, "Well, I do say! Askin' you to sit down, when they ain't no chair. Jes' sit on de side of de bed, honey."
"Now, Aunt Millie," I protested," don't you think it's bad luck to sit on the bed?"
"Lawsy me! No, dat luck business is all foolishness. De luck is in de lawd," she replied with some show of spirit. Such is the philosophy that has apparently dominated the life of this Negress, who at first glance may be recognized as a remnant of ante bellum days. Hair that is almost white and a faltering gait indicate that Millie's seventy-eight years have curtailed her bodily vigor, but her eyes, though dimmed by age, have not entirely lost their twinkle. According to her own words, her mind is "kinder muddled" at times, but she says it is clear enough when she feels well. Her conversation is perorated by the habit of reminiscence, common to many elderly people. At intervals she displays a keen sense of humor, and even though she was a "school marm" for 48 years, she has, in her old age, lapsed into the vernacular of her race.
Seating myself, I glanced about her room. The old- fashioned bedroom suite, consisting of bed, dresser, and washstand was massive and handsome. The head of the bed almost touched the ceiling of the shabby room, and the dresser and washstand were topped with marble.
The floor was bare but clean. On the mantle a clock, of a design popular long before the end of the last century, was flanked by gayly colored calendars, almanacs, and an accumulation of odds and ends. With the exception of the bedroom suite there was no furniture of any consequence in the room.
As if in answer to my unspoken question, Aunt Millie volunteered, "Yes, Miss, dat suite of furniture was give to me by white folks. I was lucky to be wid some real quality folks in my day. Everybody tells me it's wuth a lot of money, but as long as de wolf stays from 'round my door, I ain't gonna part wid it".
Aunt Millie sat down in a low, bottomless, rocker and resumed her vigorous polishing of a lamp chimney, at intervals blowing her breath on it to facilitate the cleaning process. "I don't have no 'lectric lights," she explained. "I guess if I'd been home de day de light man come 'round I'd have put 'em in, but since I warn't, it's a big comfort to know day can't cut off my lights."
"I don't know, exactly where I was born. Dat's one thing I never did ax about, but I think it was in Greene County. Anyhow I've lived most of my life right here in Athens. My mother before me believed in chillun gettin' learnin. My white folks taught me to read, and my white folks' chillun taught me to write. Yes, mam, I went to school too, and I had as good education as there was for people of any race in dem days.
Den I went to normal school; all teachers had to go to dem special schools. In 1881 I graduated from Atlanta University. I wasn't but seventeen when I went to teachin' in a little country school, and pretty soon I was teachin' right here in Athens. I kept up me teachin' for 48 years.
"I was a good sort of girl. Course I was full of fun, but I didn't run 'round and give my mother a whole passel of trouble like some. No, mam! No, mam!" She shook her head decisively, and continued: "De young folks today ain't a bit worse'n dey've allus been! It's just dat dey do things diffunt- like. Course girls is more clothes-crazy, and dey use more powder and paint. And den dey's all got to have dey hair straightened dese days. Go barefooted like us used to? No, dey don't do dat now. Dey wears silk stockin's now to make de legs look pretty. I loves de young people though; dey's so free and open- minded. Yes, honey," she sighed, "You can straighten out kinky heads, but you can't get de crooks outen old bodies like mine.
"School-teachin's a fine callin'. If you can lead somebody in de light of learnin', den you've done somepin' fine. I taught in de grades - de little chillun. Lawsy me! Ain't dey sweet? You know, chillun ain't bad like some folks say; dey's jes' worrisome, dat's all. You have to humor 'em and den some - jes' 'bliged to. Many's de time I've had little fellows to come to school, and maybe de very fust day dey gets homesick for dey mammies. I wouldn't scold and try to force 'em to stay in school. No, mam! I'd jes' say to one of de older chillun: 'Here, take dis here child home,' and wid a pat, I'd tell de little-un, "Now, honey, go on home to your mammy and ease your little heart, den when you feels like it, come on back to school." And nine times outa ten, dey'd be back de next mornin'. Bless deir little hearts! Dey ain't bad, and dem what went to school to me didn't have de white folks' worrisome call of, 'Come back here and be punished.'". Millie caught her breath and continued: "Whippin' was stylish in dem days, but it ain't now. I made 'em stand up lots 'stead of beatin' on 'em so bad. De superintendent wouldn't let us keep 'em in after school. Yes, yes, dey throwed spitballs just as bad den as dey do now. Dey didn't teach no singin' in school dem days. I can't sing, and if a body can't sing, dey jes' can't sing. Now-days de teachers is all s'posen to sing and teach singin'," she chuckled, "but dey can't do all dey's s'posen to.
"I'm proud of my teachin' record. When I look around and see so many of my old pupils in high positions, I feel like teachin' is de grandest thing a body can do. Sometimes I get down sick and some of my old pupils drops by and gives me a dollar, or maybe fifty cents, and it makes me feel mighty good. Den if de money don't come I don't worry, cause Miss, if you trust de Lawd everything will be all right. Besides, people get tired of being nice, 'specially when times is so hard.
"I didn't worry 'bout money when my husband was livin'. He had a newspaper and he done very well. I sold it after he died. Den I saved a little money, but Lawsy me, de doctor got most of dat. Dey can sho' get your money, but dey's good. When I don't have de money dey comes right on.
"'Sides teachin', I've done a lot of public work. Durin' de war I worked in de Red Cross. When de soldier boys would come through on de trains I'd go down to de depot and help serve coffee and little things to eat.
"I even vote sometimes -when. somebody comes to carry me down to de votin' place. But, honey, I'm too old and my brain gets too muddled to worry over such things as politics. Dey says our President is a very fine man. 'Cording to my notion dey's some things good about him and some bad. I ain't got nothin' 'gainst our governor, but jes' let me tell you right now, if he hadn't promised to help de old folks and to give free school books he never would have been elected. I don't have to look to de governor for nothing -- my city gives me my livin'. I draws thirteen dollars and thirty-three cents every month for bein' a retired school teacher.
"Politics is like churches - some of de folks pulls one way and some another. No, honey, I don't worry none over politics. I'm too old and my brain gets tired too easy. I didn't ask for no old age pension, and I don't want it.
"Some folks might think I get lonesome. Well, I don't. I visit 'round de neighborhood a little and read a lots. My eyes does fairly well, 'cept dat my glasses needs changing bad. Looks like I can't get enough money ahead to buy me no new specs."
"Do you own your own home, Aunt Millie?" I inquired.
"Yes,. Miss, s'cusin' some taxes dat's due on it. I'm thankful I've never knowed what it was to have to keep movin' around.
"Sometimes I think it would've been fine to have some chillun of my own to get grown, but when I look around me at some of the s'periences of dam dst's raised families, I jes' don't know. My love for chillun has been poured out on other folks' little-uns, and big-uns too. One thing sho', I don't believe in no birth control. No, mam! De Lawd give me two babies: den He decided to take 'em.
"I has a man roomer. Po' thing, he's 65 years old, out of work, and ain't got nowhere to go. He's a good barber. Yes, mam, he sure is, but like lots of folks, he jes' ain't got no job.
"I never had no idea of gettin' married again. When my husband died, I says to myself: 'I'll jes' live by myself until I die.'
"You got to be going? Well, dis is one day I feels good and my brain ain't muddled none, so I don't mind talkin', but I don't think what I can say could be of much good."
"Take good care of yourself, Aunt Millie," I said, as I left.
"Same to you, honey, and jes' remember what I say. Think right, live right, and do right by everybody, and don't forget dat de luck is in de Lawd."