Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
JANE LELDAON
(white)
82 YEARS OLD
Miss Jane Lemmon, spinster, lives seven miles west of the town of Winnsboro, on the north side of State Highway #219. She resides with an unmarried sister, Miss Belle Lemmon. She is nearly deaf, and uses an ear trumpet in conversation. She enjoys good health; her mind is clear and comprehensive; and her manner is gracious and pleasing.
These elderly ladies own their home, free of encumbrance, and 600 acres of land. They are people of education and some degree of wealth.
"My grandmother was Mary Ann Lauderdale. Her father, William Lauderdale, was born in County Ulster, Ireland, in 1762. He and his wife and children moved to America and settled in Fairfield County in 1817. My grandfather, James Lemmon, was also born in County Ulster. He immigrated to Fairfield County and located near the Lauderdales. He married my grandmother, Mary Ann Lauderdale. The following prominent families are descended from this couple: The Turners, Ladds, Stevensons, Popes, Millings, Cathcarts, Bry-sons, Blakeleys, Henrys, Bells, Ragsdales, Rabbs, McClintocks, and Rosses.
"I was born in this very house, October 7, 1856. My father was John Montgomery Lemmon, and my mother was Hester Mobley Lemmon. I had three brothers and two sisters. All of them married except Hester Isabelle, with whom I live.
"I learned my abc's at home, under the care and instruction of governesses. The first governess was our cousin, Margaret Milling; the second was Miss Annie Gott; the third was Miss Belle McElroy, from Charleston, South Carolina; and the fourth was Miss Lizzie Shaw, from Mayesville, in Sumter County. Governesses, in the days before the war, were taken on trial for a period of one month. We had no trouble or disagreements with any of them, and we were always sorry to see them leave. By the way, one of these, Miss Annie Gott, taught school in the public schools of Chester, S. C. She was a woman and teacher of great worth. After her death, appreciation was shown by the citizens and the patrons of the school by the erection of a monument in memory of her. I think it is the only instance of the kind, where a woman in the State has been so highly honored.
"We had a great number of Negro slaves. The house servants were the butler, the carriage driver, the footman, the cook and her assistant, the master's waiting boy, two maids, the senior nurse, and the younger nurse. Next in importance was the blacksmith, the carpenter, the dairy servants, and the laundry women. These lived in houses dotted about and near the 'Big House.'
"The field hands lived in the quarter - two rows of houses above the spring of water - which you may see before you leave. There were twenty of these houses, some constructed of logs and some of rough plank. They had two rooms, with a chimney in the center, and were designed for the occupancy of two families. The field hands were given a half holiday every Saturday. On this half holiday, the men slaves looked after their gardens, went fishing and blackberry picking with their children, or went rabbit hunting with the master's hounds. The women washed and tidied their family's clothes and swept up the premises about their houses. The overseer's house was near the quarter. He was supposed to be in charge of the field hands, having the direction of their work and recreation.
The field hands were rationed from the smokehouse - meat, meal, molasses, and shorts. How much? Well, that depended upon the size of the family. The rations were given out every Saturday at noon. I have not mentioned such things as buttermilk, salt, fruit, melons, and potatoes. These were periodically given them.
"We had a happy plantation of slaves. One of them is living yet, and, should she survive until the 80th of next September, she will be 107 years old. Her name is Louisa Davis. She lives just across the Congaree River from Columbia. Our family often visits her, carrying to her little testimonials of our affection. She can stand with us at her gate and point proudly to the dome of the State Capitol, which is clearly in view, and say (speaking of my brother, Robert), 'Dere is where Marse Robert used to git up and tell dem law makers what's what, and how de laws must be made and executed on vile criminals, both white and black.' My brother was a member of the House of Representatives from Fairfield, after the restoration of white supremacy and democratic government following Hampton's election in 1876.
"Louisa was interviewed some time ago by a reporter for the Charlotte Observer. She said then, 'My white folks was de best in de land to deir slaves. I was married to Sam on deir back piazza. Rev. Chalmers Boggs 'formed de ceremony. I nussed Marse John and Miss Mary's first born baby, Robert. He growed up to be a man, and was 'looted to de legislature. How I like slavery? I'd jump wid joy if I could jus' git back into slavery and have de same white folks to serve and to be wid, day in and day out.'
"We diversified our crops in those days. The production of corn was always the greatest consideration. Hogs had to be fed and fattened on corn, to produce meat for a hundred of more Negroes. And corn bread was part of the regular diet of the slaves. 'We had good orchard, and many slave women and slave children were kept busy in the fruit season, drying fruit and preserving it for the winter. And I must not forget the fowls - chickens, geese, ducks, and turkeys. A couple of slave boys attended to the geese and turkeys during those days. The turkeys were a luxury, but the geese were a necessity, for their feathers.
"The cows and sheep had free range than - crops were worm-fenced with wooden rails - animals roamed and foraged. It required alert, able-bodied slaves to follow the cows all day and to herd the sheep. I leave to others to tell you the commotion and dismay of some, when agitation of the present fence law was discussed and passed. My brother, Robert, was in the legislature at that time. I remember it was called ' a rich man's law and a poor man's oppression.' It has been a good law I think. It has improved the brood of cattle and rendered it easier to control the tick and fevers and diseases that are injurious to cows, sheep, and horses.
"We didn't sacrifice the foregoing industrial consideration for cotton production. We had our ginhouse, spinning room, and weave room near the family dwelling. Remains of the old screwpit are still evident.
"There's one thing I musn't forget. When we learned by a rider that the Yankees had crossed the Congaree River and Freshley's Ferry, father and mother were determined to hide their silverware, jewels, watches, and precious things of value. They discussed it in the presence of Mrs. McCreight, who asked permission to secrete her ring with the family's possession in the hideout. This was agreed to. When the Yankees came and pressed for the information, she became frightened and, having very little at stake, revealed the whereabouts of the hidden treasure. This was a great disappointment, and the Negroes were deeply chagrined at her disloyalty. 'We laugh at it after seventy- three years, but it was a Benedict Arnold act to us for a long time.
"The Yankees also took our provisions from the smokehouse, burned the gin- house and cotton, and drove off what livestock could be found on the plantation. Some cows and hogs were down on Little River in the canebrakes, and they didn't get them. For some reason, they didn't fire this house, and we have lived here ever since.
"I remember the old hoop skirts that women wore, but was too young to wear than. Horseback riding was ay chief sport before I went off to school. I was graduated at Due West College in the class with Nina Rabb and Ella Elliott in the year 1875. Nina married Warren Preston Castles. She died a month ago. Ella married Robert C. Gooding, and I meet her ever year at our alumnae association meetings.
"There was a great deal of affection between a child and his nurse during slavery. Louisa was Robert's nurse; Sophy was mine; Mary was Willie's; and Manda was Sister Belle's. We would make mother let them sleep in the room with us, so we could hear them recite stories and sing songs and spirituals before we went to sleep.
"I remember Louisa's pappy was the carriage driver. He dressed in white when he took the family to church or visiting. The huge carriage had wide, cushioned seats, and the steps had to be let down by the footman for the family to get inside.
"My parents had a plantation in Mississippi, and they visited it once a year. They also owned stock in the Charlotte, Columbia a Augusta Railroad Corporation.
"Our family had very little trouble with free labor immediately after freedom. The most of our slaves remained with us. Ku Klux activities were remote from our neighborhood. My brother, Robert, was busy in the Red Shirt campaign of 1876, and was a contributor to the expenses thereof. He was a rider in the parades, and he induced most of our laborers to wear the red shirt and vote the democratic ticket. It was owing to these exertions that, later, he was elected to the legislature.
"Describe a dinner as I remember them before and during the Civil War? Well, maybe that can be described by this menu card.
Roast Turkey Rice Giblet Gravy
Boiled Ham Grape Conserve
Creamed Potatoes Candied Yams
Carrots and English Poas
Lettuce with French Dressing
Hot Rolls Corn Sticks
Pumpkin Pie with whipped cream
Nuts and Raisins Cake
Coffee Milk or Tea."