POCKETS IN AMERICA
CROATANS
Along the Lowrie Road, an ancient Indian trail extending from the Sandhills of Cumberland County, North Carolina, to the Savannah River, were originally scattered the Croatans. With tribal instinct the remnants of this people in South Carolina have now drawn more closely together and are found chiefly in Marion, Marlboro and Dillon Counties, which are across the State line from, and adjacent to, Robeson County, North Carolina.
There is no organized colony of this anomalous group, no set reservation to mark off their abode from those of two distinct races among which they dwell, nor any characteristics which set apart their houses.
Several theories have been advanced to account for the origin of this group of mixed Old World and Indian ancestry. The romantic hypothesis - which, however, is rejected by some ethnologists - is that present-day Croatans are the descendants of the remnants of Sir Walter Raleigh's Lost Colony of Roanoke, end the friendly Indians of nearby Croatan Island. (For further details of the early history and traditions of this group, see Croatan Indians of Robeson County, North Carolina.)
Some Croatans own their own farms, but most of than are renters or sharecroppers. They are described as fine, stalwart men and woman, neither Indian nor white, but possessing physical attributes of both races. They are peaceable, industrious, reticent, inclined to isolation by preference, and seldom marry outside of their own racial group.
Classed legally as whites in South Carolina, the Croatans seeking education, nevertheless, encountered a strong race prejudice which operated against their admission to schools for Whites. Rather than send their children to Negro schools many parents, lacking education themselves, permitted their offspring to grow up in woeful ignorance. The Croatans, it seems, also have caste distinctions of their own.
Prior to the World War whatever educational advantages the Croatans received had to be provided by themselves or by some private benefactor, were the so fortunate as to find one. Subsequently, in certain sections, Croatan pupils were permitted to attend white schools, a custom which still exists in some counties. They generally keep to themselves-at recess and are not accepted on a social level by other pupils, even in athletics, where they sometimes naturally excel.
Therefore it has been deemed necessary, as a general rule, to establish separate schools for the Croatans. These schools are well equipped, and competent instruction by white teachers is provided. The more progressive parents now desire formal instruction for their children, and without doubt this group is receiving is full share of funds for public education, though this entails a three-class system of education in localities where no corporate wealth provides large funds.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. Personal knowledge and observation of H.Crady Davis, teacher, Marion, S.C.
B. Remarks of Hon. John D. Bellany of N. C., in the House of Representatives, February 1, 1900, Washington. (Copy borrowed from of Library of the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, N. C.)
C. Davidson College Magazine, Vol. XXI (April, 1905) No.6, Davidson, N. C.
D. Correspondence from "The Robasonian," a county newspaper published at Lumberton, N. C.
E. Excerpt from the "Handbook of American Indians" Bulletin 30, Bureau of American Ethnology, U.S.Dept. of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
F. Sir Waltar Raleigh's Lost Colony, Hamilton McMillan, Advance Press, 1868, Wilson, N. C. (Borrowed from University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, N. C.)
G. Mid-Continent Magazine, July 1895, Vol. VI, No 3, Old Series No 33 (Formerly, The Southern Magazine), Melton, F.J., "Croatans," (Library of U. of N. C., Chapel Hill, N.C.)
H. Riddle of the Lumben Indians, Ben Dixon McNeill, an undated article in "The News and Observer" of Raleigh, N.C. (Lent by Mrs. Genevieve W. Chandler, Murrell's Inlet, S.C.)
I. Correspondence by Mrs. Elizabeth Lay Green, wife of Dr. Paul Green, author of the Croatan play "The Last of the Lowries" and other folklore plays, Chapel Hill, N. C.
J. Correspondence from the Historical Commission of South Carolina, Columbia, S.C.
K. The North Carolina Booklst, Vol. X, January, 1911, No 3, The Croatans, Hamilton McMillan (The U. of N.C. Library, Chapel Hill, N.C.)
L. Unknown Marlboro History, author not given, The News and Courier, Charleston, S. C., May 7, 1922.
M. Identity of Robeson County Traced by Scientist, and Associated Press News story, dated Washington, July 11, (Year not given). This sketch was clipped from some newspaper, neither the date nor name appearing Presumably it is "The Raleigh News and Observer" of Raleigh, N.C. clipping lent by Mrs. Genevisve W. Chandler, Nurrell's Inlet, S.C.