Date of first writing:	December 27, 1938
Person interviewed:	June A. McClenny (White)
Address:	209 North Center St.
Goldsboro, N. C.
Occupation:	Automobile painter
Name of writer:	Emmett R. Brown
Goldsboro, N. C.
Revisers:	Edwin Massengill
W. J. Sadler
Number of words:	About 2800
THE McCLENNYS
"Something is bound to bust loose soon" unless employers of labor in the United States decide to pay "living wages" to the working classes of this country, is the opinion of June A. McClenny, transplanted farmer who now is a $20-a-week automobile painter of Goldsboro.
"The only excuse I can see for the hard times most laboring men are having now is that the men who pay their wages are damn dirty, selfish money-hogs," he remarked bitterly during an interview which had been arranged for the purpose of securing the history of his life.
"Every way you turn all you hear folks talking about is ’hard times' and 'depression,' but right here in Goldsboro all the plants are running full-time; the lumber mills are selling lumber just as fast as they can make it; the cotton mills are running night and day; and the automobile dealers are selling just as many cars as they ever did. But the people who are making plenty of money don't give a damn about the poor devils who are making it for them."
"Most laboring men are having to exist on starvation wages, just like I am,” he continued. "We don’t live, we just exist and stay here, that's all. The company I work for makes about $9 on every car I paint, but they don't pay me but $20 a week. I have to try to take care of a family of five on that. My wages don't even give me enough to look after the health of my folks like it ought to be looked after. I’ve had two attacks of appendicitis, but I didn't have the money to pay for an operation so they used ice-bags on my side and I had to get along the best I could.
"I tell you, I don't believe it'll be long before working people all over the country are going to get together and see that they get the kind of wages they ought to have. Things just can't stay like they are now. When folks begin to go hungry anything's liable to happen."
Adding to his grievances, McClenny said the type of work he did was injurious to his health. He has been painting second-hand cars for about ten years.
"Painting automobiles is different from other kinds of painting," he asserted. "Poison in the paint used on automobiles affects your nose, throat and lungs. I have to wear a respirator all the time when I'm painting. I know one painter who had his nose eaten clean off because he didn't use his respirator regular, and even if you do some of the poison will get in your system. It's bad on the nerves, too. I get along fairly well with my work in cold weather, but sometimes in the summer I feel like I'm going to faint, and lots of times I have to stop my work and get plenty of fresh air."
Reverting to the smallness of his salary McClenny continued:
"I've always wanted a comfortable home and a decent living for my family, but I can't give it to 'em on what I make. I'm not even able to buy the kind of food they should have. One thing that gets under my skin about as much as anything else is the fact that I can't buy enough milk for my two-year-old daughter, Jean. She's sick most of the time but I believe she'd be a whole lot better if she could get plenty of milk. I'm ashamed to tell it, but my family has to eat a lot of fat salt pork, corn bread and molasses like plenty of other poor families I know about.
"I reckon you're wondering why I can't buy plenty of wholesome food for my family out of what I make. Well, whether you have or not, it's like this: Hattie, my wife, don't know a thing about economy. Her idea of saving money is to spend forty-five cents to make what she calls a pudding out of about three cents worth of stale bread. About five men come to my house every Monday to collect for insurance, and that don't count the hospital and burial insurance collectors. Then there's two collectors every week from furniture stores. We pay them a dollar apiece. I owe a couple of doctors and try to pay them a little every Saturday. I don't spend much for clothes, but we try to keep our three children in shoes and dresses so they can go to Sunday school.
"I bought a second-hand automobile a few months ago and I've been making weekly payments on that but I'm going to give it up because I've found out that if I make the payments I've got to deny my family a lot of things they need worse than I do a car. I owe a grocery bill of $65 to five different stores. It'll be a big relief when I can pay that debt because they let my wife have credit when my family wouldn’t have had anything to eat if they hadn't. I can’t help worrying when I'm in debt all the time and I don't see anyway to catch up unless I can make more money than I'm making now.
"The house I live in is an old one and has eight rooms. We have four rooms downstairs, and a mother and her two daughters live upstairs. The house is in pretty bad shape; it must have been a long time since it was painted or had any repairs made to it. It's bad to have to live in a house like that, but I can't help it. I'm just not able to pay the high rents they charge for houses that are really fit to live in. We don't have expensive things in the house, but what we do have is neat, and if our furniture was paid for things wouldn't be so bad. The girls who live upstairs are grown and during hot weather they expect me to keep away from the front porch after supper or doll up like a dude so I won't shock the young men who come to see them.
“Speaking about my children: We don't have but one old enough to go to school. She gets along pretty good with her studies. I believe in education, but the cost of sending children to school is too high. Something ought to be done so poor families can educate their children cheaper than they can now. I went through the ninth grade of a country school and thought I had all the education I needed, but I've found out that a man without a good practical education is about as worthless as a pump without a handle.
“If I can help it, and I think I can, there won't be any more children in my family. We have three daughters and that's enough children for me. I don't think poor folks should keep on having children when they know they don't make enough to take care of them."
McClenny believes that there are no honest politicians.
"The trouble with men running for office," he declared, "is that they promise great things before they are elected, but their main thought is to look out for number one. My father said once that it would give him great pleasure if he could ever have the chance to vote for men to send to the State legislature who'd fight to do away with about ninety per cent of the laws we've got now instead of making a lot of new ones.
"It looks like to me that the big idea among members of the legislature during the last few years has been 'We've just gotta skin 'em alive and salt 'em down,' meaning the people, of course. Then they begin to study how they can put on new taxes.
"I've about reached the point where voting don't appeal to me any more. I'd forgot all about the last primary until a hired worker for one of the candidates came to the shop where I was working and asked me if I would vote for his man. I said I won't interested in voting for any candidate. Then this worker pulled a pint of moonshine whiskey from his pocket and told me I could keep it if I'd promise to vote for his man and try to get some of the other men in the shop to vote the same way. That's the biggest bribe I've ever been offered to sell my vote for.
"During the primary before the one I've just mentioned, I didn't work that day and after taking a few drinks with a couple of my friends we decided we'd vote together as we all three voted at the same place. I let one of the boys fix up my ballots and I didn't know who I'd voted for and I didn't care. I simply went to the polling place to pass away the time. What little voting I've ever done has been for Democrats."
McClenny said he was born and reared on a farm. “There was my parents, two sisters, a brother and myself in our family, and we all worked hard," he said. "We suffered many hardships and made a lot of sacrifices before my father finally got his farm paid for. He had to furnish his own equipment, animals, fertilizer and food, and give a big part of the crops he raised to the landlord before he bought his own place. He didn't depend altogether on his crops to pay for the farm. He raised a lot of meat, chickens and other food. I can remember many times when my two sisters took eggs and chickens to town and sold them when we needed them to eat ourselves. Life on the farm in those days was much harder than it is now. All the farmers I know seem to have been in good circumstances during the last few years, with plenty of money to spend. I worked on the farm till I was nineteen years old and then decided I'd move to town. I'm satisfied now that I'd be better off today if I hadn't done it.
"I located in Goldsboro and hadn't been here but a short time before I got a job firing the boiler at a sawmill plant on the edge of town. I got $40 a week on that job and held it for eighteen months. Then the bottom seemed to fall out of everything all of a sudden. I lost that job and went to work in a paint shop where I learned how to paint second-hand automobiles. I've been doing that kind of work ever since.
“I was married in 1926 to Miss Hattie Cotton, youngest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. George Cotton. Mr. Cotton ran a grocery store when I married Hattie, and I clerked in his store for a short time. But I decided I’d rather do some other kind of work.
"My father was married three times. His third wife is still living and makes her home on the farm my father left her. My brother Henry helps her run it. He's the only one of the children who decided to stay on the farm. I can truthfully say that my stepmother was a good woman. Being kind to people was a second nature with her. Before I left the farm I never saw her in an ill temper. I haven't seen her for quite awhile but I'll always love her and respect her for the many kindnesses she showed me when I stayed on the farm."
The most comfortable place in the McClenny home is the front room, which is reserved for company. In this room is a nice living room suite, a bed that looks neat and comfortable, a woolen rug, and a small stove which provides sufficient heat. There are three windows in the room, and all were covered with green shades and plain white curtains. The only thing to mar the neatness of the room is the walls which are dingy and badly in need of repairs. There were no pictures on the walls and the mantelpiece was bare.
Next to this room is the bathroom, which is clean but equipped with old fixtures. Then there is the bedroom in which the entire family sleeps. In it are two neat beds and a crib. Mr. and Mrs. McClenny sleep on one bed; Mildred and Joyce Anne, the two older children, sleep on the other; and Jean, the baby, sleeps in the crib. There was no stove in the room, but the floor was covered by a new linoleum rug. An old-fashioned dresser and a couple of trunks further crowded the room, and the only thing on which to sit was one of the beds. Here, too, the walls are badly in need of repairs. There are two windows, over which hung cheap green shades. The mantelpiece was covered with small pictures of the immediate family, and there was a small alarm clock.
A door opens from this room into the dining room which is also used for a sitting room and is heated by a small laundry stove. The floor was covered by a badly worn linoleum rug, and the two windows were covered with cheap green shades also. A small dining room table and several straight-back chairs completed the furniture.
In the kitchen the walls and woodwork recently have been painted a light grey. It is the neatest looking room in the house. On the floor was a new linoleum rug and there were new grey shades at the two windows. Cooking is done on a four-burner oil stove about a year old, and there was also a kitchen cabinet and an electric refrigerator. The painting in the kitchen was done at night by Mr. McClenny, who furnished his own paint.
Mildred is the oldest child and has just reached the gawky, stubborn age. She has an overgrown, underfed look. She gives no promise of great beauty or any remarkable talent except in having her way with the family. She is eleven years old, but when asking a special favor she acts like a spoiled child of four. Joyce Anne is five, not the least bit attractive, and has a sullen disposition. Jean is two and quite an attractive child. She is not shy and is unusually smart for a child of her age. The McClennys plan to send their children through high school but are inclined to let them choose their own professions.
Mrs. McClenny is a small woman with a pleasant personality. She does all the housework, family washing, prepares the meals and looks after the children.
“I can find something to do every minute from early morning till bedtime," she said. "Most of my time is taken up preparing meals and doing the housework, and I like to keep my house clean whether anything else gets done right or not. Washing and ironing is the hardest work I have to do. I usually do most of the washing on Mondays. Preparing meals don't worry me very much as I usually cook practically the same thing every day. For breakfast I have biscuits, molasses and oats. I fry a couple of eggs for my husband and sometimes I cook a little bacon. For dinner I cook some kind of vegetables, usually seasoned with white meat, bake a panful of sweet potatoes and make plenty of corn bread. I usually have the same thing for supper that I cooked for breakfast. On Sundays I cook a chicken when we can afford to buy one and for dessert we have a small cake. I don't give my children much sweets as I don't believe it's healthy. Sometimes I make a bread pudding which I believe is the healthiest kind of dessert to give children. When I don't cook a chicken on Sunday I prepare a big boiler full of macaroni and fry a pound and a half of pork chops.
"I'm sorry I don't have much education, but it's all my fault as I wouldn't go to school when I had the chance. I like to go to church and take the children with me, and unless the weather is too bad I always go on Sundays. My husband never goes to church, and if he has any sort of religion I don't know what kind it is. He goes to the picture show twice every week but I don't care for that kind of amusement. He gives me as much money as he spends to go to the shows and I spend it to buy clothes. Whenever I have any spare time I like to visit the stores and look at the pretty things, whether I buy or not. I don't have much time of my own because doing all my housework keeps me very busy."
