May 6, 1940,
Judge Miles W. Lewis,
3d Floor Duval County
Courthouse,
Jacksonville, Florida.
Personal Interview.
Rose Shepherd, writer.
ABRAM BELLAMY, FLORIDA PIONEER.
“My other great-grandfather was Abram Bellamy. He died before he had reached the age of forty, and was buried at monticello, Florida, on September 23, 1839. The following is an extract from a nasonic address delivered at his funeral by Judos D. Westcott, Jr.:
""Abram Bellamy was born at Waccamaw, Georgetown District, South Carolina, August 10, 1800, and died in Jefferson Country Florida August 15, 1839. He received his education chiefly in the academy of Dr. Waddel at Wilmington, Abbeville Distract, South California.
“”He commended the study of law junior the direction of Joseph Alston, former Governor of South Carolina, and finished it in the office of Mr. Simmons, a distinguished lawyer at Charleston. He was admitted to the her at Charleston in 1821, and the <text not clear> succeeding year to East Florida, to which his <text not clear> family had removed a short time previous. He was shortly after admitted to practice at the bar and pursued his profession at St. Augustine and was also chosen the fill the responsible station of chief clerk of the Legislative council of the Territory. He was subsequently appointed, first by President Monroe, and reappointed by President Adams upon the recommendation of a large number of citizens of East Florida, to a seat in that body at the session of 1827-28, and again chosen as the chief clerk of the council.
""During the year 1827 he removed with his a family and that of his father to middle Florida. In the years 1829, 1831, 1832, and 1835 he was elected by the people to the Legislative Council and in 1829 and 1832 he was chosen its President.
""For several years of those mentioned he was the only representative of the Countries of Jefferson, Madison, and Humilton, then composing and election district, and on the sub-division of the district, he was elected to represent Jefferson. In 1838 he was chosen by a large vote as Delegate to the St. Joseph Convention, to for a constitution for the state of Florida, and of which Assembly he was one of the most talented, prominent, useful, and influential members.
""He was married St. Augustine in 1826 to Miss Eliza A. Williams of that city, (step-daughter of General Joseph M. Hernandez) whom he has left with one son, Burton Bellamy, and five daughters to deplore his loss."""
From an old newspaper, no data, and unidentified:
""This sure Abram Bellamy who was President of the previous Legislative Council was an active, intelligent gentleman of pledging address <text not clear> one time he was secretary of legation at the court of Versailles, but his extensive traveling and the charm of the most seductive society in Europe did not prevent him from choosing the life of a frontiersman.""
Another clipping: ""The first Jacksonville lawyer was Abraham Bellamy, son of Commissioner Bellamy, who built an office hour his father's house and led the way for a long and illustrious line of successors whose fame has gone to the ends of the <text not clear>with that or the city's generous hosts,""
"William Bellamy, brother of Abram Bellamy was appointed by the Governor of the Territory of Florida to convey to Washington City the papers necessary "to raise Florida to statehood.
"The progenitor of the Bellamy family in America was from Bellamy, an Englishman by birth, who came to the vicinity of what is now Charleston, South Carolina, in 1665 and was associated with sir John Yoamans in colonizing the province of South Carolina. Before coming to the South Carolina he had spent some time <text not clear> in Plymouth Colony in Massachusetts, and later or, the Island of Barbadoes. He was a man of wealth and consequence and left a son, John Bellamy, born in London about 1690. He too, Came to South Carolina and settled on the Santee River were he was an extensive planter, his wealth consisting of land, slaves, and shipping, He, too, left a son, John Bellamy, born in 1720 hour Back in Prince George's Parish in 1760. Another son was Abram Bellamy some years, younger than his brother, who removed to Florida a. out the year 1819, before Florida was admitted to the Union, and participated in the Spanish war under General Andrew Jackson.
"Abram Bellamy was an accomplished civil engineer and laid out the city of Jacksonville in Florida, the city being <text not clear> luke chief. He took with him his son John, also a civil engineer.
"John was one of the first commissioners of Jacksonville, and foreman of the first Grand Jury in that city. Later he was received from the United States Government $30,000,000 in gold for cutting the road from Tallahassee to St. Augustine, known as the St. Augustine Road.
"In 1827, Abram Bellamy moved to Jefferson country Florida with his family, two sons -- John and Abram -- and three daughters) who lived and died in that county.
""The following families are the descendants of the Bellamys; Turnbull, Eppes, Parkhill, Mays, Lamar, Lewie, walkar, scott, Donham, and Willie.
"This family was expelled with other Huguenots from <text not clear> after the Ediet of Nantes, and moved to Holland. Later from Bellamy settled in London and was there known as one of the gentry. Sir John Yoamans and other colonists, among them John Eilleen, were grunted the land around Charleston in 1665 directly by the crown.
"In old letters this name is spelled Bollamio."
July 19, 1939,
Mrs. Charles (Mollis Gibson) LeNoir,
Secretary, Womens Club of Jacksonville,
861 Riverside-ave.,
Jacksonville, Florida,
Rose Shepherd, Writer.
VILLA ALEXANDRIA, MRS. ALEXANDER MITCHELL,
SOUTH JACKSONVILLE.
Mrs. Charles LeNoir, or Miss Mollie" as she is affectionately known to 'the members of the Woman's Club of Jacksonville, of which she has been the efficient secretary for seven years, volunteered information on Villa Alexandria, Mrs. Alexander Mitchell, and incidents of South Jacksonville history, and was interviewed as she sat at her desk in the business office of the Woman's Club.
Mrs. LeNoir is a small woman of Scotch-English descent, with keen brown eyes, reddish brown hair, and a ruddy complexion. She speaks rapidly, her high pitched voiced having a considerable nasal quality, and intersperses her, conversation with quick, expressive hand gestures.
"My family came to Jacksonville from Flint, Michigan, in 1879, when I was a very small child," said Mrs. LeNoir.
"My father, William L. Gibson, had been ordered to Florida by his physician, being a victim of consumption, or tuberculosis, as it is now called. The Gibsons were early settlers of Michigan, my father being of the fourth generation of that family in that State.
"When we first came to this section, we boarded with the family of ex-Governor Harrison Reed, living in the old Reed house on Flagler Street in South Jacksonville. The house is still standing in its original location, but was then in the center of a small estate of twelve acres, on which was planted a splendid bearing orange grove, and other tropical fruits and shrubs. This was in 1879.
"We were considered Yankees, and were not very popular at that period of Florida's history.
"Harrison Reed was the first Territorial Governor of Florida, also a Yankee, from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, so it was natural that we should seek congenial friends.
"The Reeds had a small son, Harrison Reed, Jr., and he and I being about the same age, were cordial playmates of pre-school age, and had good times ramping around the big house and exploring the estate. We were very fond of cats, and I remember at one time we possessed in joint ownership a magnificent colony of sixteen. They were all kinds, mostly scrubs or the common alley variety, but we loved them dearly, dressed them up, put paper boots on them, and fed them until they were as fat as butter.
"It was not long until my father secured a position as bookkeeper with the Barnett Bank. He was the third man employed. The firm consisted of Mr. W. B. Barnett, Mr. Sam Cooper, and when my father was added, the staff of three carried on the rapidly growing business of the institution. The bank was located, in a small building on the same corner where Furchgett’s Department Store now stands, southwest corner of Forsyth and Pins (or Main Street, as it is known today). When I look back now, it seems impossible almost to realise that the Barnett Bank of Jacksonville new employees around three hundred people. It was not a National Bank, but was known then as the Bank of Jacksonville.
When my father died in 1912, he was assistant cashier of the Barnett Bank.
"We lived with the Reeds for a year or so, then my father purchased an adjoining plot, which also contained an orange grove, built a house, and when the street was cut through past the house in 1886, It was called 'Gibson Street' after my family. The big old red house is still standing.
“Ex Governor Harrison Reed was a brother of Mrs. Alexander Mitchell, also from Milwaukee. She owned the 'Villa Alexandria' estate on the St. Johns River, further out on the south side, where the Swisher property now is. In passing, she came frequently to visit the Reads, and we got to know her very well.
"Mrs. Mitchell was a tall, well-built woman, and very dignified in her manner and speech. She was middle-aged, as I first remember her, with hair quite gray. Her eyes were blue. She was a woman of much culture, a world traveler, and quite artistic.
"She took a fancy to me, and as she was along a great deal in her big house, she often took me to Villa Alexandria to stay with her overnight or over the week end.
"The house was a big rambling three story structure, all frame, and not very pretentious from the outside, but the inside was most beautiful.
"Mrs. Mitchell used to humer me when I would be her most by giving me my choice of the room I waste occupy. There was a French room, with dainty blue and gold finished white antique furniture, with heavy brocade draperies, and lots and lots of mirrors - French bevelled in gold frames - everything vary dainty and 'Frenchy'. This was my favorite.
Then there was the Japanese bedroom, with heavy dark lacquered furniture, with rugs and other furnishings from Japan; and the Antique room, furnished in early American. On the other side of the house was a rather large bedroom, all gray and grey color.
"Mrs. Mitchell's own bedroom was very "beautiful. It had a big bay window which faced the river. The windows in the room were hung with white silk curtains with over-drapes of heavy "blue brocade. On one side of her "bed she had a tall screen with three doors that folded. These doors were all full-length heavy mirrors, and the other side was of yellow plush. Three steps led up to her bedroom from the hall, which caused some people to remark - 'The steps led up to her throne.' The woodwork in the room was all decorated with hand-carvings. It was reported she had secured these carvings in France, had them carefully taken down and brought over here and installed in her room. All the little cabinets, the paintings on the walls were French, and there were many round and oval mirrors of French style.
"The dining room was a masterpiece of magnificence. It was quite large. The dining table occupied the center of the room, which could accommodate seventy-five guests, mCabinets were "built in on two sides of the room, with glass doors, and in these were stored her magnificent imported china. In one was a marvelous collection of teapots from all over the world, patiently collected on her many trips abroad. Ordinarily the table was in the middle of the room, but when only a few guests were present, it was showed up into the expansive bay window looking out upon the St. Johns River. Fine paintings by European masters adorned the walls of this room.
"Mrs. Mitchell's son, John, was married to an actress. The son was rich and spoiled, the actress-wife was high-tempered and avaricious, and when they separated, Mrs. Mitchell, Sr. took the small son, David, whom the court proceedings in a divorce suit had awarded to the father. He was then about seven years of age.
"The first time I saw David Mitchell was when, his grandmother, Mrs. Alexander Mitchell, brought him back to South Jacksonville early one fall. This was in 1893. He was a Small, fair-haired youngster, dressed in a blue serge soldier suit, ornamented with much gold braid.
"I remember he had a couple of ferocious bulldogs, which he trained to catch and kill cats. This, to Harrison Read and me, was the height of cruelty, and we were not very fond of the 'little heathen'. He used to hire the negroes to bring cats to Villa Alexandria, which he would turn loose and <text not clear>sie these ferocious bulldogs on them. If the dogs caught the cats, they would tear them apart. It was terrible!
"There was no doubt of David's a being a legitimate son, as I remember all the talk about the separation and divorce of the father and mother in Milwaukee.
"Davie was the apple of his grandmother's eye, and she lavished everything upon him. He was also very fond of his grandmother and was always loyal to her.
"I remember his courtship with Kittie Parrott, who was Kittie Sutton, whom Mr. Parrott adopted after he married her mother, Mrs. Lillie Sutton. She had vowed she would marry the richest man in Jacksonville, and so she set her 'cap' for David Mitchell. He was a sport, riding wild ponies, drinking, gambling, and idling away his time. But they were married, and, I remember when the little boy, Alexander Mitchell, named for his great-grandfather, was born. He was a cute little baby and I have lots of snapshots of him, as my mother used to take care of him a great deal, when Kittie came over to visit in Jacksonville.
"She would come as far as our house, and we would walk down, to the river and put out a little white flag, when a rowboat would be sent ever to bring the passenger to this side of the river. They were landed at the foot of Newman Street. My father had his own rowboat, and made the trip across the river each day, storing the boat at the Florida Yacht Club basis fort of market st. on the river.
"When David Mitchell met with a terrible accident - a bad spill from a fast polo pony, he suffered a concussion of the brain and other injuries, being unconscious for a period of six weeks or so, Kittie Partott-Mitchell, decided she did not wish to be tied to a broken man, so she talked of divorcing David, who was practically an invalid and not accountable for his speech or actions for a long time. Her father, who was an important official of the Florida East Coast Railroad, was rather stern with her, telling her she had married David for better or for worse, and it was up to her to remember her vows. She refused to live with him, however, and immediately upon the death of her father she instituted proceedings for divorce, In the meantime, she had become involved in a moballiance with Sam Holmes, a local married man, causing a lot of scandal, and it was reported she lived with him for <text not clear> years before his wife died and he was able to make her his legal wife. After he died, she married for the third time, now living in West Palm Beach, having attained a medicum of respectability after her wild actions. The son, Alexander Mitchell, is now employed in the bond department of the Barnett National Bank. He was quite small when his father and mother separated, and probably knows very little about the Mitoholls. His grandmother, Mrs. Little Parrott, was very fond of him, however, and when she died, in her will she left him her beautiful residence on St. Johns Avenue in the fashionable Avondale <text not clear>. Young Alexander Mitchell was born in 1908.
"The first ferryboat operated on the St. Johns was in 1893 or 1894. It was called the Armington, and used to come over on it to Jacksonville to attend the Bradford institute, a prime school operated by Mrs. B. Drew Williams, under the auspices of the Episcopal Church.
"The next ferry was called the Mechanic. It belonged to the Flagler System and would meet the trains at the foot of Hogan Street and carry freight and passengers over to the south side station of the Florida East Coast Railway.
“The bridge was started about that time, and my mother who died in 1914, said she wished she might live to see the bridge completed and the two cities, Jacksonville and South Jacksonville, joined together.
"During the fire of May 3, 1901, we children were awed by the spectacle from the south side of the river. It must have been either on a Saturday or some holiday, as we were home from school. It started about noon. We had been forbidden to go down through the orange grove which ran to the water's edge. Our place was all fenced in, and there was a gate on the river side, but we never went beyond the gate. The flames kept shooting up and the black smoke rolling in, so we decided to go up to the roof of the house. We mounted the stairs to the attic, and through a window climbed out on the roof, from which we had a magnificent view. I remember the smoke and flame which came from the roof of the Catholio Church after a blazing brand was wafted there by the high wind, and we watched as the church was rapidly consumed.
"Along in the evening the ferry began to bring people over to the south side - their homes and belongings destroyed in the fire, their clothing in shreds and the shoes burned from their feet as they walked through the hot ashes. That sight we had nineteen guests.
“The "burning "brands fell in every direction during the height of the - the fire department simply could not keep up with them - and even the next morning buildings were still smoking.
"Father stayed at his post in the Barnett Bank until 3’o clock on the morning after the fire. The bank did not burn as the fire lifted and burned the next block. Every-thing in the other direction, up in the block where the Elks Club now is, was destroyed, also.
"Harrison Reed, or Harry Reed, as we called him, when he finished school, went to work for the Hubbard Hardware Co. Later he was offered a position with the Standard Oil Co., having charge of their warehouse in Jacksonville. That was when we parted company, as mother thought a ‘warehouseman’ was not good enought for her daughter to keep company with. When the Standard Oil Company became more prosperous and influential, Harrison Reed was promoted, until he finally became the Florida manager. He is retired now, having a beautiful home in San Jose. He must be a multi-millionaire, as he sold hundreds of acres to the real estate company developing San Jose Estates, one of Jacksonville's most beautiful residential suburbs. He has quite a collection of valuable historical relics pertaining to Florida, which he has treasured from his father's time, when he was Territorial Governor.
Getting back to Mrs. Mitchell, she was always a devout Episcopalian, and when South Jacksonville was building up, she conceived the idea of building a chapel on the south side. The spot being selected, she got people interested, and no one was more enthusiastic than my own dear mother. You, see, being Yankees, we made few close friends, so mother had little social activity and was glad to give her time to helping Mrs. Mitchell in establishing the little All Saints Chapel, as it was known.
“I remember that" my father used to go hunting with Mr. Ed Holmes and through this association they became fast friends. One day Mr. Holmes said: ""Gibson, I am going to have my wife call on Mrs. Gibson, so we can be family friends.”” My father was so delighted when he brought this message home, but my mother said - ""No, she'll not call - we are too much Yankee for her”” - and sure enough she didn't.
"If you will come back tomorrow, I will tell you more about the Mitchells and All Saints Church, also the yellow fever epidemic of 1888."
