Anne Winn Stevens
Asheville, N. C.
January 16, 1939.
Mrs. J. C. Lawrence,
237 Waynesville Avenue
West Asheville, N. C.
THE LAWRENCES
The Lawrence Cottage is situated on a winding sparsely settled but well-paved street. The scrap of lawn is neatly terraced, the retaining wall is ivy-covered. There has been an attempt to create a formal garden with clipped shrubbery, from out of which peers a white metal heron. Two brightly hued sun-bonnet babies carved of wood, bear the house number between them on the front grass plot.
Mrs. Lawrence, hale and active, answer the door-bell. She always gives the impression of having been called from work. About her head is a white cloth, and an apron protects her cotton house dress which is of be same blue as her eyes. "I'm sorry the parlor's so cold," she apologizes, "I was working in the kitchen," or "I've been using son' washing machine next door, so I neglected to make fire here."
The parlor, mid-Victorian in type is comfortably furnished, but over-crowded. The over-stuffed furniture is decorated with numerous knitted anti-macassars. The green art square bears a design of florid roses. There are lace curtains at the windows, and a multiplicity of framed photographs on walls and mantel, besides much bric-a-bac.
"You want to see some of my work, I reckon," she says as she brings out some mill-ends of unbleached muslin, dyed a soft, rich orange. "I dye cloth," she says, "by using clay. I learned the secret from my mother, who learned it from her mother. My mother's people must have done it for more than a hundred years. Now I'm the only one left who knows how to set the color."
Mrs. Lawrence tells very proudly how a hotel manager in Chattanooga once ordered from her two hundred yards of the clay-tinted cloth for draperies for his hotel, and how a man from Washington who was studying mountain industries even came to see her work and to ask her for her secret. A more recent order was given her by the "Blue Ridge Weavers, over the Mountain." "Why," she says with satisfaction, "a New York woman ordered enough of the material to use for draperies in her winter home, near Tryon."
Mrs. Lawrence continues, "I get a great, big lump of red clay and put it in bag, and boil it in a big boiler until the water is the right color. Then I take out the bag of clay and strain the water to get rid of any mud that may be in it. After that, I put the unbleached muslin in the boiler of water, and boil the cloth long time. After the cloth is the right shade, and has been rinsed several time, I set the color. Then I have the cloth laundered, and it is ready to deliver."
Mrs. Lawrence gets ten cents, for dyeing the cheaper grade of "unbleached" and twenty cents, for dyeing the better grade. "I seldom dye more'n a hundred yards in a week," she says. "The work is very tedious and lifting and rinsing the heavy water-soaked cloth is hard on my back."
Mrs. Lawrence is proud, too, of her curtains in the windows of the weaving-room in the City Hall basement. They hung there all summer in the bright sun light, and never faded nor changed color, she will tell you. In a rustic setting these orange draperies are quite effective.
Mrs. Lawrence will tell you that she did not learn to read until fourteen or fifteen years ago. She is now sixty-six. "But you'd never guess how old I am," she tells her visitors. "I don't look my age," and she doesn't.
"I didn't have any chance to go to school when I was young," she says. "My parents were renters," tenant farmers, she means. "I was born," she continues, "on a farm at Turkey Creek, near Leicester, in Buncombe County. My parents were very poor. They had twelve children, ten of whom lived to be grown. "I think," she diverged, "such large families are wicked. People oughn't to have more children than they can educate and provide for."
"Raising tobacco was my father's work. He raised the barn-cured kind, and it called for twelve hours work, every day in the week. Pa kept all his children in the field working. The tobacco had to be planted, reset, hoed, weeded, and topped. The suckers had to be pulled off. It had to be kept free from worms. The whole family worked at it.
The public schools, in those days, ran for only three months in the year, and those were the months when the tobacco needed most care. That was why I never got to go to school." But in spite of Mrs. Lawrence's hard worked youth, she still prefers the country to the town. "The land," she says, "is always there. Farmers can always raise enough to feed their families. They do not realize that in the city they must buy everything.
Mrs. Lawrence's first husband was a well-to-do farmer who owned two farms; one a mountain farm of over a hundred and eighty acres, another nearly as large in the bottom lands. He raised cattle, and a lot of wheat. But he died in a few years after their marriage. Then she went back to her parents, still tenant farmers. They were now not only very poor, but old, ill, and restless.
She says, "I took care of them. They wanted to be near a doctor. So we moved to town."
Mrs. Lawrence's present husband is a skilled mechanic. He, too, was from Turkey Creek, where he completed the course offered by the rural schools of that day. He made good wages and the two of them saved their earnings until they were able to buy a lot, and build the house they now live in.
"We never went in debt," says Mrs. Lawrence. "We did not buy the lot till we had money in hand to pay for it. Then we saved money until we had enough to have the house built. We went about furnishing it in the same way."
"We had money in the bank, too, enough to enable us to live comfortably in our old age. But we lost it all in the bank failures in Asheville, and West Asheville. Now we have barely enough to live on."
Mrs. Lawrence work at the Mica Shop in Biltmore. He is in poor health and under the care of a specialist. He suffers from anemia, and is on a diet. He makes little more than his own expenses.
Mrs. Lawrence was the first pupil of the "Moonlight Schools" started in Asheville some fourteen or fifteen years ago. "When I learned to read," said Mrs. Lawrence, "I felt like a person who had been born blind, and then received his sight."
The Lawrences saw to it that their son and daughter were educated in the City schools and completed high school. Mrs. Lawrence's step-grand-daughter, Mattie Cornell, was graduated not only from high school, but from Mars Hill College, and from the State Woman's college at Greensboro, N. C., where she completed a business course. Mattie, however, could get no satisfactory job.
"She walked the town over all summer," says Mrs. Lawrence, "looking for work. The only jobs offered her paid two or three dollars a week, hardly enough to take care of her bus fare. She finally took a job at the Ladies Hosiery Mills in West Asheville making paper boxes at twelve dollars a week. The hours were long, but the work was not hard. But she wanted to do better, so she saved her money, and this semester she's doing graduate work at the Western Carolina Teachers' College, at Cullowhee. She is preparing to be a teacher!"
The Lawrence's son is doing very well, indeed. He and his wife live next door to his parents in their own white, Colonial Cottage. He owns a small grocery store, an auto repair shop, and is building a second house.
Mrs. Lawrence is very much interested in her neighbors, and for a long time was a great help to the Associated Charities. She looked up the needy in her neighborhood and helped them get in touch with social workers. At present she is helping two orphan girls, Edna and Rachel Meadows.
