July 26,1939
Mrs. Thomas Kalavaris, (Greek Mother)
1430 Park Drive.,
Charlotte, N.C.
Dudley W. Crawford, Writer.
( No names changed)
DISCOVERING AMERICA IN A HOSPITAL
"A story of my life would necessarily include my childhood in Greece, but that period seems so long ago and so remote and different from what my life has been in Charlotte, I can hardly recall it. It seems like a dream, although I am still a young woman. The same may be said about my first impressions of this country. Of course, I am able to recall some of the sensations I experienced as we came into New York, the sight of the Statue of Liberty, the sky-line of the city in the early morning, and the more detailed observations I made in that city and in Washington during the next few weeks; but I really discovered America in the Mecklenburg Tuberculosis Sanitorium here in Charlotte "
In this manner Mrs. Thomas Kalavaris, of 1430 Park Drive, Charlotte, N.C., began to relate her reactions as a Greek immigrant in America. She is dark, tall and graceful with sparkling brown eyes and a personality that would be conspicuous in any group of women. Her charming smile and genuine interest in her guest makes her an ideal hostess.
"I was born in the small town of Karpension in Peloponesus, Greece, in a family of four children. I can recall nothing of interest before 1928, when I met my husband, who had returned to Greece after being in America fourteen years.
As a girl of seven, I remembered him as he was before he went away; but our meeting upon his return was really a case of "love at first sight". After falling in love with each other, it was necessay for him to remain longer than he had planned, as our families insisted on going through with the Formalities of our country, in regard to engagements and marriage. We remained in Greece a short time, enjoyed a wonderful honeymoon and then sailed for America.
"We arrived in Charlotte, where my husband had a small business, in the fall of 1928. Soon after our arrival a little girl was born, and another a year later. For this reason I was unable to make much progress toward getting acquainted with the American customs and language. Soon after the birth of the second girl I was stricken with tuberculosis and immediately entered the Mecklenburg Sanitorium. In a way this was tragic, but in one sense, it was a great blessing.
"Prior to the time I entered that nstitution I knew only a few Greek women and no Americans. I could speak no English at all. I felt lonely and out of place, but after a few days in the hospital it seemed that every one around the place began trying to see how much they could do to make me happy. The doctors, nurses, patients and even the porters flocked to my room. I thought at first it was through curiosity, but soon learned they were all interested in my welfare. When they understood I was anxious to make friends and to learn their language they seemed to vie with each other in their efforts to help. They were so anxious to help and so persistent in their efforts that the doctors had to restrict my visiting hours.
"Please remember, I had been away from friends and relatives for two years, had been burdened with two babies, and now in bed with what we considered an incurable disease. I had every reason in the world to become lonesome and homesick. While I faced it bravely as I could, and made up my mind not to let it "get me down"; I don't believe I would have been able to live through it if the doctors, nurses and patients had not been so kind and attentive. They all went out of their way to be nice to me. Even today, the head nurse, Miss Warnock, is more dear to me than a mother or sister could possibly be.
"One of "the greatest trials' in entering the hospital was giving up my babies. The Greek mother is, perhaps, more sensitive in this particular than any other mother in the world; but I soon learned they were being treated like little princesses at the Junior League Baby Home, and every' one made it a point to assure me of this fact. After a short time I became so absorbed in learning the language, and so interested in my new friends that much of the pain of separation was alleviated.
"After two years I was permitted to return to my home, but after six months it was necessary for me to enter the hospital again. Except for short visits with my family I stayed there six years longer. During these six years I devoted much of my time to study, and now I feel that I have really mastered the English language.
"During all this time I came in contact almost solely with. American people, and I learned to love them. I learned to admire their courage and determination as I saw them in the hospital trying to get well. This disease is not common in our country. Of course, it is a tragedy that one has to lie in a hospital bed year after year and be denied the ordinary pleasures of home life; but to me it has been a beautiful revelation of the kindness and generosity of the American people toward those who are unfortunate. I cannot say I am glad I was sick, but those years of confinement will always be a bright spot in my memeory, because of the lasting friendships I made. I cannot express too strongly my appreciation.
"Fortunately, my husband's business has been such that we can afford a servant since I came home. I am able to devote most of my time to my children; they are now eleven and. twelve years old. They finished grammar school here and then entered Belmont Abbey. At present they are spending eight weeks at Camp Latta. No, I don't particular want them to take up a career, but I shall see that they are prepared in case it is ever necessary for them to make their own way. I have talked with them about this and find that one would like to teach and the other thinks she would like a business career. I want my girls to conform to American customs. I have a great admiration for American girl, their independence and self-reliance, but I feel that they do not appreciate what a wonderful country they are living in. I think it is wonderful that a girl is permitted to enter almost any profession or occupation she desires.
"I was made very happy this week when I learned the campers selected one of my girls as the most "likeable" girl at the camp. This is another evidence of the generosity and tolerance of the American people.
"Yes, I agree that some girls have too much freedom; many of them perhaps go wrong by reason of this fact, but I feel that a great majority of them are able to take care of them selves and the future womanhood of America will be just as pure and good as that of any other country. I have an acquaintance with most of the Greek women in Charlotte, but I feel just as near and just as intimate with the American women as those of my own race I seldom go out and have to depend on my friends coming to see me, and I can say that they are very considerate.
"No, I don't think I will ever go back to Greece. Of, course, I would like to see my mother, brothers and sisters; but I hardly think I would risk a trip, especially at this time when there is so much talk of war Greece seems a long, long way off. You see I have to guard my health. My husband, my children and my dearest friends are here. I am thoroughly sold on America."
