May 16, 1939
Mrs. Estelle Stancill (white)
618 E. Fourth St.,
Charlotte, N. C.
WPA Worker
Mary Pearl Brown, writer
Mary Northrop, reviser
"Praise the Lord!"
Original Names	Changed Names
Estelle Stancill	Mrs. Page
Anderson, S. C.	Felton, S. C.
Charlotte	Riverton
Elizabeth Mill	Genevieve Mill
Dr. A. G. Garr	Dr. Ragan
McDowell Street	Roche Street
Dr. C. W. Howard	Dr. P. F. Johnson
Mrs. O. G. Thomas	Mrs. R. L. Williams
Mr. Howell	Mr. Sanders
Name of Bishop Grace, Negro faith healer, purposely not changed.
"Praise the Lord!"
"I was raised in Felton, South Carolina. My father was a tenant farmer. We had a large family and there were days and days we had nothing to eat but molasses and bread. I went to about the fifth grade in the country school.
"Times were so hard at my house that I married about the first man that asked me, thinking because he was a house carpenter I would have enough to eat and a place of my own. After I was married my husband run around from one place to the other and started drinking, and after my sixth child was born he left and never come back.
"I come to Riverton in 1926 and got work in the Genevieve mill. While I worked there I could take care of the children but the depression started and the mill began to lay off people. Being one of the newest I was laid off first. Finally the mill closed entirely.
It's hard when know your baby is hungry and there is nothing to feed him with.
"In 1931 I commenced to go down to Alexander's Creek to the tent where Dr. Ragan preached. I was in so much trouble about my work that I asked him to pray for me that I would find something to do. Winter was coining on and I couldn't see a thing for us but to starve and freeze. I went to the tent that night and Dr. Ragan had a special prayer for me.
"The next day they (Dr. and Mrs. Ragan) sent me wood, coal and food. I found a place as housekeeper for a lady that was sick at $10 a month. I worked there until she was able to work, then I was out again. That Christmas I asked the Salvation Army for a basket and some one, I don't know who for sure but I got an idea, went and told them I didn't need one and I didn't get one. I had canned salmon with no bread for Christmas dinner. I was thankful for that though and I went down to the tent to services and enjoyed it as much as if I'd had a turkey dinner. If the people down there had known about my condition they would have done something about it but I wouldn't tell them.
"I tried every way in the world to get private work, but finally I went to the Welfare and asked for help and I was certified for WPA work and went to a lunch room at 28 cents an hour. I promised God that if I got work I'd give 10 percent of my earnings to Him, which I have done. On July 19th, 1931, the Lord saved my soul and I was born again. I received the Baptism of The Holy Ghost, October 14th, 1931. Praise the Lord! I am happy in the Lord and really enjoy life.
"I was transferred to the Health Department and worked over there several pay periods at 28 cents an hour. One day I stepped out of the door and the Lord told me right then I was going to get a raise, and I said, "Yes, Lord, and I am going to give it all to yon." In a few days I was reclassified, and I was getting 40 cents an hour and I gave the whole amount I was raised and the 10 percent I'd already been giving. I gave it to the Lord through Dr. Ragan.
"That project closed and I was transferred back to the lunch room at 28 cents an hour. I hate that I can't give more to the church and the Lord's work. I've got to be laid off six weeks soon because I am going to the canning project, but you know school will close soon, and I'll have to wait till the canning project opens. I don't know what I'll do.
"You know we are forming a new church on Roche Street. Dr. P. F. Johnson, Mrs. R. L. Williams, and lots of others were down there praying for God to open the hearts of the people so they would come and receive the Gospel, and that the Lord would show us who the preacher should be. I was praying the best I knew how for Him to lead as in the right way about who to call and he said, “Mrs. R. L. Williams shall be your minister.“ That was just last week and they are still praying over it. But I know who it will be. Mrs. R. L. Williams. The Lord told me so.
“I have no complaint to make about the WPA. They have been so good to me and I appreciate everything they have done for me. Praise the Lord!
“You knew that fight they're having now, trying to put Mr. Sanders out of the jail? Well, they say it's because the jail is dirty and the food isn't fitten to eat, so that the Government won't put their prisoners in there. But that's not the reason. The reason is because we go down there and spread the Word. One time a young men's Bible class come down there at eleven o'clock on Sunday to preach and we were already there. Dr. C. F. Johnson said, 'This is our time. We are going to preach. You can come back later in the day if you want to preach.'
“Well, this Bible class was made up of rich men from one of the big churches and they hated for us to get ahead of them. Mr. Sanders, the jailer, backed us up so now they're putting the pressure on to get him out.
“I would sure hate to see Mr. Sanders lose his job as jailer, because Dr. Johnson and a crowd of us from the Ragan Auditorium (he don't preach in a tent any more, he's got a fine big stone auditorium) we go up there every Sunday end hold services for the prisoners, and if they get a new jailer up there I am afraid he won't let us up there for services. We preach to the Negro prisoners and they enjoy it so much. They are so hungry for the Gospel.
"You know people laugh at the healing services we have down there at the Auditorium, but it is because they don't know the Lord. Why, I saw a woman from Latonia come in there one night on a stretcher, she had pellagra, and when Dr. Ragan prayed for her she started shooting. The scabs broke loose on her legs and they started bleeding and you could track her all over the platform. That was on a Thursday night and when she come back later her skin was as smooth and clear as yours is right now. I was sitting right behind a man who had a big knot on the side of his neck, and when Dr. Ragan called them to come to be prayed for, he went and while he prayed that knot went away. Then there was a boy that had been walking on crutches for years. He went up there to be prayed for and he left his crutches and walked back down.
"The pitifullest case I ever saw down there was one time two boys went up there to be prayed for. They had the jake lag. The first one said, 'Preacher, don't pray for me to walk all right, but please pray for my sinful soul.' Dr. Ragan stopped everything and told us what he had said. All of the Christians went to that altar and we prayed to God to save that poor boy's soul. Then Dr. Ragan prayed for him to be healed and he come down walking just as good as he ever did. The other boy was right behind him, he was chewing gum and didn't look at all concerned, so when Dr. Ragan prayed for him he come down just like he went up there. You see, you are healed by faith and that last boy didn't have enough. The boy that was healed come back to church the next night. He got the witness of the Spirit and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. I tell you the Lord is working down there in a wonderful way.
"I thank the Lord for sending Dr. and Mrs. Ragan to town. I'd been going to church all my life but I didn't have any religion, but now I know my Saviour personally and can enjoy my religion, Praise the Lord!
"We had our ninth birthday Sunday night. Dr. Ragan was telling about some of them in the church wanting him to have deacons and elders, but he said if they have them they could call another pastor any time they want to and put him out without any notice."
I asked Mrs. Page whether the church was deeded to Dr. Ragan.
"Yes," she said, "We all wanted to protect him so we made the deed to him. You see we don't want the church to split up like some of the others in town. Of course there were some that didn't want the church deeded to him, but they pulled out long ago.
"Come down there next Sunday night. I'll save you a good seat. They are going to have some illustrated sermons down there and they are so wonderful. You ought to come down and let Dr. Ragan pray for your eyes. God is doing a wonderful work in the old Auditorium. I tell you if that Auditorium was not down there I would join up with the colored church of Bishop Grace.'
She called her little girl. "Tell the lady how you were blessed down there the other night." The small child said, "I thank God He has saved my soul."
"Praise the Lord!"
"Praise the Lord!", the child answered.
