Knoxville, Tennessee
303; Market Street
G. R. Weaver (white)
Dean Newman, writer
Aswell, reviser
STRICTLY MUTUAL BENEFIT
"Without question," said Mr. Weaver, "there has been and are mutual burial associations in Tennessee that have earned the name of burial rackets! There is some burial insurance schemes that are even worse. But are we to drive out everything that smacks of mutual protection, are we to scourge it from the land because some around us are crooked?"
Mr. Weaver's voice reached a sonorous, yet muted climax. Then there was silence while he leaned back in his chair and sucked at his pipe. He glanced with some pride around the well-equipped office of the undertaking establishment which his father had founded years ago.
"I'm sixty years old," he said with a long sigh, "and in those years I've learned that the greatest virtue of all is that great virtue called patience. You must be patient with those that despitefully use you as well as your friends or, as it were, with your in ethical business competitors as well as those in sadness and bereavement.
"Oh no, I don't want to appear bitter in this matter. Indeed, I do not feel that the House of Weaver has been disgraced by our recent promotion and organization of the Weaver Mutual Burial Association, of Knoxville, Tennessee, of which I am the executive or head, since I hold the office of secretary-treasurer of the burial association by its rules and bylaws. We simply had to form our own association to meet competition. We couldn't afford to commit it business suicide.
"Our association is an honest one. It was not organized for making a profit. You can understand that when I tell you that we give a two hundred and twenty-five dollar funeral to our association members at a cost of only a hundred dollars.
"Look at that piece of merchandise there." He pointed out a gray upholstered coffin lined with white satin plush.
"That's nice enough for anybody, is it not? I'd be entirely satisfied for my wife to be interred in it, We sell this casket to persons that is not members of our burial association for a hundred and fifty, but we furnish it free for any member of the association that passes on.
"Our two hundred and twenty-five dollar funerals for our association members run this way. That fine casket, a hundred and fifty; high grade embalming, twenty-five; a tasteful suit, dress, or beautiful shroud, fifteen; box, ten dollars; hearse and motor transportation for the family and pallbearers, twenty-five; total two hundred twenty-five. These services and goods cost us a hundred. For persons which are not members of our association, we make the usual mortician's profit. But association members get this funeral without putting up a dime. Not a thin dime!
"Of course, if the family of an association member desires a more expensive funeral, we make a profit. For instance, a family often desires a metallic casket like that one over there. We sell such a casket, which is water-proof and prevents the body from ever becoming soaked in the ground, for two hundred and fifty dollars. If the family of an association member buys a metallic casket, the bill usually runs around three hundred and twenty-five, of which they are given an immediate credit of a hundred dollars by the burial association.
"You say you don't see how the association can operate on twenty-five cent assessments about six times a year and not become insolvent. Well, let's do a little figuring. We give a certificate of membership in the association for an initial fee of twenty-five cents for a person between fifteen and seventy-five years of age. Parents can also take out memberships for their children at a cost of ten cents betweenthe ages of six months and five years and fifteen cents for the ages between five and fifteen. The solicitor keeps all this money as his fee. Often he writes an entire family and collects a dollar. An active man can average about eight dollars a day soliciting members.
"After paying his entrance fee, a member don't pay anything more until an assessment's made against all members. This is done after we've had five or six funerals for association members. But an assessment is always limited to twenty-five cents and in the case of children to a dime and fifteen cents. We guarantee that there'll not be more than six assessments a year. Thus we're giving burial protection to an adult for a dollar and fifty cents a year. It's the cheapest burial protection system that can be devised and we intend to follow the Tennessee law governing such associations strictly.
"The Tennessee law of 1917 regulating these associations is one of the big troubles that funeral associations and directors must face. The law's vague and it's been interpreted in a dozen different ways. It ought to be revised so a uniform and standard system may be enforced. The law is so loose it permits crooked burial associations to operate under it. There's that funeral firm up the street. Why, it's bled the poor of Knoxville for years, charging twenty-five cents each month regardless of the number of deaths. It's competing unfairly with us and other mortuary homes. Its association members don't know they are paying outrageous and exorbitant rates.
"Let's do a little more figuring, so that you may clearly understand just how we operate. We've been organized just two months and now have two thousand eight hundred members, a majority of which came to this office and tendered their own applications after reading our advertisement of the association in the Knoxville newspapers. We're proud of that. The House of Weaver has always conformed to the code of ethics of the National Association of Norticians and the public knows and appreciates that fact. The fifteen hundred persons who joined our association without solicitation proves that our funeral home is highly esteemed by the Knoxville public.
"Well, as I stated, we've to got twenty-eight hundred members now. You know that the average annual death rate in Knoxville, for all classes, including men, women, children, whites and Negroes, poor and rich, numbers eleven per thousand. The Negro death rate is greater than the whites. We don't offer membership in our association to Negroes, so we may expect, as it were, a smaller death rate among our members than eleven per thousand members per year. We find that we may expect the death of thirty of our members during each year.
"This means that the Weaver Mutual Burial Association will have to pay to the Weaver Funeral Home three thousand dollars during the year for the thirty funerals which have cost the funeral home a hundred dollars each. The burial association collects this money by twenty-five cent assessments after five or six members have died. This small coat assures one of a decent Christian funeral and burial, including casket and box, suit or dress, hearse and other transportation, chairs, and the use of our chapel.
"This is half as cheap than that of the firm up the street which is profiteering on its members, because our association is a strictly mutual benefit association which charges its members only actual cost. We're not trying to make a profit out of human misery. We're merely providing means for the poor and worthy to secure decent funerals for what they are able to pay.
"Yes, our solicitors report they have some trouble to induce many persons to provide for so certain and sure event as death. Of course, many persons contacted already belong to some other association or carry life insurance. Others don't understand our organization and feel that it's not financially able to carry out its promises. Some persons feel it would be a disgrace to become a member of a mutual burial association. The hardest men to convince, according to the experience of our solicitors, are the World War veterans. All of them know that the government will pay a hundred dollars for their funeral expenses and most of them think this is ample. But a hundred dollars will buy only a very poor funeral and only the cheapest sort of a casket. Such funerals are little better than those the county provides for paupers. No right thinking man, no person with the proper pride, can afford to be laid to rest in such a manner.
"Before we decided to organize our own burial association, I made a thorough study and investigation of such associations operating in Tennessee. From this investigation I can say positively and absolutely that strictly mutual burial associations, such as ours, give the greatest protection to every one, regardless of social standing, and that they are a saving to individuals and, as it were, to the taxpayers as a whole. Before burial associations were organized in Tennessee, hundreds of dollars had to be appropriated by the county courts each year to cover the cost of pauper burials. Now this expense to taxpayers is almost eliminated, because even paupers manage to get up a dollar fifty a year to pay for burial protection. It is a splendid service to the public.
"Here are a few observations I wish you would note. First, more than a hundred and fifty funeral directors in Tennessee furnish safe, sound, dependable burial protection to the people in their communities through associated mutual burial organizations. Second, more than eight hundred thousand persons in Tennessee are protected through burial certificates, payable through responsible funeral homes. Third, more than ten thousand funerals were paid for through burial associations during the past year. More than a third of these would have been county pauper burials but for this kind of protection for poor but worthy citizens.
"It's my honest and unbiased belief that the funeral director, who opposes burial associations such as ours, and others of the same character, has no vision. As a matter of fact, in my personal judgment, he is committing suicide insofar as his future business is concerned. At least, we found this true in our case.
"I've said that some burial associations has earned and deserve the name of racket. Such associations compete unfairly with the others. They charge more than double the actual cost, and collect regularly each month from their members. They have solicitors busy all the time seeking new members. The House of Weaver will not issue a certificate of membership to a person unless he is in good health. We wish to protect our members as much as possible and not assess them for bad risks. But these racket associations often seek out some very ill person and get their membership. Such ill parsons have been known to die within a week after they became members. Death is the very thing that the racket associations want to happen, for they secure a fine advertisement because of the death. Their solicitors take around with them newspaper clippings of the death and a photostat copy of the application of the dead person dated just a few days before death. They get a lot of new business by this crooked and inethical method.
"These racket associations are the ones which find all sorts of technicalities to set up against taking care of a burial as they've agreed to do. For instance, if a member moves and fails to notify the association they claim the association has no liability. They also set up claims that members has mis-stated their ages. It's pretty hard in Tennessee for a person born more than twenty years ago to prove his age because Tennessee hasn't had birth registrations till in recent years.
"It's these racket associations that have given mutual association which are conducted strictly honestly the black-eye in the esteem of the public. I'm going to work for new laws that will eliminate these racketeering competitors. It's a shame for a service that serves the public in time of need and sorrow to have to bear the cross of inethical competitors who are a racket, no less."
Strictly Mutual Benefit - Undetaker Tenn. Good Description by pious "fraud" of operation of Mutual burying societies, with condemnation of other societies, i.e.. those run by competitors. This story is more about undertaking than the undertaker, hence had doubtful value for us.