STATEWIDE WRITERS PROJECT
Miami, Florida.
Socio-Ethnic
Greeks in America
Susan Clark
November 6, 1939.
Mabel B. Francis Editor
MRS. ANGELO KAYS
135 S.W. 10th Ave.
My interview with Mrs. Lays took place at her home, 136 S. W. 10th. Avenue, on her front porch. I was ready to leave the home became no one answered the door, when Mrs. Kays and her small child drove up in a fairly new sedan. The automobile was grayish blue, perhaps a year old, but was very dirty looking.
The yard and porch of the Kays home were quite un-kept in appearance, toys being strewn about the porch and yard, and the porch chairs dusty and needing paint. The grass was fairly well kept in the front of the house and the porch furniture was of inexpensive wicker.
The home is perhaps a five or six room bungalow, and was built about ten or twelve years ago. It is constructed of stucco block and concrete and is trimmed in brown paint.
I explained the purpose of my visit, and while Mrs. Kays was not particularly interested, she asked me to be seated on the porch while she put her groceries and packages away. The little boy was taped in several places on his face and chin, the tape seemingly covering large sores.
Mrs. Kay's parents are from Leros, Greece, and went to Nassau to live more than 45 years ago. Mrs. Kays was born in Nassau where he parents still reside and own a large sponging business. She showed me a large colored photograph of her parents' home in Nassau. It is perhaps a 20 room mansion surrounded by a wall. The estate was lived in by Spanish American War officials many years ago. She said, and is 150 years old. Mrs. Kays has spent 17 months visiting her people during the past two years. The business, owned by her father is the George Damianes Sponge Co.
Mr. Kays came to America from Pol<text not clear>ponesos, Greece, just before the 1925 boom. Mrs. Kays could not remember or did not know exactly when he came to Miami, but said he had served in the American Expeditionary Forces in France during the World War. Mr. Kays' mother died when he was very young and he was brought to this country by an uncle. He and his uncle lived in Milwaukee for some years.
Mr. Kays is a member of the American Legion in Miami. He has a brother living in Colorado Springs.
Mrs. Kays, then Miss Damianes, came to Miami to visit her cousin, Mrs. Tomaris, and there she met and became acquainted with Mr. Kays. They were married more than eight years ago and have owned the home in which they live for six years.
For a short time after coming to Miami to live, Mr. Kays shipped limes from Key West to New York, but soon met Peter Demos an old school chum with whom he had gone to school in Greece. He went into the wholesale fish business with Mr. Demos in 1925 and has remained with him. The name of this business is the Pepps Fish Company, 300 S.W. North River Drive. Mr. and Mrs. Kays have two children, Penelope, age seven and one half years and Theodore, age six.
Mrs. Kays had a high school and convent musical education in Nassau before she married and is now teaching her daughter, Penelope, piano. Mrs. Kays is organist in the local Sophia Greek Church.
She informed me that they are "making a pretty good living now and like it here in Miami very much." She is a member of the Phellopthos Society, a social and church club for women, and the Coral Gables chapter of the Eastern Star. Mr. Kays is a Mason, and also served as president of the Miami Order of Ahopa in 1938.
Mrs. Kays' two brothers, Theo and Tony Damianes, live here and are engaged in the tire business at 700 N.W. 7th. Avenue. These brothers were also born in Nassau.
Although their son, Theodore, is not yet in school, he was asked to take part in a public school play recently and Mrs. Kays said.
"Just as soon as he is old enough, I want both the children to go to the Greek School too, which is in session from 4 to 6 each day."
The Kays use Greek language almost entirely in the home, according to Mrs. Kays. "We do not want Theo and Penelope to grow up without knowing about their Greek background." She said both children could speak Greek very well.
While I was visiting with Mrs. Kays, her cousin, Mrs. Tomaris, called, and with her small daughter, joined us on the front porch. The children began arguing and bickering, and from then on it was difficult to obtain much information. Both mothers frequently scolded and corrected their children, but it was quite evident that neither child had been systematically trained or guided for the mothers' scoldings did little good.
Mrs. Tomaris, a blue eyed blonde, is a large well dressed woman, while Mrs. Kays is quite obviously foreign in her dark-haired, dark skinned complexion.
Both mothers said they had often sung Greek folk songs when their children were very small, but could recall only one named "Love Towards Mother." Asked about Greek legends, Mrs. Kays said they left these and the teaching of them, to the Greek school teachers.
Both families observe the Greek "name day." That is when a member of the family's birthday falls on a Greek Saint's day, relatives call or telephone or telegraph "Their good wished for a happy feast day." All Greek families observe August 15th as the birthday of "Mary the Blessed Mother."
"We observe American holidays and festivals, really as much or more than we do those in Greece." Mrs. Kays admitted. "Our Christmas and New Years are the same as those celebrated here, but if we lived in Greece, we would exchange gifts on New Years, for that is the right time for it."
"In Greece, Christmas is a very quiet day, but when New Years comes, then the celebration is observed in a big way," she said.
Easter is observed by them just as it is observed in the English and American churches, Mrs. Kays said, adding that "every fourth year the real Greek Easter is the same as ours here in this country for the Greek Easter is figured by the ancient Greek calendar." The other three years the Greek Easter falls on a different day than the English Easter.
When asked about their health, Mrs. Kays said they were always well, "but that Theo had caught some sores from a child who had visited them from Nassau." Mrs. Kays said she was using ointment on Theo and that "the sores were much better."
"We live pretty much as you do." Mrs. Kays replied, when asked about any Greek foods they enjoy in the home. But she added that they "liked chicken cooked as it was cooked in her mother's home." For this she cut up and cooked one chicken in a small quantity of water. When the fowl was tender, vermicelli was added and cooked with the chicken. When this was cooked to tenderness, two eggs and the juice of one lemon were whipped together and added slowly, to the chicken and vermicelli. The resulting sauce was like a gravy "and oh, so very good." She smiled.
The Kays live in a neighborhood not far from the center of downtown Miami, and there is but one other Greek family in their neighborhood.
