Worker: John H. Abner, Burlington, N. C.
Interviewed: Walter Corbett, R. F. D. #3,
Burlington, N. C.
Written: December 2, 1938
UP AND DOWN
"I was born in Alamance County, over on the old Dickey place, way back in 1876," began Walter Corbett, “and I have been here ever since. I reckon I will live here until I die. As a boy I hunted rabbits and 'possums all around here; even right on this place, which I now own. I was born within two miles of this house; and I hope to die and be buried within two miles of it.
"My first work was for Mr. Charles Maynard. I was just a boy when I went to work for him. It was mostly farm work, but I worked about the house some. He paid me six dollars a month. I have never done any kind of work except farm work. While I was just a boy when I went to work for Mr. Maynard, I could worm tobacco as good as a grown person; and I could transplant, too.
"Tobacco takes a lot of time and care. First, the seeds must be sowed in a <text not clear> bed. The bed must be carefully made. Some tobacco growers build a fire in the bed and let it burn until the ground is well warmed. Then, the soil is prepared and the seeds sowed while the ground is still warm. The bed must then be protected from cold by a cover, if it is not glass enclosed.
"When the plants are large enough and the weather warm enough, they are set out in rows. They must then be watered and tended carefully, until they get a good start. Some will die and have to be replanted.
"Soon after the plants are firmly rooted cultivation begins. Every so often the plants must be wormed; which is to say that they are gone over leaf by leaf, and all the worms picked off and killed. If that is not done the worms will eat holes in the leaves, and that tobacco will not bring a good price.
"The tobacco plant may grow shoulder high. A stalk will sometimes be bigger than a man's arm. Every stalk has many leaves. All the leaves on a stalk are tobacco, but they vary greatly in value. From one stalk a man may get tobacco worth fifty cents per pound, and from the same stalk he may get tobacco that will bring only two cents a pound.
"The big center leaves are worth the most. They can be used for cigar wrappers. The next best leaves may be used for cigarettes, smoking, or chewing, and so on down to the poorest grades, which are used chiefly for snuff.
"The growing of tobacco is a tedious, difficult job; and so is the curing. When the tobacco is ripe the leaves are stripped from the stalk and tied into bundles, or hands as they are sometimes called. The bundles of tobacco are then hung up in a tobacco barn. A fire is built in the fire box, or an oil burner may be used; and the barn is kept hot until the tobacco is cured. Much depends on the curing. Tobacco that is properly cured may bring three times as much as tobacco that is improperly cured.
"It would be impossible to give a definite rule as to how hot the barn should be kept and as to how long the fire should be kept going. Every crop of tobacco is different. One crop may have twice as much moisture as another and require a longer time to cure. Then the farmers differ among themselves as to how it should be done. The growing of tobacco is a sort of democratic process. Every man grows his tobacco according to his belief. Then he cures it the same way, and sells it for what he can get.
"After a man has 'fooled' with tobacco for a long time he will have a tobacco 'feel'. He may not be an expert, but he will have his own notion as to when the tobacco is cured; probably from the smell, the color, and just from feeling a leaf.
"I worked for Mr. Maynard a long time; until I grew up into a young man. I learned a lot about tobacco from him. I learned how to grow tobacco, and I learned how to cure tobacco. I have been growing tobacco ever since.
"In 1896 I was a young man, twenty years old. In that year I married Maggie Sellars and we started sharecropping on the old F. P. Rogers' place. Sarah, our first child, was born there in 1897.
"Fifteen children have been born to me, counting the dead ones.
"My first wife had six, my second wife nine. I have no children by my third wife.
"I share-cropped with Mr. Rogers for two seasons, on thirds. Then I bought a mule on time, and rented a piece of land from Mr. Maynard. It was pretty hard that year, but I made enough to pay for my mule. Lee, my second child, was born that fall, 1899.
"I stayed on Mr. Maynard's place nine years; sharecropping in season, and sometimes working for him for wages when not busy with my crop. Arthur was born there in 1901 and Mary in 1903. I never could get anything ahead and it seemed like the babies just kept coming along. Virginia was born in 1905 and Cora in 1907. I managed to fatten three or four hogs every fall. We kept a cow and I always made a big garden. Every year I raised some corn and wheat so as to make a part of our bread.
"In 1909 I lost my wife. That was a right sharp set-back. I had six children to look after and no woman to help. The oldest child was only twelve and the youngest two. But I just had to keep going on. A man can't raise tobacco without children to help. I had to have the children in the field part of the time so we would take the little ones along with us. There they could play a round while we worked. I was afraid to leave them at the house alone, as they might have got burned or fell in the well. Sometimes Sarah could be spared from the fields and then I would leave the little ones at home with her.
"In 1913 I put four more acres in tobacco. I done fairly well that year and in the fall I married Annie Liza Lee. In 1914 Priscilla was born. In 1915 I got a chance to buy twenty acres here at this place. The price was six hundred dollars. I had no money but I decided to risk it. I had a mule and several children to help me so I bought the twenty acres, giving a mortgage note for the payment. There was no house on the place so we lived on at Mr. Maynard's. Me and the mule and the children worked hard that year. We put in a big crop of tobacco and we tended it from daylight till dark. I also planted a good bit of land in corn.
"When the tobacco was ripe we gathered it and I stayed on the job night and day until it was cured. I was in debt for the land and the only chance I had to pay the debt lay in that tobacco and I did not intend to take any more risk in the curing than I had to. All the sleep I got that fall was on the ground, lying around the tobacco barn, between spells of firing. The tobacco cured out well and as fast as a load was ready I would haul it to town and sell it. I hid the money away. Finally the great day come. I had nearly six hundred dollars and a load of tobacco ready to sell. After selling that load I paid off the note, I was one happy man that day. I had become a landowner! I was a tired man too, and I guess I must have let down, because on the way home I went to sleep. I slid down off the wagon seat and slept right on. I had lost so much sleep and worked so hard that I was mighty tired and then having the debt lifted made me easy. So I slept all the way home. The mule knew the way so he just went along by hisself.
"It was almost dark when we got home. The mule pulled up to the barn and stopped. The children run out of the house and climbed into the wagon. They waked me up. We unhitched the mule and give him a good feed. Then we had a kind of jubilee celebration. I had bought a few things for the family. We had paid the debt and even had a little money left and we had not yet cured and sold all our tobacco!
"Well, after all the tobacco was sold I got to thinking about a house. I did not have enough money to build but my credit was good. I decided to build a house on my place and move there. I built this very house. We moved here in 1916 and have lived here ever since.
"Eight of my children have been born in this house. Vivian was born in 1916, the same year we moved here, and Leevolia in 1917. Walter Elmer was born in 1918, Luther in 1919 and McKeever in 1920. Talmadge was born in 1922, Ora Lee in 1924 and Galvin in 1928.
"All during that time I was raising tobacco.
"Tobacco went up during the Big War and in 1917 I bought twenty acres adjoining my place. The price was four hundred dollars and I paid cash. I was making a little money on my tobacco. In 1918 I bought another thirty acres, paying five hundred and fifty dollars.
"More land meant more tobacco and it also meant more work but I had a good force of children to help me. I was compelled to take in more land as my family increased. I bought more stock, but I did not lose my head. I did not go tobacco crazy. Tobacco was bringing such good prices that many tobacco farmers went tobacco crazy. Every year they would try to plant more tobacco than they had the year before. They seemed to think that it would keep going up every year. I did not think so and I kept on farming just like I had been. I tried to raise enough corn every year to feed my stock and hogs, as well as to make meal for my family. Corn bread, and plenty of mush and milk is good for children. They will thrive and grow on it. I sowed some wheat every year too and we kept three cows so we would always have plenty milk. We had to eat just the same whether tobacco sold high or low.
"But all along that time tobacco brought high prices and we had money to spend. In 1920 I bought the eleven acres up on the road. They cost me nine hundred dollars. That was a pretty high price but everything was costly then. One time that year I remember paying thirty-five cents a pound for sugar. Everything just got so high it had to come down. It did. It came down that very year and it seemed to me that tobacco come down faster and further than anything else. I lost money on my tobacco that year but I had not gone in debt to make a big crop like some farmers had. I did not lose much and I had raised a good food crop. I had a good crop of tobacco too, but it did not bring cost.
"In 1922 I bought the last three and a half acres, paying one hundred and seventy-five dollars. I own about eighty-five acres here and it is free of debt. Some people would not consider it much, but it is good for a living. That is more than some town folks can say about their job. Even when tobacco don't bring anything we still have plenty to eat and a place to live. The land has always fed man and I reckon it always will. It seems to me that many people have overlooked that. If a man owns a little farm and has his own stock he can get along if he tries hard. I don't farm as a business. I farm as a way of life and to make a living for myself and family. I raise tobacco as a money crop but I do not put all my eggs in one basket. All my children have always had enough to eat all their lives. They are all strong and hearty. Our food may sometimes be coarse but it is plentiful and healthy. I have often been thankful that I never moved to town to try public works. What chance would I have had in town? A colored man with fifteen children! Some of them might have starved to death. Out here on the farm we are free and independent. I thank the Lord that I was born on a farm and that I stayed there. Sometimes I don’t make any money on my tobacco but we eat just the same. If a man in town has a bad year he may have to do without eating for awhile and he may even get thrown out of his house because he can't pay the rent!
"I told the boys this when they wanted to go to New York. Lee was first. He went up there in 1924. He did not like it at first. He wrote back that he was lonesome and that he was about to freeze to death. But he stuck it out. He is in the trucking business now and doing well. Arthur followed the next year. He is working at the hardware trade.
"Mary went on a visit to see her brothers in 1931. She married and stayed. Just married away from home and stayed away from home. Vivian went to visit her sister a few months ago. She got her a job as nursemaid so she is staying too. But what will happen to them if they lose their jobs and cannot find others? They might even lose their place to eat and sleep. I miss them sometimes but shucks! A child can't hang around its daddy forever and besides I got plenty more children here at home, as well as grandchildren.
"Up and down, up and down; that's the way it is with a tobacco farmer. A tobacco farmer has a lot of ups and downs and sometimes he loses his farm on the downs but he is not liable to do that unless he first loses his head on the ups. A tobacco farmer don't always have a good crop and he don't always get a good price for it. It seems to me that it is best to just 'steady' along and make an average. Tobacco is a finicky plant. It is subject to the weather; to wind and hail; to heat and cold and even to worms! It is hard to grow; hard to tend; hard to cure and easy to sell. But there's the rub! Tobacco is easy to sell but sometimes it don't pay for its raising.
"That was the case during the lean years. The more tobacco we raised the less we made. After the Big War tobacco kept going down, down, down. Some farmers planted a little more each time and we come to the lean years. The lean years started in 1930. That was the first year of the depression. Many farmers lost their land and homes that year and in the next two or three years. I managed to keep out of debt but I did not make any money. I had a good crop of tobacco in 1930 but it did not bring cost. The big tobacco companies did not play fair that year. They knew that a big crop of tobacco had been raised and they knew that the farmers had to sell. After curing, tobacco should be sold as quickly as possible else it may lose in flavor and color. That hurts the price. Tobacco buyers have the tobacco 'feel' as well as the growers and they judge tobacco on smell, color, texture and many other points. Cold will cause tobacco to turn black even after it has been cured. I don't think that hurts the tobacco but it does hurt the price.
"Tobacco is sold at public auction in public warehouses. Auctioneers and warehousemen try to get as good price for the tobacco as possible. They have to do so for there are many markets and every market will have at least two warehouses. The bigger markets may have ten or twelve. The tobacco markets and the warehouses compete with each other and both auctioneer and warehouse get their profits from a commission on the sales. Naturally, every auctioneer and warehouse wants to sell as much tobacco as they can for the best price possible. They are opposed by the buyers who want to buy as much tobacco as possible for the least amount of money. When the big tobacco companies play fair tobacco will bring a fair price but in 1930 they did not play fair. They sent their buyers out to play an unfair game which the tobacco farmers called 'You take this un, and I'll take that un.' That game ruined many tobacco farmers but the big tobacco companies made more profit than they ever had before. They made an 'awful' profit.
"The farmer cures and grades his tobacco and takes it to a warehouse to be sold. There it is again sorted and graded and piled on flat, square baskets. Each farmer's tobacco is kept in one lot, together, but it will be in several baskets, according to grade. A basket may be piled high with two hundred pounds of tobacco, or it may have only a few pounds. The lot number and the weight are written on a tag and that tag stays with that basket.
"The baskets are set in long rows, up and down the warehouse floor; with an alley, or walkway, between rows. The auctioneer and his assistants pass slowly down one alley and the buyers the other alley, so that they are facing each other. Each basket of tobacco is sold individually and the tobacco in one basket may bring fifty cents a pound, while that in the basket beside it sells for two cents a pound. That is because every farmer's tobacco is kept together and he may have a dozen different baskets of tobacco and each may have a different grade. In a free market tobacco will bring a price based on the law of supply and demand. In a controlled market it can bring only the price which the big tobacco companies want to pay. That is what happened in 1930. The big tobacco companies controlled the market by not bidding and it ruined many tobacco farmers.
"When a sale is going on an expert grader goes along in front of the auctioneer. At each basket he tries to start the bidding at a fair price. He may come to a certain basket of tobacco and shout: 'Thirty dollar bill!’ That means that he thinks the bidding should start at thirty cents per pound, or thirty dollars per hundred. The auctioneer begins his chant at thirty, and if any buyer thinks the tobacco is worth thirty cents a pound, he will look at the auctioneer; wink, nod his head slightly, raise an arm, cross his fingers, or something of the kind. There may be twelve or fifteen buyers at a sale. They walk along single file, facing the auctioneer. In a short crop year the bidding is sometimes brisk, and one buyer does not want another to know that he is bidding. For that reason they bid by signs. As the auctioneer chants his eyes flash up and down the line of buyers. He is alert for the signal that will raise the bid. It is taking a long time to tell this but it is done very quickly. Some auctioneers are said to average selling two baskets per minute all through a sale.
"While the grader may holler ’Thirty dollar bill!' no buyer need offer that price. He may instead offer six cents and if no one bids against him the tobacco will be knocked down to him for six cents. If the farmer thinks that price too low he can turn the tag on that basket and it is a ’no sale.' He can then take his tobacco from that warehouse. He can take it to another warehouse or he can haul it back home. But the farmer has no place to store his tobacco and he most always needs the money. The price the buyers pay at one warehouse is no different from that paid at another so a farmer seldom turns the tag. When the buyers for the big companies go in ’cahoots’ they can just ’take’ the tobacco. That is what they did in 1930.
"In 1930 it seemed like the big tobacco companies had told their buyers not to bid. At any rate they did not bid. They just 'took' the tobacco at their own price. They would not bid against each other, and tobacco was almost give away. The big buyers played ’You take this un, and I'll take that un.' The grader might come to a basket of tobacco that was worth forty cents per pound. He knew that he could not get anything like that for it so he would try to start it at twenty. 'Gimme twenty?' he would plead. The buyers would look bored and the one due to bid would offer about five cents. No one would bid against him and that basket of forty cent tobacco would be sold for five cents a pound. The next basket would go the same way to another buyer, and so on. That was a ’made up’ thing between the big tobacco companies, and the farmers called it 'You take this un, and I'll take that un.' It spelt ruin to many of the farmers but the big tobacco companies made an 'awful' profit.
"Many farmers say that the Reynolds Tobacco Company got up that game. I don't know who was at the top of that chiseling, but I know who was at the bottom. I had some friends working in the Reynolds Tobacco Factory in Winston-Salem and that company cut wages to as low as three dollars a week in some cases. They got their tobacco for almost nothing and they paid their hands almost nothing. But they sold their cigarettes as high as ever and they made an ’awful' profit. I remember seeing their advertisements soon after the tobacco markets closed. They had whole pages in the newspapers, bragging about the ’awful' profits they had made. They said that there was no depression and that they had made more profit than ever before. 'Awful' profit! Well, there might not have been no depression with them, but there was a great depression among tobacco farmers; and among the poor people who worked in their tobacco factories for three dollars a week. While some say that Reynolds got that chiseling game up, it is my opinion that all the big tobacco companies had a hand in it.
"I did not get anything for my tobacco that year but I had raised a good crop of foodstuff, so we had plenty to eat. We had our own meat and bread, plenty of milk and canned fruits and berries and vegetables. The next year I put still more land in food crops. I aimed to have plenty to eat, tobacco or no tobacco. I just about broke even on tobacco that year.
"Up and down, up and down. That's how it is in tobacco growing, but there was no ups in the lean years. It was all downs. I just hung on and managed to keep my farm clear of debt; by not raising tobacco. If I had gone in debt to make a big crop of tobacco I might have lost my farm. But I did not do that. I just planted less tobacco, and I did not spend much on fertilizer. So that is how we got through the lean years.
"Then the New Deal started and the AAA helped the tobacco farmers. We planted less tobacco and some folks say that President Roosevelt shamed the big tobacco companies out of their dirty way of doing. The buyers started bidding again, and tobacco brought good prices. It is not doing so well this year. Good tobacco is selling mighty cheap but the low grades are bringing good prices.
"Many farmers in this section don’t like the new control plan. In my case it worked all right. I had been planting nine acres in tobacco and my allotment was seven. But some farmers were cut more. Some folks say that favoritism and politics were used in giving out the quotas.
"So that's how it is with a tobacco farmer. Up and down, up and down. I have been raising tobacco for more than fifty years. If I had tried to raise all tobacco I would have lost my farm long ago. But I did not do that. I raised something for me and my family to eat every year, as well as tobacco and we got along."
