By D. W. Crawford
THE GREEKS IN CHARLOTTE
Kantantinos Kokens, trading as Gus McKene at 1417 West Trade Street, came to Charlotte in 1904, and several other Greeks preceded him. The first, who was married to an American wife, established a small fruit and confection store on West Trade Street in 1900, which he operated about a year. In 1901 two other Greeks opened a candy kitchen and store on Independence Square, but soon gave up the enterprise and went to South Africa. Some time in 1903 Henry Beavos and George Kerakos opened a wholesale and retail fruit business, which they operated as partners till 1906, when Beavos returned to Greece. Kerakos continued the business till 1919, when he also returned to Greece.
In 1907 two brothers, Jim and Gus Lambros, and two of their cousins, George and Charles Lambros, came from Roanoke, Va., and opened the New York Cafe on West Trade Street. This was the most modern and commodious place of its kind in Charlotte at that time. These four men stayed together for several years, and, by 1912, were operating thirty places of business in the two Carolinas. Some of these were cafes of the better type and some were small drink stands and billiard parlors. One of the partners returned to Greece in 1919 and died there the following year. The others are still in business in various sections of the South.
Prior to 1915 all of the Greeks who came to Charlotte were unmarried, but in that year three men and their families arrived, and other families have constantly been establishing residence here. According to the records in the naturalization office here, there has been an average of one family each year asking for citizenship papers for the past ten years. There has never been a movement of colonies to this section, seldom more than one family at a time.
All those who came during the first fifteen years of this century seem to have entered one of the three following occupations: fruit and confection stands, billiard parlors, and cafes. With the addition of dry cleaners, wine merchants, and traveling salesmen, these same occupations still claim about ninety per cent of the Greek population. From the time they first arrived in Charlotte all have prospered. They readily learned the American customs and language, and soon gained the respect and confidence of their business associates. Only a few who settled here during this period came to Charlotte directly from Greece, but selected this as their home after spending a short time in Norfolk, Savannah, Charleston and other seacoast towns; all are natives of Southern Greece.
All foreigh-born Greeks in Charlotte state that they came to America in the hope of improving their economic status. One of the older men, who did not at first settle here, stated that during the period from 1872, when the railroads began to penetrate the West, till 1890, Europe was flooded with advertisements about the opportunities offered in cheap land and ample employment in this country. This resulted in the migration of a great number of young men to America. As they became established and prosperous far beyond anything ever experienced in Greece, they induced relatives and friends to follow. There are two families here who came to America because of stories received by their parents from relatives who had settled in the West in the late seventies, after having worked several years in railroad construction. Many Greeks in Charlotte came to America because of the oppression of the Turks in 1912, and a more recent cause of migration was the political difference between King Constantine and Premier Venzelos, in 1919. The king was forced to abdicate and, as many of his followers lived in Southern Greece and were dissatisfied with the new government, all who could migrated to other countries. This fact no doubt accounts for so many southern Greeks in Charlotte.
According to the 1930 census, the Greek population in Charlotte was 310; of this number 142 were foreign-born. The present population is estimated at 400, with only a small increase in the number of foreign-born. Heads of families as well as single men have at all times been prosperous enough to maintain a high standard of living. Virtually all men with families own their homes, and there are none on relief rolls or working on WPA. In numbers the families are about the American average, the largest in Charlotte having eight children. The comparatively small number of immigrants coming here in recent years, in the opinion of some of the local Greeks, is due to the fact that Greece has been experiencing an era of unusual political and economic serenity. It is estimated that the Greek population in Charlotte, both native and foreign born, exceeds that of all other foreign nationalities combined.
There is no tendency toward living in colonies. Their homes compare favorably with those of the average middleclass American. Many of them use their native tongue in the home and in conversing with business associates of their nationality. Among the young people there is an increasing tendency to drop the native tongue altogether. This practice, however, is discouraged by the parents.
While parents see that their children attend their own parochial school two hours each day, they are equally as anxious for them to attend the public school, and enter whole-heartedly into school activities. They are ardent "fans", and even the mothers rarely miss a ball game. Their church school is conducted by the resident minister and the courses are Greek language, literature and history.
High school records in recent years show one graduate in 1935. In 1936 there were six boys and one girl; three of the boys entered college, but one dropped out after two years in order that his brother might attend. In 1937 one girl graduated with honors. She did not go to college, as Greek girls are not encouraged to follow a career. There were four in the class of 1938, all boys. Three of these are now in college. One is studying chemical engineering, one electrical engineering, and one printing and engraving. Four young men finished in the class of 1939 and all are planning to go to college. Two expect to enter military schools, one plans a literary career, and the other will study business administration. One member of this group was awarded the highest honor in a class of 496, besides receiving many other honors in scholarship and athletics. A Greek girl was selected Queen of the May Day Festival in the leading Junior High school. Twelve out of the eighteen Greek boys in high school are members of the school band which took first prize in the recent Southeastern Musical Festival.
In asking if the Greeks have a "Youth Problem", one gets only a shrug of the shoulders or a deprecating smile. However, Chris Papas answered the question as follows: "Yes, we have that problem, but I hardly think we have allowed it to become as serious as most American parents have done. We spend all the time we can with our children. We train them to respect our judgement, and insist upon them giving us their complete confidence in everything they are interested in. I have a boy seventeen, he is now a counselor at a boys' camp; a girl fifteen, and three other children. This is what I say to them: ' You are here in America- a great country. A country with a glorious past. A country in which there are all sorts of people- over one hundred millions. Some are good, some are bad- just as they are in France, England, Germany, Greece and all other countries. But you, with your own particular background of twenty-five centuries of culture and education, are obliged to take out of the American traditions, ideals and customs all that is good and worthwhile; combine them with your own, as they have been taught to you by your parents and teachers, and mold them into something that will mark you as an American citizen worthy of the trust, confidence and respect of all right-thinking people.' That is our attitude toward our youth. I love to think that we are presenting them with a beautiful boquet made of the choicest flowers of two great civilizations-ours the old, yours the new."
One youngster, the high school honor graduate mentioned above, stated that while he attended all the social activities of his class while in school, he had never asked for his father's automobile to "fill a date" with his girl. As a matter of fact, Greek parents discourage the practice of having a special girl friend. This young man stated that he had never had a regular "date" with a girl, and that he would never think of staying out on a "wild party" till the early morning hours as many of his American friends do. This boy's parent, however, stated that while the Greeks frown upon the privileges and freedom allowed American youngsters, there is an increasing tendency toward laxity in this particular. The Greek boys and girls mix freely with American youngsters and are on friendly terms with all their associates, but their more intimate friends are among their own people.
Mr. Athens, of the New York Cafe, stated that his observation is that the young Greeks in Charlotte are very circumspect in their conduct. He told of a case where a young man of good breeding had become involved in an "affair" with an American girl of doubtful character to the extent that he was threatened with a suit for breach of promise. While this young man was not completely ostracized by his Greek associates, there was a noticeable coolness toward him. This attitude resulted in a complete reformation of the young man.
The social and civic pride among the Greeks of Charlotte is considered exceptional. They have almost one hundred per cent co-operation in everything they undertake for the betterment of their people. They have the distinction of organizing the second chapter of the American Hellenic Progressive Association in the United States. Almost all of the local men are members. The order of the Maids of Athens has the largest membership of any city this size in the country; while the "Estia Girl's Club" has enrolled almost all the eligible young girls in the city. "The Sons of Pericles" is an order for young men. Members of this order are publishing a quarterly magazine in Charlotte, which is the only one of its kind in America. It is printed on high-grade book paper, is artistic in detail, and contains news and feature articles about the Greeks. It circulates extensively throughout the two Carolinas and is mailed to all parts of the United States and Canada. The publishers, who do the work during their spare time, do not receive any compensation. The publication is patronized by both Greek and American advertisers.
Another organization of importance is a chapter of the Adelphatis-Karyae. This is a national organization, composed of members from the city of Karyae in southern Greece. The local chapter has a membership of over three hundred, and ownslands and buildings near Gastonia, N. C., valued at more than $20,000.00. They hold an annual three-day meeting in July. During this session they present plays, pageants, musicals and other forms of entertainment for the members and their friends.
One of the Old World customs which is kept alive by the Charlotte Greeks is the observance of natal day anniversaries. Individuals do not celebrate the anniversary of their birth, but all persons who bear a certain name celebrate on the day which corresponds with their given name, according to the old Greek Calendar. For instance, the birth of any boy named "Stephen" is celebrated on September fourteenth, and all families where there is a "Stephen" unite in a round of social activities which lasts all through the day and sometimes till late at night. People of all ages attend these celebrations, and many of the church societies and social clubs take advantage of the occasion to hold their regular business sessions.
Another semi-social activity is the christening ceremony for infants. The ceremony proper is held at the church and lasts about an hour. After the formalities are dispensed with all relatives and intimate friends are invited to the home of the child's parents, where dancing, feasting, and other forms of entertainment are enjoyed for several hours.
March twenty-fifth is the only national holiday observed. This corresponds to our Independence day and marks the overthrow of the Turkish rule in 1821. Their celebrations are quiet. Part of the day is given over to public meetings at the church, picnics in the country, and meetings of various social clubs. Their games and forms of recreation are almost entirely American. The game of "amathaetis", which is similar to our game of "horseshoes", is the only native game played by the Greeks.
Most Charlotte Greeks belong to the Greek Orthodox Church. They have recently completed a church building at a cost of $25,000.00. They are distinctly a church-going people, whole families attending services in a body. The local minister, who also conducts the parochial school, is necessarily a man of great education. However, they are not always educated in American colleges, since all their services are conducted in the Greek language and their teaching is also of the Greek, it is not necessary that they have an English education. In discussing the religious life of the Greeks here, one resident stated that he was of the opinion that Greek children easily grasped the principles of the Christian religion by reason of the fact that it is all expounded to them in the original Greek language, which they are taught from infancy. This informant stated that any Charlotte Greek could easily converse with St. Paul if he should return to earth. They assume a great degree of pride in the fact that theirs was the first nation to accept and promulgate the Christian Religion.
All of the Greeks interviewed in this survey state that their main interests are the same as any loyal American. They take no part in politics, voting independently.
They have no political aspirations and no "pet" notions of government which they wish to promote. They are in a sense clannish, but they have no clashes with, nor any particular dislike for other nationalities. However, in recent years they have resented the attitude of Germany toward the Jews and the Czechs. They are bitterly opposed to Communism.
A noteable characteristic of the local Greeks is that they place a premium on hard work. The young men are taught to engage in some honorable occupation, and they do not object to drudgery. They are all conspicuously law-abiding. The name of a Greek seldom appears on the criminal court records. There have been cases where a criminal has allowed himself to be referred to as a Greek, when he was of some other nationality.
