Concord, N. C.
October 2, 1938
M. L. W.
Songs
Songs copied from the notebook of the guitarist at the camp meeting at the Concord Tabernacle. This woman has spent two summers travelling around with the revival crew. She collects songs that she likes, as she hears them, and adds them to her notebook.
The first song, "I'd Rather be on the Inside." she said she picked up in the West last summer but it has been a favorite in meetings throughout this State. "Forty Years Ago" she learned from a man in Kannapolis, North Carolina. Of the last song, "He will set your Fields Aflame." she said: "God give that to me when
I was at death's door with a carbuncle. That was when I was living here in Concord before I ever went off anywhere." She wrote both music and words for this, and she sang several hymns for which "God give me the music."
The guitarist was willing to sing for me, but she was not a very talkative person and seemed to resent any questions askedher. She was a woman of around twenty-five with a sharp face andclose-set gray eyes. She always dressed neatly either in a gray suit with orange blouse or on Sundays in an orange dress. Herhat, shoes, and stockings were gray also.
Elvira Barbee gave me the woman's history briefly. "Why I've knowd Ella since she was a little cross-eyed young'un runningaround here. She was from right here in Concord; her folks workedat the mill. You jest ought to've seen her before God straightenedher eyes. She was a sight. But after she was saved God straightenedher eyes and now she looks right good.
"She was saved a good many years ago and then she went off tothat Bible school Dr. Meyers runs down in Florida. You know he don'thave no support for it, he jest runs it on faith. But he always gets what he needs to keep it a-going.
"After Ella went there a year she started going around helpingout with revivals. She married her husband at a camp meeting lastsummer. They had met one another down at Bible school and hadtravelled around together, then jest all of a sudden they decidedto get married. And they did, at camp meeting lastsummer.
"They live in Spindale now, I think. I reckon they work whenthey can get it, but they live mostly on faith."
'I'd rather be on the inside looking out
1. In the days of Noah before the flood
When the wicked world had all forgotten God,
Brother Noah built a boat which above
God's wrath (rath) did float,
And the people saw that they were made of mud.
As the door stood open with the gany plank out,
Noah and his family entered with a shout
As the scoffers stretched their necks
Noah stepped out on the deck, said,
"I'm glad I'm on the inside looking out."
Oh I'd rather be on the inside looking out,
Then to be upon the outside looking in
When the rain began to fall, sinners on the
Lord did call
But the door was shut and night was setting in.
Good old Noah from the window looking out,
Gazed away to heaven beyond the water spout,
And he said, "I thank the Lord that I took him at his word,
I'm so glad I'm on the inside looking out.
2. Good old Daniel lived in Babylon long ago,
And he had the grace to tell the devil no,
So he prayed three times a day
In the good old fashion way
Till they said he to the lions den must go.
So the lions made him welcome to their home
For they found that he had grace and not backbone,
When the king looked in and said,
Are you alive or are you dead?
He was stirred as Daniel spoke in gentle tone.
Oh I'd rather be on the inside looking out,
Then to be upon the outside looking in,
While you paced the palace (pallace) floor,
I had naught to do but snore,
Jehovah (Gehovah) put a padlock on each lion's chin.
Good old Daniel from the window looking out,
And I guess that he felt good enough to shout.
And he said "Long live the king and he started in to sing
I'm so glad I'm on the inside looking out.
3. Paul and Silas went down to old Phillippi
And determined that they'd preach the word or die,
Till a damsel, hell possessed, to defeat them,
Until Paul turned round and blacked (blaked) the devil's eye.
So they locked them up and none to go their bail,
But they sang and prayed to the one who could not fail,
Then an earthquake shook the place,
And the jailor showed his face.
Paul said, "Do thyself no harm. we've not broke jail."
Oh, I'd rather be on the inside looking out,
Then to be upon the outside looking in,
So now put away your sword and take Jesus at his word
If you'd have the Savour save you from all sin.
Then the jailor cast away his every doubt,
Paul and Silas baptized him with a shout,
Then this hallelujah bunch went and had a midnight lunch,
I'm so glad I'm on the inside looking out.
4. Nicodemus come to Jesus after night,
Guess he was ashamed to seek him in day light.
Though he was a big D. D. there were things he could not see,
And he asked the Lord if he could set him right?
Then the college gent was filled with an offul pain.
When the Lord said, "Oh, you must be born again,
If salvation's car you ride you must right your heart inside
And it matters very little about your brain.
Oh I'd rather be on the inside looking out
Then to be upon the outside looking in
Though they call us dups and fools
We're no longer Satan's tools,
I'm so glad I prayed a hole through and jumped in.
It's so nice to be set free from every doubt
When there's nought to do but sing and jump and shout
If old nick you chance to see
You can tell him just for me,
I'm so glad I'm on the inside looking out.
Forty Years Ago
1. I wish I were a boy (girl) again in old camp meeting times,
Chorus
To hear old fashioned people sing their hallelujah rhymes,
And see the mourners at the bench, pilgrims kneeling around Awaiting for the Holy Ghost to show their Savior found.
Chorus
Forty years ago, forty years ago, I wish I were a boy (girl)again as in the long ago
Forty years ago, forty years ago, thank God for old campmeeting times of forty years ago.
2. I'd like to see the preacher's face above the bench again.
Shining through his happy tears like sunshine after rain, And hear his "glory be to God" his wonderful "Amen."
While half a dozen anxious souls were truly born again.
3. Oh, for one day of that past year and of that day one hour, when good old mothers filled with God were shouting throughhis power,
And men and women laughed and cried as she went down the aisle,
Shaking hands and blessing all in old camp meeting style.
4. I'd like to go back to the church in old revival years,
When all the people still believed Christ listened totheir prayers,
With those who sang the loudest songs and prayed the loudest prayers,
I'd go back with a willing heart could I once more be there.
5. Well praise the Lord, I'm glad to say he's coming back again,
The Holy Ghost is here tonight, so let us say "Amen,"
New fashioned ways we don't approve, and some may call us slow,
We like the good old fashioned ways of forty years ago.
He Will Set Your Fields Aflame
1. In this world so full of woe,
Jesus said that you must go
Tell the world of his righteous name
And he will set their fields aflame
Chorus
He will set your fields aflame
He will set your fields aflame
None can conquer his righteous name
For he will set your fields aflame.
2. Jesus bears our every blame
Saves the soul from sin and shame
Heals the body of aches and pain
For he did set our fields aflame.
3. When he walked round Galilee
He called out twelve and made them free
Gave them power in his dear name
To go and set the fields aflame.
4. Jesus Christ alway the same
With his love and light shall reign
In every county, law and lane
Yea he did set their fields aflame.
