Anne Winn Stevens	Edna Meadows
Asheville N.C.	42 Howard Street
January 12, 1939	West Asheville, N.C.
Not good for our purpose<text not clear>
THE MEADOWS
A girl of about twenty appeared quietly at the door of the living room where Mrs. Lawrence was entertaining a caller. She was tall and rather hesitant, with brown curls surrounding a flushed face, and with anxious brown eyes.
"Do you want me to go on with the washing, Mrs. Lawrence?" she asked.
"Not now, Edna," replied Mrs. Lawrence, "Turn off the washing machine, and go home. After you have looked after your sister, come back and go on with the work."
The girl disappeared. "That was Edna Meadows," said Mrs. Lawrence. "She's an orphan who helps me with the house work. She can't get a steady job because she has to take care of an invalid sister, who can't be left alone more'n an hour at a time. Edna's capable and willing. She works for me off and on. I can't afford a helper, really, but I pay her from a quarter to a dollar a week, give her groceries now and then, and let her have the food left from meals. Last week I gave her shoes, and one of the social workers gave her a good warm coat. She's very humble and grateful."
Meanwhile, Edna hurried down the steps and presently turned into an unpaved dingy street, on each side of which were strung drab, four-roomed cottages. Smoke, fog, and mud contributed to their general shabbiness, only mitigated by the forest trees left standing when the street was opened. Like the rest, the cottage into which Edna disappeared was painted a dull battle-gray. The floor of the porch had been patched and repatched with narrow strips of wood of different colors, --white, red, and green.
<text not clear>
On the walls of the living room the dull gray of the exterior was duplicated. The floor was quite bare, but the room and the adjoining dining room were scrupulously clean. Beside a small coal heater in one corner, a woman in a red cotton dress was slumped over in a low chair. She turned relieved, but reproachful brown eyes toward Edna. "You've been gone a long time," she said, "the fire has gone out."
"I'm sorry, Rachel," said Edna, "I couldn't get off sooner." She shook down the ashes in the stove, and replenished the fuel. "I'll get you some hot tea in a moment," as she placed the kettle on the stove, "and here's a sweater to put around you."
It needed but a glance to see that Rachel is hopelessly deformed. She has the head, arms, and torso of a mature woman, the short, shrunken legs and inadequate feet of a child. When a caller inquires about her, she half turns in her chair. "You see," she says, "what a bad spinal curvature, I have".
She has indeed. But with all her deformity her features though plain, are not forbidding. Her bobbed hair is thick, smooth, and brown. Her expression is patient. She talks intelligently.
She likes to call the attention of her guests to an enlarged framed photograph hanging beside the dresser. It is a family group seated on a farm-house porch. In the middle of the group sits the farmer, lanky and work-worn. He is in his shirt-sleeves, but the rest of the family are clad in their Sunday best. Beside him, sits a large-headed, bigeyed child. His wife holds an infant in her arms, and grouped around them are five boys, the oldest about twelve years old. This, Rachel tells her visitors, is the Meadows family in 1918, before the flu epidemic.
Rachel, the oldest of the group, the big-eyed child beside her father in the photograph, doesn't remember very well the details of farm life. "I could never run about like the other children," she says. "From the time I was three years old, I could only sit in a chair and watch them. That was hard; for I always had an independent disposition."
Today, a woman of thirty-five, she still sits and looks on, beside the bedroom fire in winter, on the porch in summer. Even a rolling chair does not help much; for she cannot operate it herself.
"Pa did everything he could hear of to help me," she says. "The doctors did not know what ailed me. They think now I must have had infantile paralysis when I was three years old.
"Pa even got a small battery and gave me electric shocks every day, because one of the country doctors thought electricity might help. Pa was always bringing a new doctor to see me.
"If they had known to put a brace on me when I was a child," she says wistfully, "I might not have such a bad curvature now. I might have been able to walk like the lady that owns the spinning wheel. She has a spinal curvature, too. But you'd never know it. She says she has a steel back bone."
"We lived on a farm near Leicester," continued Rachel. She pronounced the name as if it had three syllables: Lee-ces-ter. While Rachel talks, Edna sits to one side, says little and watches Rachel rather anxiously. Edna is a little too thin, her expression is very serious, but she seems healthy.
"Pa was always strong and healthy," continued Rachel. "He was a renter and worked hard on the farm. He raised corn and potatoes and some vegetables. Ma had her chickens. They never could make much or save anything, because the owner of the farm took most of the crop.
"When Pa took flu, we weren't much worried, because he seemed so strong. I guess he got up and went back to work too soon. He took pneumonia and died of it.
"Then ma tried to carry on the farm. That's her photograph hanging on the wall above the bed." She pointed to an enlarged, framed photograph of a middle-aged woman, not unlike Rachel in features, but capable, and even handsome.
"Ma took the responsibility of the farm very hard. The older boys helped her; but she fairly wore herself out." Even so the family might have pulled themselves through in the country, but one day in August, George, the seventeen year old son, was brought in from the field where he had been at work. He was flushed and unconscious. "He had had a sun-stroke," said Rachel. "He got well then, but after that he began having fits, and crazy spells. The doctor said his brain-cells had been burned away."
Worn out with work and worry over George and the farm, Mrs. Meadows finally left the country and moved to West Asheville. The boys got jobs at the Carolina Coal Company. George was taken from doctor to doctor but only got worse.
"Ma did everything she could to hold us together," said Rachel.
One by one the boys married and moved away, one to Winston-Salem, another got a job in Texas. Only George stayed on.
Then one afternoon Mrs. Meadows hurried to the grocery store nearby on Haywood Street. At a street crossing she was struck by a car. She was instantly killed.
"It was a drunken driver who did it," said Rachel. After his mother's death, George became violent. "He would get out of bed in the middle of the night, muttering and raving," said Rachel. "I could hear him walking about in the room, as I lay on the bed. He would wake me up out of a sleep."
A doctor persuaded the girls and their brothers who still lived in Asheville to have George committed to the State Hospital at Morganton.
"He will get better care there than you can give him," said the doctor. "If he has any chance to recover, the experts at Morganton will know it."
George has been in Morganton now several years. The superintendent of the hospital wrote Rachel that nothing can be done for him. Physically he has improved, but his mind is hopelessly gone.
Edna, meanwhile, had been sent by an interested social worker to Dorland Bell, mission school for girls in Madison County. Edna was clothed and partially supported by her Asheville friend. She worked at various tasks set by the school, and learned weaving so that she could pay a part of her expenses. "I loved to weave," she said. "The rugs we made were brown and green, and very pretty."
At the opening of Edna's senior year in high school, the principal of the school wrote, that owing to the school's financial condition, Edna would have to be dropped.
Edna's patron went to Dorland Bell herself, investigated, pled; but although Edna by working for the school a part of the summer had already paid her fall entrance fee, the school did not reconsider. Mrs. Lawrence broke the news gently to Edna. But Edna feels that she has never learned the true reason, and broods and frets over the dismissal.
"You see I wanted to graduate from high school," she sighs, "so I could get a good job. Girls without high school diplomas can't get work. If I had a good job I could support myself and Rachel, and I could pay someone to stay and take care of Rachel while I work."
Social workers and public health nurses have all tried to help Rachel. Miss Douglas, proprietor of the Spinning Wheel, was even induced to come to the Meadow cottage weekly to teach Rachel weaving. A friend furnished a loom. But Rachel who could at one time even use a sewing maching, now finds she cannot concentrate on anything. Even reading upsets her.
"Her blood pressure is high," explains Edna. When she tries to work at anything, she gets very nervous and excited, and goes all to pieces."
The neighbors are kind to Edna and Rachel. They practically clothe them. The Welfare Department allots them two dollars every other week. "Edna," says Mrs. Laurence, "is very humble and grateful."
