KATE O'BEAR
86 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
Miss Kate O'Bear lives in a substantial two-story frame house at the southern extremity of the town of Winnsboro, on the west side of Congress Street. She owns her home, and her nephew, J J O'Bear, and his wife, and a grandnephew, Norwood O'Bear, a young lawyer just admitted to the bar, live with her.
"My father, Josiah J. O'Bear was a descondant of one of the Huguenots who fled from France to escape religious persecution on the repeal of the Ediot of Hantes This ancestor settled in the State of Vermont the State in which my father was born. My mother, Julia Saffery, was born in London, England, and came with her parents to Charleston, S. C. My father was ordained to the priesthood of the Episcopal Church in the diocese of Vermont. He entered upon his duties in connection with the mission of the church at Winnsboro, May 25, 1841 He and my mother were married in Charleston, and they seen thereafter moved to Winnsboro.
"Until their coming, there had been no serious movement for the construction of a chapel or church of our denomination at Winnsboro Services had been conducted in private homes, in the courthouse, Aimwell Presbyterian Church at Ridgeway, S. C., Gibson's Baptist Meeting House and at Cedar Creek in a rough board house fitted up by General Edward Gendron Palmer.
"You may take this from the report made by my father at a convention held in Charleston, February 1842, one year after he began his work. The congregation is endeavoring to erect a neat but plain church building in Winnsboro, for which $2,400 has been subscribed. A lot has been purchased and paid for, and a part of the material has been delivered and laid down upon the site for the building. The work will soon be commenced.' The name decided upon was St. John's Episcopal Church. At this time the congregation contained 18 families, 54 children and services were hold every other Sabbath day,
"I had several brothers and sisters Henry Norwood, the oldest was born January 4 1847, the next were twin daughters, who died in infancy. I was the next child born. My birth came October 3, 1852. My sister, Emily, was next, in 1854 The last and youngest was Jane. All are dead.
"My brother, Henry, was generally called Norwood O'Bear. He studied law in the office of Colonel James H.Rion. He became noted as a 'pleader', by drawing complaints in causes which were not easily thrown out of court on demurrers. He had a fine mind, and prepared many written arguments in cases before our State Supreme Court and many causes before the Supreme Court of the United States. For many years he was a member of the firm of McDonald, Douglas & O'Bear at Winnsboro. His son J J O'Bear, now resides with me and his youngest son, Hugh Norwood is a prominent attorney in Washington, D. C.
"When my brother was first admitted to the bar at Winnsboro, he was appointed and commissioned. United states Commissioner. Many cases came before him in preliminary trials, envolving violation of the post office laws, internal revenue laws, and persons accused of being in conspiracy against the government in regard to Ku Klux operations. One of the most difficult cases, and the one he lost the most sleep over, was a case growing out of an election riot at Woodward, S. C. In the melee a Negro was shot and seriously wounded.
The ball passed through his neck and lodged in his aesophagus. He didn't die, but, after he got well, a warrant was sworn out for Mr. William Brice and Mr. B.G. Tennant, both white democrats. Mr. Brice stood his ground, but Mr Tennant rode off to Tennessee and was never arrested. Because of Mr Tennant's going away, the was delayed by ay brother for over a year, and then he dismissed the case for lack of evidence.
"Have you heard the origin of the name of the Klan? Well, my brother told me that in the format ion of the band, the word 'circle' was suggested. Then 'Kuklos', the Greek equivalent was chosen. This Kuklos was corrupted by common usage to Kuklux, and further to the two words, ku Klux. Then clan was spelled klan and now we have Ku Klux Klan. He told me that the Ku Klux Klan was organized with fine intentions, but there were occasions when scalawags and carpetbaggers got to disguising themselves as Ku Klux and doing all kinds of things against Negroes and helpless poor white democrats, leading the world to believe it was the work of the real clan.
"Presidents Grant, by proclamation, declared Fairfield County in 'rebellion'. He next suspended the act of habeas corpus, but soon revoked it. He arrests were made in Fairfield, however.
"In connection with him ministry, my father taught a private school in Winnsboro, and I assisted him. The school he taught was in the residence now owned and occupied by Mrs. Addie J Williford, near the corner of College and Congress Streets. The home has been remodelled since that time. Then there were steps running up each side of the structure to the second story. The pupils slept in the second story, and two of them ware down with the measles. When my mothertold this fact to the purloining soldiers, they scampered away, and a quarantine was posted on the house. We saw very little of them, but could see the wagons leaving, loaded with household furniture and other things of value. These soldiers were instigated by the devil, I think, and fully proved what Sherman is alleged to have said, that 'war is hell.' On Washington's birthday, February 22nd, they burned St. John's Episcoppal Church, the temple of the Prince of Peace, dedicated and conseorated to 'peace and good will toward all mankind.' Speaking of the set of vandalism in Charleston in 1868, R. Withers Meminger said,' St Johns was deliberately and wantonly burned by Sherman's troops in their march through Winnsboro. The organ, furniture, books, and all church property perished. It has involved a small congregation in a loss of $5,000000.'
"The bell of the church had an interesting history. It was the survivor of the chimes of an old church at Dorchester, that St Paul's church in Charleston get possession of and gave to St. John's Church, in Winnsboro. Truly, if Sherman did not have a Vandal heart, he had a Vandal horde for an army.
"My father's ministry was concluded by his death. A report of Bishop W. B. Howe, May, 1882, records: 'rev. Josiah J O'Bear departed this life on the 25th of February, 1882 He was ordained by Bishop Hopkins of the diocese of Vermont' I am safe in saying that he died beloved and esteemed, not only by his own parishioners but by the whole commity, which had known his life and its purity for almost a half century. My mother survived him until June 25, 1901, at which time Bishop Theodore Bratton conducted her funeral.
"In my father's school were taught English, French, Latin, piano, guitar, and painting, truth, honor, gentleness, and kindness. Miss Susan Finney was one of the assistant teachers. She taught drawing.
"Father encouraged the owners of slaves to look after their spiritual welfare We had a gallery in St. Hohn's church, where they sat. The Negroes came to a second table to take communion.
"After father's death, I taught a private school, mostly of Colonel Rion's children and old Dr R A Buchanan's children.
"Referring again to the 'uncivil war, I know you will be startled with unbelief, but I heard the noise of the cannon in the bombardment of Fort Sumter I remember it very distinctly. The third year of that war, some things, such as flour, salt, sugar, coffee, and cloth, got pretty scarce. We saved the flour for special occasions and used corn meal instead. There was no substitute for salt, and its price was high Sorghum was used for sugar, dried peach peelings for coffee, and corn mush for rice Dress? O, we just used old clothes and homespun Again, I must tell all the truth. Wheelers men came and were as sudacious in taking portable things as the Yankees and, strange as it may seem, the night before they left, the wheat and corn meal and the depot and platform with many bales of cotton were burned Sherman reached here about 9 o'clock am the next day.
"Cancellor Carroll was living in Winnsboro then. He and Peranol Finley were both signers of the Ordinance of Secession. They went off in haste: The Yankees seemed to take a delight in humiliating our most prominent people I remember their treatment of Judge W. R. Robbebson. He had a fine stable of Arabian horses. They took every one of them in spite of his requests that a friend in New York be allowed to purchase them. Years after this war Between the States, the United states Congrees recognized the sacrilege committed by the army in burning St. John's Church and passed a bill compensating the congregation for the destruction. The matter went before a referee, and the loss and damage were estimated at $7,000.00 This was duly paid Time cures all things. The Spanish -American War removed most of the bitterness between the North and the south. The World War welded all sections together. And now we are, thank God, what webster proclaimed us to be 'an indissoluble union of free and indestructible states!."