GREEK STUDY
WINSTON-SALEM, N. C. JULY 25, 1939
WRITTEN BY: SIDNEY F. JONES
AUTHORITY:
A year book entitled - HISTORY OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE -GREEK ORTHODOX
COMMUNITY, Winston-Salem, Greensboro, and High Point.
Published by the GREEK ORTHODOX COMMUNITY, 1939.
Interviews with:
George Gallins, President of the Greek Orthodox Community
Nick Pappas, Secretary of the Greek Orthodox Community
Rev. Christ Pappalambros, Priest of the Greek Orthodox Church
George Bambalas	Mrs. Steve Poulos
Steve Poulos	Louis Hondros
Christ Hondros	Pete Cristou
Miss Ethel Chryson	Jim Cristou
* The name "Christ" is found both as a given name and a surname and is pronounced Krist, short "i".

THE GREEKS IN WINSTON-SALEM
The Greek population of Winston-Salem by un-official estimate numbers about 300 in 1939, of whom approximately 175 are members of families and the balance single men between 18 and 30. The 1930 census gives the population as 116, of whom 14 were American born, 102 foreign born.
The migration of Greek to Winston-Salem has been about evenly divided between those who came directly from Greece to this city and those who landed from other places and finally came here. Practically all of them came as single men under 30. The men are evenly divided also as to wives. About one-half of them have married Greek women, and the other half non-Greek American women. Most of the Greeks who live in Winston-Salem came from families of small shop keepers or small farm owners. Among those who came early the education was limited to common school attendance but of recent years the majority have been somewhat better educated. Most of those who came to the United States have come without any financial backing beyond the requirements for admission but there are a number of young men of well-to-do Greek families. Mrs, Steve Poulos said in this connection, "There are young men working as dishwashers, bus boys, and waiters who are well-to-do and are only waiting until experience will permit them to operate places of their own. You know all the Greeks want to own their own businesses".

The first Greek, Aleck Keriakedes, came to Winston-Salem from Ronoake, Virginia in 1906 on an Invitation from a Winston-Salem business man. With this business man as a silent partner he opened the Phoenix restaurant. Almost immediately he began sending back to his old home in Asia Minor for young men to come over and help him in his business. After they had acquired experience and facility in English, he assisted them in opening businesses of their own.
The three localities from which the Greek people of Winston-Salem have come are Asia Minor, Evrytania, and the Island of Samos. During the first ten years the migration consisted entirely of single men and numbered about 50 in 1916. In most cases they left Greece as the result of glowing accounts of the United States as a land of opportunity.
Nick Pappas said, "They told me I could get a job and that as long as I worked and minded my own business I would not be interferied with. I can say what I please over here". Mr. Pappas was a tailor in Greece but found that his in ability to speak English made the tailoring business a hard one to get into in the United States. He went into the restaurant business because, he said, "Anybody can learn to say, a cup of coffee".
The Greeks are all American citizens, those that have been here long enough to become naturalized. They take out the first papers as soon as they are eligible to do so. This applies to the women as well as the men. When asked about their political affiliations George Bambalas said, "All of the Greeks in the north are Republicans and in the south they are all Democrats".

The language in the homes is English. There are homes, however, where the wife and mother has not learned to speak English, so whenever she takes part in the conversation the language is Greek. In talking man to man the Greeks use English. One peculiarity however, was noted. Communication over the telephone between Greek and Greek is usually in Greek, while conversation between the same men, face to face, is usually in English. This seems to hold good even when one or both-speak halting English. Nick Pappas said, "We talk English at every opportunity for by speaking English we learn to speak it better".
While the majority of the Greeks in America are now employed in restaurants, shoeshine parlors, and hat cleaning establishments, when they first arrived they did not insist on sticking to that sort of business. Louis Hondros came to the United States during the panic of 1907. "I would have gone back if I had had the money", he said, "but now I wouldn't go back to live for anything". His first job was in a coal mine in Pennsylvania for about two years. "We didn't work every day so I studied bookkeeping and English. I knew that some day, some how, I would need them in a business of my own." He went then to Wilmington, N.C. with his brother and opened a restaurant. From there he moved to Memphis, Tenn., New Bern, N. C. and finally, 19 years ago, he landed in Winston-Salem. He went to work in the oldest Greek restaurant in the City, the Piedmont Cafe, and worked as a waiter until 1929 when, with the assistance of his brother, Pete, he bought out this restaurant. When asked how the Greeks lined America he leaned over the counter, his little round face alive with enthusiasm and said, "74,000 out of 500,000 Greeks in the United Hates enlisted during the World war that tells you how they like America. That is probably £he largest percentage of any nationality in the country".
Christ Hondros' experience is more like that of most of the young men who came from Greece to America. Nearly all of them go to work promptly under another Greek in one of the three businesses, restaurant, shoeshine and hat cleaning or poolroom. Practically every Greek in the United States, whether he was foreign born or native born, either owns his own business or is planning to have one of his own.
During the second decade, from 1016 to 1926, the Greek population was about doubled. It was in that year that a group of leading Greek citizens of Winston-Salem, Greensboro, and High Point met at the home of Nick Pappas to arrange an organization of Greeks. In November, 1926, a mass meeting was held in the Episcopal church and resolutions were made to invite a Greek minister to hold public worship once a month. In February, 1927, another mass meeting was held and a constitution adopted. In 1928 a permanent place of worship was established at 2251/2 North Liberty Street where they have been holding services to date. In 1930 the community was organized under a State Charter as "The Greek Orthodox Community, Evangelismos". Beginning with the loose organization in 1926, practically every adult Greek subscribed a fixed sum to be paid monthly. A priest was called, Rev. George Diodoridis. He served as priest of this community until 1939 when Christ Pappalandros, a young man educated in Greece, was called.
The Greeks in Winston-Salem are truly a paradox. They are patriotic, co-operative American citizens interested in community progress and active in developing a clean citizenship and at the same time they keep pretty much t o themselves and do not associate socially to a great extent with other nationalities, including native Americans. Among the native born children of high school and college age this condition is changing but the speed of change is hampered by the close supervision that the Greek mother maintains over her daughter.
During Christmas 1935 the first marriage of a Greek girl to a non-Greek American boy in this community was solemnized. The method by which this romance was fostered explains why there have been so few marriages of Greek girls to non-Greek men. The young lady was employed in one of the down town stores. One of her friends invited her to her home and there she met the man who was later to become her husband. The courtship was conducted at this friend's home without the knowledge of the girl's parents. The marriage, however, was a Greek ceremony held in the Episcopal church, with the consent and co-operation of the parents. In this connection a sister of the bride who is selling women's wear in a ready-to-wear shop, made this remark; "How are we going to meet anybody but Greek men, when if we go anywhere we must take one of our parents with us". Pete Crist, an American born Greek married an American born Greek girl. He said in connection with the parents' supervision of young people that the boys were allowed about the same freedom as in other American families, but the girls were so closely protected that they had little change to meet any but Greek boys. "You know", he said, "the parents want them to marry Greek men".
Until very recently the Greek girls have not been employed in public. Very few of the Greek business men have allowed their wives or daughters to become actively associated in business with them until recent years. As for working for a non-Greek, in-dependent of their parents, that was unthought of for a Greek girl. This custom is changing.
The Greeks live in groups in comfortable, moderate prioed homes. They avoid apartments, but nearly every family has one or more single Greek men as boarders. When Greek women are seen on the streets with their children they are usually in company with other Greek mothers. It is only in business that the Greek fraternizes with men of other nationalities. Their religion is the Greek Orthodox Church whose origin they trace back to the churches organized by the Apostle Paul in Corinth and Antioch, The church is more loosely organized than the Roman Catholic church and has for its head seven Patriarchs in Constantinople. The Greeks are christened into this church as infants. Marriage, as in the Roman Catholic Church, is a sacrament. But divorce, while frowned upon, is not forbidden.
Almost Immediately upon arrival in this city the Greek adopts American dress if he has not already done so before he came. The moving picture and other international contacts have led to the adoption of the conventional European and American styles throughout Greece, with the exception of remote mountainous regions.
The holidays that they celebrate are very much in line with our own with one exception. Their independence day is March 25th. This is also celebrated as a religious holiday because it is approximately the day of the Conception of Jesus.
The younger folks are kept in close association with Greek customs by attendance, as children, at a Greek school held daily for one hour after the close of the public school. This school continues daily for one hour throughout the summer. The officiating priest of the community gives the children instruction in the Greek language Greek history and tradition. As these youngsters grow up they have a reverence for the great civilization from which the Greek people sprang. The young men are consistently law abiding and it is seldom that any of them are found in the hands of the police.

