May 20, 1939
James Kivelos (white)
Atlas Restaurant
318 Main Street
Jacksonville, Florida.
Proprietor
Lillian Steadman, writer
Evelyn Werner, reviser.
A GREEK RESTAURANTEUR
For the third time we entered the bright cool restaurant of Tony Varnakus. Flowers nodded, the canary sang, the radio was turned on, and Mr. Varnakus was busy dusting his stock and arranging it more advantageously.
"Well, how about today? Any time to talk?"
"Today iss all right, yes," he said pleasantly, going on with the dusting. "I be through here now in minute. Everything iss sold by suggestion, see? Half of success of any business iss by direct or indirect suggestion. That iss why I do this." An expression of satisfaction came over his long, pallid face.
The cool air of the large circulating fans and the cleanliness of the place was very restful. We sat at one of the tables to wait. In a very few minutes Mr. Varnakus came over and sat down with us.
"How about a piece of pie? No? Well, a cup of coffee, dis pie iss made in my kitchen and I know it iss good. Excuse me, I get this order." He heaved his tall slightly fat body up and over to greet a young couple entering.
"Well, well, you get congratulations from me winning the jitterbug contest. That iss something to be a jitter-bug. Is dis your wife jitter-bug?"
We knew the couple had won a dance contest during the Naval Air Base Celebration held in Jacksonville on May 12. Mr. Varnakus talked to them for some time, then came back and settled himself at our table.
He tossed back his long loose pompadour of gray-sprinkled brown hair, fixed as with large myopic eyes, "So--first the boyhood in Greece, eh? Well, it was no different than anybody's childhood. Things were different only in accordance with the different customs of the country." He pursed his heavy mouth judiciously.
"My papa he was in the hide an leather business and had a steady demand for his products. He make a fair to good living for his family. He supply the home all right, but not lavish. We eat a good living and keep healthy by home treatment if nothing serious get the matter.
"I leave my family there when I am in my teens and come to United States. I come with bright hopes, and love of liberty, which is hard to understand for those who have been born here.
"When I leave my family, I never go back to see them, only for a short time while I am in Europe after the World War. Naturally they were unsettled as every country was then. My mother she die a long time ago and I have no close family living there now, for they all die out.
"When I leave Greece I leave it for good and I am not interested in conditions over there for I can do nothing for them. I cannot bury them and they wouldn't let me bury them. This iss my country and I never think of Greece as my native country for the American people have given me everything; Greece, nothing.
"When I come here in my teens, I am handicapped not knowing the language. I worked in two different lines. First in a cleaning establishment and then in a hat cleaning parlor. Although I made ay expenses I was not fascinated by my work.
"One day a customer who came often to the shop I was working in, asked me how I would like to learn the restaurant business. The idea appealed to me. I could mingle with the customers, and learn everything about the kitchen, too. I joined him. Well, now, my real work began. I was proud to meet the public, listen to them, observe them closely, and notice, above all, what displeased them. I learn very quickly that most of the people are appreciative but there are a few of the other kind. Big dinner or joost cup coffee get same service from me, though.
"Yes, the secret iss treat everyone nice, call them by name--they like that--and never talk to them unless they seem to want conversation. It becomes quite a pleasure to wait on the public, but it must be remembered that familiarity brings contempt. Never encourage familiarity.
"There are two points in the restaurant business, service and quality of goods. I have always bought the very best meats and vegetables and did not spare any expense to learn all about foods and their preparation. My dealers know I want the very best at the right price. Well, I became successful, and saved money.
"When time come to marry, I marry an American girl. I could not fall in love with a girl from the Old Country for she would not be modernized and would not be able to learn the new tricks and customs of this country. A girl has to be born here and brought up here to know all that. You hear it iss hard to teach the old dog new tricks and that iss truth. Men come here and make good success, then they do something that does them more harm than good. That iss they send back to the Old Country for their sweetheart and bring her here. Then she iss strange find people look at her and thinks she iss not American through and through, and that hurt his business very much.
"The people make my business good. Why should I not get a wife, if I fall in love, from this people? That iss wat I did. I never fall in love with nobody until I fall for this wife I got. She help me very mooch. She iss smart and she know the customs of the people and business. I have a good wife, she iss good to me and I am good to her, we have a good home, wat we built an enjoy.
"Dis house of mine iss in Brentwood an I keep half of my big lot for my flowers. About 15 years ago I buy the place an have it built joost like I want, according to my own plans.
"These flowers on my grounds that I plant myself when I am off on my hours." He waved his hand toward the flowers in the place. I have 102 sets of dahlias all dark red, and dis large," making a large spaced circle with his hands. "The marigolds are new to me. This year iss the first time I have experimented with them and they do very nice. See they are the new improvement, so mooch bigger and brighter. I like the bright canary yellow look they have. They looks so good in the business and in the home."
At this point a stooped, shabby old man tottered in slowly and took his place at the far end of the restaurant. Varnakus served him coffee and came back to us, a look of pity and sympathy on his face. Leaning confidentially close he said in a low voice, "Dat man, it iss a shame for him. He use to be rich, now he iss nutting. Joost living and that iss all.
"He come here from Greece about 45 years ago an made a lot of money. He was in Tarpon Springs an worked in the sponge business. Later he give up the sponge business and started peanut vending where he made a fortune at Tampa. The president of the State Bank there taken a liking to him and let him sell his peanuts in front of the bank. He made $12,000 in four years. The president of the bank would often times come to him for advice regarding finances for he seemed to be a wizard when it came to making good investments.
"Gradually he lost all the business sense he had. He got to gambling in a big way and the president tried to influence him to check his gambling. The president tried to make him stick to his business but one day Mike, that's his name, Mike Tjogas, cussed the president out and then he had to move his location from the bank.
"He come to Jacksonville and during the boom he put $20,000 in the slot machine business and went broke. He had left only $500. He sent the $500 to his poor widowed niece and this left him on mercy. He had a gambler's heart and now he iss a subject of pity to all who know him.
"I tell you this little story so that you will know that he was not a poor man all the time, and to let you know that it was poor management that put him in the condition he is in now."
The old man got slowly to his feet, mumbled his thanks to Varnakus in Greek, who answered in the same language, the look of sympathy and pity on his face once more.
"He has a peanut wagon on a busy downtown corner but the location iss not a paying one, for it not every corner that you can sell enough peanuts to make living. He does not make enough to live on so I give him his lunch every day and his afternoon coffee. He iss feeble and seems to live a lonely life. No one to care but others of his race; and some are not kind to him because they know that he has gambled his everything away.
"Everything in life is relative. Although many people in my community say that I made a success in business, and act a little envious when they don't do so good, I feel like almost anyone can do joost as well by using common sense. Of course, common sense means never to make the same mistake twice, and learn at all times by the mistakes of others.
"Yes, I done good in America, and I was happier man when the Armistice was signed and I left the service because I felt I had repaid some the country that had done well by me.
"When the World War broke out I enlisted in the Navy. Many friends told me I was fool, but I must admit that I was proud to wear the American uniform. I still feel proud today, when I think about it. I was fighting for America and its ideals. A country where any one can make good, if he has courage and wants to work.
"Maybe you like to look at the pictures I make while I was in the United States Navy. Take the album and look while I take care of customers."
The first photograph that attracted our attention was a picture of a poster displayed in all the principal cities of Italy after the World War. Columbus is depicted standing in a pose indicating disgust, his arms crossed on his chest, his expression unhappy and disgruntled; the caption below in Italian, "What the hell did I discover America for anyway!"
Varnakus a came back as we were enjoying this one and said, "Italians don't like the allotment of lands after the war. They think they been cheated so they get out these big posters, to show their displeasure to America and President Wilson."
He turned several pages and paused at a group picture in which some of the men were receiving gifts of cigarettes.
"That Y.M.C.A, it did no good over there. We buy a carton of cigarettes from the Y.M.C.A. for $2.00. Wat we find when we open? Little note inside saying, 'this carton of cigarettes donated by such an such a club,' an the Y.M.C.A. make us buy for $2.00 that carton wat has been donated.
"Now here iss pictures of a bull fight I see in Tangeria, Spain. That iss a very cruel sport an I cannot see how they get so mooch enjoyment out of it. It iss terrible to look at, still it iss a great thing to the natives. You never saw one did you? I will tell you about it."
He drew a plan of the arena where the action was to take place and as he talked became more end more excited, "It takes three horses to each bull, see? The horses are usually old horses that have been pretty well worn out. Probably about 15 or 20 years old because they are nearly always killed and if not, they are so badly injured that they have to be shot.
"It take four hours to see this fight. There are stone walls at intervals around the stadium, so the man can jump behind to save himself from the infuriated bull.
"You see this bull has been pierced again and again by the rider, with a short spear that has a point on it like a fish hook, a banderilla. When it goes deep enough it catches and stays there sticking out of the bull as he runs and jerks himself this way, that way trying to get it out and getting madder and madder all the time.
"The spears are thrown from time to time by the rider into the bull's back. When at last the bull is so mad the rider has to protect himself, he rushes his blindfold horse to the stone wall and gets behind just in time to save himself.
"Now come the most cruel sport in all history, for now the bull is seen many times to thrust his long horns all the way into the horse's belly." Illustrating the length of the bull's horns by the length of his own long arms, Varnakus is by this time so excited that his hair is waving from side to side, his shirt tail is out and large drops of perspiration are falling from his forehead. His last customers had finished their meal and were standing awe-struck watching the highly emotional Greek relate the story of the bull fight.
"The horns they would tear the belly of the horse so mooch that his guts would fall out and maybe then he would step on them himself and break them. Then the crowd goes mad and roars and roars.
"The more cruel the more better bull fight. The horse is forced to prance around and suffer the abuse of the bull. When it can no longer stand it, he lies where he falls and other blindfolded horses are brought in to meet their death the same way.
"At last after three horses have fallen either dead or so injured they can't move, the man comes in that can hypnotize the bull. He dances around with his very sharp spear concealed in a red cloth and keeps his eyes on the bull's eyes every second, never allowing them to stray away, for if he should it would mean instant death.
"Gradually the maddened bull calms down under this man's eye, and is seen to be almost kneeling on his front feet before the man. When the bull lowers his head the man thrusts his spear directly between the bull's shoulders and into his heart, which instantly kills the bull. The man must not miss the important spot, for if he make a mistake the bull will then kill him right, because the man is close and it would be easy. Just before the man kill the bull, everything is very quiet; not a sound is heard, but in the moment the bull is geared and falls, the crowd goes crazy."
By the time the story of the bull fight is complete, Mr. Kivelos is a sight. His hair is wild and his sweat-soaked shirt hangs rakishly out of his rumpled pants. He apparently feels no concern for he walks calmly to the cash register where he thanks his customers and tells them to come back.
"When the Armistice was signed," he continues, on his return, "I left the service. I tell you before I was a happier man because I repaid the country which has given opportunities to millions before me and millions after me. A country where there is only one aristocracy, the aristocracy of achievement. Today I have my own home and garden, a nice wife, a fine restaurant. I do not owe any bills, because I know that respect of your fellowman is the most valuable asset. I express seldom my political views, but study every question, and have never failed to cast my vote."
"What do you think of the present administration?" we ask mildly.
"My idea of the present administration? Well, that is a very funny question and I don't dare to answer it just so, for that would not do. You are working for the WPA, aren't you?"
"That doesn't mean you can't say exactly what you think," we assure him.
"Well, I think President Roosevelt meant only good for the people and has been able to accomplish a lot of good things all right. But there is an awful lot of money being spent. It's not all getting to the poor people like he wanted it to, either. It is spent in the higher brackets. I can't exactly call it graft, but it just doesn't get into the channels that the relief money was intended.
"Ah, that is a funny question, let's talk about something else. You see, I know that the President means only good for the people and everybody makes mistakes sometimes and you could not put anybody in that office and please everybody.
"I am grateful for the Home Owners Loan Corporation that has materialized through the present administration. It helped me to save my home that I might not have been able to do without it."
He rises abruptly, "Well, this should be all. I will give you anything in this store if you will let me alone. Here, take this package of chewing gum and good bye." He was smiling as he said this, but there was an undercurrent of seriousness. We thanked him for giving us so much of his time and left hastily.