
Mrs. Ellen R.Blanchard(white)
409 Street
Montgomery, Alabama.
(Housekeeper)
Adelaide Rogers
Montgomery County,
MRS. BLANCHARD, PROFESSIONAL MOTHER
"Well... if you think you'll be contented here with me and the children and our pets, I'll be glad to rent yon the room, at ten dollars a month. I believe - all things considered - that's a fair price. The room is nice and light and is convenient to the bath; it has a fireplace, as you saw, and a large closet. And as there is nobody here during the day but me, you won't be disturbed while you ar e writing. When I am not at my mother's, I usually sit in here and sew or read, until the children come in a little after five. My daughter. Trances works at the Capital, and my son is with an Insurance company.
"No, I haven't a job now. My children say its my turn to stay at home and rest and enjoy myself, while they work and take care of me. I did have a job though, as assistant housekeeper at the Ashley Hotel. I was there fifteen years. Before that I was a stenographer in the Department of Public Welfare when Mrs. Bush was its Director.
"Girls didn't take business courses when I was young as they do now, So I didn't learn typing and stenography until after I had been married for some time. In fact I have never attempted much of anything until I got married. That marked a turning point in my life. Oh must yon go? I thought maybe you would sit awhile and talk. People who live in the same house ought to know each other real well. And there's nothing like a good long talk for getting acquainted with somebody. Oh you will stay for awhile! That's fine! I get awfully lonesome sometimes, staying so much by myself. I'm the sort that likes company. I like to see folks happy too, and comfortable.
"You are not close enough to the fire. Try this slumber-chair with the cushions. My son gave me that on my birthday. He is the sweetest boy in the world to his mother. I declare! I do believe I have the best children in the world. Sometimes I think the Lord blessed me that way particularly, to make up for other things. You know I am not with my husband. We separated when the children were quite small. I live entirely for them. And outside of my home I have little interest.
"I didn't go to college. My father was well-to-do, but after I graduated from High School, I decided I'd just stay, at home and help my mother with the housekeeping. In that way I'd learn how to manage a home of my own, and be mo re certain of making a success of marriage.
"Somehow I never had any doubt that I would marry, I had too many beaux for one thing, to stay single. You can ask anybody who knew me in those days if Ellen Weaver wasn't the prettiest and most popular girl in her crowd. I was a nice girl, too, and to this day, I haven't any patience with those who say a girl can't be popular and decent at the same time.
"Other popular girls sometimes wondered if they would ever marry, but I never had any doubts on that subject. I just felt within myself that I was cut out to be happily married. I felt too, that while a few 'happy marriages' might be made in Heaven, the majority were planned for and attained, just like any other successful achievement. So I made up my mind that when I did fall in love, I'd use my head as well as my heart. 'No rich, pampered, society Idlers for me,' I said to myself. And my father encouraged me in the idea.
"We thought that money was synonymous with dissipation, and that rich men's sons were invariably worthless. And since my family repeatedly cautioned me against the folly, of marrying an attractive ne'er-do-well, I never permitted myself to become deeply interested in any of the frivolously fashionable young gentlemen of my acquaintance.
"I realize now that when I met Mr. Fenton, I was already prepared to fall in love with him.
"He wore overalls, and as he stood surveying an old brick wall, into which he meant to blast an opening for the building of his repair shop, I thought him the handsomest , most manly, and most fascinating person I had ever seen.
"Through inquiries, I learned that Tommy Fenton was not merely a mechanic, who wielded a pick. Be was a wizard with machinery, and an inventor of sundry articles indispensable to the operating of numerous factories and plants throughout the country. In short he was a genius, who would go places, or 'amount to something' as we said in those days when every diamond in the rough was expected to 'make a mark in the world.'
"Well, Mr. Fenton was in the rough all right, but the diamond side turned out to be phoney. It was such a good imitation however, that I didn't discover its falseness for a long time. Stragne to say, no one else did either. Everybody liked Mr. Fenton and believed in him. And since many of his friends were mine also, an introduction (which was then a necessary formality) was easily arranged, and almost before I realized what was taking place, a whirlwind courtship was in progress.
"For six months Mr. Fenton treated me like a queen.
"At home, nothing was too good for 'Cissie,' as I was called by my family, and Mr. Fenton made us all believe this consideration would continue. Only my father was a little suspicious; a little doubtful that Mr. Fenton's flamboyant plans would aver materialize.
"'Cissie,' he said to me a day, or so before the wedding. 'I don't exactly dislike Mr. Fenton, but somehow he is just too good to be true.
"'He is just a little too pleased with himself. Those inventions of his strike me as being a little too marvellous. And his plans for you are a shade too perfect. That fellow is entirely too, too,too. I hate to say, it Cissie, but I distrust Mr. Fenton. Suppose you postpone the wedding, and I'll give you a nice little trip to New York, or Milwaukee, or maybe take you to visit your Annt Millie in Dallas.'
"It was Sunday morning and my father and I, after a late breakfast, were loitering at the table in our big, old fashioned dining-room, where a fire crackled and glowed on the hearth, and a canary-bird chirped so loud and incessantly that we could hardly, hear ourselves speak.
"Though it happened so long ago, I remember perfectly, the hopeful look on his face as he waited for my reply.
"I told him I loved Mr. Fenton, because he was a man who did things. And that I would marry him at the time we had agreed upon, and go with him to the ends of the earth.
"For an instant my father seemed on the verge of weeping; hut after a moment or two, he made some casual comment and then left the room.
'I stayed on, I remember, to finish a second waffle. And about eleven o'clock, Mr. Fenton and I went to a service at the old Court Street Methodist Church, where we heard a sermon on the rapidly increasing evil of divorce, which would eventually, if it remained unchecked, shatter the stability of the American home.
"When the sermon ended, we sang 'How Firm a Foundation', and as the strains of the inspiring old hymn died away, I felt certain of only one thing in all the universe, and that was the permanency of my, happiness with Thomas Fenton. Other homes might be broken ... other couples estranged by the rising tide of too easy divorce. But Mr. Fenton was so different from the average man, that I had no fears on his account. I knew our union would be indissoluble.
"We were married the following Thursday at four o'clock in the afternoon. My dress was Alice-blue silk, and I carried a bouquet of pink rosebuds and lilies-of-the-valley.
"An improvised altar had been arranged in the group of hay windows in our living room, and here the double ring ceremony was performed. My, Sister was the only attendant. She wore a fawn colored - I mean beige - silk dress, and looked, better, I thought, than anyone else at the wedding. My mother wore black taffeta, and cried softly, throughout the ceremony. None of Mr. Fenton'a people were there.
"As soon as the minister concluded the benediction, the company surged forward to kiss the bride. And amid Mrs. Fenton, how do you think you will like being married?' we drifted into the dining room. There, our old Negro servant and her nephew (who had been borrowed for the occasion) served us a supper of chicken salad and beaten biscuit, fruit compote, charlotte russe with lady-fingers, salted almonds, and wine.
"On the table, that was covered with a lace cloth, was the bride's cake, and my grandmother's silver candle-sticks with lighted pink tapers. Pink candles shed their light from the mantel too, and the large oak sideboard, while every available space was banked with pink asters and maidenhair ferns. But only white flowers, and white tapers formed the decorations in the living-room.
"Everybody said they had never seen a prettier home wedding. I know I have never been so happy since. No incident arose to mar any detail. It all moved smoothly - without a hitch. And I am glad it was so, because that was the last time I was ever to be singled out for adulation and attention.
"About an hour after the ceremony, some boys came to serenade us. While they were singing, I slipped upstairs to change into my going-away suit of Oxford gray.
"At a quarter to six, the cab came to take us to the Railway station where we were to hoard the train for Oklahoma City.
"When our goodbyes were said., ay mother cried, and Implored Mr. Fenton to be good to her little Cissie. My father embraced me in silence. But my brother, with the casual frankness of the seventeen year old boy. whispered, as he gave me a farewell kiss...'Take care of yourself, Cissie. Papa says you've made a terrible mistake.’
"Perhaps I have! The thought stabbed me with a premonition of disaster as Mr. Fenton assisted me into the cab, and slammed the door upon a shower of rice, and a babel of goodbyes and good wishes.
"Beam to look out for yourself, Cissie,' my father called from where he was standing on the porch steps, 'and don't forget the old folks at home.'
"Through his words caused me to break - for - instant-into tears and to vow I would think of them every moment of the time we were apart, I am ashamed to say, that I literally forgot their existence during the ensuing days with Mr. Fenton in Oklahoma City.
"For in something old and something new, something borrowed and something blue, I had married the man who most completely represented the ideal of which all young girls foolishly dream, and hundreds of miles away from those I knew and loved, I was embarking upon the most stupendous adventure in a woman's life,
"Having entered whole-heartedly into the experience of home-making, our little apartment, with its green and yellow carpet; its golden-oak furniture and ruffled lace curtains at the windows, seemed to me, the most beautiful spot in the world. I know now that it wasn't much. But I thought that it was perfect; just as I thought Mr. Fenton was perfect.
"I suppose all brides who are very much in love at the time they are married, go through that stage when the King can do no wrong. It's all a part of life I believe, and except for this period of bedazzlement, a lot of marriages wouldn't last long enough for the ink to dry out on the marriage certificate.
"As it was, all manner of humiliating sacrifices were exacted of me, and. I was not even aware that anything in our little menage was amiss.
"Mr. Fenton had explained to me at the beginning, that I must practice the most rigid economy so that he might succeed with the costly inventions into which he was sinking the major portion of his salary. So quite as a matter of course, I ate what he left on his plate in the morning. At supper I rarely ate at all. Only at the mid-day meal did I have adequate food. Consequently with no money to buy tidbits on which to nibble vetween meals, I was always more or less famished. Mr. Fenton paid all the hills himself. So there was no way I could eke out a few pennies from a household allowance. Yet I did not feel badly treated. And when I wrote my first letter home I said,....!
"Dearest folks: You simply cannot imagine my happiness. It is something that would have to be seen to be appreciated.' And it was. Fortunately however, they were too far away to grasp the actual conditions, or to realize how intangible my happiness really was.
"My two oldest children, Frances and little Jamie, were born in Oklahoma City. Mr. Fenton worshiped the children, and was never mean or niggardly to them as he was to me. By the time Frances was five, and Jamie four, their father was manager of a cotton-seed oil company, and we were financially able to have anything Mr. Fenton desired.
"Then the company transferred him to Atlanta, Georgia, and my real troubles began.
"A few months after we moved to Georgia, little Jamie died with membranous croup, and though I had been the most devoted of mothers, and never at any moment neglected either of the children, he blamed me for the loss of his son and my life was made unbearable.
"I loved my boy even more than he did. But after Jamie died, Mr. Fenton pretended to think I had never cared anything about his child.
"I would be awakened at night by him standing over me saying, 'You let ay child die. You let my child die. I ought to kill yon. I ought to strangle yon to death, as he strangled. But no, you are alive, while he is dead.'
"I tried to tell him that life meant nothing to me. But he would not listen. It was impossible to make him understand. And I ceased to try. When he had a large placard printed in letters proclaiming, 'The Child of a Careful Mother Never Dies,' and hung the Lie in our bedroom, I never looked at it but once. And when he came home in the evenings, and started walking the floor, moaning, 'Oh my boy, my boy! How I miss him!' I simply closed my ears to his reproaches.
"I thought when I told him I was expecting another child, it would make a difference, but he acted like a madman. 'What!' he cried. 'Another child! For God and its mother to strangle to death! Never! I'll kill it first. I'll not support the child if its born. And I'll not give you one cent to buy clothes for it in the meantime.
"You will hardly believe it, but he was as good as his word. Not one cent would he give me - for any purpose at that time. Yet my baby when it was born - had clothes ... beautiful clothes.
"I went to the store where Mr. Fenton paid his bill every week. I explained the situation to the wife of the grocer, and he added a dollar a week to our bill. The washerwoman added twenty-five cents a week to her bill, and the combined sum was mine to buy clothes my baby needed. He had the prettiest layette too, I believe, of all my children.
"My father sent me the money to pay the doctor, and the nurse. And when little Herbert was born, the doctor said he was the prettiest baby he had ever seen. Mr. Fenton wouldn't look at him for a long time. Then one day he saw him on the street with the girl I employed to take the baby out in the afternoon. 'What a beautiful baby, nurse,' he said. 'Whose child is this?'
"'Hit's Miz Tom Fenton's baby suh,' the nurse replied. 'An' you looks to me lak his pa.'
"From that moment he took charge of the baby. If anything he loved him more than he had loved Jamie. He resumed his old affectionate attitude toward Frances, who was then nine years old. And he tried to woo me back with the boast ful, braggadocio promises I had once found so alluring. But somehow it all seemed as flat to me as an omelet without eggs. The curtain went up. But the show just didn't come off. Everything between Mr. Fenton and me was ended. I cared no longer if he made a hundred million dollars on the inventions he talked of incessantly: or if he starved to death in a garret. By this time I knew he cared nothing for anyone but himself, and the little gadgets he thought would bring him wealth and fame. I had discovered that not even his love for the children was sincere. He had become as heartless and mechanical as the bits of steel or iron with which he toyed incessantly. And I was not surprised one day when he suggested that the children and I shoend the summer with my family in Montgomery.
"'It will be cheaper and better - for me - in every way,' he said, as he eyed me furtively, board you and the children for awhile with your people. I'll send you the money every month for your expenses, but it won't cost me as much as it does to keep up a house. Then what I save, can be used to push that new peanut roaster I have just patented. Johnston says it's a humdinger and ought to clean up a million. What do you Bay to that, Cissie? Are you willing to help me out?'
"I had' helped out' so many times and in so many ways, that one more try didn't make much difference. So I agreed to take the children and come home for the summer.
"I thought if all else failed, that home was one place where I would find welcome. My father had assured me that if I ever wanted to come home again, they would always be glad to have me. But when I was finally, forced to return to them, I was not received as rapturously as I had expected to be. The children complicated matters. They ate too much... they made too much noise. They wore out their clothes, particularly their shoes, too quickly. And too little money was provided for their maintenance.
"My father was old, and his business was not what it had been. My sister, a school teacher, was saving for her old age. My brother was a rising young lawyer with a long way to go. My mother was getting old, and the children made her nervous.
"In the Spring, before I came home, I had been glad to leave Mr. Fentom. But I was glad too when I returned to him at the end of the summer.
"During our absence he had made fifty thousand dollars on one of his many patented inventions. So with seven thousand dollars, he bought a nice home, and to my amazement, gave me the money to furnish it quite attractively. I began to hope he was taking an interest in something besides inventions. But the next Spring he told me I would have to take the children and go home again for the summer.
"This time he did not send me any money at all. I sold the diamond ring my father had given me years before for three hundred dollars, and gave part of that toward the household expenses which two children and another adult naturally increased, and used the rest of it to buy winter clothes for myself and the two children.
"That winter and for several years afterward, there was no task at home too menial for me to perform. I was so anxious to make myself wanted again by my parents, and my children welcomed, that I did all the housework, the washing and ironing, and even scrubbed the floors to save hiring a negro. But when school was out in May, my people sent us back to Mr. Fenton. I knew he didn't want us, bat I had nowhere else to go.
"He had sold the house and was living at an expensive hotel. The furniture he had allowed me to buy, was divided among his relatives. He had even sent the piano, that had been given to Frances by one of my uncles, to his niece in Athens, Georgia. So there was nothing for him to do but take us to a hoarding house. The cheapest in Atlanta! We lived there until September. Then he told me it was not suitable for a man of his standing to remain in such squalid surroundings. I suggested that we rent a house, but he said he had a better plan, and that he would appreciate my- cooperation.
"He said he saw nothing else, but for me to take the children and return permanently to my people. For if he became a success as an inventor, he would be obliged to put all of his money, and all of his time into that field. The children kept him from concentrating, he said. And he could not put up with the distractions of a family and get anywhere with his inventions.
"So I came home again with the children. My father was wonderful.
I wanted to get a job and work outside, but he would not hear of it while the children were young enough to need my care. He made me promise I would not leave them until they were old enough to at least partially look out for themselves. And I never did.
"When my father died, he left me the bulk of his moderate insurance. It was not a great deal, but the children and I could not have got along without it.
"Frances had developed functional heart trouble; caused, so the doctors said, by the effect of constant unhappiness upon a sensitive temperament. They told me to keep her diverted, and to make her as contented as possible. So I rented a room in Capital Heights where in the High School she would have no stairs to climb, and my children and I began to actually live.
"Of course we were awfully crowded - the three of us in one room. But inconvenient as it undoubtedly was, those quarters were the only accommodations I could secure in a handsome home. And I wanted my children to have the best.
"I paid thirty dollars a month for the room. It would have been cheap at sixty. Mr. and Mrs. Moorefield who owned the house, were so lovely to me, and especially to my children, that I have always felt there wasn't enough money in the world to pay for what we received from them.
"If the children were sick, Mrs. Moorefield sat up at night to help me wait on them; and when Frances began going out to dances and parties, she assisted me in planning and making her evening dresses. She arranged ways too for her to meet the right people, and was always ready to sustain and encourage me through the trials that confront every woman in my position.
"Once however, something occurred that I never let her know anything about. Perhaps I ought not to tell you about it either. But if it were to do over again I'd go through it the same way. And what we are willing to do we should be willing to acknowledge. So I am going to tell you of something I did for my daughter.
"As I said before, the doctors had told me to keep her as happy as possible. Bat no girl can be entirely happy who hasn't pretty clothes. Frances was good about doing without things as a rule. But she needed a new evening dress, and an evening wrap, and some dance slippers and a bag, and a few other trifles that amounted to a hundred dollars.
"There wasn't a chance for me to get them. I wrote to her father and told him what the doctors said, and asked him to lend me the money. I knew he had it, and it never occurred to me he would refuse. But Mr. Fenton out-figured me on that as well as some other matters.
"I got a letter by return mail, saying 'Yes, 'he had the money, but I could never have a cent of it for clothes, or anything else.
"Well, I had helped to earn that money. It was just as much mine as it was his. So I sat down and wrote a check for one hundred dollars. I signed his name to it and cashed it the next morning.
"In a few days Mr. Hunter, who was President of the Planters' and Trust Company requested me to come down to his office. He had just been notified that Mr. Fenton not only repudiated the check, but had written to the bank urging my arrest as a forger. He told me this as kindly as possible, and then asked, 'Why did you do such a thing, Mrs. Fenton?'
"I asked him if he had a daughter. He said 'yes'. I asked him if he wouldn't do anything in the world to save her life, if she were in danger, and he said 'yes'. Then I told him what the doctors (I gave their names), said about Frances. I told him too some of the circumstances that had led to that condition; and I let him read Mr. Fenton's letter refusing me the money, that might be the means of saving his daughter's life.
"After he read the letter, Mr. Hunter looked at me for a moment in silence. Then he said 'Mrs. Fenton, I'm going to see that that old scalawag takes up this check, or I'll have him run out of Atlanta. Hanging is too good for his sort. I'll bet he led you a dog's life. But he's going to pay for it now.'
"And he did! Thanks be to Mr. Hunter. It's funny now. I always have to laugh when I think of it. But it wasn't a laughing matter when I went down to explain to the president of a bank why I had signed my, husband's name to that check. I get a shivery feeling yet, sometimes, when I pass a bank. It simply did not occur to me that Mr. Fenton would refuse to meet the check. But it was a good lesson for me I guess, after all.
"Mr. Hunter came with me to the door of his office. ‘I hope that girl of yours will never forget what you did for her,' he said. 'Children ought to be told of such things. It makes them realize what they mean to a parent.'
"I didn't tell Frances however, for a long time. She was so happy, at Mrs. Moorefield's I didn't want anything to shatter her pleasure, or her feeling of belonging there.
"We were six years at Mrs. Moorefield's. During that time - while Frances was a senior in High School - I got a job as a stenographer in the Welfare Department. I didn't have the money to go to business school, so I learned typing and shorthand by myself. It took me seven years to master it, but finally I did. I held the job too, until I got mad and quit. Then I went to the Ashley Hotel as assistant housekeeper. I made fifty dollars a month. And as Frances had taken a business course and secured a job, we had enough between us, to live on.
"Then like a bolt of lightning out of a clear sky. Mr. Fenton appeared. Richly dressed and in a handsome car, he had come, he said, to take us to California, where he would get Frances into the movies, and let Herbert finish his education at a fashionable military school.
"When he saw that I would not go, he determined to take the children. No one could have made me believe - had I been warned, in advance - that my children would do such a thing. But they left me. And went with their father to California.
"That night after they had gone, I went to the drug store and bought some chloroform, and before I went to bed I saturated my pillow with the liquid, and placed the bottle so it would slowly drain out near my face, as I was sleeping. I did not know how to live without my children. But evidently I didn't know how to die either, for I am still here. The chloroform instead of putting me to sleep made me dreadfully nauseated, and for a day or two I was quite sick.
"Later I was glad I hadn't died; because letters came from the children asking why I had not followed them to California as their father had assured them I would do. They were expecting me any day, they wrote, and unless I came cut pretty soon, they were going to hurry straight back to me.
"Herbert did come hack a few days later. I sent him the money to make the trip. But Trances married while she was out there, and. remained for several years. She wasn't happy, so she got a divorce and came back to Montgomery. 'The West and the South just don't mix,' she said when we were discussing her return. 'Besides Mother, I was homesick all the time for you. I just couldn't stand it any longer.'
"Their father has never forgiven me for their refusal to stay in California. He doesn't like it either that they are providing for me so well. No indeed! He'd like to see me toiling in a factory for my dally bread.
"I do think sometimes I'd like to have a smart millinery store like the Elizabethan. But I've never done anything really well except keep house. I am doing that now for the children. And they say I'll never be on anybody's payroll but theirs.
"Yes they are lovely children. I believe you will all like each other. I am anxious for you to get moved in. We certainly had a nice visit together this morning.
"I always said there is nothing like a good long talk for getting people acquainted.
1/31/39
S.J
