Dr. W. H. Evans (white)
Baptist Pastor
Fairhope, Alabama
Lawrence F. Evan
Baldwin County, Ala.
STORY OF A MINISTER'S FAMILY AND LIFE
It was meal time and there a steaming dish of black-eyed peas, a platter of cornbread and a glass of milk at each plate. The Minister and his wife followed the custom of having the largest meal at moon and this are their moon <text not clear>.
"You see," said Dr. Evans, who served half-time (two Sunday out of the month) at the Fairhope Baptist Church and supplied wherever he could get work on other Sundays, "we try, to get the best balanced diet for the small amount of money we have. Now for breakfast we have oatmeal and since we have the cow we can have milk, but for the last three years we have had to use canned milk for coreal. Sweet milk and cream have been too expensive. At supper we have some milk and bread and very often canned soup. But of course we eat out - on invitation - a great deal but since Mother is unable to get around much we nearly, always stay, at home. Now on Sundays we always have a chicken dinner or a nice beef roast with mashed potatoes. It seems to me that our meals have been balanced enough but the doctor says that Mrs. Evans is suffering from a minor pellagra and my information is that pellagra is caused from malnutrition. I can't understand it."
Mrs. Evans had been suffering for a long time with some sort of stomach ailment. She had refused to go to a doctor for years because she could not afford it. Upon the insistence of some of her children she had gone to a specialist in Mobile who said she had pellagra, treatad her, prescribed a diet, and because she was a minister's wife, made no charge. He set a regular schedule for her to come back to see him, "But", said Mrs. Evans, "I feel like a charity patient. I cannot afford to pay, him and he insists on making no charge. I'd rather try to get well myself."
"You see," explained Dr. Evans," we make such a small amount of salary, here, only, thirty-five dollars a month, when they, pay it, and the State Board pays me twelve dollars a month. It isn't enough. We are trying to buy our home and then we have a little car to pay on, the water bill, light bill, fuel bill and servant bill have to be met. Mother is unable to do any, housework and since I have to be busy, a great part of the time I cannot help la the house much. Well, the bills are just tee heavy, for us,"
"I can remember when people need to feed the minister and his family. Lots of times when the children were young I have had ay, buggy, and later a car, filled with corn, potatoes, pork, hams, chickens, eggs, butter, and all kinds of green vegetables. But people don't do that any more. They have forgotten the old ways. The automobile and rapid communication have made a different race out of county, and little town people. Few of them go to church and so of course our collections to carry, on the church work, are snail. But I have always held that the Lord will provide and he has never failed us yet. We have never gone hungry, nor been without clothing.
"Even a visiting minister today gets little notice whereas he used to be the 'man of the hour'. Let me illustrate. I visited a country, home where large preparations had been made for the minister's reception, the usual preparation of a big dinner with fried chicken as the 'Piece de resistance' was prepared. When we had all started to eat dinner a little boy, yelled from behind the kitchen door where he was hiding, 'Ma, that preacher's got my, gizzard'. You see, even though the baby boy liked to have the gizzard, everything was given to the preacher in the way of courtesy end reverence. Not so today.
"Well, I need twice as much as I make today to pay all my, necessary bills. A minister has to dress well, visit sick people, marry the young, bury the dead, be a hail-fellow-well-met in town, visit the service clubs and be a member if possible, visit the schools and deliver chapel talks, deliver graduation addresses, patriotic addresses and make any number of call visits on human welfare constituents as well as perform many unnamed services. All this takes money, for transportation, for clothing, and requires attention to duty all hours of the day end night. Now, I'm not kicking against the pricks but one just can't do it and do it well when one has to worry, about insufficient income. I can remember when the children were small, tea to twenty years ago, when my salary was $1800 a year plus all the ether little extra courtesies and foods that ministers got. Even with tea children in the family we lived well. We had plenty to eat, and although there were lots of clothes that Mother had to make over for the smaller children, we still wore clothes that were respectable and looked nice.
If it were not for the help that the children give us we couldn't live, even as well as we do.
"I always say," said Mrs. Evans, "where there's a will there's a way."
"But," said I, interrupting for the first time, "of course you knew all this when you started preaching, didn't you?"
"Certainly." said Dr. Evans. "When I started preaching I was a farm boy who lived with a grandfather la Mississippi. He was a minister and I ought to know the life. Besides, Mrs. Evans' brother was a minister. He's the Editor of the Baptist State Paper In Georgia now at Atlanta. But I felt the call to preach and after I had become a father I decided to preach. I just couldn’t get away from the call. It was after three of the children were born that I fully realized that I must have more than a mere grammar school education.
"I sold the farm, took the family to a town where there was a high school and when my two oldest children started to grammar school <text not clear> to high school. I couldn't do all the college work and keep up with my churches too, so it took me a longer time. But I preached and looked after the family which had increased to six children, three boys and three girls, by this time.
"Then I was called to a full-time pastorate. Here we moved and built a new church and a large congregation. I pastored six years there, the longest time at any one church in my forty, years of preaching.
"During those forty years I have pastored at eighty-two churches, served 11,746 church members, and preached and held revivals at a great many churches. I have married 8,274 couples and buried mere than twice that many people. I feel that the Lord has blessed my work."
By this time the dinner was over and we went and eat in a cozy living room, which, they told me, was furnished completely by the children.
"And," said the minister, "we're proud of our children. There are ten of them, nine living. The baby, Mary Ruth, passed on by an accident five years ago when she was only fourteen. She was a sweet and dutiful child, always happy and very smart. She was not end of help to Mother.
"Our oldest child has been the principal of Livingston High School for years. R. L., besides being a school teacher is a minister and pastors country churches. He has done well and has a wife and three nice children. They always come to see us on holidays end send us money and produce from a farm that he owns in Alabama's Black Belt. His wife is a daughter of an old aristocratic family of Sumter County. We always wanted all three of our boys to be ministers but God sometimes does not see things the way we want them. When our second son, Lawrence, was a young boy he wanted to go away, from home and see the world. We couldn't stop him. Sometimes we didn't hear from him for years but he returned last year. He is a naturalist and has worked for scientific institutions in many, parts of the world. He is the only one that has traveled a great deal. Be lest his health in the tropics, got jungle fever, and a fire and tornode destroyed all his property, in California, where he had a home. He came here where we have been for six years and has married; is getting over his fever and doing very well. All through the years he has sent us more financial all the. Then children put together.
"The oldest girl, Beatrice, married a young minister in Mississippi and they are pastering a small town church. They have three children, a lovely family. She finished Woman's College. Then there's our other son in Florida, John, who is one of the best ministers in Florida. He has a lovely wife, (she was a preacher's daughter) and three children & they live in Florida, and are getting on well. Eunice, the next daughter, is married to a fine young man. He's an executive in a paper mill. They have one child. Lois, the next, child, recently, divorced her husband in Atlanta, Georgia, and has taken up her abode in Jacksonville, Florida, where she is a leader in young peoples church activities.”
Here the Minister paused and seemed to consider some question in his mind. I took occasion to ask if he condoned divorce.
"No, I can't say that I do. The new testatment teaches that there is only one cause for divorce and I guess Lois had it, according to all I hear. But I do not re-marry people who have been divorced. I can't find any grounds for it in the Bible."
"But," said Mrs. Evans, "there are times when it's better to live apart than go on with the farce that some people have to put up with."
"Our next child is also a girl, Willie Marguerite, she is considered by some to be the most beautiful girl in the family. She finished Judson College and began to work in Live Oak, Florida, where she fell in love with Harry Horn, manager of the Standard Lumber Company. She married him and they have one little boy now. They are good substantial Christian people working in the church whose pastor is her brother, John." "And Willie helps John a great deal," said Mrs. Evans.
"Christine," continued the minister, "is our commercial daughter. She wouldn’t go to college but started to work in a Mobile department store as soon as she finished a business college. She married a young postal employee and they have been transferred to Foley, where her husband, Raymond Welch, works in the Post Office. They're both active in church work and come to see us often. Our youngest left college to marry William Mason, son of a local druggist. Sybil and William live in Montgomery where he is employed as an auditor in one of the departments of state. They have a fine new baby boy. Sybil is our baby now and a beautiful Christian girl who, with her husband, takes great interest in church affairs. They send their tithe to me as part of their church work. All of the children have college degrees except two and one of them has three. While some of them were in college I finished my, Seminary course at Fort Worth, Texas, to become a Doctor of Divinity. It has been a hard struggle, but the Lord has always provided."
"Of course, "said the minister, after a pause, "it has not always been pleasant, nor have we had everything that we should have had in the home for the enjoyment of life, but Mother and I are happy that we have brought up nine children who are taking their places in life and making a stand for the better things as they, ought. We are alone now but hardly, a week passes but some of them visit US or send us something. Guess we couldn't get along without them. We have a cow, she's dry now; and a few chickens. We've never been able to own a home since I started preaching because the money had to be used for the upbringing of the family, and their education. But we're trying to buy this home now."
It is a nice stucco bungalow; not beautiful but comfortable. A long living room is flanked by, a bedroom. The dining room adjoins it on the north canter and on the east the minister's study, whose walls are lined with many books, is a cozy, den. Two more bedrooms, kitchen, sleeping porch and bath complete the modestly furnished house. A long screened porch crosses the front of the bungalow. The assemble is pleasing. The house has a radio, an electric refrigerator, electric range and a piano. Of course, there must be a piano in a minister's family, he told me. "Why, do you know that there is not a member of my family who does not play, the piane, at least by ear! We're Welsh and like music. The violin, saxophone, banjo and a number of other instruments have been played by the children. We couldn't get along without the piano. I always play it when I feel blue and Mother plays it when she feels well. We're fond of this one for it has a good tone and there is - as with nearly everything in the house - a story, behine it."
And the minister sat at the piano and demonstrated his ability.
His fingers are getting stiff, for he is sixty-three-but he still plays well.
"Yes," said the minister's wife, in answer to my question, while his fingers were still moving over the keys, "yes, I've been pretty, active myself. You see a family, of ten children is no small task. Besides sewing for them and looking after them in a general way. I have taken a very active part in church work. It has been a long time since I've missed a regular preaching service - until I was ill enough to go to bed recently. I've always led prayer-meetings when necessary, organized and led Women's Aid Societies, taught Sunday School and looked after children's activities. That has been especially, true the last few years when there have been so few leaders in church work. There's a meeting of some kind nearly every day, in the week. My husband is often called away on a mission of mercy, when a meeting convenes and I sometimes lead it for him. And then he spends the mornings in his study and visits in the afternoon. It is so necessary, to visit the sick and shut-ins as well as other members of the congregation."
When the minister's wife stopped I asked her what were her amusements.
"If you mean picture shows and such entertainments, we never go to a show. I've never been to more than six picture shows in my whole life. We have too many other things to do. And there's more wholesome entertainment reading a good book then can be found in any show. We have lots of church picnics, entertainments end young people's parties. We help organize them and enjoy, it because the young and old seem to have a good time. We try, to do this as much as possible because we feel that if we keep the children busy with wholesome fun, they will not get into mischief, There is too much opportunity for them to start bad habits and bad companionships at public dances so we think the best thing is to keep the young people busy, with something else - something constructive as well as entertaining. Yes, we encourage them in all sorts of clean sports. It's good for them.
You see, the hope of the nation is in the young people."
Mrs. Evans stopped talking when her husband quit playing the piano.
"Now there's one other thing,” said the minister, "you can say, for me that there is only, one thing that will save this nation and pull it out of the depression and all the labor and war troubles. That's Christianity. We need more Christian homes and more people who follow the teachings of the Saviour. No family, has ever contributed any lasting good to the nation that was not a Christian family. Today there is very little home life. Until we get back to the home life that is Christian, we will never have peace and prosperity, in this or any, other country, Christian families are educators and leaders. They don't have to be school teachers to be educators. They, can be educators in the way they, live before other people. That's the way we've taught our children and there is not a one of them who has not made an enviable record. They have established Christian homes and are associated with the work of the Master. When the Nation as a whole adopts this simple remedy war, labor wars, capital wars, aggrandizement, greed and depressions will cease. You can write that for me." And then he changed the subject.
1/18/1939
S.J.
