Rose Shepherd
No. 177
March 5, 1937.
JACKSONVILLE'S FIRST AUTOMOBILE
(John Einig, Inventor)
Personal interview
John P. Einig, (son)
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mr. Einig says: "My father perfected the first automobile in the south, which was the third model in the United States. In 1903, he <text not clear>eured a boiler and engine from the Chicago World's Fair that had a tripod leading up from the frame and four wheels. It was equipped <text not clear>a horse saddle, stirrups and everything complete, and had a steering wheel three feet in diameter. The little steam boiler held 200-lbs. <text not clear>steam. He attached a gasoline tank that carried 60-lbs. of pressure.
"My father, with the assistance of Mr. Chapman, of the Chapman Carriage Factory, designed and made a surrey and attached it to the running gear with the above engine equipment. The driver sat in a front seat, while the passenger sat facing in the opposite direction in the back.
"The gasoline tank was right under the feet of the driver in the forefront of the vehicle and the boiler was placed directly under the front seat.
"The wheels were five feet in diameter and had hard rubber tires. The first "speed-way" was up and down Bay. st., perhaps the leading business thoroughfare of that period, and here he used to drive his machine at the stupendous rate of the miles an hour, frightening the children and scaring all the horses and chickens.
"He would give almost anybody a ride, although some felt they were risking their lives in accepting his invitation, and often he carried boxes and packages back and forth trips to and from his work with the S. B. Hubbard Hardware Company.
"The engine did not have a condenser, and as the automobile proceeded it was accompanied by a great cloud of steam, which made such a fog it was hard to distinguish the occupants, and the noise was terrific - almost like a pile-driver.
"He met much opposition with the City father, as they considered much a "contraption" a menace to traffic of the City, and he appeared before the City Council several times, taking about two weeks before he would obtain a permit to even try out his machine. He never obtained a patent on this first machine.
"The second "horseless carriage", which was run by gasoline and electricity, my father bought outright. This he also secured from the Chicago World's Fair. It had been the property of the German Kaiser Wilhelm and had headlights with his coat-of-arms four feet high of shining brass. This was sold to an Englishman for one thousand dollars, and was boxed up and shipped to him in England.
"The first machine was assembled at the factory of the Chapman Carriage Company. My father did the work on the engine in the shop of S. B. Hubbard Hardware Company.
"He built another which when placed on sale was bought by a new fork man, but unfortunately he could not operate it for some reason or other. My father went to New Fork City, and after vainly trying to get the auto to run, he refunded the purchaser's money, had the machine hauled thru the streets by a team of horses to the Clyde Line Docks and shipped it back to Jacksonville.
"After considerable work, it was deemed satisfactory and sold <text not clear>Coone & Golder, Plumbers, who converted it into a truck and used it in their business for several years.
"Shortly afterwards, Charles A. Clark became the owner of the second automobile in Jacksonville, and J. E. T. Bowden, a former Mayor, has the proud owner of the third.
 TEST STEAMBOAT WHISTLES:
"My father, who was a natural inventor, also built in 1880, the original Steamboat whistle, which serves as a model for all the <text not clear> now used on ocean vessels and steamboats of all discriptions - of fact, every time you hear a steamboat whistle blowing you may be sure it is the one of my father's invention, since in all sorts of water navigation it has come to be recognized as the general equipment for this purpose. This he patented, and the whistles come in sizes from 1-1/2 inches to 12 inches.
"It is interesting to know that in those early days my father did not seem to regard patents as important in connection with his work, but Pat Crowley, an old time friend of his in Jacksonville, took him aside one day and said: "John, if you do not get a patent on that steam whistle, I'll take it out myself."
"My father then considered the matter seriously. He did not have the money necessary to cover the legal cost of securing a patent, so he temporarily gave up his position with the S. B. Hubbard Co. <text not clear> went o work on a Schooner leaving the Harbor of Jacksonville, working his way to Washington, D. C., where he staid until he had been awarded the patent for this useful invention.
"I very well remember my father used to get a big kick out of staying up each New Year's Eve until midnight, so that he might hear the whistles, as every one that blew was one of his make.
"The famous whistle at the plant of the Jacksonville Water-works he built in 1880 also. It is made of copper, most of the work of which has done in S. B. Hubbard Company's shop by James Patterson, my father's brother-in-law, a coppersmith. My uncle was a very large man, and in his honor my father named the whistle "Big Jim," and thus it is still known today, heard morning, noon and night regularly by the citizens of Jacksonville, calling then to work, to lunch and to end their day's occupations, and sounding a general continuous warning in case of large <text not clear>res or other disasters. Thus it has become a Jacksonville institution.
"One of the next whistles he built after "Big Jim" and the steamboat whistles, was a whistle for the drawbridge of the Florida East Coast Railway across the St. John's River here, where it was used constantly for twenty years.
"Big Jim" which he fashioned by hand himself is of copper, while all the other whistles are made of brass."
"An interesting point in connection with the first automobile which he sold to the New Yorker was the humorous booklet which this man wrote about his "horseless carriage." He made quite a joke about it <text not clear>booklet was widely read.
"Another humorous incident relates to a little accident which a father had in operating his first automobile along the City streets, <text not clear>it collided with a small boy on a bicycle, not injuring the boy, <text not clear>smashing his bicycle. My father promptly bought him another; and fate or not, when he went to New York to try to adjust the first purchases complaints which ended in his buying back the automobile and <text not clear>it back to Jacksonville, the first thing that met his sight on the <text not clear>de Line Docks was this self-same boy, homesick, saying "You known Mr. Eining, I don't belong up here, take me home," and my father brought him back also, along with the auto which would not run on New York streets but become the first truck operated in Jacksonville, "and true/to the tradition of "Florida sand," lived out the usual period of usefulness of such a machine."
Mr. John Einig was a highly honored citizen of Jacksonville. he died in 1912 and is buried in Evergreen Cemetery here.
