Original Names	Changed Names
Roy Harris	James Tarter
Edgar	Tony
Louise Spruill	Sarah Boone
Charles	Buddy
John Parker	Bill Means
Esther Taylor	Geneva Marker
Date of first writing:	June 10, 1939
Person interviewed:	Roy Harris (white)
Address:	New Bern, N. C.
Occupation:	Rural Mail Carrier
Writer:	Mary M. Phillips
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 3,000
LOSS OF FAITH
A sulky looking young man, tall and well-built with blue eyes and curly brown hair, went down the steps. Then he got in an old roadster and drove away.
"That," said James Tarter, "is my son, Tony. He thinks I'm awfully mean to him because I just told him that he'd have to get a job of some kind and stop loafing all day. He might not find just the job he wants, but I believe he could get something to do. He doesn't know what he wants. He can't decide on any job. For months he talked about getting on the highway patrol work, and now that he has been accepted he can think of the most excuses not to go. He'd better go or else he'll have to get out and shift for himself. I can't see why he doesn't have any more ambition. He went to high school and made good grades in the commercial course. I wanted all my boys to have a better education than I got, for I quit school in the seventh grade and see where I made a mistake. I could have gone through college but I just wanted to work.
"I sent him to college, and he forgot what he'd gone for. He tried to see how much fun he could have, and then he began to have trouble with the dean. He did manage to finish the first year's work, then he came home and got a job and said that he'd had enough school. In the early summer he went to Mississippi with the National Guards and was gone for several weeks. His mother persuaded him to go back to college, so he went back in the fall. For the first few months his reports were fine, his conduct was good, and he did well. Then the trouble started. In February he came home. He hadn't been expelled but he was asked to leave."
James arose and began to fill his pipe. He, too, was tall and in his light sport clothes and shoes he looked almost as young as his son. His face was unlined and his hair was thick and black.
"My eldest son has caused me more worry and sorrow than Tony ever has," continued James. "From the day he was born it was my dearest wish to see him enter West Point. His mother was as anxious as I, and he was taught from a baby that someday he would go. He studied hard and graduated from high school with high honors. He went to college and made the highest grades in the history of the college. He was still not old enough to enter West Point and there was no vacancy, so in the fall he entered the University. He took all the extra courses in math and continued making good grades. Then, just a short time before graduation, I got a wire that he had been accepted for the next appointment. That was the happiest day of my life.
"In the meantime, he had fallen in love with Sarah Boone. I never thought either was serious, and that was the worst mistake I ever made. They were more in love than I'd thought and as soon as he got over the thrill of being appointed he began to get homesick. He kept writing and telling how lonesome he was and how much he wanted to see us, so when he wrote and said that he could come to Philadelphia for Thanksgiving in order to see the Army-Navy game I planned to go. Sarah went also. Things went along fine for a little while, but soon he wrote me that he'd failed an examination. He came home, then he went to spend a few days with Sarah and next thing I knew he was working. I didn't know then, and I still don't know, what he is doing, but he says that he is making more than he would have made in the Army after twenty years of work. He never writes to me now and I haven't seen him since. I still can't see why he and Sarah haven't been married before now.
"Buddy is different from the others, but I reckon he'll change, too. If he doesn't he'll be the pick of my crowd. He's only sixteen, but he buys all his clothes, pays all other expenses, and he even has a bank account. He carried papers, worked at the Western Union and did all kinds of odd jobs. Then last Christmas, during the rush, he went to work at a department store. Since then he has worked every Saturday, and he's even gone down after school to do any job that he could.
"It's no wonder that he likes a store, for I reckon it's in his blood. I almost lived in a store when I was growing up, for my father owned and operated one of the largest general merchandise stores in town. There was no need for me to work but I just liked to be moving around. I couldn't loaf.
"I never cared anything about going to school. I wanted to get in the store and work, but Papa made me go to school. If he had lived I would have finished school, but he died when I was eleven years old. I was too young to take charge of things, and Mama knew less than nothing about the business so she leased the store and we lived on the rent from the real estate.
"I had to have spending money, so I went to Mr. Bill Means and asked him to let me work for him after school and on Saturday. He gave me a job, and from then on my mind was completely off my studies. I did finally manage to get in the seventh grade, but I made such poor grades that Mama told me I might as well quit school and go to work. Mr. Means took me on as a regular clerk and in those days stores stayed open as long as there was a customer. I worked all day and part of the night, but I never minded.
"Soon I began to think I was grown and began to go around with the girls. I soon settled down to one girl, and we were engaged but she didn't suit Mama and I was too young to go against Mama's wishes. The girl was a Christian Scientist and that was the only fault Mama could find. I loved her better than I'll ever love anybody else and I'll never forget her. I had given her a ring, but when Mama objected to our marriage I sent all her letters and presents to her and she sent me the ring. But I told the delivery boy to take the ring back to her and tell her that I wanted her to keep it, for no other girl would ever wear it.
"After that, I kept my love affairs to myself. I met many girls but I cared nothing for any of them. Then I met Geneva Marker. I didn't love her as well as I had the other girl, but I liked her better than any other girl. So after going to see her for a year we decided 'to get married. I was only getting $7.50 a week, but she seemed to think that was enough for us to start with. I rented an apartment and we bought enough furniture to use for awhile.
"I worked for Mr. Means for nearly a year after that, but we were having a struggle to keep expenses paid. Then Mr. Means went out of business and I was out of a job. Geneva's mother was sick, so we thought it would be a good time to go to see her. I am glad we went when we did, for her mother died about two hours after we got to the house. We stayed there then until everything was straightened out, and I Knew I had to get back to find a job of some kind. We came back on the boat and when it docked a fellow gave me a job.
"I had been saving my share of the rent that Mama gave me, and I went out and borrowed every cent I could. I rented a store by the bridge and stocked it with groceries. I opened the store for business September 1, 1913 and on September 3, we had the worst storm in history. The bridge was blown away and I had to work all night to get my stock off the first floor, for the water was running across the floor. I saved most of it and I knew my business was ruined, but to my surprise it increased. All the people across the river had to get to town on a ferry, so they stopped at my store because it was near the river and they could get their groceries down to the ferry with no trouble. I did a rushing business. I paid back all the borrowed money and bought a place out in the country. I had a nice five-room house built, and the whole thing, including the bathroom fixtures and plumbing, didn't cost but $900.
"It was a good thing that I built the house, for when the new bridge was completed my old customers forgot all about me. They would pass by the store without turning their heads. Still I was successful for a while longer, then people began to run up big grocery bills and when I tried to collect they traded at another store.
"As soon as the house was finished we moved, and I bought four head of cows. I thought I could help make expenses with the milk, in addition to having all we needed. I bought several hens, some roosters, geese, and a few turkeys. With a garden, our feed bill was low.
"Soon the store began to fail and I sold all the stock at a sacrifice. I was through with trying to make a living in town. I went to the farm, and from that July until the next fall we got our living there. I got up and milked the cows while Geneva fixed breakfast. After breakfast I went to town with the milk and made my deliveries Sometimes there would just be enough money to pay the feed bill, but that was always paid. We sold eggs, vegetables, milk and butter. I had planted an acre in turnips and we had them to fall back on. I never wanted to see another turnip as long as I lived. Of course, we had plenty of milk, chickens, and fruit, but we had very few other groceries.
"Late in the summer I lost the best Jersey cow. One night when I came in from plowing I saw the cow out in the pasture. The other three were near the barn, so I went to see what was wrong. When I got near enough I saw that she had tripped on the chain and broken her neck. When she fell one horn stuck in her side. I couldn't sell her for beef, so to make a little money I skinned her and sold the hide for $10. The loss was great, for I had paid $75 for the cow and fed her three months without being able to milk her.
"I got through the winter without any more trouble, but early in the spring I went down in the swamp to get a load of wood. Geneva went with me, for she was expecting a baby in August and hated to stay by herself. While I was getting the wood she walked around and found some green grass growing in a warm sunny spot. She got my knife and cut some to take home to the chickens, for they needed something green. Next morning I got up early and went out to milk. The chickens had been flocking around me while I milked, but that morning I didn't see a one. My old turkey gobbler didn't show up either, and he always strutted around until he was fed. By the time I finished milking I had forgotten the chickens, but when Geneva went to get the corn to feed them I remembered that I hadn't seen any. We ran to the chicken house and opened the door, and all were lying dead on the ground.
"One day I was offered a job in a grocery store for $5 a week, but that was $5 more than we had. For the next few months I worked harder than I had ever worked before. I got up every morning and fed and milked before breakfast, than I had to deliver that milk and be in the store by seven o'clock. At night all the stock had to be fed again and the night milking done. I averaged eighteen hours a day.
"It was about time for another streak of bad luck, and it soon came. I had neglected my water barrel and it began to leak, so I was driving bands around it to hold it together. A piece of steel flew off the band and hit me in the left eye. There was nothing to do but go to the hospital. The doctors got the steel out, but I lost the sight of the eye. The steel was no larger than a pin point, but the doctors charged $300 to get it out. Mama went with me and she still has the steel. She said that she wanted to keep anything that cost her that much.
"Early in December I was downtown and met the register of deeds. He wanted to know how I would like to work in the post office. I told him that I would be glad of the job. At that time a carrier only got $600 a year, but that was a regular salary and better than what I'd been getting.
"Just three days after I went to work as a regular Mama fell and broke her hip. She wanted us to move in with her, for she couldn't depend on the girls as they were too young and were both courting. We leased the farm and sold all the cows but one. I thought I was rich, so I bought a car and after supper I would take Geneva and the baby and one of the nurses for a ride.
"One night we went out and when we came in one of the girls was out on the porch crying. I asked her what was wrong and she said it looked like I thought more of other people than I did my own sisters, for I always carried them out. I said more than I should, and then Geneva got in the argument. We were right by Mama's window, and she called us in her room. She agreed with the girl and said that after the way things had turned out she thought it would be best if Geneva and I left the next day. I wanted to get out that night, but the baby was asleep and it was too late to get our things together.
"Things went along smoothly then. I knew how much money we could spend and I still sold milk and vegetables. Geneva didn't have enough to do, so she persuaded me to build a filling station in a corner of the yard and she could run it while I was at work. I hesitated for a long time, and I believe if I had let it alone everything would be different. It was a mistake to leave her in the station, for there was a lot of gossip about her and another fellow.
"One day I went home and found the oldest boy sitting on the back steps. He had cried until his eyes were red and swollen, and I asked him what was wrong. He said that his mother was gone. I went in our bedroom to see if I could find a note or anything, and all her clothes were gone. The two youngest boys' clothes were gone, too. I knew in my mind that she had gone off to see this other fellow.
"Geneva stayed away about four months, then she wrote me to go to her home. Well, I went down to see her and she and her daddy and I had a long talk. She wanted to go back home to take care of the children, and her daddy said he knew she had done wrong but it would be a favor to him if I'd take her back. I liked the old man and still do, so I told her to pack her clothes.
"About that time I began to get raises and, with the farm and the station, I was making a good living. I didn't feel the same toward Geneva, but for the sake of the boys and to Keep talk down we lived together and tried to get along. When I got my vacation that summer we went to Chicago, Canada, and came home through New York. We carried a load with us and between the crowd we had a pleasant trip. We came nearer to liking each other again and probably things would have been all right after that, but she got to seeing this other fellow again. She did stay home though, but there was a lot of talk.
"Later, this fellow had a bad wreck, and she went to see him regularly. After he recovered his mind was affected and he had to go to the asylum. She didn't say a word to me or the children, but she packed and went where she could see him every time possible. She stayed right there with him until he died several months later, then she came back home to live. I never went around her, but I saw her once in awhile in town.
"Her father sent for me again and I went back to see him. He begged me to take her back for her sake as well as the boys'. She cried and said that she only wanted a chance to live with the children again, for they were the only things she really loved. By that time it didn't matter to me, for I no longer felt a bit of love for her. I closed the filling station, and it stayed closed. Geneva raised the devil, but I meant what I said.
"I do believe that Geneva did everything she could then to make up for the way she had acted. Strange to say, I, who had stayed home and nursed as well as work, began to run around with other women. I wasn't satisfied with one; I went out every night and with a different one. Then I found one that I especially liked and I went to see her every night for three years. Of course, in a small place everyone soon knew how I was doing and my reputation was handed around by everybody. It was a disgrace for a woman to even be seen talking to me.
"I stayed at home at night and provided well for the family. The boys were getting older and it was taking more money, but I was making more than I'd ever made. Our house was well-furnished. We had an electric refrigerator, and I bought every new convenience that Geneva mentioned. The living room was comfortable with an overstuffed suite, radio, piano, tables, and my own chair. She did everything she could to keep me home. She had big dinner parties and dances at the club, but I still filled my dates.
"Finally things got to such a point that I couldn't stand them any longer. I had absolutely no love or affection for her and I was miserable about the whole thing. The boys knew I was running around and naturally their sympathy was for their mother. I couldn't blame them, for in their eyes she was perfect. Then one night Geneva found me with a young widow. The devil was to pay then, so I packed up and left. I came to town and found a boarding place and went to work as usual the next morning.
"I had made up my mind that if I ever left her that I would never go back. Weeks passed and I stuck to what I had said, then she sent for me. We talked, and I told her that I was through. Then there were separation papers to draw up. I gave her the house, the furniture, and the farm, then she asked me to pay her $100 per month. I absolutely refused, then we settled for $25. She was to keep the boys; I was to pay for their education, but she was to meet the rest.
"I got up one morning and found the boys sitting on the front porch. I asked them what was wrong, and they told me that Geneva had leased out the house and all the other buildings. I went to see my lawyer, and he sent for her to come to see him. She came, and he drew up more papers. These gave me absolute control of the boys until they were twenty-one. She signed them, but she called that lawyer every ugly name you could think of.
"My whole family has now deserted me. My mother hasn't been around me, and my sister here in town treats me as if she had never heard of me. The boys visit them, but I can't. You would think that I was the only man who ever did wrong. The best years of my life are now gone and every plan I ever made has failed to go through, so I'll drift along as best I can and see how much more can happen."
LAR
