Approximately 3,900 words.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
THE KELLYS ON WILLIAM STREET
Date of First writing	January 4, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	The Reverend Charles M. Kelly (white)
Fictitious Name
Street Address	305 Williams Street
Place	Columbia, S.C.
Occupation	Preacher
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
Reverend Charles Kelly, pastor of the Nazarene Church (Holiness), was out in the back yard feeding the chickens.
"We like to keep them," he said, "like to have one to eat whenever we want it. These bantams are mostly pets for the children, but they aren't such a bad investment after all. Three of their eggs equal two of the hens' eggs in weight, and they lay practically every day of the year. Those guineas in the coop over there are waiting for the fence I'm planning to build 'round the yard. I'm going to turn 'em out and raise guineas, too. We eat a lot of eggs at our house.
"You want a life story? Mine's interesting-to me. Come into the house and meet Mrs. Kelly and the boys."
The tall, red haired minister put the chicken feed away and we walked together to the house-really a four room annex to the Nazarene church. Both buildings are of wood, the unpainted boards of the church vertical, those of the house horizontal.
"This is a unique plan," I said. "You literally live in the church, don't you? Do you like it?"
"Yes, we do," said Mrs. Kelly, seating us in the simply but neatly furnished living room. Color had been added by the attractive curtains, cretonne-covered chairs, and a bright wool rug which covered the painted floor.
"It does make us have lots of company on Sundays, though. It's so convenient for folks to slip through this door from the church to the living room; but then we like company. Come take a peep at the church. It's much more attractive on the inside." Mrs. Kelly's soft brown eyes fairly sparkled with pride and joy as she talked about her home, modest as it is. Distinctly brunette, she was becomingly dressed, her brown hair arranged in a knot at the back of her head. Her teeth were even and white.
"It's all a temporary arrangement, of course. We built our house in a week. Did it last summer when the mill operatives had a vacation. We hired one carpenter, as foreman, and the rest of the work was donated. Just cost us $300, but we expect to make lots of improvements along."
The door opened and two little boys in pink and blue pajamas came running into the room.
"Mummee, look at tattoo! Daddy, tattoo, tattoo!" they shouted, showing marks of red and blue ink on their wrists.
"We let the boys sleep as late as they want to, and they've just gotten up. We're all sort of resting from the Christmas holidays. Haven't even gotten the house straight this morning."
"They certainly are lovely children, and the picture of health."
"Well, they drink about a gall on of milk a day. Yes, we have a cow now. But, even before we got her, we sometimes bought as much as I seven quarts of milk a day. We believe in giving them plenty of wholesome food-fresh fruits and vegetables, cereals and eggs. We try to keep fresh fruits in the house all the time, and they are free to eat it any time."
"What about Popeye, Bruce? Kike spinach?"
"I like to see Popeye. I fight Jimmie. I like to fight Jimmie." "Yes, strange to say, they both are crazy about spinach," added Mrs. Kelly, "and somebody has to read the funnies to them as soon as the Record gets in the house. The oldest boy, Charles Wesley, is in the second grade now, and can read a little to them. At least, they all enjoy looking at the pictures together."
"Where do they get those lovely blue eyes?"
"From my grandparents, I guess," said Mr. Kelly, "They had blue eyes. On both sides of the house my grandparents were tenant farmers, from Lexington and Richland Counties. When my grandfather Kelly died, my grandmother married John Paschal, the father of John Paschal who is practicing law here now. There was a big family of children-thirteen in all. My grandmother had four; Mr. Paschal had five; and together they had four. Making ends meet and tie was a problem with them, as you might imagine, with that many hungry mouths to feed. So they decided it would be easier to do at the mill, and they moved here to the Olympia Mill.
My father worked in the mill for fifteen years, first as a spinner, then as a weaver, and finally as a loom fixer. I presume he got about fifteen dollars a week. I've heard him say, but somehow statistics just won't stick in my head. He met my mother and married her. She also worked in the mill. They struggled along, doing the best they could. About twenty years ago, ay father decided he'd try the grocery store business, and, for five years, he and Ben Davis were partners and ran two stores. They made money; some weeks their sales ran between $1,200 and $1,500. My father bought a home on the Bluff Road and paid $3,000 cash for it. Everything was going smoothly, and we were happier than we had ever been.
"One fall my father and Davis went hunting on the State farm. They came upon a rattlesnake and, in the excitement of killing it, Mr. Davis accidently shot my father. He died right there in the woods. My mother was left a widow with eight little children, and it wasn't an easy road to travel alone. After seven or eight years, she became so lonely that she married Sam Hawkins, who was employed in the quarry. Mother lost everything she had but her home, and she sold that. Mr. Hawkins works on the R.P.A. now.
"I was born at the mill, on Second Street, but, when I was five years old, my parents moved to their home on the Bluff Road. When I was fifteen years old, and in the ninth grade, I stopped school and went to work in my mother's store. She paid me ten dollars a week and my board. I worked there several years. When I was seventeen, I married Mamie Baker, but she lived only three months.
"Two years later, I had gotten me a job in a Home Store, and there was a pretty little brown-eyed girl working with me as cashier, Florence Chawning, from Manning. Of course, you know what happened. Mo, we didn't have a wedding; just went over to the Methodist parsonage one Monday morning and R. C. Griffeth, the pastor, tied the knot for us. We didn't take any trip, but both of us got off from work for a few days.
"I thought the world of Mr. Griffeth. I was converted the first year he was at Whaley Street, and, although I knew less than nothing about the Bible, I began to teach a Men's Bible Class. The membership soon grew to two hundred. And for the year 1927-1928, we had the second largest Sunday School class in Columbia. I tell you, I had to do some studying to keep ahead of those rascals.
"After our little vacation, we went to board with a friend of ours for a few months. On leaving there, we rented some rooms in the village for about a year, and then we moved to my mother's home on Heyward Street. By that time, I was beginning to feel my lack of education so keenly that I decided to try a year at T. I. I. You know about that school, I guess; how you make your expenses as you go, working two weeks and studying two. We stayed only two or three weeks, however, for we found there were no convenient apartments for married couples with children. We came back here, and I soon found a place in the Home Store again.
"Evangelistic work appealed to me, and, with a partner, I tried independent evangelist work at two different times. But our tent was destroyed both times by storms, and we finally gave it up. Yes, we made a very good living, about twenty-five dollars apiece a week.
"During these years, I preached for the Negroes occasionally, and I recall one experience we had. We arrived at the church about 11 o'clock, by appointment, and by 2 or 3 o'clock the crowd had assembled. The pastor announced that they would take an offering of two or three dollars, which they must have that day. He called for the members to walk right up and put their offerings on the table. Then the brethern passed the plates - frying pans, covered with colored paper and attached to the ends of broom handles. Still there wasn't enough. They lacked seventy-six cents. The preacher announced that the choir would sing till the amount was contributed. Whoever wanted to make an offering would kindly raise his hand, and he would go to him and receive the gift. The choir began to sing, but the response was disappointing. Finally, the pastor announced, 'Big Six is in his pocket', and he apparaisingly looked in the direction of the leader in giving. He walked hopefully towards Big Six and received his offering. Then he announced, 'The choir will continue to sing; we don't lack but seventy-five cents now.'
"But back to my story. About that time, I borrowed money and bought a grocery store of my own. I worked in the store and pastored this church for four years. The church grew out of a whaley Street revival. In these five years, we've grown from twenty-one members to eighty-five. And that means eighty-five; for, if a member fails to attend church in six months, we drop his name. The building was at first an open shed with a sawdust floor. Gradually, we added to it until we made a right respectable house of worship, we think. We've got $1,000 invested in it now. We just leased the land from the Guignards for ten years, and I don't know what will happen. I do know we're planning to build us a new brick church and parsonage somewhere real soon. Yes, the parsonage has water on the back porch, and the fixtures are bought for sewerage and a bath, but the plumber just hasn't had time to put it in. We'll be so glad when we have these conveniences."
A fight was staged between the boys, and, as Mr. Kelly took Bruce on his lap to soothe him, he told us that oftentimes when he is leading Bruce's evening prayer with him, he uses this petition, "And don't let me jump on Jimmie any more." Bruce repeats the words solemnly, and then adds, "But I will jump on him whenever he bothers me."
Mrs. Kelly was reminded of what Charles Wesley said recently. After trying and trying to kill some birds with his sling shot, he came in discouraged. Upon being questioned as to how many birds he had killed that day, he replied, "How you 'spect me to kill birds? They run faster than the rock every time."
Mr. Kelly took up the story again.
"We find it a little hard to live on our salary of twenty dollars a week and keep everything going. But I do some extra preaching along, and I guess I average holding eight revivals in a year. I get about twenty-five dollars a week for that work. This helps us meet the bills. Yes, the car is practically new. The members made a down payment of eighty dollars, and they pay five dollars a week on it. A car is a necessity with me. I have to do more visiting than I really would like to do, since I need so much time for study. But, after all, the personal contact counts a lot, I know.
"I'm due to take a patient to the Columbia Hospital at 12 o'clock," he said as he looked at his watch. "Florence can finish the story. But I have a little time yet and will tell you about an experience I had last spring. Our church is not fanatical on the subject of Sabbath observance, but so many grocery stores in Columbia were sending their trucks to back doors on Sunday morning and delivering a week's supply of groceries that I decided I'd try to put a stop to it. I circulated a petition, and many merchants signed it, saying that they did not want to do this, but competition had forced them into it. Several arrests were made when men failed to comply with the order, but the juries failed to convict. I feel the effort was worth while, even though we didn't accomplish our purpose. Anyway, it was a start in the right direction, and the stores were closed for four Sundays. No other church entered the fight, but Doctor Schackford, Reverend Corbett, and Doctor Setts attended the sessions of court and used their influence to help.
"I surely do feel very keenly my lack of an education," this suave, genial man of thirty years told me. "And I don't mean to stop studying. I've taken four hours a day of home study. Yes'um, a correspondence course, under the general board, and I'm taking an hour every night now at the Columbia Bible College. I'm planning to go to college at Nashville next year."
"Will you go with him, Mrs. Kelly, and perhaps study, too? You're both young, with alert minds."
"Yes, ma'am, I surely will. He won't leave me behind when he starts. I want him to go to school possibly more than he wants to go, but I can't be happy when we are separated. I depend on him so. I hope I can get some one to look after the children, so I can take a course in church methods myself."
After a pause, Mr. Kelly said thoughtfully, "I know I haven't enough education to preach successfully, but I do want to climb. The largest churches want educated men, and I realize what a handicap the lack of education is to me. The more I study, the more I realize I know so little; and I expect to go on with my training. It's the one regret of my life that I stopped school when I did. But when we are boys, we don't see things as we do later. There's one lesspn my father taught me, and I'm glad of it. That's the ability to concentrate. When I'm studying, nothing takes my attention from my work."
Radio enthusiasts listen with much interest, they tell me, to an occasional broadcast by Mr. Kelly and some members of his church. They are always impressed with his choice of words, as well as with his faith, earnestness, and humility.
"Well, if you want to know how I feel about large families," Mrs. Kelly said with seriousness and decision, "I think it's a shame to bring little children into the world when you can't take care of them like you should. If you can't give children an education and proper food, I think you'd better not have them, Children don't have any say-so about coming into this world, and if you can't give 'em a decent living, I say don't have 'em. I don't think it's a bit of harm to prevent their coming, but I don't believe in destroying life. What you can't give, you shouldn't take away."
To all of this sentiment, Hr. Kelly acquiesced silently for a time, and then he added, "Robert Quillen had a good article recently on this subject. Did you see it? Well, it's about time for me to go. I'm glad you came to see us. Florence will tell you all the good things about herself, She's pretty tactful and will forget the rest."
The boys came from the adjoining room, each eating a piece of toast and each with a good sprinkling of soot on his clothes and hands. They had been too quiet not to cause some feeling of suspicion on the part of the parents.
"You've been in the stove again, haven't you? Well, you're fine boys just the same, if you do look like pickeninnies. Come tell Daddy good-by. Take good care of mother till daddy gets back after a while."
When things were quiet, and the boys had been sent to the yard to play in the sunshine, Mrs. Kelly began to talk about herself.
"I'm thirteen years older than Charles, and I tell him I'm that much wiser. These preachers need one practical member of the family to serve as a sort of balance wheel. Yes, that's right, they do 'dream dreams and see visions', all right. I've always been a practical sort of person. I had to be. Father died when I was thirteen years old, and there were six of us children. He was the jailer in Williamsburg County, but he also farmed. He was a good farmer, too. But I reckon that Williamsburg dirt is so good, he doesn't deserve much credit for being successful. He was a renter, and, after his death, my mother bought a home in Sumter. She took in sewing to help give us an education and the things we needed. I remember I was only sixteen when I made my first money selling Calumet Baking Powder. I've worked in a ten cent store office, too. For a while I kept the offices of a doctor and a dentist in Charlotte. And Charlie told you that I worked a long time as cashier in the Home Store. No, I haven't had any commercial course, except a little bookkeeping I took in high school."
A car came up in the yard, and an informal guest walked in. Mrs. Padgett feels it is no intrusion to come to the parsonage at any hour of the day or night, without apologies. Before her husband's death, he was a Nazarene preacher. And that fact, she felt, entitled her to some privilege. Besides, she is an influential member of the Kelly's church, a leader of young people, and they depend on her for many things. Her mother-in-law, who is called "Granny" by all the neighbors, lives within a stone's throw of the Kelly's, and the younger Mrs. Padgett often drops in on her way to see the sick mother. This particular morning, she seemed to feel just like gossiping a little and dropped in to see the Kellys. Even before she was seated in a comfortable rocking chair, she started talking.
"I reckon everybody's missed my gas since I've been gone. Haven't been to town in more'n a week, not since two days before Christmas. Evelyn and me went over to Georgia to spend Christmas with my sisters. We had a mighty good time, too, and the best things to eat. I came a little early to-day. Wanted to see you all and Granny before I go to work. Where's Brother Kelly? No use to ask, though, for he lives in the road. It's an awful grind, this working in the mill every day. Sometimes I'm tempted to quit and stay at home. Reckon if it wasn't for that check coming in every month I'd have quit long ago. Do you know Mrs. Kelly, if Granny's feet are any better? Poor old Granny. She does have a time."
"We're glad you're back. We missed you as much as Granny did, I suspect," said the pastor's wife as soon as she could get in a word.
Mrs. Padgett continued:
"Here I am with this voile dress on and this one slip, this cold day. If it was a steaming hot day in August, I'd have on a heavy print dress, two slips a big canvas apron, and a sweater.
"You all heard about Herbert Mitchum? Yes'um, the old man. They say he's got double penumonia in both lungs and he's too sick to take him to the hospital. Just got sick yesterday, too.
"People don't wear enough clothes to keep 'em well these days. Did you ever see anything to beat these short dresses the little girls wear these times? Honestly, they come up to their little bumpuses. The skirt's no more than a frill below their sweater. And Evelyn's is shorter than anybody elses. No wonder they have to put powder and rouge on their faces before they're twelve years old. You can leave an old automobile a settin' out in the rain and weather and don't pay no attention to it and first thing you know it'll be all faded out and have to be painted over.
"I'm in the worst humor to-day. You all will wish I had stayed in Georgia. Wonder what does make me so cross?
"Lord a mercy; Did you see that hat Miss Moore had on at prayer meetin' last night? That feather was two feet long and sticking straight up behind. The funniest looking thing I ever seen. I laughed right in her face when I spoke to her. I bet if I'd take that stuffed squirrel of Granny's hanging up on her all and put it round my hat with the tail hanging down behind, every woman on this hill would put a squirrel on her hat. Ain't folks funny 'bout things like that?"
Without waiting for a reply to her question, she continued to talk, chewing her gum and rocking back and forth in her chair.
"What you think about Miss Smith dying and they wouldn't have no doctor? I don't believe in no craziness like some folks do. I believe in the right kind of holiness myself. The Bible says, 'Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord!' (Hebrews 12:14). All this sanctification, divine healing, speaking in tongues, and such nonesense, whew, it's bosh to me. Most people wag their tongues too much anyway.
"Did I hear Roosevelt's speech? No, I didn't, and I won't hear the next one neither. I don't like Roosevelt. Got no patience with him. I'm working hard as I ever did and ain't getting a cent more for it. If I'm gonna starve, I'll just kick my feet up on a dry goods box, get me a good book to read, and ait right there and starve. I don't want nobody givin' nothing to me. No sir-ree.
"My light bill come in to-day, and it's too much. I ann't gonna pay that much for lights and live in the country, too. But, shucks, I'm in an awful mood to-day. Got to try to feel better before I go to work or I'll lose my job. I must have eaten too much in Georgia.
"And there's that old car. I'll be glad when it's paid for. I ain't never gonna buy another one 'less I've got the spot cash to pay for it with. I'll walk first. This thing of having to plank out your money for a good-for-nothin' old car every time a check comes in don't suit me.
"You say you'd like to write my life story? Well, by George, it would be one worth reading. Full of good luck and hard luck, and a little bit of love mixed in it. But, geewhiz, I wouldn't tell nobody my life story for a thousand dollars. I come from Georgia, and some of those fellers I went back on over there would spot me sure. No, ma'am, couldn't tell my life story."
As she directed the next remarks to Mrs. Kelly in particular, she fixed her eyes on her and spoke with feeling.
"Don't Hugh Slater know he can't get no crowd over here to-day? Young people's got to work. They can't come to no meetin' Friday afternoon. I can't lose the time myself. He oughter known he couldn't have no young people's meetin' except on Saturday night. And delegates comin' here from Winnsboro and Eastover and everywhere. It's a plum shame. But lemme go before I bless somebody else out or start something else up. Yeah, gimme an apple. I'll need it for lunch before twelve o'clock to-night.
"I'm glad to have seen you folks and sorry I've been so hateful to-day. Don't tell Brother Kelly: he'll turn me out of the church, sure. Evelyn's coming from school by here for the meeting. And I believe I'll just leave my car here till I start to the mill. Good-by.
Near the step, the one step which was needed to enter the house, a good-sized bulldog, white and black spotted, was being pulled about, with two husky boys clinging to her neck.
"I love Pup. Pup goes wid me everwheres I go. Jimmie, you git off. Pup's my dog. Git off, I tell you. Me jump on you, Jimmie."