Rose Shepherd
Interview # 107
August 28, 1936.
HISTORICAL - JACKSONVILLE and SOUTH JACKSONVILLE
Mr. Wilbur W. Swaim,
56 Hendricks-ave., cor Louisa-st.,
South Jacksonville,
Florida.
Mr. Swaim came to Jacksonville with his grand-parents, <text not clear> and Mrs. John S. Swaim, from Montgomery, Alabama, in 1871. He was at that time 17 years of age.
"Jacksonville at that time was about the size of the present city of South Jacksonville. There were no paved streets and very few side-walks, which for the most part were of rough boards. Many a time I have had to stop in my boy-hood trips around down-town Jacksonville to pull splinters out of my bare feet.
"I worked for furniture men, first for Bennett & Kenney, then for W. G. Knapp, who sold out to Cleveland & Son then for Edward F. Clark, afterwards Clark & Leftus, later going into business for myself.
"The furniture we handled in those days, from 1870 to 1890 - <text not clear> decidedly different from the present type. It was plain, a lot of it <text not clear> made, and all of it substantial. We had some upholstered pieces, but any were for the large part confined to sofas or lounges, as they were <text not clear> few chairs. The coverings were the durable horse-hair, mo- hair and some <text not clear> tapestries, etc. The stock came from Boston, Chicago, and St. Louis. The Boston shipments came via Savannah, from which point they came into Jacksonville via the Savannah Line of Steamers. We were too far away from the Grand Rapids and other Northern markets to profitably do business with them. In the early 90's I formed a partnership with Mr. B. H. Chadwick, the firm was known as Chadwick Swaim Furniture company; and we were located in the Byrne building, between Forsyth & Adams-st on Main-st. The building was completely destroyed in the big fire of 1901. However, I had disposed of my interests in the business to Mr. Chadwick, who was a native of Cleveland, Ohio, by the way, and he continued to maintain the store.
"Time paymentsy Yes, we had time payment records, but we did get <text not clear> that it those days - we simply sold goods on credit, and our customers paid us when they could. We lost very few accounts.
"There was no bridge across the St. Johns. My sister married <text not clear>lter <text not clear>thews who ran the Ferry, and he bought some lots and established as home on the South side of the River.
" I was married in 1885, had saved a little money, and I, too, purchased some lots near my brother-in-law, and built a large home which <text not clear> occupied as soon as it was completed, which was in 1886, on Louisa-St., about the Middle of the block West of Hendricks-ave. However, the house proved too large for two people, and I later built this house. The narrow side-walk <text not clear>ound the property is the first concrete side-walk in South Jacksonville. From our front porch in these first days, we could see only three houses between our house and the River towards the Ferry.
"I rowed my own boat across the river for ten years, from 1886 to 1995, and only one day in that time was the water too rough for me to make the trip. What was in an equinoxial period in September, when the waves of the Jacksonville side were too rough to permit the landing of a <text not clear> A wrong wind from the South west caused the high waves.
"When I was a boy we used to get together, two or three near my age, and pay a Negro to row us across the River to hunt in the heavy woods around here. It was ten cents each way - so we did not go very often. <text not clear> game <text not clear> plentiful and we used to have great sport.
"I am met a real estate man, but I have built on an average one house a year on my holdings in South Jacksonville and sold to people for homesteads, for the past forty years.
"There were many passenger boats on the River in the early days; there was the "Pastime", the "Water Lily" operating between here and Green Love Springs, the "City of Sanford" - a stern-wheeler in regular run be<text not clear> Jacksonville and Sanford.
"I well remember "Villa Alexandria", Mrs. Mitchell's estate on <text not clear>is now the Atlantis Boulevard on the River, and have been in the house any times. She did not buy any of her furniture in Jacksonville, it was chipped in from abroad, and from New York and other large centers, where the dealt direct.
"I well remember also the fever scourges, yellow fever, malaria and typhoid - also a very severe small-pox epidemic in the late seventies, with which I had a very personal experience, and there was as much if not more <text not clear>of small-pox than yellow fever.
"Our early family home in Jacksonville was at No. 33 East Monroe-St., and my grand-mother, Mrs. John S. Swaim, had a great many letters, <text not clear>pers and mementos of the period and of our previous home in Alabama. Nowever, when she died, I sold the house to Mr. Zaring, and when we moved to south Jacksonville, boxful after boxful of these old records were dumped at the old all in the back-yard at the above address. I wish I had them<text not clear>
"Mr. Swaim's wife, Mrs. Elizabeth Swaim, was a most gracious and cultured woman, and early in her residence in south Jacksonville formed the book-lover's club," which was an immense success and grew so large met it was lated incorporated as the south Jacksonville woman's club, which has <text not clear> its own location and severed as a cultural center for the <text not clear> for a number of years.
She was a Christian woman and great church worker, and upon her with Mr. Swaim contributed $20,000. as a fund out of which was built the Elizabeth Swaim memorial M. E. Church," of South Jacksonville.
