Whitlock, Tennessee
December 20, 1938
R. C.
WE STARTED OUT THE POOR WAY
The Woods family live on the Charlie Jackson place one and one-half miles from Whitlock on the Puryear road in a large rambling down-at-the-heels farm house which goes with the rented farmland. I was greeted at the door by eighteen-year-old Lama, the young lady of the house, Davis, a husky good natured boy of fourteen; Joy Love, a fat towheaded girl of seven, and little Hugh Joel the baby. They crowded in the door and grinned their welcome.
"This way," Lama said, opening a door and leading me through three large, scantily furnished rooms. "We'll have to go to the kitchen. Ain't got no place to have far except in the kitchen."
In the huge kitchen fireplace a log fire crackled cheerily. In one corner of the kitchen was a small four-eyed box stove on which Idella preparesfor Erie, her husband, and the five children who are at home now, three hot meals a day.
More than once I'd heard Erie say, "I don't git nothing out of life but what I eat. I like it hot. I might as well be dead if I can't git it."
"In one corner of the kitchen there were meal and flour barrels, in a third a big cupboard where food, extra dishes, spices, and a hundred one other things were kept. Also there was a chest piled high with school books and wraps of the three youngest children who had just returned from school, a long dining table, straight chairs with bottoms of inner tubes cut in one inch strips and woven together. Dirty wall paper hung in tags from the walls and ceiling. Two mottled windows lighted the rooms. The long mantel over the fireplace served as a catch all.
"Mamma's gone to Mrs. Walker's to git some sallet for dinner tomorrow. I'll go git her, "Joe volunteered.
I said that very probable, she'd come soon, so Joe sat down.
Joy Love took from the cupboard a huge plate of baked sweet potatoes and passed them around.
"Pap's gone and I'm glad, "Hugh Joel said.
"Why?" I asked in surprise.
"Just because." He hesitated, then continued, "When he's gone we can set up late. We can play checkers and pitch after we've studied our lessons. When pap's here, he won't let us except when somebody comes."
The conversation turned to Christmas.
I suggested, "What a nice place for a Christmas tree in front of that big window."
"Pappy won't let us have a tree," Hugh Joel said. "He don't think they're worth the trouble. Santy don't never bring us much." He fell silent when Idella came in.
A small stooped woman of fifty-six, with raven black hair and clear dark eyes. She was dressed in a clean patched print and a ragged red sweater. She carried a pan of greens. After greetings had been exchanged, she set the children about the chores. "We'll have to help Davis," she said to the girls. "Yo pappy is gone."
Then to me, "Erie's going to hate missing you. He went over to Marvin's to go 'possum hunting. They been ketching the great biggest ones I believe I ever seen. We cooked one a-Sunday that was sure fine with sweet potatoes."
Clovis Woods, a low broad young man with dark eyes and hair, came in a moment or so after his mother. He and the children busied themselves with the chores until the steaming hot supper was on the table. After the dishes were washed in strong lye soap, the family sat about the stove and talked.
Idella said she knew little about her grandparents. "My mammy was a Davis and she come to this country from Virginia. Mammy's mammy died when she was young. Her pappy married again. He had a lot of land but when he died my mammy come to Tennessee to live here with her older sister who'd married and moved down close to Hazel. Mammy didn't ever get much from grandpa's estate. The step-mother got it all. Mammy died when I was six, so I just barely do remember her. Pappy talked a lot about her. Pappy come to Tennessee from North Carolina.
"He settled on North Fork. When him and mammy married they started keeping house in a little one-room cabin with no floor and a stick and dirt chimney. It's still a-standing this very day. That was before the Civil War and they had ten children in all. I was the baby.
"Well, Mammy and the baby stayed by theirselves while pappy was gone to war. They had two mules and mammy shut them up in the smokehouse to keep the bushwhackers from gitting them. Pappy didn't stay to war long. He got tard of it and run away and come home.
"My poor old blind pappy was a good old Christian man. He was blind in one eye. Lost it somewheres in the war. I guess that helped make him tired of the war. He lost the other eye a long time before he died. I can't remember what happened to number two. Pappy lived to be real old.
"After the war pappy and mammy bought some land and built a better house. We children all got a little track of land. I've got twenty-one acres. It ain't no house on it and we couldn't make a livin' on it so I don't guess we'll ever go there to live. I don't feel like I'd like to live back down there now, noways. It was all right when we was there but it's changed so much. I was down there a year or two ago when sister Jane was sick. I went down in the woods where we used to play, riding sassafras bushes and swinging in the grapevines, and to the old sand bank where we dug caves and made frog houses. Used to look wonderful to me. Now it's just a plain patch of woods. Forty years makes a lot of difference.
"I try to rent my twenty-one acres to git enough to pay the taxes. They's about thirteen acres in cultivation. The rest is in timber -- good, fine timber. Why, I sold nine hundred dollars worth at one pop I'm selling some postes now. Some sort of gum wood, they is. Erie says it's two or three hundred dollars worth down in a little bottom. I'd thought I'd git some Christmas money out of them but I ain't collected nothing yet.
"I usually cook seven or eight cakes on Christmas If the children all come home it takes a hogshead to fill them up. I try to give them all the cake they can eat once a year. Then it's sort of scarce the rest of the time.
"I didn't never go to school further than about what we'd call the eighth grade. Kept on going to school right on till I married. I went through my books three times, was twenty-one when I married.
"I remember the first school I went to. It was a little boxed shack set in a patch of hazelnut bushes. They was one little path that wound around in the bushes and if you missed the path you wouldn't never find the school. We had long slab seats with a narrow back rest. We had to set there for hour with slates on our laps and our feet dangling. But we had a heap of fun. It wasn't many years till they built a better school house over at Oak Hill. It was two miles but we went over there. I had an aunt living in Paris and she wanted me to stay with her and go to high school but Sister Jane said, 'Pappy, that would plumb ruin that girl. She'll git uppity to where we can't stand her. She'll be running around and into ever' thing.'
"So Pappy said, 'Well, I guess if that's the case she'd better not go.' "
"Pappy was blind then and sort of depended on the older children for advice. So I didn't go. I've always thought maybe my life would have been different if I could have went.
"They wasn't anything for a girl to do in them days but git married. I met Erie five years before we married and I didn't have many beaux except him. He moved into the country with his uncle's sawmill. They was making heading for barrels. Erie worked there with the mill for three years, then he made two crops before we was married.
"I met Erie one day. I fell in love with him on the spot. He was tall and fair complected with the prettiest blue eyes I ever see. His hair was brown and sort of wavy. My, my! My heart done tricks when I saw him!"
She laughed, "He made a date with me to go visiting and then we never missed being together a Sunday for five years. He didn't never come during the week or Saturday nights but every Sunday from one o'clock 'till ten.
"Me and Erie married in nineteen and four since then we have had a lot of ups and downs -- mostly downs. Erie worries a lot about things but I manage to not worry much. Somehow I've knowed that they'd always be a way. Sometimes I don't see the way and git blue but then usually something turns up and I make ends meet somehow. Sometimes the ends git bungled and stretched but we make it.
"We went to keeping house six weeks after we was married, in a little shack about a mile from my home. I had a feather bed, a box of quilts, and a trunk. Erie had a trunk and a horse and buggy. He moved our things on a slide. Then he come back and got me. We started out the poor way. No installment plan furniture in them days. We had a bed, a stove, a table, some dishes and three chairs to start with. If company come we made a seat out of plank laid on stovewood blocks covered with a quilt.
"I didn't use to git mad. Some of the children said, 'Mammy, I didn't use to think you could git mad, but I guess they's times when you can't help getting mad.' I guess it is righteous indignation if they is such a thing. I mean about Erie. In some ways he's one of these modeled husband. But lately he's got so he likes to take a drink. He does a little running around. Maybe he shoots crap sometimes. Anyhow, the money drops into some hole. And that kind of thing takes time, too, and time is money, you know.
"Oh, we've had a lot of bad luck of one kind and another. We ain't never had no just real bad sickness. Of course, they's been measles, mumps, whooping cough, itch -- children all git the itch at school, seems like -- and such like. That's all to be expected with a gang of children. These days Erie's always complaining he ain't able to work a heap of the time. Rheumatism in his shoulder and knees. Summer before this last I got down. I had a right tight spell and fell off a lot. It was good that Wallace was in the CCC camp. He paid my doctor's bill and for the medicine. I don't know what I'd a done if he hadn't.
"Wallace is enjoying the camp. He's in McKenzie. He's got a car but he don't come home so often. He's got a girl in Huntington and goes there pretty nigh ever Sunday. He's got a buddy that goes and pays the gas bill. He had me raising cain last time he come. Said he was married and wanted to bring his wife home.
"None of my children ever went further than eighth grade, for that's far enough. It's a sin to raise children when you can't do much for them. I've done what I could for the girls, though. I just put all my attention on one of my girls when she gits to marrying age. First, I let up on her when it comes to the work. When a girl's all worked down she loses her looks. Well, I git store soap for her to wash herself with -- that kind that the ads says the movie picture queens uses. Then that girl gits the best clothes in the house and a pair of high heel shoes. Well, she goes to church and dinner on the ground and everything like that so she can meet the boys. When she brings a boy home, I make over that boy. I keep Erie out of sight, because he might say something out of the way. I give the two of them plenty of privacy so they can git to knowing each other. And pretty soon they pop off and git married and. I can start on the next oldest girl. I can do that much for my girls. Anyhow. Boys can take care of theirselves.
"Yes, as I said, we've had a lot of ups and downs. We got a pretty good start once. We bargained for a farm and it was pretty well fixed. That was twenty years ago, and after we'd made several payments the house burned up and burned everything in the world we had. The smoke-house was way back so it didn't burn. It was a blessing that it was summer time. Until we could build a house we cooked and eat in the smoke-house and slept in the hay loft. It was a log smoke-house, so we punched out all the chinking so I could have light and air. It was easy cooking in there because ever'thing was hanging on the wall so handy. In good weather we eat out under a great big magnolia tree.
"We got a right nice little four room house built and for the first time in my married life I enjoyed a new house. But it takes more than a house to live. We worked and worried trying to save and skimp to make the payments until it was actually a relief to move off and leave it.
"We've just rented since then. We've stayed several years at ever place. The depression in nineteen and thirty hit us hard. We was paying two hundred dollars a year rent on a big place and had a big crop. But potatoes got so they brought only ten cents a bushel, so we just couldn't pay the rent. I've nearly always made the living for me and the children. We raise ever'thing we can to eat. I canned a hundred cans of cucumber pickle this year. I sell enough cream and eggs and chickens to keep us going. Ain't been many years since we couldn't sell cream. Now a man comes by to get it twice a week."
Idella showed me eighteen quilts she had made for her boys. "I give Leslie -- he's the married son -- six quilts. I mean to make six for each of the other four. That means twenty-four. I let the girls make their own."
Lama who had sat across the room listening to the conversation showed me some quilt pieces she had cut from the good parts of old coats.
She said that she was trying to get in the NYA Home in Paris. Idella thinks it will be a schooling for her. She doesn't want Lama to run wild as Sister Jane had feared Idella would.
"I wonder what my life will be like ten years from now," Idella said, "when the children is all married and moved off and gone? My little farm may come in handy then. They's enough timber on it to build a good house. We may want to move over there and make a living on the ten acres. You can't ever tell what's coming. But I've got faith.
"I belong to the Missionary Baptist at Foundry Hill. I go occasionally but the preacher over there's just preaching for the money. They's a lot of the members that has fell out with him. Some of the leaders, though, think: he's grand. Why, Mr. Walker over here is a staunch church member. He use to go to every meeting day and he paid well. One day last year the preacher come by and asked to buy a shoulder of meat. Mr. Walker expected him to pay-market price. They figgered up what it would come to. The preacher got in his car and said, 'Well, Brother Walker, you can just take it up in preaching!' Mr. Walker was so plumb taken down he ain't been to preaching since."