SOUTH CAROLINA WRITER'S PROJECT
Life History
Title: WILLIAM DONALD MITCHELL
Date of first writing:  Feb. 22, 1939.
Name of person interviewed: William Donald Mitchell (White)
Fictitious name:  "Mitch."
Street address: Central Fire Station
Place:  Spartanburg, S. C.
Occupation: City fireman.
Name of writer: D. A. Russell
Name of reviser:
"I was born on Sept. 15, 1866, in Fairview township, Greenville County, and am the son of John Mitchell and my mother, Mattie Donald Mitchell, father was a farmer, but during the War between the States, he was superintendent of a yam mill at Cedar Falls.
"I was married to Effie Johnson, of Statesville, N.C., in 1916, and she died in 1928. We had three children, a daughter and two sons. After my wife's death I sold our home on Walker Street, and have been living at the fire station ever since.
"I never had but two week's schooling in my life. This was when I was ten years old and I went to the Fairview school. My mother died when I was eleven years old, and soon thereafter I went to live with my grandfather and worked on his farm. I stayed with him until his death. I was seventeen years old then.
"I hired out then to Lewis Thompson, in Greenville County, for $8 a month and board. I stayed with him for about four years and decided to farm for myself. I averaged around two hundred bushels of corn and eight bales of cotton during the year. I soon learned to buy and sell horses, and in 1894 made up my mind to come to Spartanburg where I secured work with Mr. Finch Alexander, who was running a livery stable. I helped him run the business, buying and selling horses for him. My pay was $10 per month and board. I also received a small commission on the selling of horses and mules. I was with him for three years, or until I was elected a fireman in 1897.
"I am now seventy-two years old and will be seventy-three this coming September. I am the oldest city fireman, both in years and in service. I am also the oldest city employee, they tell me. I have been a fireman for forty-two years, and for twenty-eight years of that time I served as chief of the department. I was the first paid fireman employed by the town. I was elected a fireman on Sept. 20, 1897, during the administration of Mayor Arch B. Calvert. My salary was $30 per month. There were only two pieces of apparatus then-a hose and chemical wagon, drawn by two horses, and a steam engine. Moses Greenewald was the chief, and he received $100 yearly. Bob Wilder was employed as a fireman after me, and later, Will Salder, negro.
"The first fire station was a one-story frame building, with a dirt floor, which was located east of the present city hall on Broad Street. There were two stalls for the horses. Then there was a fire the bell in the opera house was tolled, and the number of rings would tell us which ward the fire was in. Only the hose wagon would respond first, but if the fire was a big one, and the steamer was needed, the horses were unhitched from the hose wagon, brought back to the station, hitched to the steam engine, and started to the scene of the fire. Strips of bacon were used to start a fire in the engine as it left the station, and by the time it reached the scene of the blaze, the old pumper was red hot.
"There were no paved streets then, and most of the time, or rather, a great part of the time, we had to respond to a fire in mud ankle deep. We simply got to a fire the best we could, and sometimes we arrived too late to save the house or building, and could only keep the fire from spreading. We had to depend on the volunteers to respond to every alarm. There were no electric lights then, as kerosene lights were used on the lamp posts. The lamp lighter made his rounds every evening. I remember that Henry Alley was chief of police then.
"Most of the boys always referred to me at 'Mitch,' even after I was elected chief of the department in 1911. That was on Sept. 11. I succeeded E.S. Kennedy, who resigned. I served as assistant chief for five years before my election as chief. Mr. L.T. Cothran, at present a city commissioner, succeeded me as chief of the department in 1933. salary as chief was $196 monthly. present salary, that of a private, is $130.
"I have served during the administration of six mayors of Spartanburg. They were in the following orders Mr. Calvert, John F. Floyd, Boyce Lee, O.L. Johnson, Ben Hill Brown, and the present mayor, T.W. Woodworth.
"When I joined the department, or "when they elected me a fireman, we had about sixty volunteer firemen and four paid members. There were three volunteer companies. They were 'The Champions,' 'The Reds,' and 'The Bonnie Blue,' the last company being Negroes. Chief Greenewald did not live at the department, but stayed at his home. Bob Wilder, Will Salder, the Negro, and myself stayed at the fire hosue day and night. We were on duty for twenty- four hours, and were given a half a night off once a month. Today we have two stations being used, and a third that was abandoned in 1931. There are eight pieces of motorized apparatus, an up-to-date fire alarm system, and thirty-seven men, who work on twelve-hour shifts. When station No. 2 -was discontinued, that put eight men out of work.
"What was the town's largest fire? Well, I am sure that it was the fire that destroyed fifty-nine houses in the Spartan Mill community in 1907. Inadequate water supply, coupled with the fact that it was a windy day, made the conflagration all the worse. All the firemen and volunteers could do -was to prevent it from spreading further.
"I suppose that the red-letter date in the history of the fire department, was on Feb. 8, 1909, when city council signed a contract for an electrical fire alarm system to be installed by the Gamewell Fire Alarm Company. Thirty- five alarm boxes were installed at first, and gradually additional boxes were placed until now there are seventy-nine located throughout the city, which includes boxes at Wofford and Converse Colleges and the General Hospital.
"It takes the fire apparatus less than a minute to leave the fire station after an alarm is sounded. It may seem strange to you, but the trucks can get out quicker during the night than in the day-time. I can explain it this way: After the firemen have retired, and an alarm comes in, all they do is jump into their boots, slide down the poles, jump to their places on the apparatus, and start going. Many times they have to wait for the first round to come in before they start. When an alarm is turned in from a box, it is repeated four times at the fire stations. When the first round is completed, the signal operator cheeks it -with the number of holes punched in the tape, and signals for them to get going. We go by the tape. We know that will be correct. Sometimes, but very seldom, the gong indicator has tapped the -wrong number. Usually it requires less than thirty seconds to leave the station at night. Now, during the day-time, the firemen may be scattered about the house, same doing duties, each as scrubbing, shining the brass, etc., when an alarm comes in, and it quire a few second' more to get out. However, it has never required as a full minute before the trucks left the house and were on their way.
"For the past six years I have been the switchboard operator and answer the telephone at the central station. I do not do any fire fighting now. I guess they think I am too old to do much good at a blaze. Maybe I am slowed up a bit, but I can still get out and fight a fire if needed. It is my duty to see that the alarm, if sounded from a box, tallies with the indicator and the tape. When a fire alarm is telephoned, I must ascertain for sure the correct address from excited persons who, on many occasions, cannot give their own home address. I suppose it is natural for people, especially women, to become excited when their home is on fire. Often an excited woman will merely scream; 'Came quick, our house is burning,' and forget to give the address. I have, on several occasions, had to call back the telephone operator, and find out where the call came from. You see, we request all of the telephone operators to listen in on all fire calls. I have asked excited women where the house was, and they would have to call another member of the family to the phone to give us the address.
"Oh, yes, we have been called upon to perform many unusual requests during the years I have been in service. I think one of the most unusual calls we ever received over the phone was when we raised a ladder to get a drunken man off the roof of a house on East Main Street about two years ago. Also, there was the time about three years ago when a lady living in the Converse Heights section of the city locked herself in the bathroom, and had a neighbor call the fire department. We went out and put up a ladder and she came out the bathroom window.
"About fifteen years ago we went out on Golden Street and pulled a mule out of a well thirty feet deep. First, we got a Negro to go down into the well, tie a rope around the front legs of the animal, and make a loop over his head to keep his head erect. We then pumped the well full of "water and this floated the mule to the top. The animal belonged to Converse College.
"In 1930 we took the extension ladder to a location on East Main Street near the corner of Converse, and got a woman tree-sitter from her perch in the top of a huge tree. She had been up there for two days and nights. It was during the 'tree-sitting craze'. A storm had come up rather suddenly, and she became too afraid to climb down from the swaying tree.
"Several years ago we rescued a dog from a well on Wofford Street, and in 1927 we pulled a frightened cat from a well on Seay Street. One request, however, that we did not fulfill, was that of the lady who called us a few months ago and asked that we come to her home on Hydrick Street and 'smoke some rats out of her basement.'
"But I suppose the most unique request we ever had, through all the years I have been a fireman, was about two months ago when some lady in Converse Heights called over the 'big phone' and wanted to know if we would start a fire in her furnace the next morning at 6 o'clock! Then requests like that come, I don't know whether those making the call are just plain dumb, or whether they are doing it for a joke. At least, they don't stop and think.
"I take very little time off. I stay at the station practically day and night, regardless of the shift I am on. It is home to me now- the only home I have. Two of my children are married, and occasionally I visit with them, and enjoy it. My youngest boy graduated from Wofford College, and is now in training as an aviator for the United States Amy. He was the third highest in his marks when he graduated a year ago. I am very proud of him, and I wish he hadn't taken up flying. But, on the other hand, I think a father should let his children choose their own career in life, so long as it is an honorable one.
"I know that I haven't many more years to go, but I do not want to have any lingering illness. I hope to die in harness-just like old 'Jake' did, when he and 'Joe' were two of the best horses ever hitched to a fire wagon. Now I think I have told you everything about me that's worth mentioning. Tell the truth, guess I have told you too much!"