In an otherwise identical version the following life history is titled "Like Me". The following additional information appears on the top of page 12653: "December 10, 1938," and "Dr. John Adkins, Veterinary." And someone wrote the name "John Doe Aikin," on the top of page 12653. Perhaps this handwritten name was intended to serve as a pseudonym for John Adkins, or vice versa.
Puryear, Tennessee
Dr. John Adkins (white)
Nellie Gray Toler, writer
Edwards and Aswell, revisers
A MAN LIKE ME
"I've done more good to the State of Tennessee than any man living. Go all over it. Known everwhere--Chattanooga as well as Nashville, as good in Memphis as Knoxville. Most any night folks will come up here from Dresden, car and all, jist to git me. Off I go to some far county to see what's ailing a cow or a dog or a horse."
Dr. John Adkins laid his fiddle on the stack of wood piled by the cellar opening.
"Yes, I'm the oldest practicing veterinary in Tennessee. Looking after stock's jist borned in me. My grandfather was a veterinarian. So was my father. Both well-off, too. Owned a lot of land and raised big families. I started to doctoring horses when I was nineteen. I'm seventy now and still at it. Be at it when I'm minety."
An old white mare, chewing a mouth full of hay, stuck her head out of the cellar opening.
"Shuck back in there, Molly. I can't fiddle for you every minute when we've got company. See, Molly's got a good stable down there in the cellar. Dug it big myself. Planked up some of the floor. It's more houselike than a lot of humans' holes, I can tell you. Not dark. Windowed it at the top. Not danky, neither. It's boarded up partways."
Molly cautiously drew bony forequarters into the open.
"It does look like a plain pity for a man like me, the most deserving man in the State. to have as little as I've got left to show for a life of helping others. If people stopped to think how I've done more for stock and man than any man living--but they don't. A prophet's not without honor saving among homefolks.
"Anyhow, I don't know a one of them's got a fiddle good as mine or a mare like Molly. They's not a tune in this world or the next that's not in that fiddle. You got to know how to draw 'em off the strings, though, like me. And Molly's the same as the fiddle. They don't come better than Molly. She can do five gaits without shifting you in the saddle. Crowhops, singles, cat lopes, walks---and stumbles. Bet you if I got her in a State Fair ring, me astride her fiddling, she'd do more'n five and fancier ones than her regulars, too. If I had a few years off me, I'd give the judges something to judge in one of them horse shows. And jist like as not some cow would git sick while me and Molly was off gitting blue ribbons."
He gave Molly's forelock a tug.
"Now you git back down there where you belong. Yes, when I git lonesome I come out here in the backyard and I play for her. They's no better company in the world for a man than a horse. Did you know that? Anyways, not for one that knows animals like I do. I'll have to give her a tune to git rid of her. She'll be all left-out when we go in the house 'less I leave something with her to hum."
Dr. John Adkins tucked his fiddle under his chin. One draw of the bow across the strings and he settled to work. In a quavering mixture of tenor and bass he sang as he played Bull Amongst the Yearlings. Molly finished her mouth full of hay before he left the backyard to go inside the house.
"Horses is always glad to see me coming." said Dr. John. "Hate to see me go. They love me. Never had one to kick me yet. Treat a horse like a human and he'll act like a human. More grateful-hearted, though. I wish men had treated me half as right as horses.
"Don't try to control a horse 'less you can control your own self. They's a lot of folks mouths I'd like to stick a curb bit in. That's if I had hold to the bridle. I wouldn't stick it in, though, it they's old. I'd be soft to 'em then like I am to horses. Then a horse gits old I feed him right. I bruise oats and corn and chop hay for him. You got to mash your oats when every tooth in your head's gone or you wished it gone."
Dr. John pulled the front door key from under the loose piece of tin nailed to the porch.
"That's too good a piece of tin for where it's put. I ought to git it up on the roof to stop that leak. But I can set a bucket under the drippings easier than I can top patch. I guess I'm getting too old. My head got to swimming last time I got up on that ladder and I haven't known yet how I got back down. I'm good for some carpentering yet, I reckon. I built this whole house less than two years ago. Built it all from things I'd found about. The way people throw off good tin and planks and bottle's that's not broke is the reason the world's in the shape it is. Maybe they's some good comes of it as long as they's folks like me with good sense enough to gather them up. I didn't even have to ask nails off anybody when I started to putting up this house. I'd been picking 'em up, all sizes, for years."
He worked at the clumsy lock and chain that fastened the lopsided wooden door. The heavy key turned in the lock. The house rattled as he shook the door open.
"Inside or out it's not like what I once had. But they's about everything in this room a man needs to make living easy. That stove's small, but plenty big for my cooking. I made that lamp myself--the one hung center if the after. Burn grease in it. I jist fitted it to that vinegar bottle to fancy it up. I bet they's not a bed in the state sleeps with as little sag as mine. I roped the springs myself. If you dry grass right and mix it with goose feathers you've really got a mattress.
"You can take a chair. Plenty that's not broken. I never have got around to gitting all their legs in the shape they should be for setting. That trunk there 'longside the chimney's the best easy chair I know. I've got it cushioned for fiddling, with that old quilt. I like to know that something like that chimney's ready for my back if I'm starting to fiddle some big tune. Jist rest your feet on that auto tire. I filled it up with that harness so's to give something to scratch an itching leg if your feet feel itchy."
Dr. Adkins settled on the quilted trunk with his fiddle beside him.
"Most everything in this room is company for me. Things that have gone along with me through good years and bad. That saddle bag hanging by the dresser was bought in Mayfield, Kentucky over fifty years ago. Them jeans hanging alongside were mine when I was eight years old. Sister wove 'em for me herself. Got a pair old phelgms in that leather case on the floor by the table that my grandfather used when he was practicing in North Carolina. I've got a knife in there, too, that's every bit of seventy years old. I couldn't buy a better one today. I fitted a deer horn to it for handle. Why, they's hypo's in that case--two or three of 'em--that's been in the family for years. My family's done enough stock doctoring for it to take a man more than a lifetime to tell it. Still, living right here in the center of things that's stuck by me, they's times when I have to go elsewhere for company.
"I jist pick up my fiddle and git out. The want to go usually comes on me after sun down. Sometimes at late hours of night. If I think Molly needs the rest, I jist slip off soft so's she won't hear me I go straight to yonder graveyard. They's never a hour, day or night, when the voices of the dead aren't ready to speak to the living. I jist go about from one grave to the next, until I find one mounded to my liking. A tombstone, set right, is as good a prop for your back when you're fiddling as any chair ever made. I wish you could hear the music I make some nights, jist talking back to the dead. I can't make it straight off though, one tune to the other, when I git to talking to my lost loved ones. Tears slow me up in fiddling. They's some dead I talk to I'm glad's gone. I know it devils 'em when I can't shut up laughing while I fiddle for them."
He stopped long enough for a good laugh to demonstrate.
"Well they's more for tears than laughs in this world. Here I am the most deserving man in the State left without land or loved ones to cheer me why, my father owned about all the land around here. And I had a fine farm once and as pretty and sweet a wife as a man could ask for Nice home. Plenty horses. Healthy children. Every one of my children have done well--even the old maid one. Sally's still single. She fell in with an old lady who feeds her off the fat of the land jist for minding her wants. Now Emmy married a rich man. They live in Chicago in a house big enough for a good stable. Mary married rich, too. But she had to take an old man to git her money. Both them two have spoken of me living with them. But I'm better content on this little plot of ground. Judge Paschall up in Puryear says it's mine to call my own long as I live.
"I'm not city broke. Besides I wouldn't know every dog- trot in northern counties like I do here. I'd be losing the road. You've got to know where you going when you keep busy tending folk's stock. Up there in Chicago I'd git somewhere that was no place to me. I like a graveyard close by for me to have company with those gone before. Do my part to keep their spirits up with my fiddle. I never heard Emmy or Mary mention a burial ground. Not a word about bringing Molly, either. And I'm not leaving her.
"I've had enough of things jist slipping away from you into other's hands without having mind of it until it's past help. I'm going to stay right here in my own house that I've taken pains to build from other's waste. My two boys is well-off. Least they haven't gone broke in the ways they make their living. Both of them got wives and children. No, they's a lot worse things in this world than poverty and going it alone."
He crossed one spindly leg over the other and loosened the thick leather shoe string in the top shoe.
"When my first wife died I took a notion I was lonesome. Didn't want to live single. Wanted to git married. The Children were grown and gone from home. I saw by the newspaper that a woman over at Murry was like-minded. I corresponded. She came right over to see me. I shined myself up. Had all my horse doctoring stuff round the parlor and hall in sight. Two or three saddles and some good looking harness where she'd have to stumble over 'em. Well, I looked more than I had. She married me for money. I married her for company. Both of us got fooled. She riled me for two years and then left me. Sued me for every penny I had on earth. Got it, too, all six of 'em. She could have killed me dead when I forked that six cents out of my britches pocket. Makes me feel good allover when I think about being done with her forever."
Fixing his fiddle under his chin, he let the bow mix snatches of the Arkansas Traveller and Turkey Bone Bugger. He stopped the jig tunes abruptly. Slowly he played Nearer My God to Thee.
"I have to live with myself and so I want to be fit for myself to know. I want to be able as days go by always to look myself in the eye. I never hide myself from me. I don't want to stand by and watch the setting sun with a heart full of hate for myself for the things I've done. Every day I live my life over from the beginning, from the time father came to Tennessee. The most that's in it is to help horse and human and harm none -- or few anyways. The way a horse looks at me can tell anyone the man I am. Faithful and true. That's Dr. John Adkins."
He laid the fiddle on the quilt, waved the bow in his hand.
"All I need is one look in a man's or animal's eye to know whether he's right with himself or needs doctoring. I don't git the calls I use to. Sometimes no more than one a week. But I go when they call. Glad to. Set up all night with the sick for two dollars. It seems like folks never know a horse is sick till it gits dark.
"Well, they'll always be calling John Adkins as long as their stock gits off their feet. And he'll know jist what to do for them. If they're heaving, he'll wet their hay. If they're snorting and choking at the nose, he'll set fire to a shovel of good coal tar. Tar smoke's the best breathing he can give them. John Adkins is not going to come rushing in a cow lot and stick a good Jersey before he tries to trot down her bloats. The cows these squirt doctors have killed because they're too lazy to lift on their feet and keep 'em on the go! I'm more than glad to go when I'm called to cure the sick. Worries me to think of the good stock's going to die when I'm gone."
The sound of Molly's whinnying came from the cellar through the wide cracks in the floor.
"She's not hungry. I know she's not ridden in the legs. She's not sick. She wants fiddling. You see before you none other than Dr. John Adkins who's going to fiddle a tune to his lonesome mare. It may rain Tuesday. Did you know that?"
A Man Like Me Veterinarian Tenn. Very Good
"Oldest practicing veterinary in Tenn." - slightly off – has fiddle and old horse – children have done well – prefers, however, living alone – plays to dead in graveyard – lives in past.
Features: slightly addled gentleman, who feels that the state is unappreciative of the most deserving man in the state.