NC-439
PERSONAL LIFE HISTORIES NORTH CAROLINA
Name: Isaac (Big Ike) O'Neal	
Address	Ocracoke, N. C.
Occupation	Retired merchant, formerly a seaman and in the U. S. Life Saving Service
Writer	W. O. Saunders, Elizabeth City, N. C.
REAL NAMES	CHANGE OF NAMES
Big Ike O'Nea	Big Jake McCallum
Ocracoke Island	Croatoan Island
On the island of Croatoan, one of that chain of many islands that forms the true coast line of North Carolina, separating its inland sounds from the Atlantic Ocean, lives Big Ike McCallum. A mighty man he has been in his day, measuring six feet two in his stocking feet and tipping the scales at 240 pounds.
At the age of 74 he is still a robust enough man, to all outward appearances, and his speech is punctuated with an infectious laugh and a flashing of good white teeth. His speech is relatively free of the idioms peculiar to this isolated coastland. This is his personal life history as he told it to me in his home on the south end of that picturesque island.
Life was hard when I was a boy. There wasn't but one other family on this island that had a harder life than ours. My father fell through the hatch of a ship when I was a little boy and was crippled for life. He couldn't do any hard work after that.
But we always had somethin' to eat; fish and clams and oysters and crabs. Never had much flour bread; if we had flour bread once a week we did mighty well. Corn bread was our bread.
We had two wind mills on the island that ground corn. When there was no wind the mills didn't turn. I remember we once had a calm for twenty one days. But most families had their hand stones to fall back on at such times. It took a half hour to grind enough corn for breakfast with those old hand stones.
No, we didn't grow corn on the island; we got our corn from the mainland; took salt fish, oysters and clams to the mainland and traded for corn and molasses.
We didn't know what white sugar was; and never saw much of the brown sugar that was used in those days. Coffee? The only coffee we had was parched chestnuts which we boiled and made what we called coffee. Sweetened it with molasses. Most often we drank yaupon tea; just step out your back door and gather your tea leaves. Yaupon still grows wild on the island, but most folks now-a-days hold themselves above drinkin' tea made out of it.
Yes sir! Life was hard. Many a time I had to go a mile to borrow a piece of bacon rind to grease the skillet with before we could have our corn bread for breakfast. Nothin' unusual too to get out before daylight and go to borrow a chunk of fire. We had no matches and the flint and steel wouldn't always work when our tinder was damp; and it was damp most of the time in this salt air loaded with moisture. The only lights we had were oil lamps in which we burned fish oil - mostly porpoise oil. We made our lamps from any jars or bottles that were handy, putting wicks of twisted yarn in 'em.
I remember the first money I ever made. There was a clam factory here on the island. The man who owned it paid 25 cents a basket for a five-peck basket of clams. I was eight years old. I took a yawl boat and went to Hatteras to get clams. Was gone two weeks and came back with thirteen bushels. The man paid me 75 cents, the first money I ever made. And that wasn't money; the clam factory man paid off with due bills that you had to trade out at his store. I got three 25- cent due bills.
How did I feed myself during the two weeks I was away from home? Well, I started out with two or three pones of corn bread, some sweet potatoes and a cask of water. I took along my steel and flint. Clams were plentiful and two or three times I would catch me a fish and broil it over the coals after I made a fire. Slept on the beach rolled up in the sail cloth which I'd taken off the yawl when I tied up for the night.
I declare, I don't know why a lot of us weren't drowned in those days. About the only boats we had were yawls, the small boats we picked up from ships that were wrecked on the island. We'd beat around the sounds in these little boats in all kinds of weather. Nothing unusual to be away from home for a week or two week at a time.
Yawl boats were just one of the godsends shipwrecks brought us. We had to depend on shipwrecks for most of our luxuries. A shipwreck brought us rope, timber, hardware, cooking utensils, fuel wood and, often, food and clothing. I remember when the Pioneer, an Old Dominion Line steamer came ashore and broke up. Most of her cargo washed out to sea; but enough came ashore for everybody on the island to lay in all sorts of supplies. There were hams and bacon, canned goods, coffee, yard goods, buckets, brooms, baskets and almost anything you could think of. It was a sight to see. They said there was a lot of white flour on her, but we never saw it and it wouldn't have been fit to eat if it had come ashore.
Fact is, I never saw but one whole barrel of flour when I was a boy. My father had a flock of sheep and when he clipped the wool one spring he and one of his neighbors, who also had a lot of wool, made up a shipment and loaded it on a schooner for New York. When they sold it they bought, among other things, the first barrel of flour ever brought to the island. I remember as well as if it was yesterday.
To divide the barrel between them, they spread a sheet and laid the barrel on it, on its side, and sawed the barrel in two. It was a strange sight to me to see that the flour didn't spill out of both ends of the barrel when they took 'em apart after the barrel was sawed in two. My job that day was taking bowlfuls of flour around to the neighbors. It was a rare treat for ' em.
The biggest money I ever made on the island when I was a boy was killing redheads for the man who ran the clam factory. He furnished me with a 12 gauge pump gun and I hid out in a clump of bushes near the shore where the ducks came in at night. 'Long toward sundown they began to come in by the thousands. Presently they made a raft on the water several hundred feet long. But, about the time I was ready to shoot, a flock of devilish geese got in between me and the redheads. The man wouldn't pay anything for geese. I killed one goose, but got 73 redheads. I don't know how many I crippled; more cripples got away from me than I killed. I got $26.85 for that kill.
When I was fourteen years old I shipped on a two- mast schooner, the Annie Farrow. She was built right here on the island. We had a heavy stand of timber on the island back in those day -- oak and red cedar, but no pine.
I got $8.00 a month. It was a hard life. Got plenty of grub, such as it was -- salt pork, beans, bread and molasses. But it was a hard life in good weather and awful in foul weather. The only clothes I had were the ones I stood in; a home made wool suit that my mother had made from yarn she had carded, spun and loomed herself. I remember when we sailed out Hatteras Inlet on that first trip I thought I'd freeze.
Later on I shipped on a three-master and got $12 a month. You had to carry your own bedding, a tin plate, a tin cup, a knife, fork and spoon. The vessel owner supplied none of these things.
The richest I ever felt in my life was when I was nineteen years old. We had landed in Bangor, Maine, with a cargo of lumber. The captain paid us off and my pay was $73.00 cash money, the most money I had ever seen at one time in my life.
I remember, I had a dollar watch. The first thing I bought when I went ashore was a 65-cent nickel-plated chain for that watch. With that chain and watch and seventy two dollars and odd cents in my pocket I felt like I was the richest boy on earth. No millionaire could have felt any richer.
No, I didn't blow all that money in; I still had forty dollars of that seventy three when I got back home months later.
I was first and last about ten years at sea, during which time I saw every port on the Atlantic coast and most of the West Indies. I never had but four months schooling all told, but in all my knockin' around and keeping my eyes and ears open I picked up right smart of what has made up for what I didn't get in the way of book learnin'.
I enlisted in the U. S. Life Saving Service when I was twenty four and stayed in that eleven years. They call it the Coast Guard now. It was a heap easier than shipping, although I've seen some tough times in the Life Saving Service.
I never shall forget the British steamer that grounded on Diamond Shoals in a wild nor'easter. It took us almost all day to get a life line onto her and we took the men off one by one, all except the cook who had lashed himself to the mast and wouldn't let himself go. When we got the crew ashore the Captain and two officers were missing; we found out later that they had made their way to Diamond Shoal light ship in one of the ship's boats. How they ever got through that sea is more than we could figure out.
The last one we took off that ship was a little Porto Rican nigger. I said to him: This is better than molasses, aint it?' He was so scared he just rolled his eyes at me and didn't answer. I had said that to him because I had seen a lot of Porto Ricans and all I ever saw one of 'em eat was bread and molasses.
I've seen a lot of changes in my life time. Why, a lucifer match was a curiosity when I was a boy. I reckon I've lived to see more changes than all the McCallums that ever lived before me. We were mighty proud when we saw our first kerosene oil lamp with a burner and chimney. Now look: Electric lights everywhere, even on this island. We never knew what artificial ice was until I was quite a young man. I remember once we took on a cargo of ice at Bangor, Maine, for Washington, D. C. It was a hot summer and they had run out of ice in Washington. They sent a tug to tow us so we wouldn't be delayed by calms. Now we've got an ice plant right here on this island.
I remember the first flying machine I ever saw. I came home all excited and told my wife about it. She almost got mad; said that was another one of my big ones. About a year after that a flying machine flew right over this house. I told her, 'I guess you'll believe it now!' She said, 'I'aint ready to believe it yet.
Yes, I've seen a lot of living in my seventy four years, and I've had a lot of fun. Aint much account now. I was five months in the hospital at one time. Laid on my side for five solid weeks last summer. Prostate trouble. That was tough on a man who has seen an active life.
I started a little mercantile business here on the Island when I was still in the Life Saving Service. M wife looked after it when I was on duty. Went in on a bigger scale when I left the service; but had to give up general merchandising when my health broke down. Still keep a little shop, selling pop, confectioneries and a few notions. Aint much in it. But I used to do a good business. One summer I went to Washington, N.C. with $1,700.00 in my pockets; paid $700.00 I owed and laid out a thousand dollars for a new stock of goods. But things haven't been so good for several years now. On another trip to Washington I lost my pocketbook with $140.00 in it.
Then they passed a law that we had to dip our cattle. I had 53 head of wild cattle here on the island; they were so wild you had to crawl up to them on your hands and knees to shoot one when you wanted beef. They never saw a shelter. Our winter's being mild we just let the cattle range through the winter. There wasn't much forage for them during the winter time; they got mighty thin along toward spring, but when the grass come on in the spring they'd pick right up and by the end of the summer they would be in good condition. They brought me in good money sometimes. I once sold a carcass for $45 and got $16.00 for the hide.
But I couldn't round up wild cattle like that and dip 'em. Finally they got me in court and made me pay $120.00 fine and cost and shoot my cattle. This was in the spring of the year when they were just skin and bones and wouldn't fetch a cent for beef. I shot 'em and took my loss.
When I had to give up my general store I had $1,600.00 on my books. I'll never collect it. Maybe I shouldn't have done a credit business; but when neighbors come to you and ask for credit, and you know they haven't a crumb of bread in their houses, it's hard to turn 'em down. Least wise, I never could do it.
There isn't the money on the island there used to be. In my boyhood days we didn't have much but we weren't used to much and didn't want much. Life was simple. But as we learned to live better, we somehow found the means to supply our wants. Fish, oysters and clams were plentiful and we could always find a market for them. There was a world of wild fowl in season and they brought sportsmen here, some of them staying right on through the winter. They spent a lot of money for board and guides. We could sell game for market, too. Now the fish and oysters are about played out and game the same way. Few can make a living at fishing any more; you can't sell a wild duck and they are so scarce and the law's so strict on them that mighty few sportsmen come here now.
But I aint worrying; life can't be any harder with me than it was when I started. I've got a good roof over my head; I get a little pension money; we've got a little garden, and as long as any neighbor has a mess of fish or clams we won't go hungry.
Now you were asking about my religion. There is some who might tell you I aint got any. I never belonged to a church. My wife belongs; at least her name's on the books. I went to sea young and didn't get to join a church then. By the time I settled down again I had knocked around right much and thought right much. I knew right was right and wrong was wrong and knew t'other from which. Never could see that church would make me any better or any worse. I try to do right and I reckon that's all God expects of any man. As for going to heaven when I die, I'll take my chances with a lot of preachers I know. Why, there was a preacher came here from Hatteras once, only twenty miles away, and got lost on his way here. But when he got here he had a chart to show us all about how to get to heaven all right.
