Two other versions of "A Versatile Craftswoman,"
one entitled "The Tale of a Tailoress" and the
other "A Versatile Craftswoman," can be found
on pages 2648A-2661 and pages 13565-13586.
Athens, Georgia
142½ N. Jackson Street
Mrs. Margaret Davis (white)
Grace McCune
A VERSATILE CRAFTSWOMAN
Breathless after climbing the long flight of steps leading to Mrs. Dawson's shop, I entered a narrow hall. It was vacant except for a table, stool, and telephone, over which a light was burning.
I knocked at the first door and a friendly voice said, "Come in." I entered a large work room, where several men from local dry cleaning establishments were talking with Mrs. Dawson. She is a large woman of brunette complexion, and usually wears a neat print dress. "just have a seat,” she said, "I'll be with you in a few minutes.”
Several chairs were grouped about a glowing heater at one end of the room. This was the sewing room; here were two long tables used for cutting out clothing, and for marking garments for alteration. Finished garments almost filled the long rack at one end of the room. Between two large windows, a smaller table was flanked by sewing machines; one was a modem electric machine, while the other was of the old-fashioned, pedal type.
As the men put their work down and started out the door, another man came in, and said, "Miss Mollie, can you turn these shirt collars for me! They are pretty bad, but I know you can fix 'em if any one can.” After inspecting the collars, she replied, "I can fix 'em as good as new, but you'll have to wait for 'em 'til tomorrow." He said that would be all right, and added, "What'll the Job cost met" She told him that she charged tea or fifteen cents for turning collars, according to how much work was necessary. "All right," said the man, "I'll come for them tomorrow."
The man had not left before another customer was in the shop, Saying, "Miss Mollie, can you fix a hole in my coat right quick! I got it caught in a screen door a few minutes ago and you know that I can feel this cold wind." Miss Mollie laughed and said, "Hand me the coat and I'll see what I can do." He pulled off his leather "lumberjack” and in a very few minutes he was on his way, coat mended and it had only cost him fifteen cents.
Mrs. Dawson called, "Ed!" and a Negro man came to the door. "Fix up the fire," she told him. "This room's getting cold. And don’t go off, for there's plenty of work to be done." She turned to me with a pleasant smile and said, "Did you think I would never get through! It's like this every day.
"But that's where I get most of ay business, for I don't get as much from the stores now. Since Christmas they're not doing so much business. Yet I have all I can do, and I don't take but very few new things to make since I have been running the shop by myself, for I don't have the time for that.
"All this is not interesting to you I know, "She remarked. But I explained that was what I wanted, the story of her life, and her work. She laughed and said, "I don't think my story would be interesting to anybody else, for I guess it's just about like most anyone's. I have had my ups and downs, pleasures and, yes, troubles too. We all have 'em.'
There was another knock at the door, and la answer to her "Cone in, a Negro man entered. He was well-dressed and his speech and manner wade me think of a Negro preacher. Be had brought in a pair of pants that had a hole in them, and asked if she could fix them inside of two house? "Cause, Mistess, I has just gotta have 'em." Mrs. Dawson told him that she would do her beet to finish them on time.
As he went out, a salesman from the Lee Morris Clothing Store came in with a pair of new trousers to be adjusted to measurements of 38' waist, 34" inseam length, and the cuffs were to be put in. The customer would be back for them in two hours.
As he closed the door behind him, Mrs. Dawson looked at me, and laughed again. "I'll make a bargain with you," she said. "See all that work that I have to do. Well, if you will fix this pair of pants for me, I will give you the story of my life and my business. How about it? Are you a good sport?"
I pulled off my hat and coat and told her to hand me those pants. She grinned and gave me a quizzical look. "You'll have to french-cuff then," she challenged, "for I know they are not long enough to get a cuff without it.” I insisted that I could do that toe. As I took the pants to the table to measure and mark them, she said, "I believe you know what you are doing." It was my turn to laugh, and I informed her that I had fixed many a pair of pants, that she need not worry about then, and that I was willing to work for my story.
"Well, I like a good sport," she said, "but I didn't think that you'd do it. I'll be a good sport too, and if you don't Kind me talking and working too, at the same time, I'll tell you all I can remember. But don't think I won't have to stop, for I will. You see how it is."
It did not take me long to finish the chore, and I handed the trousers to her to see if they would pass inspection. She said, "Well, I was fooled one time. You did a very good Job." "Ed," she called. Waiting for him to come, she said, "Bo you like coffee!" "Very much,” I replied. "Now I know that we will get along." she remarked. Ed appeared. "Take these pants and press 'em," she ordered, "but first fix some coffee for us, for I think a good cup of coffee will help us out.” Ed went out and came back with a coffeepot. He stirred up the fire and placed the coffeepot on the heater. Mrs. Dawson said, "He won't forget our coffee - I Just don't know what I would do without him. He has been with me so long he knows just how I want everything done, and he is one honest Negro - never bothers a thing.
"Now, you don't have to sew any more. If I talk too much. Just stop me, for I really like to talk and I get lonesome for someone to talk to." The wind was rattling the windows, and he coffeepot was beginning to percolate as she started her story.
"I was born in a little two-room log house on my grandfather Summers' place, out near where Princeton is now. While I was still just a baby, daddy moved near the old paper mill. The place is now called the Cord Mill. The old paper mill building is still standing but it's in too bad a condition to be used for anything.
"My father and Jerome Wallace were the man that operated the paper machines, or 'en-jines,' as they called them then. Of course they had helpers, but either father or Hr. Wallace had to he on duty all the time. If one of them was sick or off for any other reason, one had to stay until the other vas hack on duty. There was only one woman employed in that part of the mill. She counted the paper. It was made in large square sheets ready for the printers, and they said she was an expert. It was a long time before they ever got a machine that was as accurate and fast at that task as she was. "Old man Bishop ran the finishing machine. I have watched them work many a time when I was a bhild, for it was so interesting to see the machines run. Out from the paper mill was the rag room where the rags were sorted, and each color was put in a separate bin. They bought old clothes and rags to make paper. All the buttons were cut off. They had to be very careful about that, for a button left on could ruin a machine.
"I was sent to school when I was about six, but it was not like the schools are now. School than was in the Old Hall, and was all in one room. Miss Sally Wood was our teacher, and there was only one teacher for the whole school. She taught all the children. There were about one hundred children, all sizes and ages, from six years up, and some of them were almost grown. Our books were spelling, out of the Old Blue Back Speller, arithmetic, and geography. We sure had to study, Everyone stood up in rows for spelling bees, and every time you missed a word, you had to go to the bottom of the row. OB yes, we studied, But at that we had some good times in that old schoolhouse. In later years it was made into a dwelling house and is, I believe, still standing.
"It was a great tiling to us kids to work in the rag room at the paper will after we were out of school. They were glad to have us too. Our job was to sort the rags, and we enjoyed the work, They paid us fifty cents a month. That was a lot of money to us then. Of course it wouldn't mean much to the kids these days. People from all around sold their old clothes and rags at the paper mill, and many times we found nickles and dimes in the bags of rags. We were allowed to keep this money, and we bought candy with it and had a big time.
"One day - I sure remember that time, for I think that pleasures and disappointments in our childhood days are better remembered than anything else - we found a large bag of new clothes, and they were nice ones: dresses for women and children, underwear, stockings, and some men's shirts. Well, we just dressed ourselves up, and put these things aside, for we wanted to keep 'em. But the very next morning a woman from town was out there hunting her clothes. She said her maid had sold them and kept the money, and as the old saying goes, 'our feathers fell,' for we had to give up all those nice clothes.
"About this time they put in machines to make paper bags. The machines would cut a hundred bags at a time, and that provided something else for us kids to do. We tied the bags in bundles, two hundred bags to a bundle; that was fun, for we folded half one way and the other half the other way. Those bag machines were a great curiosity to the, people then, and they would come for miles to watch them run.
"They also used Jute to make paper. That was bought in large bales, and it made another Job for us. We would tear up the jute into small pieces to have it ready for the machines. One day we found a lot of paper money in a bale of jute. But two of the women that worked there took that away from us and said that they would have to send it back. Folks said that they kept it and bought them a home with it. I don't know about that, but I do know that we didn't get any of that money.
"Did you know that they used to make paper out of wood, even in those days? Well, they did. I don't remember just what kind of wood they used for it, but they would cut young saplings, skin the bark off, and grind them into pulp ready for the paper machine. The paper made from the wood was a heavy brown paper such as they use for wrapping and was called manila paper.
"People was paid once a month then for their work, and it was the custom to buy a month's supply of provisions on pay day. They all traded at the company store. The men all liked their tobacco, and this was one supply that was not forgotten when they were buying groceries. It was something they felt like they couldn't do without.
"Kids would slip tobacco out and chew it, the boys especially. One day some of the kids swiped some of their dad's tobacco and told me that I had to hide it, and I had better put it where it would not be found. I decided that the old well would be the best place if I could climb up and put it on the sills in the top of the well shelter. I managed to climb up and arranged it so nice along the sills, and was sure that no one would see it. But it started raining that night and rained for a solid week. After the rain was over the kids told me to get their tobacco. I went to the old well, and found that it was ruined. The top of the shelter had leaked and the rain had soaked that tobacco until it swelled up twice as thick as it should be. I almost got a beating from those kids, for of course they chewed it, and was sick. No, I didn't try any for I knew better. Hama would sure have tanned my hide.
"I had some older sisters and our house was just a gathering place for the young folks. There was a crowd of them in and out all the time, and I could get the biggest thrill out of watching and listening to them talk. One night, two girls come to our house to set a dumb supper. I was just about seven then, and I cried because they put me to bed, for they had these suppers at midnight, just on the stroke of twelve, and I did not want to miss any of the fun.
"They started their supper and one of my sisters and another girl put on pants end was going to scare 'em. I could hear them talking for I wasn't asleep if I was in bed. I slipped up and told one of my uncles what they was going to do. It was a disgrace in them days for a a girl to dress up like a boy, so he said that he would fix them. When they started around the kitchen to scare the girls that was cooking, he got after 'em, and did they scream? Anyway it broke up the supper and I was satisfied.
"Did you ever hear about those old time dumb suppers! They was popular then. That was the way the girls found out who was going to be their future husbands. I know it seems funny now to look back on things we did then, but after all I think we had more fun than the young folks has now.
“Well, I'll try to tell you. how they cooked these suppers. Two girls did the cooking, set the table, and each one used their right hand. Everything was done backwards, even to making the bread. They could not speak or laugh from the time they started until it was ended, for if they did the spell was broken and nothing would happen.
"Everything must be ready just at twelve, the table set for two. A Bible and a bottle was placed on the table. Then the wind was supposed to blow the doors open, and the future husbands were expected to come in and eat. They did not speak either, Just ate and walked out. If a man picked up the Bible, then he would make a good husband, but beware of the man that moved the bottle for you would sure get a husband who could turn out bad and be a drunkard for sure. And if no man came, and your coffin came in, then you was doomed to die an old maid.
"These suppers were lots of fun, for 'most every time the girls would get scared and wake up everybody in the house. Oh, yes, they had to be the only two people awake in the house." At this time Ed came in with cups, but before we could pour our coffee the Negro customer came back for his trousers. When Mrs. Dawson only charged him fifteen cents for the work, his gratitude was profusely expressed in his best manner.
We now enjoyed the excellent coffee. Mrs. Dawson was tired. She had rapidly reduced that pile of work as she talked. When I mentioned it, she said, "I'm used to it, and it doesn't worry me. My customers are all so nice, and if I am occasionally a little late in getting out their work they never say anything. I guess I had better get back to work. You can. rest if you are tired." I reminded her that my Job was to write when she talked.
"Well. I am going to tell you about how we need to spend Christmas. Christmas lasted a week, from Christmas Eve 'til New Years. Nobody worked, just ate, danced, and visited all during that week. Many's the time I've laughed over the Christmas I'm going to tell you about now.
"Mamma vas looking for her half-sister and family from Alabama to spend Christmas with us. None of us had ever seen them, and we vas sure looking forward to their coming. We was having a big supper and dance for them on Christmas Eve night. We kids were just on tiptoes, so excited we couldn't hardly wait. And, of course, we were looking for Santa Claus too, and our tree was all ready. Mamma had killed turkeys and chickens, and had been cooking cakes and pies for two weeks.
"At last they came. Now, Child, we have had many laughs over this particular Christmas, and I'm going to tell you about it, just exactly as I remember it. Our uncle and aunt got here several days before their three children arrived. Like so many other people in those days, they did not have enough money for the whole family to ride on the train for a long trip, so the children started off several days ahead of their parents. They rode with friends part of the way and then set out to walk the balance of the way. Those two girls and the boy got here on Christmas Eve, and if they wasn't a sight! One of the girls weighed over two hundred pounds and she had walked the soles off of her shoes.
"All of our folks and many of our friends were there. Among them was one of mamma's nieces and her husband, a man named Stencile, Also one of my uncles and his daughter; they played fiddles and were to furnish the music for the dance. Everything was cleared out of two rooms, and about three o'clock the young people started dancing. We kids were happy. We could watch them as long as we wanted to, 'cause we didn't have to go to bed early on Christmas Eve.
"The older women were busy cooking and getting the supper ready. Everybody was having a good time. The man calling for the dance would holler, 'Swing your pardners!' Oh, it was a grand time. We kids were so interested in the fat girl from Alabama that we stayed pretty dose around her. She did not seem to want to dance and we couldn't understand that, so when we saw one of the boys start toward her we just had to hear what he said. He asked her if she would dance that set with him. We held our breath for her answer. 'I had just as lief dance with you as anybody else,' she said, 'but I has walked all the way from Alabamy to see Aunt Sis, end am too tired and galleded from walking to feel like dancing with anybody.'"
There was a knock at the door. Mrs. Dawson said, "Come in. "A man from the dry cleaners brought in more work, and with him was a laundryman, who wanted to know if she had been able to mend the coveralls that he brought her the day before. She laughed and said, "You'll be surprised at how much wear that man can get out of 'em yet." The customer looked at the coveralls and said, "Miss Mollie, how do you do it? It makes no difference how bad anything is when we bring it to you it's always fixed when we get it back." He requested his bill for the day before, paid it all, and departed.
Mrs. Dawson said, "Where was I? Wasn't we just fixing to eat? Well, anyway they started eating supper about five o'clock, and we had to set that table eight times, there was so many to eat. Of course, we children didn't eat until all the grown people had finished. Well, this man, Stencile, sat down at the first table, and that man stayed there, eating with every table full of people. I never saw one person eat so much in all my life. There was plenty to eat, but we kids were watching the turkey. There was one piece left on the dish as the last table full was about to finish eating, and that man Stencile reached over and got it. We was so mad, but we knew better than to say anything. Much as we had to eat, we couldn't enjoy it for thinking about that last piece of turkey. -
"The dance lasted all night, but we kids got so sleepy we gave it up and went to bed of our own accord. We were up early the next morning, ready for breakfast, but first we had to see what Santa Claus had left for us. Of course, we didn't have things then like children do now, but we had many nice things, and when it was time for dinner, Mamma saved out some of the turkey for us, and I guess it was a good thing that she did for that man, Stencile, was still there, and he was still eating just like he did the day before.
"I had just about finished school when the paper mill closed down and we moved to Athens, near the old check mill on Broad Street. We went to work there and I don't think I will ever forget how that old mill looked. It had large posts all through the mill, and one day my sister was leaning against one resting. One of the women thinking she would have some fun yelled out to her to move quick. It scared my sister so that she jumped too gudden and tore out a hand full of her hair that caught on a nail. Every one laughed, hut it mads me mad and I hit her so hard she fell in the floor. We were due some teasing because we were new people in the settlement, but after that they did not pester us any more. We were soon satisfied there and having the same good times that we had enjoyed in our old home community.
"Just when I was thinking that I was about grown, I met my present husband at my sister's house. He came to see my brother-in-law and had the prettiest horse and buggy. He carried me to ride but we just went down the road, not far enough to get out of sight of the house, but even at that, mamma heard about it. She didn't believe much in whipping, but she sure could find other ways of punishing, and just for that one little ride, I had to stay at home for three long months. I was not even allowed to go to church and Sunday school.
"I had a girl friend that I used to spend the night with real often, and she would visit me too. Once I was spending the night at her house while her mother and father were away visiting, and there was no one at home except the children. Some of her sisters were much older than we were, so nobody was afraid to stay. We decided that after the others had all gone to sleep that we would slip out of bed and cook a dumb supper, for we had wanted to do this a long time, but they had always said that we were too little.
"After they were all in bed we got up. Yes, we was scared, but we was determined to show 'em that we could do it as well as they could. We did get the supper ready, didn't even forget the Bible and bottle. Two boys that knew us had been fishing and was on their way home, seeing the light in the kitchen so late they thought that somebody might be sick, and came by to see if there was anything that they could do. When they saw us in the kitchen, they knew what we was doing, and just pushed open the door, walked in, and picked up the bottle and went out. We were scared so bad we couldn't move for a few minutes, but when we did get to yelling we had everyone in the house up. But, strange as it may seem one of those boys is now my husband, and my girl friend married the other.
"Now, I am going to stop a little while for lunch and drink another cup of Ed's coffee. Do you go home for lunch, or do you eat in town? I said that I usually lunched in town. "Well then." she said, "we will just order us something sent down here, for I don't leave the shop; there's always someone coming in. "We ordered sandwiches and were arguing as to who was to pay for them when a customer came in and suggested that he toss a coin and settle the question. I lost. My last fifty cents went to pay for the sandwiches.
As we ate our lunch, Mrs. Dawson said, "I'm glad that you came to see me today, but I'm sorry that I've made you work so hard. It seems like I have got along so well with my work, better than usual because I had good, helpful company. I guess I had better get back at it now, but we can still talk.
"I have been married twice. I met my first husband on a picnic. Yes, we had real picnics then. Everyone went in those old tallyhos. They just put straw in the bottom to sit on, and all piled in together. After dinner there would he a hall game, and my husband was one of the players. Once we went with a crowd of young people to the old Beaver Bam Church, to see a foot washing. After that was over we rode to the Jim Smith place, where one of the guards showed us around. We were especially interested in the prison labor camp. There was so many prisoners, some of them were crippled up in different ways, some with one arm and some with one leg, but they all had to work. It was on the way home from there that Sam proposed. And in about three months we were married.
"We went to housekeeping in the house with Hr. and Mrs. Endicott. We was both young but got along fine, was very happy.
"It was during this time that my daddy got burned so bad. He was working at the old waterworks plant then. Some of the pipes had been condemned, but they had not changed them. One day just as daddy passed by, one of the large pipes with about two hundred pounds of steam in it bursted, and the steam went all over daddy's left side and head, just missing his eyes, he was just a solid blister. There was no ambulances then, and they carried him home in a cab. They had two doctors with him and they told us that he could not live until dinnertime. All our family was called home. Two of our neighbors put him in bed, took off his clothes and shut all the windows because they said the air would make the fire go inside. They started giving him whiskey, and afterwards they told my daddy that he drank over a half of a gallon. I don't know about that, but I do know that they gave him some for my husband went to the dispensary and got it for daddy. The doctors came hack at noon expecting to find him dead hut after they had stayed a long time, they told us he had a chance to get well. They said it was because the whiskey had run the fire to the outside. It took him a long time to get up and where he could go back to work. In a few years he started to having strokes of paralysis in his left side, and the fourth stroke killed him.
"My husband died in 1907. After he passed away I went back to live with mamma and daddy. I was blue and discouraged, and decided that if I could work it would help me, and I got work at the Climax Hosiery Mill. I worked there for awhile and then I went to work for Mr. Heart at his overall plant. I had never done any of that kind of work, but I started in and when I had learned it from the bottom up I made $8 a week. We made some khaki work pants and did so good on 'em that Mr. Hart decided he would open up a tailor shop. He got the place fixed up and put in all the machines. He sent to Hew York for two Bohemians to learn us how to he tailors. He paid them Bohemians $50 a week each. I guess they earned it too for we was hard to learn. When the war came on we got orders for officers' uniforms, and our pay was raised to $18 a week. Orders kept coming, and he had to put on ten more girls to help sew on buttons, fell seams, and whip in waistbands. Then the older help got another raise to $25 a week. We was just rushed to death with orders all the time while the war lasted.
"The war ended and things began to drop. Mr. Hart couldn't collect and his business began going down. He bad to cut us to $15 a week, and the extra help was laid off. It was at this time that I saw my first fight between men, and I don't think that I ever want to see another one. The Bohemians got to fussing about their work and then started fighting and throwing things at each other. The women were all scared, and I started to go for Mr. Hart. Just as I got to the door, one of them threw the stand that the heavy press iron sits on. It just missed my head. I screamed, and that brought Mr. Hart to see what was the trouble. When he got 'em straightened out and tried to talk to 'em, he told 'em that Southern men did not fight in front of ladies. But they told Mr. Hart that it didn't hurt us and that the ladies in New York didn't think anything of a fight, that they were used to it. They didn't fight any more around us.
"Business was getting worse, and Mr. Hart seemed about to go broke. We got another cut that sent our wages down to $12. That is when Milly Myers and I went in a the tailoring business for ourselves. We rented a place on Clayton Street over the Dunaway Furniture Store, and we made good while we were there.
"Then Mr. Hart got a big order for knickerbocker pants. He came to our place and begged us to come back and work for him, at least until he could get out that order and to give him time to learn someone else to do the work. He had always been so nice to us that we went back to help him out.
"We stored our machines and other things for we knew that we would need them later, and in 1922 we rented this place. Hilly came down here then and went to work as soon as the shop was ready. But I stayed on with Mr. Hart for several months until his orders were all filled and he had someone that could do his work. But as long as he was in business here he would come to our shop and beg us to come back and work for him.
"We have done fairly well. We made a good living, and during the Hoover administration we never made under $15 each a week after all expenses we're paid. After all hills were paid we divided the rest between us. We worked together until Hilly died in February 1938. She was taken sick in 1937 and they-found that she had a tumor. After that she was never well any more. Fart of the time she was not able to work at all.
"Before Hilly got sick we made all kind of things, men's clothing, ladies' dresses, coats, in fact just everything that came to hand, as well as doing our regular work of repairing and altering garments. We also made pants for the cavalry troops that are stationed here, and I still make them, but that is the only new stuff I take in now. There is no way out of that for they just bring 'em in and leave 'em.
"We have always tried to be reasonable with our customers, and not over-charge them. They have been very nice to us, and we have made everything from airplane wings to grave awnings, so I guess we have tried 'most everything that can be sewed. I have never had any trouble collecting as most of the time they pay when they get the garments.
"We used to order most all of our supplies from Bruner and Mason Woolen Company in New York, but since I don't need so much by myself I buy what I can from the retail stores here as they give me their work, and I get some things from Atlanta supply houses. A girl helps on busy days, and I pay her $2 a day. Another girl works for me by the hour, as she just works when she can get away from home, and sometimes that is just for a few hours a day. I like them both, and they seem to like me also.
"Business is not as good now as it used to be, but as you see I have all the wrk I can do and I make a good living out of it. I do not belong to any union or tailors' organization, and if there is one here in town I have never heard of it. My day's work here starts around seven in the morning, if I am very busy, but most times around eight. I always close around six except on Saturday nights, and then I stay open until the stores close, as I most always have work for them late.
"One day not very long after I had gone to work for Mr. Hart I was walking down Broad Street, when who should I meet but the boy that came to my dumb supper. He had been married also, but had lost his wife not so very long after my husband died. And that meeting was the beginning of a friendship that later ended in a happy marriage. He was then and still is, a great teaser and enjoys playing jokes on me."One night he came down to the house to see me and asked me and one of my sisters to go to the show with him. Shows then only cost 5 and 10¢.
Well, when we were almost there, he said that we could go in the show and he would wait on the outside for us, as he did not have enough money for all of us to go in.
"I was embarrassed and said that we would just go back home. But he insisted that we go on. I got mad and said that I could pay my own way in the show. My sister just laughed; it seemed that she could tell that he was teasing, and she told him to just give her a dime and she would buy peanuts and candy. Of yes, we went to the show and he went with us, but I was so mad that I could not enjoy it. After we came out, he bought me a large basket of fruit. I wouldn't have it, but my sister told him to just give it to her. It was a long time before I would let Mm come to see me again, They both like to tease me about that show.
"When one of my sisters was fixing to get married, he came walking in and told mamma that it was going to be a double wedding, for he was going to marry me and that she would lose two daughters instead of one. I told them it was not so but he would just laugh and say it was so and he had everyone believing it. Even when the preacher came he told them that we would be next. I was so mad, but the more I quarreled the more he laughed. But he won out at last, and in 1913 we were married.
"We have our little home that we bought when we were married, we are still living there. We have no children, end there is no one there but just ourselves. We have a very happy home, with our chickens and flowers. Yes, we have a lovely flower garden, but my husband looks after that and takes a great pride in his flowers. He tends the chickens too. I have my shop and he has his barber shop. Did you know that he is the oldest white barber in Athens? His brother was the first white barber to open a shop here. All the barbers used to be colored. He learned my husband the trade when he was just a boy, and now all the older white barbers are dead, and he is the oldest one left in the barber business, I mean by that, he has been a barber longer than any of the others.
"We both work every day. I do my housework at night and he tends to his chickens and flowers. We have our church, and we visit our friends and have a lot of company. Sometimes we go to the shows, but we both like reading and we read most of the time, after we get through with our work at night. And then too, we have our car and can get out on Sundays whenever we feel like we want to go some place.
"It has been lonesome here in the shop since my partner died. I sure do miss her, for we had worked at the same trade together so long, even before we went in business together, We never had any disagreements over our work, for what one done was all right with the other. Our customers have been nice and we have tried to please them and I believe that I can say something that not many people in business can say, and especially in this kind of business. And that's this, since I have been in business I've lost less than five dollars, that's right, I have less than five dollars on my books from the time that I first opened a shop until now, that has not been paid. I think that is excellent. Do you suppose there is another business in Athens that can show fewer uncollected accounts?"
There was another knock at the door, and in answer to her "Come in" a entered and asked her if she could sew some buttons on the trousers that he was wearing. Mrs. Dawson told him to go in the dressing room and that id would get his trousers for her to work on. As Ed was bringing the pants, she said, "I have three rooms. This is the work room, the next is the dressing room, and the last one is where Ed does all the pressing."
Ed came in with the man's trousers. She sewed on the suspender buttons and sent the garment back to the customer. He soon made his appearance and asked the price of the work. "A dime," she Bald. He handed her a quarter and said that he did not have any change; that he appreciated her doing the work so quick, and would the ladles just get coca colas with the change? He was gone before Mrs. Dawson could give him the change.
"Well," she said, "we will just have coca colas," and ordered them. As we waited for the drinks I prepared to leave. Mrs. Dawson said, "I sure am glad that you came in today, but I'm sorry that I made you work. The truth is I didn't think you'd do it. But if you do as good a job on this story as you did on the pants you'll be all right. I promised to do the best I could. The drinks came then and we enjoyed them. "I hope you'll come back again," she said, "just stop any time you come this way and Ed will make coffee for us. He doesn't forget that when it's cold weather."
I thanked her for the story and the very pleasant day that I had enjoyed in her very friendly shop. As I went down the stairs I knew that I would like to go hack again and have another chat over a cup of coffee.
