No names in this story have been changed.
Date of first writing	December 14, 1938
Person interviewed	Roxie Dann (Negro)
Address:	715 E. Hargett St.
Place	Raleigh, N. C.
Occupation:	Maid (retired)
Name of writer:	W. B. Sedberry Raleigh, N. C.
Revisers	W. J. Edwin Sadler Massengill.
<text not clear>
AUNT ROXIE DANN
On a small plot of ground at the back of Policeman Maddrey's house on East Hargett Street in Raleigh is a small shack built of boxes, sheet tin, rusty screening and old weatherboarding. In this shack lives Aunt Roxie Dann.
When Aunt Roxie saw she had a visitor she came hobbling up the path on her cane. She was dressed in a clean, freshly-ironed apron and wore an old felt hat that shaded her face so the wrinkles did not show plainly. As she stepped on a plank labeled "doorsteps," she said, "I jes' been a-visitin' a bit with one of my friends. What do you want? Did you come to buy my place? Well, I want a $1,000 for it, and it's cheap at that price. I jes' want enough to live on the rest of my life. I can't find a man that can take as good care of me as my husband did, so I jes' live here by myself.
"That dog that's a-barkin' over there belongs to Policeman Maddrey. He's the meanest dog I've ever seen in my life, but he's chained up so's he can't hurt any of my company, so don't worry about him. I feel sorry for Policeman Maddrey. His wife's been away from here in a hospital for T. B. for over a year and I don't think she's gonna ever get well. And Poor Mr. Maddrey, he's been goin' away to see her every week or so, but here of late he's been sick in bed, too. I wonder how he's feelin' today? I goes over to see him nearly every day for he sho' is a fine man. Well, let's go inside the house; it's kinder cold out here."
Seating herself in a little straight-back chair, worn slick, Aunt Roxie continued, "Well now, what do you want to see me about? You talks like you been knowin' me all your life. Did you come from the bank to bring me some money? Mrs. Ed Crow was out here last week to see me and she said I'd get some more money from the bank purty soon.
"What have I been doin' all my life? Lawsy, I worked for Mr. Ed Crow for years and years; I remembers when his baby was born. They jes' come and got me and said I was the one to nurse Mrs. Crow, so I had to go and when that baby come me and it slept in the big bed together. Mrs. Crow slept in a little bed on the other side of the room, and at night if the baby would cry and I couldn't get it quiet she would jes' come over and get in bed with us and sleep there. Yes suh, a bed jes' like this one here." She pointed to a bed in the corner. "Some of my good white friends give me that bed years ago. Mrs. Crow told me the other day when she was here that she was gonna give me something for Christmas, but she lives in Richmond, Virginia, now and I bet she forgets all about me.
"I jes' don't know what I'm gonna do about this Christmas; I ain't got nothin' and no way to get nothin'. I can't get about up the street. I jes' have to depend on my old stick here to get around on and the last time I went uptown was long ago. I can't recollec' time but it was when they had that big fire sale way down this street. It was Mr. Efird's fire sale. Lawsy, I got in that crowd of people; I never did see so many people jes' pushing and shoving. I wanted to buy me a hat like some of my friends had bought up there, for they was so cheap and jes' what I wanted. When I got part of the way to the table the hats was on I was nearly pushed down twice but couldn't even fall for so many people was standing so close around me. That was the last time I went up the street.
"Well, I reckon as old as I am, I'm lucky to be able to get about on my stick. My insurance man was out here yistiddy and told me 'cordin' to his book I was eighty-two years old, but if that's right it was jes' handed in to him wrong. I can't recollec' time, but I believes I'm seventy-eight years old. Then, on the other hand, I can remember when I was a slave. I was born on Marsta Higgs' plantation down near Scotland Neck. I was six or seven years old when the War Between the States was over.
"I remembers when I used to nurse the mistress' baby. I was so small they wouldn't trust me to carry the baby around. They would make a quilt pallet on the floor and put the baby on it. I jes' had to set there and watch him. My mammy was the mistress' own maid and jes' waited on her and kep' her room in shape. My older sister carried the keys and dished out the food and worked about in the kitchen. My mammy had thirteen children; I was the youngest one. Mammy died when I was a little thing. Me and Sister lived with Gran'mammy. She lived on Slave Row--that's some little houses built off aways from the marsta's house for the slaves to live in; they was all built jes' alike. Marsta Higgs was good to his slaves and treated me mighty good.
"One time, though, the war was going on and the mistress missed some money and said my sister stole it. Sister said she didn't, that she hadn't seen any money except one time, and the woman that done the washing had that. That woman helped Sister around in the house some, too, but Marsta Higgs ordered Sister to be whipped. I was at Gran'mammy's house and a white man and Mean Joe--Mean Joe was a slave but he was the boss of all the other slaves--brought Sister right up in front of the house and tried to tie her to a tree so they could whip her. But Sister was fighting like a tiger and my old gran'mammy was sittin' on her porch cardin' cotton. All us slaves had so much cardin' to do every day. Well suh, Sister was yellin' she didn't take no money and they won't going to whip her, and they was jes' tearing her clothes off of her. My old gran'mammy was crying and I never will forget the tears on her face. The marsta sent word to her if she didn't like what they was doing to Sister he would give her some of the same stuff. I was scared to death. I would run to the door, peep out, then go and hide. Then I would peep again. But they never whipped her to this day.
"I don't know what I'm going to do for Christmas; I wish you'd brought me some money. Last Christmas the American League (American Legion) sent me a basket of oranges, grapes, apples, and nuts. That certainly was nice, but I don't know about this year for last year was the only time I've had one and maybe they'll forget me this time. I wish you'd buy this place.
"Down on the plantation Mean Joe always had fresh meat at his house and we hardly ever had any at our house. The slaves was allowed to hunt at night and sell what they got, and then some days when we had time we'd pick a few berries and sell 'em. But the marsta got 'spicious of Joe one time and told him if he ever did catch him stealin' a hog he would whip him to death. There was a lot of trees and swampland around there then and people could do most any kind of meanness and get away with it.
"After the war some of the slaves left, but, Gran'mammy and me stayed on for awhile. Joe built him a big pen, bigger'n this house and lot, and he made it out of the biggest logs and trees he could get. That was some strong place. He had to make it way high so they couldn't jump over, and he filled it plum' full of wild hogs. He had some with tusks I don't know how long, but the longest I've ever seen.
"Well, in them days there won't any money. White folks didn't have any and Negroes didn't have any, so the marsta's would give the Negroes part of the crops they made. I hadn't had any schoolin' at all, didn't even know anything about schoolin'. Then we moved to Halifax to live with some of Gran'mammy's folks. I didn't know anything but to jes' take the marsta's name so until I was married I was named Roxie Higgs. That's what most of the slaves done them days. I could of got the book and had it looked up but I jes' didn't know.
"I can't recollec' time, but while we lived in Halifax I got married. The man I married was lots older than I was--I won't even sixteen years old, I don't reckon. My husband was old enough to go to the war. His marsta sent him in his place 'cause he was sick and couldn't go. That was the way they done if the white folks couldn't go. They'd have to send a slave in their place. It sure is funny how older men can paint such a nice picture for the young girls. I knowed he was twenty years older than I was. But he was always good to me and provided well for me. Just as long as he was well and could work he wouldn't let me hit a lick. All I had to do was jes' keep the house and mess around.
"You know I keep on worrying over Christmas. What's you goin' to give me? One of my good white neighbors said she was goin' to send me dinner, but I'd like to get my own self a tender little chicken jes' in case she don't do it.
"My husband was a farmer and we raised our own chickens and pigs back in them days. He farmed in Halifax a long time and that's where my children was born. Then we moved to Littleton. We stayed on a farm there but after awhile decided we better move again, so we went to Warren Plains and Weldon. After a time in them two places we went up in Virginia, the southeastern part, but I lived all over North Carolina.
"Then my husband heard about some guv'ment buildin' goin' on out in Little Rock, Arkansas, and how much the guv'ment was helping the Negroes out there. I didn't think much of him going out there, it was so far away. But he was getting so crippled he couldn't farm any more. So he went traipsin' off out there. My children was so little I didn't go with him right then. But after awhile he sent for me and I started and stopped off in Texas for awhile. I didn't like Texas--it won't nothing but water and flat ground. So I went on to Little Rock after awhile. I liked Little Rock. I had a good time there and was gettin' along fine. Then one night a crowd of white folks lynched a Negro right near us and my husband got scared and Left for North Carolina the next night. He said he had to walk part of the way back 'cause his money run out. Soon after he got back the people took up a collection and sent me the money to come back home on. I kinder hated to leave out there, but since the folks at home missed me so much as to send me the money I thought I better use it that way so I come back.
"My children was still small. I had three boys. William was the oldest one, and he growed up to be a mighty fine boy. I don't know how old he'd be now or jes' when he was born but I can get the book and see. David Junior was my second son. He got along all right and was a fine boy. I can't recollec' time but it's been way over fifty years since he was born. My next boy didn't even live to be a year old. Instead of them dying, I thought it'd kill me having them babies.
"Like I said, my husband won't able to farm any more, so I got a job working at Peace College, and I worked there for twenty-two years. Miss Cornelia and myself run that college. I cleaned up the girls' rooms and if any of them would get sick, they'd always call on me to nurse them and look after them. I sho' did learn lots ofsense doin' that.
"Lawsy, I remember one time when David, my husband, was bad off in bed and David Junior, who always would play with bigger boys, was in bed with a broke leg. That's what he got from playing with them big boys. I was so worried and tired. I had my folks to nurse and go do my work at the college, too. That night was so bright and the clock had stopped I didn't know what time it was so I just got up and started walkin' to my work. I had to walk all the time for there won't any trolleys runnin' out there then. Well sir, 'bout the time I got up there to the Guv'ner's house where there was a lot of bushes it seemed to me like it was darker than usual. I got scared and run the rest of the way to the school. I went right straight to the night watchman's little place, just a little room he used to rest in. I knocked on his door real hard and he come to the door, and there I stood all out of breath. 'Lawsy Mercy, Miss Roxie, what you doin' here this time o' night?' he asked in a surprised tone. I told him what happened, and he let me stay there until daybreak but I don't reckon I'll ever forget that night.
"I bought this house over fifty years ago from old Cap'n Moody. Things were building up around here then, and every time I'd get my pay check I'd go up to the bank and give all the money I could spare, sometimes two payments, so I'd hurry and get it paid for and then maybe when I got down sick I wouldn't lose it. My boys was going to St. Augustine to school. I sho' was glad 'cause I wanted them to be educated. They was picking up odd jubs and helpin' me pay as much as they could. William was studyin' pharmacy and workin' part of the time in a drug store up street. I didn't have to pay a cent for David Junior to go to school 'cause he'd work on the school farm and lay brick. He finished as a brick mason but he kep' on goin' to school tryin' to decide what else he wanted to be. He was a good boy.
"David Junior got down with the pleurisy and nearly died. The doctor said after he got stronger that a change'd be the best thing for him. So he went up in New Jersey to see some of our folks. He didn't get any better so he started back home and when he got to Norfolk he met some friends there, and they got him a job in the Atlantic City Hotel. He wrote me that it was inside work and he was going to stay for awhile. He done all right there for awhile. Then he wrote me that he'd gone out and got his feet wet and was back in bed again.
"I went for several days and didn't hear any more from him so I wrote a friend of mine to go and see how he was and if he was real bad off to bring him home to me where I could see to him, and I would pay all expenses. I had a letter sayin' they would be here in a few days as he was right sick and mighty weak. He went to bed right there"--she pointed to the bed in the corner--"and never got up any more. He was mighty weak the whole time and pneumonia had set in. Everybody liked my boys. The doctors and the professors from the school would come over to see him and they done everything they could but he died anyway."
Aunt Roxie's small front room was spic and span. The pine floor was as clean as if it had been scrubbed with lye water. In one corner was a bed with a snow-white spread on it. In the other corner was an old chest of drawers with a half-size mirror. The knobs were gone from the drawers and there were wide cracks between them as if some of the supports had fallen out long before. On the dresser was a clean scarf and a framed picture of Christ.
Aunt Roxie picked up the picture and said, "One of the teachers over at the school brought me this picture long years ago."
Hanging over the mantel was a large picture of the Union Station in Washington, D. C. "Now that picture come to me in a funny way, but I always liked it," she said. "After I had worked at Peace College for twenty - two years I went to work at the Y.M.C.A. and a mighty nice man who was stayin' there had it in his room. He was s'posed to get married one Christmas but he died sudden-like and had willed everything he had to his lady. So she come down here to get the stuff he'd left in his room and she give me that picture because I'd looked after her man so good while he stayed in the Y.M.C.A."
In another corner stood a ten-shelf stand with many varieties of trinkets and a few small pictures--one of herself when she was about fifty years old and one of the librarian at St. Augustine College. On the wall hung two enlarged pictures.
"Now that picture is of my youngest son but it ain't any good," she said, pointing to one. "I started to send it back to the people but it was so far away I just said, 'Well, I'll keep it,' for that company was way up in Illinois. That one is of my oldest son. It turned out pretty good.
"Come back here and let me throw some coal on the fire. It's gettin' too cold in this shack." She went into the next room. There was a six-inch step-up between the rooms.
She pointed to an old wooden bed, and said, "That's where I sleep. That bed was given to me years ago by some good white friends. On the cot in the corner is where a little girl sleeps. I rent them rooms on the other side to a married couple and they let their little girl sleep over here with me. I ain't sayin' how much rent they pay me; that's my business."
She threw a couple of lumps of coal in a small cast iron stove and asked me to have a chair. In the room there was a wooden rack holding quite a number of old books.
"They're just a few of the books I've had," Aunt Roxie said. "I give the library over at the school twice that many. No sir, I didn't have any schoolin' when I was little but I studied along with my boys when they was in school and I learned to read and write pretty good I reckon.
"Now you take my old Bible right here; I try to read some in it every day." She picked up a small and very worn Bible. Turning the pages, she said, "Right here in Jeremiah it says the Jews will always be persecuted and scattered all over the world. Then, they will have to go back to Jerusalem and that is what Germany is doin' to them. They was mean people to do what they done. But you take we Negroes; the United States is goin' to send us all back to Africa. Ain't some big man up there in Washington already said so? I read the Negro paper sometimes. When my friends finish with it they bring it to me. Well, maybe I won't live to go back to Africa but you will see it, young man.
"You know, I ain't voted many times but after Mr. Roosevelt done so much for me that cold winter when I couldn't buy any wood and coal to keep me warm--he'd send me a load every two weeks, and I could get some flour and potatoes free, too--I just went and voted for him the next time. That man said, 'Here, vote for the Democrats' and I said 'Lawsy, Mister, I never voted for the Democrats but I'm goin' to now.' Well, I never voted but one time since. That was when they had a city 'lection and people was going around in automobiles to carry you to the place and I went and voted, but every one of my folks lost so I don't see any use in me ever votin' again. But Mr. Roosevelt kept a lots of us from freezin' and starvin', so if he ever runs again I'll vote for him.
"You know, I'm the only Negro livin' in this neighborhood and all the white folks is poor but they're my friends and they like me. If I get hungry I jes' go over there and ask them for somethin' to eat and they always give me somethin'.
"I bought that lot out there where that big house is built on a long time ago. And I paid in $35 on it, when a mighty nice-seeming white lady come along and wanted to buy it from me. I told her if she'd pay me the $35 I had paid in on it and let me have enough ground for a walkway down to the street she could have the lot. She took the lot but never paid me my $35, and the next thing I knowed, I saw Cap'n Moseley and he said he bought the lot from her for $100 cash.
"I wish I had knowed she was goin' to sell it. I could've got the money from Mr. Crow up at the bank and bought it myself. I sho' did want that place for it would give me a nice big front opening. Well, I got enough front now I reckon and it's paid for, too.
"Soon after that they put double, tall beds in the Y.M.C.A., and I had to quit there 'cause the work got so hard I couldn't do it. I had this place all paid for then so it didn't matter much.
"You know my daddy was a quadroon. I reckon that's what he was. His daddy was Marsta Williams and his mammy was a mulatto and you know that's a sin. It says right here in the Bible that races should never mix and there's been plenty of mixin' right here in my time. But it's a sin and I don't know what's goin' to come from it. You can see some nice black Negroes but that don't mean nothin'; all of them is mixed. There ain't no true African Negroes in this country. My daddy was the marsta's bodyguard--that's what they called them in them days -- he would drive Marsta Williams everywhere he went and jes' 'tend to him. When the marsta died the mistress sent him to Richmond to be sold and they had him locked up in the jail. One night he watched where the keeper put the keys and that night he stole them and put everything he had in a bundle on his back and sneaked out of jail. He swum across the James River and went back to Mistress Williams and she give him a mule and told him to go join the Yankees. Nobody's seen him since.
"My son, William, was gettin' along fine workin' upstreet in a colored drug store and doin' some studyin' over at college. One night he woke us up so sick he couldn't hardly live and I worked with him until day-break. Then we called the doctor, and he said it was 'pendicitis and to carry him to the hospital. We carried him to St. Augustine Hospital. They operated on him and his 'pendix had busted and they had to put tubes in his sides so it could drain all that old stuff out.
"He was gettin' along fine. I'd been stayin' over there with him every night, but one night I come home to sleep some. The next day his daddy went over to see how he was while I done some wash and cleaned up a bit, and he sent for me to come at once. I went right over there and my boy said, 'Mamma, I am going to die.'
"'No, son, you are gettin' better,' I said.
"He told his daddy to pray, that he was not afraid to die and he knowed he was dyin'. Before my husband could get halfway through with the prayer my boy was dead."
Aunt Roxie started repeating the prayer but she couldn't finish it. Her voice cracked and died out in a sob.
"That just left David and me alone again," she continued, "and we made things pretty good. I'd get work all around town and David would cook the meals and split a little wood when he felt like it. I can't recollec' time but along then my husband died. He won't down flat all the time until about two weeks before he died. I don't know what was the matter with him. He just never got over the war. I get a pension check now but it ain't very much. I get rent on the rooms, too, but I ain't tellin' how much.
"I've been here ever since, makin' out all right. Come back and see my kitchen if you want to." I followed her.
"Now this is my back porch," she said as she went through the door. One side of it was closed in with old sheet tin and planks of assorted sizes. Where the door led out into the yard was rusty screen wire. On the porch was a small, badly abused ice box and a small table with a pound of ground sausage on it. A spigot dripped water into a tin basin.
She said proudly, "Yes, I had to put in water and Lights both. I don't pay much on the lights 'cause my roomers has a radio and I only burn one light a little at night. My water bill always is $1 every month."
In the kitchen was an old oil stove and the bottom part of an old sideboard with three drawers. On a pine table sat a can of tomato soup and a pan with some turnip greens in it.
"My niece that lives in Rocky Mount come to see me yistiddy and brought me this mess of salad. She knows how much I like it and that sausage out on the porch, too. She used to come to see me real often but here of late I ain't seen much of her. She's havin' a right hard time herself trying to pay for a little place her and her husband bought there in Rocky Mount, and right after Christmas she has got to go to the hospital. She paid the taxes on this place for me this year and it was higher than it ever was before. They charged me more than $22 just for taxes. You know, I've had this place a long time and that's the most it's ever been. I couldn't get the money to pay the taxes, so she paid them for me.
"Well, this house has been here a long time. That front room up there is over a hundred years old. All this land was a plantation once and they used that front room for a little clubhouse. I can't recollec' jes' what kind of club it was but that's what is used to be. I know, for I had these rooms built on. That old chimney, I am afraid it's going to fall in on me some night. I had a man come out here and he fixed the bottom part up with cement but the bricks are loose in the top and when it rains the walls get just as wet. You reckon it will set my house on fire sometime? Let me sell you this place and you can fix it up. I wonder what this guv'ment money for fixin' up houses is? I can't pay nothin' to have it fixed, but if they would fix it up for me I sho' would be glad."
