THE CAPITAL CITY INSURANCE COMPANY
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
April 27, 1939
April 14, 1939
J. H. Robertson (Negro)
Samaritan Building
West Washington Street
Athens, Georgia
Manager - Atlanta Life
Insurance Company
G.M.
THE CAPITAL CITY INSURANCE COMPANY
The young Negress, who set at her desk in the reception room of the Capital City Life Insurance Company's local office, was industriously thumbing through a sheaf of important looking papers when I entered. She stood up at once when she saw me, and when I expressed a desire to talk with the manager of the office, she said, "Just have a seat, and I'll see if he is busy." As she left me to open a door marked "PRIVATE" I noticed her straightened hair, combed back from her very black face and arranged in a smooth coil on the back of her head. Her neatly fitted frock was made on the tailored lines of appropriate office costuming for women.
She returned promptly, saying, "Mr. Smith will see you now." She led the way, and on entering the small private office I saw a dark complectioned young Negro man, whose impeccably tailored and freshly pressed dark blue business suit and well-groomed appearance made me wonder if it was from him that Octevus Roy Cohen had taken his well-known character, Florian Slappey. "I'm Sam Smith," he greeted me, standing beside his desk, "what can I do for you."
He laughed delightedly when I asked him to relate some of his experiences and problems in his occupation as an insurance man. "We do have a good many problems," he admitted, "and our experiences might fill a good many books. But first, won’t you have a seat?" He sew that I was comfortably settled before a table, then began his story.
"Maybe you'd better start off asking me questions, for I don't know just what it is you went, and then, I’m not very good at telling things anyway," he suggested.
"First, I'd like to know something of your company and the type of life insurance that you promote. Then, you can tell me about how long you have been doing this work and about interesting experiences you have had in that time," I told him.
His broad grin displayed his white teeth. "Now, that's putting me on the spot," he exclaimed. "Do you really want to start back at the beginning of our company?"
"I would appreciate it very much I replied.
"Well, our company was organized in 1905 in Atlanta and our home office is still there; this is just one of our several branch offices. In that year, the State legislature enacted a law forcing all insurance companies to put up a cash bond of $5,000 for the protection of beneficiaries. Prior to that time there had been several small companies doing business in sick benefit and accident insurance that carried a death benefit of from twenty to thirty dollars, and none of these little organizations were able to raise this cash bond. After several months of conferring end planning to arrange some way to save the insurance business among the Negroes, our Mr. Henley, who was already operating one of the small accident and health insurance companies, bought out several of the other companies and merged them into one company. That was the beginning of the Capital City Insurance Company.
"You probably have heard about the remarkable man that founded our company, our Mr. Henley?" he queried.
"Everyone has heard of him," I replied, "but I’d like to hear his story from you."
"Well," he continued, "he was born a slave, in Monroe County, Georgia. After freedom came he went to Atlanta end started to work for a barber. That he made a success of his work is shown by the large business that he built up. His best customers were among his white friends. Before 1900 his barber shop had more than 2C chairs in it, and that shop is still going today. His ambition to do something to enable members of our race to prepare for the financial crises so often brought about by sickness, accidents, and by death, led him to organize his first little accident and sick benefit insurance company. I think it’s probable that the purity and unselfishness of his motives in starting his insurance business were some of the factors that led Providence to permit among our people. We write any kind of life insurance now, from sick, accident, straight life, and paid-up, to endowment. In fact, this is an industrial as well as an ordinary life insurance company, and we're more than proud of it.
"Our records show that in 1928 we paid out more than $800,000 to our paid-up policyholders and to beneficiaries in general. This, of course, includes loans on policies, sick and accident benefits, dividends, and final payments after the death of the insured. After making these payments, totaling considerably more than three-quarters of a million dollars, we still had a surplus fund of more than $980,000 on hand. At the beginning of this year we raised our capital stock from £100,000 to $500,000. That'll give you some idea of how our business is growing.
"Our one hundred and four employees include our managers, clerks, inspectors, and field agents. If I haven't covered all of that sort of data needed, you'll just have to ask me the questions that'll let me know what you want to record."
"Do you mind telling me of your own experiences?" I asked.
His white teeth gleamed in another of those expensive grins. "Well," he began, "I've been a manager for 8 years, but, let me tell you, I put in plenty of hard work for the company before I was ever appointed manager. I had to earn that promotion. I started out as a helper, making the rounds with one of the special it to prosper so that he was able to buy out the other companies and put up $5,000 cash bond when it was necessary.
"Mr. Henley passed away some years ago, and his son inherited his father’s business interests. He soon found that with the insurance business growing so rapidly, he didn’t really have time to give the barber shop enough attention to keep it up to the standards maintained by his father, so he decided to do a very noble thing. He gave that shop and its entire income to the barbers who had operated it under his father, and ’what’s more he permitted them to continue using his father's name to keep it open. He made only one stipulation in the deed of gift, and that was that as long as they should keep the shop open it must rigidly continue to give the same high standard of service that won for it the patronage of a list of men whose names if read to you would sound like a roll call of Atlanta's most prominent end important business men.
"Of course, all of the employees in that barber shop at the present time aren't the same ones that worked with his father, for many of those older barbers have passed away also and have had to be replaced by younger men. But there are a few of the older ones that worked for Mr. Henley still on the job, and these are the ones for whose protection and care the eon so generously planned "our little mutual company, that before the merger in 1905, paid sick benefits of from two to three dollars a week, has now grown and improved until we have more then 300,000 policyholders, and we're now one of the largest insurance organizations agents, and that helper’s job is about the humblest work we have in the insurance business. I wasn't allowed to do any collecting, and neither was I allowed to sell any insurance. My job was just to keep up with the literature that was used for advertising and selling. My long experience as a helper has been valuable to me in the years that have followed, for that's a grand way to learn the essentials of life insurance work.
“My first promotion came when I was assigned to learn the business of selling and collecting by assisting an agent in our district, and that practical experience under his supervision meant a great deal to me. Right here, let me say that none of our employees are turned a loose to work independently until they have been thoroughly trained. It really does take someone that's plenty interested in insurance work to stick to it long enough to go through the training that begins with the lowest chore and takes in every phase of our line of work just as fast as you can earn the promotions.
"I can tell you it was hard on me when I first started out, and there were times when if it hadn't been for my firm determination to stick, the many discouraging days when it seemed impossible for me to make even a small increase in our business, would have caused me to give up. The agent with me knew that I was really trying my best, and that I wanted more than anything else in the world to make good at the insurance work, so he gave me every assistance and did everything in his power to encourage me. It was his kindness end understanding that really enabled me to successfully pass through this, the most trying period of training.
"When dark came, the other agents would call it a day and they would go out for an evening of pleasure and frolicking around at dances and shows, but I worked right on. That was my time for contacting those of our people who couldn't be reached in the daytime because of their jobs. It was this night work that enabled me to pile up a higher total of insurance sold then could be shown by the others in my district, and it won for me my place as manager.
"After we're appointed as agents, we're assigned our own territory, and we become responsible for the business in that definite territory, not just for one type of policy, but for all of the different kinds of insurance that we write. All the special problems of that particular territory - and believe me, there are plenty of problems coming up all the time in any territory - the agent has to settle by himself, as far as possible.
"Of course we investigate every risk as well as we can before re write the insurance, and then do more investigating before we pay any claims that appear to be doubtful in the least, but even at that we do get caught sometimes. Things aren’t always as they appear on the surface, and it’s not possible to accurately Judge the physical condition by casual inspection of outward appearances. People who went to collect on sick-benefit claims will swear to anything that they think they can get by with. When they want to get a policy written, they'll swear they have never had to see a doctor, at least not for the last 5 or 10 years, when all the time they’re just planning to cash in on some disease already present in their bodies and which they may be able to conceal from us long enough to get the insurance written and in effect. We've learned that there are almost as many speculators as there are honest people.
"I'll never forget the time when a woman who held one of our sick and accident policies sent in her claim for sick benefit. She had a pretty good policy, and it enabled her to collect $5 a week in the event of illness that was sufficiently severe to keep her confined to the bed.
"I went personally to make the first investigation of this claim and aha appeared to be a pretty sick women, so I paid the first week's claim without a doubt but that I was taking care of a just and honest claim. I was so concerned and sympathetic about her apparently serious condition that I dropped by several afternoons just to inquire about her.
"But when the claim came in for the second week, I decided to make another more searching investigation. This time I knocked on her door in the morning, and I had to knock several times before I could get an answer. Finally her little girl cracked the door open just enough to see who it was. 'Mamma,' she called back into the house, 'it's the polish man; he's here again.'
"I could hear considerable scrambling around going on in the house, but the child still kept the door fastened, so that I couldn't get in. Next, I heard a sound like someone dragging a heavy object across the floor, then I heard the mother call to the child to bring the man on in. The little girl opened the door then. 'Mamma is sick in bed,' she announced, 'but she said for you to come on in.'
"It was a very hot day the latter part of July, and as I entered the room I could feel and smell the heat from a charcoal ironing bucket. The ironing board was learning against the well, and I thought of the sound of something being dragged across the floor that I had heard. The bedclothes were tucked close about the woman's neck, and unironed clothes were piled all over the bed. In a choir was a neat stack of apparently freshly ironed garments, she had gotten into bed in such a hurry that she hadn't removed her shoes, but she didn't know that the disarranged bed covering revealed this fact.
"As I glanced around the room while I listened to the story of her ailments, I became convinced that she had been ironing when I knocked on the door and that she had instructed the child not to let me in the house until she had had time to get in bed. I was determined to make her sick if she wasn't sick already.
"Perspiration was streaming down her face, and I knew that she was just burning up under ell those bedclothes and the piles of unironed clothes, but I got a chair, sat down by her bed, and listened to her. When she would pause I would talk about just anything I could think of, but the point is that I stayed and talked and she had to remain under the covers on that dreadfully hot day.
"She was evidently miserable. After awhile she began shivering and shaking, and I let her think that I was very much alarmed over her condition. I urged her to let me send the child for a doctor. She wouldn’t agree to that, but said she knew her condition and was sure she would be all right if she could just get perfectly quiet. That was a hint for me to leave, but I didn’t pay it any attention, just kept right on talking to her. As she kept up the squirming and shivering, I persisted and sent the child for one of the neighbor women.
"When the neighbor came in, I told her I was confident that the patient was afflicted with the chills and fever that accompany malaria, and that I wanted her to fill some hot water bottles and place them at the woman's feet, and to get some extra blankets for the bed so we could see if we could break up the chill. From the way the neighbor hesitated, I knew that she was wise to the plan to get the sick benefit money.
"I pretended to be helpful by gathering up the unironed clothes from the bed, and with all the appearances of an accident contrived to get than mixed with the ironed ones, then turned them all over on the floor, and managed to step on practically every ironed garment. By the time I had them all gathered up and piled on chairs, they were thoroughly wrinkled, as well as soiled. Oh, yes! If looks could have killed, I would have been a dead man right there, for both of those women looked at me as though they wanted to kill me, as though it would have been a pleasure to kill me.
"By now I had begun to enjoy the situation, for I meant to make her own up to the swindle before I left, if it took the rest of the day and the night too. When the patient saw the mussed condition of her ironed clothes she had a real chill, a hard one. When I had removed the lest piece of the rough-dried garments from the bed, both her shoes were revealed. 'My goodness,' I exclaimed, 'you have even got shoes in the bed with you,' and I started as though I was going to pick up the shoes.
"'Naw, you don't, ' she wailed, 'dem shoes is on my foots.
I had to git up a minute dis mawnin', and I was so sick and weak I had to fall back in de bed so quick I never had no time to pull offen my shoes.'
"I instructed the neighbor to remove the shoes so that we could piece the hot water bottles at her feet and then wrap them in blankets to keep the heat in. Then I had her bathe the patient's face in hot water. When that had been done, I said, 'put a mustard plaster on her chest, and that will be the very thing to break up those chills.'
"Both women looked so angry that I was sure either of them could have gladly wrung my neck, end they wouldn’t have hesitated to bite off my head, but my enjoyment had increased from the moment I begun to see the funny side of her deception. I decided that if I had to pay that second week’s benefit, she was sure going to earn it. So I sat there and watched her writhe and squirm under the extra blankets with the hot water bottles at her feet. It seemed that it took the neighbor woman longer to make that one mustard plaster than it should have taken her to cook a whole meal.
"Finally she reluctantly entered the room with it. When the patient saw that mustard plaster and realized it was about to be placed on her perspiring skin, she come up out of that bed in a hurry and confessed that she was just trying to collect on her policy. She insisted that if she had to go through all of that to get the money she would rather do without it, end admitted that she could get 'long without it. It really was conical," he said with another wide grin.
"But you know, I don't believe she ever did suspect anything other than that I was just extremely uneasy about her, and that I was conscientiously trying to have everything possible done for her benefit. The story spread through the district and it did give me a great reputation for looking after the sick people who took out insurance with me. If anyone else in that district ever tried to swindle me on a sick benefit claim I never did find it out.
"Now don't get the idea that we're reluctant about paying just claims. We very readily pay all just and honest claims, but because of the great number of speculators that are always ready to take any and every advantage of us, we must at all times be very careful in our investigations, of all claims.
"The worst feature of it all is that these speculators sometimes find doctors low enough to help them in their efforts to swindle life insurance companies. However, I'm happy to say that this doesn’t happen very often. We always learn when these cases do show up, that the policyholder has promised to divide the benefits with the doctor when, and if, the claim le paid. But I don't think that they ever gain by this practice in the long run, for if they win once they invariably keep on trying to work the same gag, and sooner or later it makes a lot of trouble for them, if not jail term."
"Are all your insurance payments due weekly?" I asked.
"In town, yes; or that is most of it is paid by the week in town. It can be paid by the month by special agreement and arrangement, Cut in communities where we don't keep an agent all the time, we send a representative once a month to make the collections, end those clients are usually very prompt, for they know that if they don't have it ready for him, they'll either have to buy a stamp and money order to mail it or let it lapse before the agent calls in another month. It's counted a serious matter to lose money by letting insurance lapse.
”Perhaps our greatest collection problem in rural communities lies in the frequency with which our policyholders move from one farm to another, and we've never been able to make them understand the importance of notifying us whenever they plan to move. Sometimes it takes 2 or 3 months for us to locate them after they've moved. It's a simpler matter when they move from one town to another, for then we can just transfer them to the agent in the new community where they've moved. However, the fact still remains that we have to locate them before the transfer can be made.
"Another feature of insurance which has brought up many questions and caused many lawsuits is the minor child beneficiary. Of course we can't turn the money over to a child, and sure as the world when the uncles and aunts of the beneficiary learn that it has money coming from insurance, they all fall cut about who is to be the guardian. Each one of them will want the child, as long as they expect it to receive money. In most of those instances we have turned the money over to a court, whose duty it was to appoint a guardian for the child and its money. Now we refuse to write policies that name children as beneficiaries unless the policyholder specifies a guardian in the application for a policy.
"As to the matter of production, we divide the business area into districts, and in each district we set up a local office in some central town. We appoint a manager to take charge of the business of the district and to handle the affairs of the local office. The personnel of the local offices includes, manager, assistant manager, cashier, clerk, inspectors, supervisors, and agents. Each supervisor has from four to six agents working under him. Each agent has a quota to make, and this quota must go over and above his lapses.
"For instance, it's worked out this way: if you are collecting on 25¢ policies end you lapse four, that would mean slapse of $1, and for every dollar lapsed you have to write $1.25 in new business to keep up your quota. That makes it very much to the interest of the agent not to permit policies to be lapsed, end how they do work to keep up their quotas and to exceed them, for they know that’ll count more on their records and will bring promotion quicker than anything else can.
"And then too, the agents are supposed to make so many calls each day. That number of calls is rated according to the territory end the amount of business done in that territory, while we understand that not every prospect called on will take out insurance, we do expect our agents to land at least three out of every ten that they cell on. Each agent has his prospect book, and in this is kept the names of all the people he calls on, the date of each call, and a notice of when he expects to see each prospect again sometimes it takes weeks for the agent to make just one trip to each of his prospects, but whether they want him or not, ho hunts them up end calls regularly, just as a matter of persistence. Do you know that in the end these regular calls usually win out for the agent?
"Our larger towns are divided into what we call zones, and each agent has his own zone to work. Their work is so carefully outlined for them that they run on schedule time, just like postmen. That schedule is important to the prospect as well as to the agent, for they know just what time the agent is due to arrive for his money.
"From time to time the company puts on a contest, and the prizes are, as a rule, nice trips. For instance, one winner of our latest contest got a trip to California, and the other won a trip to the World's Fair in New York, There were many other smaller prizes in the contest that were well worth working for. These contests rake the agents feel like putting out their best efforts to win those fine prizes, and the efforts of the agents compose the lifeblood of the organization, not only of our own, but of any business organization. Their lives depend on the men who bring in the business.
"Few people on the outside realize the valuable services we render to morticians. You know the collection end of their business is bound to be difficult, for they are compelled to bury the deceased even if they never get anything for their services and merchandise. As a usual thing people are inclined to request expensive funerals for their relatives, whether they can pay the bills or not. We encourage the proprietors of the mortuary or undertaking establishments to call us as soon as they are notified of the death, so that we can tell them if the deceased has any insurance with us or not. Most of the other insurance companies extend the same courtesies.
"When they know in advance how much cash will be available, the morticians are enabled to make a more sensible deal with the family. They can show only what they know con be paid for.
"It's an established fact that unless they get at least a substantial part of the cost before the interment, it will be difficult for them to collect at all. After they have rendered services to the best of their ability, furnished burial robes and caskets, and used their hearses, automobiles and other equipment, there is little that they can do toward collection after the body is under ground. They had better get a claim on what insurance exists before they even start work on the corpse."
There was a proud and satisfied look on his face when he asked me, "How do you like our new home?" As I looked about me, he continued, "We have just recently moved into these offices. We had simply outgrown the old place and just had to have more room. I'll have to admit we are rather proud of our new home."
The modem offices were well furnished and equipped. Venetian blinds shaded the windows facing the street, and the walls and woodwork were immaculate in their fresh coat of light tan paint, "You have every reason to be proud of these lovely offices," I told him, "and they are so centrally located and convenient for your workers end clients."
"Thank you," he answered, "and now I think that I've just about covered everything of interest about our work, and I hope that you'll find at least a part of the information usable."
"I like your story," I replied, "and I do so very much appreciate it."
His eyes kept straying back to the papers on his desk and I knew that he was anxious to get back to his work, so I thanked him for giving me so much time for the interview, and arose to go.
"I'm very glad that I've been able to assist you," was his response, "and if in the future there are questions that arise in regard to our race, I hope that you'll let us try to help you compile the information needed." He stood up as I went out into the reception room, where the young receptionist left her desk long enough to escort me to the hall and open the outer door for me. "Good-bye," she said, "we hope you'll come our way again sometime."
