Concord, N. C.
October 2, 1938
M. L. W.
CALVARY LUTHERAN CHURCH
Location: In the Forest Hill section near the Locke Mill, on McGill Street.
Building: A small, conventional brick structure with a steeple. Inside the walls are of clean white plaster, the floors are bare. The pews are old and scarred, but the altar and other chancel furniture is neat and new looking. A piano at the front, near the choir seats, holds a large basket of flowers.
The People: Most of the older men and women have the patient, stolid look of country people. Their clothes are neat but plain, while those of the younger girls are cheaper reproductions of the clothes the "down-town" girls wear. The women and most of the girls wear hats. Many children and a few babies are present.
The Service: The Sunday morning was warm and bright. On the sidewalk outside the church the men stood waiting for "preachin'" to begin. They didn't talk much. Inside the women waited quietly while the children, many of them alone, squirmed and shuffled about from pew to pew. When the pianist played a soft prelude, the men came in to take their places with their families.
I was surprised at how well the congregation sang the long and rather difficult Lutheran service, which they followed to the letter. Even the children became quiet and joined in. The voices of the people were soft and pleasant.
For the text of his sermon the young pastor had taken the passage on serving Sod and mammon, and he began by saying that "the mammon here referred to is not capitalized as readers of Milton might think." Then he plugged away at the idea that man cannot serve both God and mammon, repeating it in at least a dozen or more slightly varied ways. He wound up by rebuking the congregation for not giving the church and its organizations more support. Apparently they would not come out to choir practice, brotherhood meetings, young people's meeting or even to Sunday School in the way they should. The adults listened placidly, not betraying a flicker of feeling even when he became indignant at their short-comings; the young girls did not listen to him, but whispered, giggled, fussed with each others bushy permanents and looked at polished fingernails; the children wriggled once more.
After the sermon, the rest of the service was conducted in the same orderly manner in which it was begun and the sixty to seventy-five souls left the church slowly, pausing at the door to shake hands with the minister.