CASTLE HAYNE*
The highway that goes North out of Wilmington to Richmond, to Washington and New York, around New Hanover County is called the "Castle Hayne Road." To a casual observer there is nothing unusual about the two small churches, the houses and filling stations strung along the road at this spot ten miles from Wilmington, nor is there anything remarkable about the little railroad station with its long, covered, freight platform, the battered wooden shack bearing a dim sign "U. S. Post Office, Castle Hayne, N. C." In what way is it a place worthy of attention?
Look at the countryside, flat and gentle, beautifully cultivated even along the highway; ride down side roads through fields that stretch in every direction to the rim of trees at the horizon and notice the neat houses end farm buildings that dot the rich, green landscape; visit some of the people who make a living from the straight-furrowed fields. Then you will find part of the answer, but to have a complete one it is necessary to know something of the history of the community.
Castle Hayne started about fifty years ago in the mind of Hugh MacRae of Wilmington. This young graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology realized that the South was in a bad economic condition and he believed that one of the things the region most needed was a system of agriculture based on small, independent, self-sustaining and diversified farms. It seemed to him that this could best be achieved by bringing in farmers from outside the region, farmers who were not wedded to old methods or bound by worn out traditions, and settling them in colonies throughout the South because, as Mr. MacRae still says, "One fanner alone has no chance, but a group has opportunities almost in proportion to its numbers." If such colonies could be established, if they were successful, wouldn't they serve as examples for local farmers and thus improve local methods until Southern farming would gradually be revolutionized?
*Originally Castle Haynes, but changed by the railroad to Castle Hayne.
The southeastern section of the Coastal Plain of North Carolina, with its warm, sunny climate and abundant rainfall was ideal for the production of early spring and summer vegetables for northern markets under a system of intensive farming. But most of the pine covered and swampy land in the region was considered worthless. Mr. MacRae believed otherwise, and in 1906 when he organized the Carolina Trudging and Development Company, he began to carry out his plan. The company imported soil experts and drainage engineers to examine about a half million acres of this "worthless" land in New Hanover and Pender Counties, and on the basis of their reports purchased areas of the best types of agricultural land. Preparations were made for colonists. Roadways were built, the land was drained, divided into ten and twenty acre plots, then portions of these small farm plots were cleared, ploughed, small houses and necessary farm buildings were erected. Markets were less than a day's journey distant by way of the Atlantic Coastline Railroad which runs from Wilmington to New York. How all that was needed were colonists.
The company sent agents to Europe to study agricultural conditions and find colonists from the nationalities best suited for the type of agriculture to be followed on the coastal plain of North Carolina, Advertisements were run in foreign papers and magazines, in selected papers in this country.
Many unforseen difficulties arose in establishing permanent colonies. A group of Italian grape growers, personally chosen from a community in Northern Italy where no crime had been committed for over three hundred years, were the first colonists brought to this country by the company's representative. These people settled at the colony twenty-two miles north of Wilmington and two miles south of Burgaw, county seat of Pender County. They named their colony "St. Helena" in honor of the Italian queen. The principal money crop was grapes from which wine was made and marketed through Italian wine merchants in New York. This was a successful Industry, the colony grew and prospered. Then after several years the North Carolina legislature enacted a prohibition law which blocked the industry, most of the farmers became discouraged and moved away, and it was some years before the colony of St. Helena prospered again.
Soon after St. Helena was established, some Greeks were settled at "Marathon" and Hollanders at "Van Eeden." The Greeks, being unmarried, became dissatisfied and before long moved away; the Hollanders, who had been personally selected by a company agent, quarreled among themselves because of old country class distinctions which they could not forget, and their colony was a failure. A group of Belgians was chosen to settle on farms, but when they arrived in this country they were offered such good wages In industry, they abandoned the idea of farming and again the company took a lose.
The colony called Castle Haynes was established on the site of an old plantation by that name. Mr. MacRae thought first of bringing Western and Mid-western farmers to settle there, and a special train was chartered by the company to bring a group of them to look at the prospects. They came, they looked, they listened to people in Wilmington who named then about trying to make a living on "that old land," they went back to the West and the Middle West. After this experience, Mr. MacRae decided that it might be wiser to stick to the company's original idea of European colonists. For one thing their unfamiliarity with English might prevent them from being so easily swayed by the advice of local people.
About 1910 some Dutchmen from New Jersey, who had heard of the new developments in eastern North Carolina, applied for farms in Castle Hayne. Before long friends and relatives followed them, and thus the present colony began. In addition to the house and outbuildings, each farm was equipped with the necessary implements, mules, a cow and chickens, and the company saw to it that each farmer got the seed and fertilizer he needed during the first hard years. For the first four or five years this colony, like all the others, received agricultural advice from an expert who instructed the farmers on the preparation of their lands, selection of seeds and fertilizers, the cultivation, gathering, grading and marketing of products; a social worker advised the women on housekeeping problems and helped organize community life. Despite such assistance, the early years were not easy, or successful, but the Hollanders persisted and gradually their intelligent industry and thrift won. They paid for their farms and began increasing acreage, trying new crops, Poles and Hungarians moved into the colony, and followed the farming methods in use. Spinach, lettuce, snap beans, English peas, carrots, cucumbers, radishes, squash, potatoes and other garden products, were successfully grown, shipped cooperatively to northern markets, and sold locally. Corn and forage crops were grown in the summer and fall, cover crops in the winter, so that the soil was in productive use throughout the year.
In the early 1920's the Dutch started growing flowers and bulbs, an industry which brought a fresh spurt of prosperity to the colony. It is now the principal means of revenue for the Hollanders, while the Polish and Hungarian peoples have continued mainly with the growing of truck. The flower shipping season begins in January with daffodils grown in beds which can be covered as a protection against extreme weather. Then come the daffodils in the fields, the iris and tulips in beds, the tulips, narcissis and iris in the fields, and the gladiolis in fields. After the gladiolis are through blooming, about the middle of July, bulbs must be dug up, graded and stored for the next year as other bulbs have been, then beds and fields are made ready for fall and winter planting. Truly flower growing is an "all year round business" as Castle Hayne people say.
The soil at Castle Hayne, a fine Norfolk Sandy Loam, is in excellent condition even after years of intensive farming, because it has been properly cultivated and a careful system of crop rotation has been used. Enormous amounts of fertilizer are used to produce a good grade of truck and fine flowers; many fields are equipped with irrigating systems so that water can be sprayed on young plants during early dry spells. At meetings of the Truckers Association and the Flower Growers Association agricultural problems, packing and marketing difficulties are discussed until satisfactory solutions are found.
The colony which began with six hundred acres of cleared land and a few families of Hollanders now comprises about 2, 000 acres of land and some sixty families. Twenty-two of these families are Polish, 20 are American, 7 Hungarian, one German, and 10 are Dutch. About 15 other Dutch families lived in Castle Hayne first, but have moved out in the county or down the road near Wrightsboro where they could find more space. Most of the people who have come into the community have stayed, so that a spirit of peaceful stability has developed.
The influence of Castle Hayne has permeated surrounding territory. When the colony was first settled, the road loading into Wilmington was practically uninhabited and uncultivated; now much of this road is lined with farms which use the farming methods and produce the same kind of crops as Castle Hayne. Up the road to St. Helena and out the side roads through New Hanover and Pender counties the same thing has happened. Mr. D. L. Futch is an example. He was born in Pender and spent all his life farming there, growing tobacco, corn, some cotton. Several years ago his Dutch friends near Castle Hayne helped him learn the tricky business of raising daffodils, iris, gladiolus, and now flowers are about his best cash crop. This year he is trying lettuce too.
The present settlement at St. Helena has been greatly influenced by Castle Hayne. Some of the Italians stayed there after the exodus, but the colony did not prosper again until the 1920's when Poles, Austrians, and Russians came in, started extensive truck farming and cooperative marketing. Today some seventy families farm about 6,000 acres of the Norfolk Fine Sandy Loam and Portsmouth Pine Sandy Loam. The community has a Catholic school, a Greek Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, a store and a community house. The schools of Burgaw are available for the Protestant children.
On the whole, the people of St. Helena do not live so well as the inhabitants of Castle Hayne. They are not as well educated themselves nor do they give their children the opportunities that are given Castle Hayne children. At Castle Hayne they will tell you that "those people up at St. Helena make lots of money, but they stick it away in the bank"; they will tell you too that "St. Helena is a tough place," because the people are emotional and fiery, quick to fight if they are stirred to anger. Yet the two communities are quite friendly in spite of a disparity in ways of life. From the beginning Castle Hayne has been dominated by the Dutch, a people who seem to have a remarkable facility for adopting the good things of American culture and retaining the best qualities of their own.