October 16, 1938.
William David Wrather Wade
Casual Laborer.
Paris, Tennessee.
Nellie Gray Toler, writer,
Revised by Aswell.
TN-35
Old Fellow that looks at passing women
DUB
My name's really William David Wrather Wade, but I'm known far and wide by the name of Dub. My ma thought too much of a preacher name of David Wrather, so that's what she named me. But, doggone, it didn't make me no better! My brothers and sisters named me Dub and it stusk. They was enough of them to make it stick, though. Let me see-- they's Crete and Kate and Daisy, Mattie and Connie and Ludie, Honest, all of them is my sisters, too, Then they's Thomas and Maston and Bill and me, Dub, and Pled and Owen. They's all boys and my brothers, Ain't that enough to make the sweet name stick if they wanted to call me that? I'm here to tell you, yes!
My pap he had plenty of money or property or else we'd have all starved to death. Too many mouths and all of them liked to eat and still do. Me, I don't believe in large families. They's too hard to support, though my old man he seemed to have it easy then. They had all the meat and bread they needed. Raised it theirselfs and that's all you needed. A little piece of meat every Saturday out of the store is jist about all they is in a common house today.
I married one time. Didn't have no better sense. Don't look like a woman would have had an old ugly reprobate like me, but she did anyway. She died without no children. She was sure a beautiful woman. I'm fifty years old now and I don't never want to marry again ever at no time."
These days I like to spend my time farming or cutting wood, That's all I want to do, jist farm. My mother was old man Jim Jones' daughter and the Wades was the first settlers here and me, I'm jist no account plain Dub with no ambition but to be what I am now and that's jist a lot of nothing.
Shucks, I've got my own home, I own it but it ain't paid for. Got a piece of a car, too. It runs, anyway, but looks to me like heck though and I've got two acres of land. It's enough for me. I'm jist plain Dub and I don't care.
Well, I went to the eighth grade in school. Got too smart for school and I quit. I was too smart for the teacher. Knowed more than she did. If I'd stayed in that school, if I'd gone on through the high school, nothin on earth couldn't kept me out of the colleges. They'd begged old Dub to go to college. I'd ripped through that college like nothing at all. I'd been one of the biggest Big Ikes in this country. Even them that's not smart ought to finish school. All children should be whipped and made go as high in school as they can go. They'd make more money then.
Me, I make a dollar twenty-five a day. It partly pays my income in all. It's not making what I'd like to make. Twenty or twenty-five a week is what I'd like to make. Don't like it not making it. I sure don't It's all the WPA will pay me.
On WPA I am and I ain't my own boss. I mean I like my bosses because I don't know who they is. The real high up ones, I mean. I don't like my time keeper though. He thinks he's Big Tail Pete. I vote like I please, too. Vote for the right man always. Can't help it because I'm religious and that guides me.
Guess you might call me a Missionary Baptist. But religion's got nothing to do with life far as I can see. I don't know how it could affect me anyway. I ain't got nothing else to amuse me but that. It's a fairly good way to amuse myself and church is good to go to when they's no place else, I never have no other place.
Better than anything, I like to sleep, Sleep when I'm not at work, I read maps and papers a little bit though. Sometimes I walk and look around and see what I can see.
Stand on the street corners and see the women go by like I'm doing now. I always get around the ten cents stores and watch them pass around. See my eye? I can still tell what a pretty woman looks like, even if it is out and the other one bad. I've had one doctor in twenty years. That was when I got this eye put out. My sister scared me and got mad at me and threw a pair of scissors and the point stuck in my eye and put it out.
Other ways I've been well blessed with health, but not much sense. Didn't you know I've always been called crack brained? Well, I have, believe it or not, and I ain't got overly much sense either. I know it and that's lots more than lots of folks knows too." Ain't that right.
Oh well, my courting days is over. Unless you'd call me standing around town watching the women pass courting. Then, in that case I sure do plenty, but none serious. I don't want to have to feed none of them women for all time. I'd buy most any of them an ice cream cone, or a stick of candy or a sack of grapes or apples. Wouldn't buy none of them no clothes, though. Not me, not old Dub!