Oklahoma Writers' Project
D. M. Garrison
"These Are Our Lives."
Joe Haskins is in his early forties. He is over six feet in height, and he would push the scales to a good one hundred, eighty pounds. Rawboned and sleepy-looking, he is like most rigbuilders, a dark sun-brown. His hands are big and powerful. He speaks softly, and he delights in "spreading it on."
"Believe it or not" standing before you in the flesh is a rigbuilder who married a woman Yep, I did that very thing. It's hard to believe but it's the God's truth if I ever told it.
"And what are my thoughts on whether a man ought to have lots of kids or limit his family?
"If single, limitate. But if you're married, let your old woman and nature take their course. Personally, I believe in large families. I feel there's no sense in getting married if you ain't planning on raising a brood of kids.
"Me and my old woman have four between us, three boys and a lone girl. The oldest boy is twenty. That's Joe. He's got the brains in the family. He stood first in his class at high school, and he's now going to a business college in Oklahoma City. If our money holds out he'll finish up in another year and wear a white collar. And if times don't pick up, but get worse, he'll wear a white collar, but it'll be the same one he's wearing now.
"I never had much schooling myself. If I remember right. I got either to or through the third grade. I learned to read and write after a fashion and even to this day I can count till my fingers give out. Back in the mountains of Pennsylvania where I grew up, kids didn't favor going to school none. And our parents didn't favor schooling much neither. Maw needed us at home to help with the farming, while paw was "setting- a-hen" -- making moonshine whiskey.
"Paw was the best moonshiner in the county, which was only natural for he came from a long line of moonshiners, dating back to the Whiskey Rebellion. If I was of a mind I could start myself a patriotic organization calling it "Sons of the Whiskey Rebellion." And of course. I'd affiliate with the C.I.O.... But all that ain't got nothing to do with paw and how he brung up us boys.
"There was four of us boys, and paw had named us all Joe, because his name was Joe, and his paw's name was Joe, and his paw's paw's name was Joe-all the men in our family from way back was named Joe.
"Us four boys all looked alike; tall, rawboned, and sleepy-looking, We were all around the same age, and not even maw could remember which one of us was born first. And seeing we was all named Joe, nobody knew which one of us they was talking to. A gal could date all four of us, and think she was going steady with a fellow. But there was one way, and only one way, to tell us Joes apart. When it came to drinking paw's whiskey, there was a half-pint difference between us. Joe could drink a pint Joe could drink a pint and a half, Joe could drink two pints and Joe could drink two pints and a half.
Paw and maw was always getting us boys drunk to find out which one to scold.
"And don't for a minute think we had an easy life just drinking and the like. Paw was pretty strict in training us boys. And he had to he strict because the revenue officers would scatter us through the woods ever so often. To train us boys, Paw would play a little game. We would all be setting in the house peaceful, when paw would bellow revenue. That was the signal for us boys to go a-flying for the brush. Paw, who was playing like he was the revenue officer, would grab up his shotgun storm out on the porch, count ten, and then open fire on us boys. If we tore around the back of the house, maw would take a pot-shot at us from the back door. Paw never hit none of us boys, and that made him sore. So he cut the counting down to five...........
"Oh, I see, you just want true facts about my life. Well, I reckon I did stretch the truth a little, but a rigbuilder ain't a rigbuilder if he don't lie now and then. So if you want a true life story of a rigbuilder, you've just got to put up with the lies. There ain't nothing you or me can do about it. It's natural for a rigbuilder to spread it on thick, stretch the truth a little.
"We'll forget paw and his good whiskey, and go back to talking about my kids. I told you about Joe, my oldest boy. My next kid was a boy too. His real name is Leon, not Joe, but the boys in his crew call him Greb. And that's what I call him.
"Greb is more like his old man, he would never get nowhere using his head. He stayed in the first year of high school for three years, and the only reason they didn't bust him back to grade school, he was the best football player the high school had. Greb is as strong as an ox, and eats like a horse.
That boy sure likes to eat. He works hard to raise a good appetite. When his girl ask him to her house for a Sunday meal, Greb eats dinner at home first so he won't make a hog of himself at her house.
"I got Greb on a rigbuilding crew as a boll-weevil, a ground man He'll be a boll-weevil for a year or so before he gets to be a rigbuilder. Under our working agreement an apprentice or boll-weevil, gets $6 a day against a rigbuilders $11. That sounds like a lot of money, but it ain't when you figure us rigbuilders are lucky to get in five days a month.
"There was a time when a rigbuilder could work 365 days of the year, if he wanted to. The pay was good, getting as high as $25 a day during the World War. Then when the depression hit, jobs started getting few and far between. The contractors didn't help none by cutting the pay to $5 and $6 a day. But it didn't take us rigbuilders long to organize, and now we get $11 a day.
"Us rigbuilders are in the Oil Workers International Union, C.I.O. We've got nearly a closed-shop now in the Mid-Continent Field. Every once in awhile we've got to close down a scab-herding contractor. We've got all kind of injunctions out against us, but we don't mind. If a scab takes our work, injunction or no Injunction, we run him off and fine the contractor. If the contractor won't pay up, no rigbuilder will work for him. And us rigbuilders stick together and never run away from a fight. We're good union men.
"Here I am clean off telling about my kids again. Let's see, I was telling about Greb. Well, Greb is the working-stiff in the family. He pays his own way now.
"After Greb came Ruby, the lone girl in the family. She is 16 and is going to high school. Ruby and Joe are the ones who put on all the airs for the family. Ruby is quite the little lady. It hurts her the most when we ain't got enough money to put on a big front. And she's forever hounding me about the way I talk. I kinda feel sorry for Ruby, especially when we go on a pellagra diet. Most her girl-friends' fathers are merchants and professional men, uptown people. Her girl-friends talk about having lots of clothes and going to dances and college. And Ruby doesn't know when she'll be wearing fancy pink underwear, and when she'll be damn fortunate if she steps into a pair of flour-sack drawers. Having no steady income, sure makes that girl's life miserable. She don't know which side of the tracks she belongs on.
"And the youngest one in the family, Tuffy, even makes Ruby's life more miserable. Tuffy is only ten, and he likes to play with anybody and everybody. Money don't make no difference to him. If he's got a pair of overalls, he's satisfied fine. Tuffy is a mess. Ruby will be putting on airs for her uptown friends, and Tuffy will appear with every poor, shaggy-haired, dirty-faced kid in town. Ruby won't speak to him in public at all. She keeps out of Tuffy's way.
"How come he's called Tuffy? He's the best scrapper in grade school. He don't make good grades in his lessons, because he won't study. But his teachers tell me that Tuffy could lead the class if he wanted to. He don't like school none, but he's going through all them grades. I ain't going to let him quit like I let Greb do.
"I'm strong for learning.
"Some folks claim education puts fancy notions in a person's head, makes a person feel too good to work for a living. I think everybody ought to think thataway, or not to think that away. What I'm trying to say, all folks ought to have the chance for an education.
"The only thing I got against the schools, them teachers learn the kids all about the interest rates and the like, but they don't say nary a word about labor unions. They teach our own kids to work against us.
"That cleans up all my kids. All in all we've been pretty fortunate. We ain't starved yet. This change in income, having lots one year and an application in for the poor farm the next year, don't bother me and the old woman much. We're used to it, and we ain't strong for society, fancy ligner and the like. But it's plenty hard on the kids. There's no planning for their future. I don't want them to poop-off their lives, like so many boys and girls do today, for something better to do.
"Yep, I'm satisfied with life. I've worked hard and have been in good company. My wife don't nag me too much, and, now that us rigbuilders got a union, the contractors don't rob me as much as they used to.
"We've had some sickness in our family. The kids have had all the diseases, and my old woman all the woman's troubles. She and me both got a third set of teeth. I've been ruptured and my veins, especially in my legs, are all cracked from straining. You've got lots of heavy lifting to do when you set up a rig. And I've never got one dime compensation. Of course it's different now. If the union finds a contractor working men and not carrying compensation, he is reported to the industrial commissioner. Yep, I can truthfully say them doctors have got a big slice of my earnings. But we're all alive and kicking, so I guess it wasn't money thrown away. It was damn high though.
"Our house ain't nothing fancy, but it's kept clean. My wife is as clean as a hound's tooth. She don't even let me keep a cuspidor in the house. And we've got most of them modern conveniences; an outhouse on the inside, a washing machine a radio, an electric iron, and a nice living-room suite. We've got a good car too.
"Lots of strangers wonder why oil field stiffs live in shacks and drive good cars. Working in the oil fields is just like going to sea you ain't never in one place long. A good car is more important to us oil field stiffs than a good house.
"And a rigbuilder, more than the other stiffs, is on the move most of the time. He's got to go where the work is.
"It's this moving around that keeps us rigbuilders from taking an interest in politics, religion, and morals. I never bothered voting until us boys formed a union. Now I vote for the old boy who is for labor. But them politicians are such goddam liars, it's hard to tell who owns him. Hanging ain't too good for a politician who lies to the people. Party lines don't mean much these days. I vote for the man, and I don't care what ticket he runs on.
"As for religion, my old woman does the praying for the family. Personally, I don't give religion much mind. Going to church never kept a man from sinning. If there's sin in a man, it's coming out despite heaven, hell, and plain old dust. I know a lot of religious folks don't believe in picture shows and dancing. My family ain't like that. We like having fun. I think folks ought to amuse themselves at anything they're big enough to do.
"I like a good Western movie once in awhile, and I like a good square dance now and then. But I'm getting old and can't take too much of that carousing. I spend most of my spare time in my garden, or beefing with the boys at the union office. Yep, I'm slowing down. In my day, I used to be a powerful drinker. Now I take a drink of whiskey only when I'm sick, and I get sick when I want to.
"Though I was the Joe who could drink only a pint, I soon outstripped all the other Joes. But that's only to be expected, because a rigbuilder, to have any kind of reputation, has just got to pour down a half-gallon of whiskey of an evening.
"I'll never forget the night I polished off a whole gallon all by myself. It was white mule, but I poured a whole bottle of Iodine in it to give it a little color, and a good kick.
"Well, sir, by midnight I was as brown as a berry. The iodine was coloring me up from the inside. The owner of the joint came over to me and asked how I got in. I told him I had been there all night. He called me a damn lie and threw me out, saying he didn't allow no colored people in his place of business. If I hadn't of been so drunk ...... oh hell, I'm spreading it on a little bit thick again.
"Guess I better go home and work my garden. If work don't pick up soon, them greens and onions and the like will help keep us off a pellagra diet for a spell.
"When a rigbuilder marries a woman, he's got to start thinking like a human."
