A VISIT TO THE JAIL
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
and
John N. Booth "
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas o and 7
Augusta, Georgia
May 4, 1939
 
April 26, 1959
Mr. and Mrs. George Nash (white)
Clarke County Courthouse
Athens, Georgia
Bailiff and Jailer
S.B.H.
A VISIT TO THE JAIL
Bill, the elevator operator, looked at me in surprise when I asked to be taken to the fourth floor of the courthouse. "No, mam," he protested, "I can't do that unless you get the con-sent of the .jailer. He's Mr. Ashford you know, and that floor's the jailhouse. we ain't 'lowed to run this elevator up there 'less he says so."
"All right, Bill," I said, "I think he's up there now, so just go on up and I'll get his permission to leave the elevator." Fortunately, the jailer was standing at the barred door awaiting the elevator. I explained my mission.
"I'm sorry," he said, "but I don't have time to talk with you now, but if you'll ask Mrs. Ashford, I'm sure she'll tell you all about our work, and to tell the truth, she knows as much about it as I do." Bill called out, "Miz Ashford! Oh, Miz Ashford!" The jailer's wife soon appeared, unlocked the door and permitted me to leave the elevator, and her husband boarded it. Bill seemed relieved when he was convinced that it was all right to bring me to the "jailhouse" floor, so he closed the elevator door; Mrs. Ashford locked the barred door, and the elevator went zooming back to the first floor.
"Come, let's look the jail over first," Mrs. Ashford invited, "and we can talk later. Come this way." Walking down the long corridors we stopped in the doorway of a room somewhat larger than the average cell. "This," Mrs. Ashford told me, "is our private dining-room. The compact little place did not seem too much crowded, although I noticed that among its furnishings were the dining table and chairs, china cabinet, buffet, several small tables, and a refrigerator, all arranged with the compactness of a pullman diner. "I do my own cooking," Mrs. Ashford explained, "at least I prepare the food and the cook tends it for me while it's cooking. I'm sure if I were to start over again without any help, I'd burn everything I tried to cook. The county pays the cook $2.50 a week, and my husband adds 50¢ a week to that in return for what she does for us."
We walked on until we were confronted by a barred door at the end of the corridor. "Shorty," she called.
"Yes, mam, Mrs. Ashford," was the response from someone beyond the corner.
"Unlock the door, and tell the boys I'm coming, and that I'm bringing a lady with me."
"Yes, mam," came the reply, "I sho will."
Soon the door was unlocked and we entered what Mrs. Ashford called the main walkway. "These cells," she explained, were for the confinement of Federal prisoners, but they do not serve terms here any more, and it is so seldom that we have to make temporary confinement of a Federal prisoner that we now use these quarters for county prisoners. I had to let the boys know we were coming for I very seldom come on this side of the jail at all, and as a rule the prisoners don't dress. They usually lie around in their shorts and undervests. In warm weather many of them don't wear anything but their shorts. When I let them know I'm going to walk around they usually dress hastily or get under their blankets.
"This walkway is for the caretaker and the visitors. That other one over there is where the prisoners are allowed to walk up end down for exercise. However, when we get in desperate prisoners, such as murderers, we put them in small separate cells and lock them in. Each cell has two bunks, a commode, end a lavatory. Where there is just one person to a cell, the mattress and blanket are removed from the top bunk and it is folded back flat against the wall.
"The prisoners are not given sheets nor towels for the reason that sheets can be torn into strips and tied together for use in attempts to escape or a prisoner might try suicide. On the other hand a torn blanket will not hold; the knot will slip."
In low tones she said, "We don't have a single murderer in jail now. One of the men here is charged with assaulting a very young white girl, one for stealing an automobile, one for not paying alimony, and one for drinking. His sisters had him put in here trying to break him of the habit. The sister he lives with said he was driving all of her people from her boarding house by his vulgar behavior. The other three men are in for different things. I don't know what they did other than being drunk on the street. They told me the one who raped the girl was an orphan boy, that had been reared by an uncle who was known to be in trouble most of the time, and it is said that no girls would go with him."
We had turned to the right of the walkway, and Mrs. Ashford continued, "This side is where the Negroes are kept. Most of them are in here for stealing: two are charged with stabbing. Good morning, boys," she greeted them, and eyeing two children, she exclaimed, "Say, you have some mighty young company this morning!"
The majority of them spoke; the more sullen ones just looked at her. The little Negro boys were sitting on a cot in the walk way, they were barefooted, and kept their eyes on the floor. Several were playing cards. They looked up and smiled as we passed them, saying, "Good morning, Mrs. Ashford." We walked the full length of that walkway and turned to the right. This led to where the white men were clustered together in the corner. All of them spoke. "Tom, how are you feeling this morning?" Mrs. Ashford greeted the evader of alimony. He took a few drags from the cigarette he was smoking and answered, "Oh, fine I reckon. It's mighty lonesome in here, and I get awfully tired, but I'm trying to make the best of it." A boy who was lolling on the floor smiled, and another in a cell raised up to give us a swift glance as we passed, but he quickly turned his face away. Mrs. Ashford informed me, "That's the one who ruined the girl. He doesn't mix with the rest of the prisoners, just lies on his cot most of the time." Shorty stopped his cleaning long enough to unlock the door, let us out, lock it again, and then went back to his work.
On our way up the corridor, Mrs. Ashford began talking: "You know it's a shame we don't nave a place to put those young boys other than with the older ones. They hear all the things the older men say they do, and when they get out they will try their hands at what they hear."
We had by this time returned to where our tour began. In a corner, before the elevator door, was a large refrigerator; to the left of this was a door. Mrs. Ashford opened the door, turned on the light and bade me look. "This room," she said, "is where we store our surplus mattresses and cots. I guess there are fifty mattresses and at least twenty-five cots here." We turned to the right and entered a small dark passageway. Pointing to a cot with an army blanket on it, she said, "on this side is where the night watchman sleeps. And those steps over there lead to the third floor."
We entered a room packed with baskets, boxes, barrels, and tables. "Now this," she said, "is our storage room, and those are the vats where the vegetables are washed before they are cooked. I help the cook with that chore, because it takes a long time to pick enough turnip greens, peas, and cabbage for so many."
From the pantry, or storage room, we went into the kitchen. "This is where the cooking is done, and the wagons are loaded to be sent to the prisoners' cells," I was informed, "One cook is all that is necessary as the prisoners are only fed twice a day. Eight o'clock in the morning and two o'clock in the afternoon are meal times here. The pans are left with them at the two o'clock feeding so that if they choose they can save some of the food for a suppertime snack. A huge boiler was on the wood-burning stove. Mrs. Ashford lifted the lid and said; "There is ten pounds of meat in that pot. We put a good size piece of meat with the vegetables on every prisoner's pan."
She picked up a pan and said, "These are the pans we put the prisoners' food in. They are divided in two sections, so we can put the vegetables in the large section and the bread in the smaller one. For breakfast we give them fried meat, syrup, biscuits, and coffee. We change their vegetables every day, and the left-over vegetables are put in soup for them on Mondays. Cabbage, turnip greens, rutabaga turnips, end dried field peas are rotated on the other days, and they get Irish potatoes once a week, and stew meat on Sunday. We would like to give them fish for breakfast occasionally, but we would have to buy them in such large amounts they would spoil over night as ice is not furnished." I could see no objection to serving fish at the noon meal, but raised no question.
"Today we are having peas. What you see here in soak is ten pounds. We put meat on to boil about seven o'clock in the morning and cook it until the vegetables are ready to be put in. In this way all the grease is out of the neat to season the vegetables, and the meat is thoroughly done. This is the cook," she said as a very black Negro woman of medium size, entered the kitchen from en adjoining room. She carried a washtub with meal and flour in it. "How much meal do you have in that tub, cook?" I asked her. "I don't know, Miss, I'se worked here so long I don't measure it no mo'. I gen'ally knows how many prisoners dey is here so I jest puts the meal in the tub 'til I thinks it's a plenty. I mixes a little flour wid my meal so it'll stay together. No mam, I sho don't put no eggs in dis here cornbread. It's for prisoners to eat: not for folks what 'haves dey-self lak me." Walking over to the stove she took up a large pan filled with fried meat grease. "You see," said Mrs. Ashford, "we use the grease from the fried meat in the morning for the cornbread. Have you noticed our coffeepot? It holds nearly three gallons. Did you see the square holes in the cell doors? Well, they are just large enough to slip a pan end a tin cup through.
"I want to show you where we keep the flour, meal, lard, meat and coffee." We left the kitchen and entered a short passageway, and went into a room to the left of this hall. "This is our meat supply. You see we give the prisoners what we call streak-of-lean-and- streak-of-fat. We also use the best grade of flour and coffee. A man brings fresh water-ground meal every week and I heard the sheriff give a man an order for 35 pounds of turnip greens to be delivered every Tuesday. I like compound lard best, for I think it makes better bread and stays fresher longer when we buy up a large supply of it.
"We give the prisoners the privilege of having what they want to eat, outside of what the authorities furnish them here in jail; but they have to buy it themselves and make arrangements for the cook to cook it. It is up to them and the cook about what they pay her. If she wants to do it for them that is her lookout, and if they pay her for cooking extra food for them, the money goes to her. When the watchman comes on at night he often goes out and buys food for the prisoners. The other night he got 18 bottles of 5¢ drinks for them and I think they were the largest ones they could think of. We don't give them ice water and that is the only cool drink they get.
"Now come this way and I'll show you where we keep the women prisoners, Negro as well as white. We have had fewer women prisoners in jail since last Christmas than I can remember since we took the jail over.
Two cells held 8 cots and each of these rooms had a bathroom. The other cells on this side were like the ones I had seen in the men's quarters. "This side of the jail is called the hospital," Mrs. Ashford said, "I don't know how it got that name.
"Let me show you the cell where we kept Miss Lane, the white woman, who wouldn't give up the cat that she said took up at her house, and had kittens there." All the cells in the women's quarters have wooden doors that close over the barred ones, thus insuring privacy. "Do you see this paper stuck in this hole in the door?" Mrs. Ashford asked. "Well, we run a small cord through the hole of each door and tie it to the barred door, so the women can have privacy when they are bathing and dressing. They can push the door open and then they close it by pulling the cord to them. Well, Miss Lane pulled the cord out and stuffed paper in the hole to keep anybody from peeping in at her.
"That was a funny case. She was locked up because she wouldn't produce the cat and its kittens in obedience to a court order. After she changed her mind and agreed to turn the cat and kittens over to the original owner of the cat, the authorities wouldn't let her go that night for fear she would do away with 'em. So the bailiff was sent to her house for the cats, and they were brought here to the jail. She made that bailiff come up here at eleven o'clock at night and at eight the next morning to feed them cats.
"When she was taken to court the cats were kept up here in the jail until the Judge ordered them to be brought into the courtroom. Oh, yes, she really did spend the night, and ate breakfast and dinner. She ate a biscuit and a half, and all of the meat and drank her coffee. For dinner she ate some of her vegetables and the crust off of her cornbread. She was put in jail about six o'clock one Wednesday and left about that time the next day. When they locked her up she began to fuss and fume about how nasty her cell was.
"'I never saw such a nasty place in my life,' she snorted.
"I told her Wednesday was cleaning day, and I would have the cook bring her the broom, as the prisoners cleaned their own cells."
"'Do you think I'm crazy?' she snapped, 'I don't intend to clean nobody's damn jail.'
"'All right,' I told her, 'then stay in it as it is. Nobody else will clean it for you if you don't. But if you change your mind call the cook and she will bring the broom to you.'
"'I don't intend to touch the damn broom,' she said. I just walked off and left her. Bright and early the next morning she called for me to come to her cell. 'Are you matron of this place?' she asked.
"'No,' I replied.
"'Well, who are you anyway?'
"'If you really want to know I am Mr. Ashford's wife,' I informed her. She kind of changed her tone of voice after that."
"'Do you mind doing a favor for me?' she asked.
"'It all depends on what it is,' I answered.
"'I want you to call my lawyer for me.'
"'I don't know whether I will or not.' She had acted so hateful, her nose all turned up, it made me mad.
"'Well, the sheriff said there was a phone in jail,' she argued.
"'That's true enough,' I admitted, 'but it isn't for the prisoners' use.' Then I went on to my apartment.
"My husband was sick in bed. When I told him about it, he said it would do no harm for me to call her lawyer, so I did. He came and about ten minutes after he had left she called the cook and asked her to call her lawyer again she had thought of something else she wanted to tell him. The cook told her she was sorry, but Mr. Ashford was sick and he was asleep in the room, where the telephone was and she couldn't disturb him. However, her lawyer did came to see her later. We didn't call him and she didn't ask us to wait on her again. I am sure she didn't go to bed that night nor wash her face and hands as the toilet tissue was left just where I had placed it on the lavatory. I tried to peep to see if she was in bed but couldn't see her for she had plugged the hole in the door with paper."
Mrs. Ashford closed the outside door to the cell, and as she led me toward the opposite side of the corridor, she asked in low tones, "Do you know Nell?"
"Nell, who?" I wanted to know. "Oh, she's a girl who used to hang around the courthouse all the time. I'm sure you've seen her if you didn't know her name. Anyway she has been in jail since the third of last August. She was picked up on the streets for vagrancy, really I don't think she has the mentality to work. Don't yon want to talk to her? I am sure she gets lonesome."
I was caught off my guard and for a few moments I couldn't think of a word to say to the vagrant, when Mrs. Ashford called her, and opened the outside wooden door. Nell came forward and stood behind the barred door.
"I thought you would like to talk to this lady," Mrs. Aahford told her, "she's visiting the jail. I'm going to my apartment, but I'll be back when you have finished talking."
"Good morning, Nell," I greeted the pasty-faced waif. I noticed that she was dressed in a red crepe dress. Her oily hair was hanging down on her shoulders and needed a shampoo, as well as a good combing.
"Howdy," she replied. Conversation was a difficult matter. Nell told me of the lonely hours she had experienced in the nine months that she had been in jail. Reading seemed to be her only diversion. A shadow of a smile wavered hopefully on her face as she asked, "Can you tell me how I can get out of here?"
"No," I told her. "I surely can't, but of course you know that the length and terms of your sentence depends on the nature of the trouble that put you here."
"It was because I couldn't find any work to do," she said, "and nowhere to go. I used to work in an overall plant at Jefferson, Georgia. My first cousin owned the plant, and after he sold it I haven't been able to find any work since somehow. Do you know if they work girls in the overall plant here?"
"I am sure they do," I replied. "Have you ever tried to convince the authorities that you will work if they will help you get a job; that you will go to work and stay straight."
"No," she wailed, "because they wouldn't believe me. They have warned me so many times if I didn't get work and stay off the streets they would put me in jail. I didn't pay no attention to their warnings, and got in with the wrong kind of folks and got in trouble, and the folks here made the authorities take me off the streets and put me in jail, and I've been here since last August, and no hopes of ever getting out again. What are you doing up here?" she inquired.
"Oh, I just came to look around."
"Are you working?'"
"Yes."
"Who for?"
"The government."
"The WPA?"
"Yes."
"Do you reckon they would help me?"
"Have you ever tried?"
"No, because I didn't want to be on relief, but I reckon it is better than doing wrong and being where I am now."
She smiled and I told her: "I'm quite sure it's a million times better. Now, Nell, when you do decide to go straight and they let you out, remember no one is ever put in jail that is good and tries to go straight. As long as you try to help yourself in the right way, and live so that you can respect yourself, you will always find someone willing to help you. Now be a good girl and when you get out go straight and you will be helped."
"Yes, I'm sure going to do that if I ever get out this time, for I know the Lord will help me if I do good." She saw Mrs. Ashford coming. "Good-bye," she whispered, and closed her outside door.
The walls on this corridor are solid cement and bars are seen only on doors and windows. I followed Mrs. Ashford to the end of the corridor where we entered her apartment through double doors. She is a tall, stout woman of pleasing personality. Her short hair was in curls and waves all over her head, and on this morning she was wearing a print dress that hung full and loose from the shoulders, and the fact that she wore no hose with her black oxfords did not seem to embarrass her in the least. The jail keys were in her dress pocket.
This three-room apartment has a large room - the one we entered - that is flanked by a smaller room at each end. As I followed her toward a door to the right, she began to explain about her apartment:
"This room used to be a cell, I understand, and then the sheriff fixed it up nice and slept here before he married." A four- poster walnut bed and the accompanying pieces of the suite were crowded, into the tiny room. Mrs. Ashford said, "You will have to excuse my apartment I have slept in this room while my husband had the flu, and I told him I was going to keep on sleeping in here until he gets completely well. I don't want to take his flu.
"This middle room is living-room and bedroom combined. I was told it was built for the detention room. Lawyers used to talk to their prisoner-clients in here where it was more private than the cells.
"Did you near about the jailer who shot himself in this room? My bed is in the very position his was. His right hand was paralyzed, so I guess he must have snot himself with his left hand. The bullet went through the left temple and nit the wall on this side of the room. come over here and I will show you where it hit the wall. They found the bullet in the corner near this little place it had nicked in the wall.
"Now come in here, let me show you my bathroom. This was a cell too. After we moved here we had a bathroom put in and to do it they had to raise the cement floor a foot. Now, I have to step up end down but it is worth it to have hot water all the time. Our pipes for hot water are connected to the wood stove in the kitchen. Of course there was no closet, so I had this framework put up and hung this curtain across it to conceal our clothes. It don't look so nice but it'll do.
"Come in the living-room, and excuse me while I go to the kitchen for a minute." She left the room, and I noticed what a lot of furniture there was in this one room: bed, sewing machine, tables, chairs, radio receiving set, lamps, a three-piece living-room suite, pictures on the wall and criss cross curtains at the high barred windows. There was a rug on the cement floor, also another smaller rug in the hall Just outside the apartment entrance.
The telephone was ringing as she came back into the room. She glanced in its direction. "I never answer the phone during the day no matter how many times it rings," she said. "We begin answering it at night when the sheriff closes his office for the day. Because when the phone rings in his office it rings up here at the same time. However, I call outside as much as I like."
She sat down and began rocking back and forth, talking all the while. "I haven't told you how long we've been living here, have I? Well, if we live to see 1940 we will have been here eight years. I am sure my husband will run again. He wouldn't know what else to do.
"We haven't been living in Athens tut eight years. I was born in Jackson County, but I guess you could say I was raised in Lawrenceville. I didn't finish high school but my husband did. When I met him I was in training to be a nurse at one of the hospitals here. We went together about a year before we married. He was a farmer in the Oconee Heights district then, but after we married we moved from there out on the Atlanta road.
"He took over a filling station and store, was appointed bailiff and served in the Bradberry district about four years before coming to Athens. He was not paid a salary then and don't get one now. He gets a commission on all papers he serves and a bailiff's fee. After the former jailer killed himself, and during the time the unexpired term was being filled, the sheriff begged my husband to move to town, as you have to be a resident of the city six months before you can run for office. He took the sheriff's advice, moved to town, ran against several other men, and won. Most of the work he has ever done was for the government and in politics.
"The only trouble I can recall be ever had with escapes and catching people, was when we lived out in the Bradberry district. It was reported to him that two Negroes who had stolen an automobile in South Carolina were hid out in that district. So he gathered up several men in the neighborhood and they took to the woods to hunt the thieves. While he was searching the first one of the Negroes they found, his buddy, hiding in the bushes nearby, shot at Mr. Ashford. Instead of hitting my husband, he shot his own buddy in his hip. That surely was a lucky break that day.
"Oh, we've had all kinds of prisoners up here from murderers to whores. The last mentioned are usually kept up here a short while, and then made to leave town. There have been several drunk women up here who have cut up something terrible, Federal prisoners who escaped, others who bound and gagged the night watchman, and an 11-year old girl, as well as crazy women. The crazy ones are funny people. You know we have to keep them here for 10 days before they can be sent to Milledgeville. No matter how hard you try to tempt their appetites, some of the crazy people simply won't eat. They usually laugh, cry or sing; it all depends on what they lose their minds about, but some refuse to utter a sound.
"The saddest case I ever experienced was that little 11-year old girl, I mentioned before. She was brought up here by the welfare people after they discovered she had a bad disease. She said a 75-year old man had given it to her. He was indicted on the charge of contributing to the delinquency of a minor child and was put in jail. After a medical examination it was found he didn't have this disease that she had contracted and they turned him loose. It was found out she was just a bad little girl and that she had become a street walker. When they would take her to the Health Department for those shots she was the sickest person you ever saw. She would cry and beg to go home to her mother, and her brothers and sisters, but they were not allowed to even visit her. However, she begged for her mother so hard the authorities did let her come up here once, and she put so much meanness in the child on that visit they wouldn't let her come back. She was a nasty old woman. When I caught her spitting snuff behind the door, I said to her, 'Look here, this might be a jail, but it isn't a hogpen, you get something and clean that snuff up.' The child gave her something from her cell to wipe it up with and she left.
"Once the child asked me why they wouldn't let her go home to her people. I told her what was wrong with her, and explained that she might give the disease to the rest of the family if she went. She told me if that was her trouble she didn't want to go home. Five years ago one of the social workers got her admitted to the Home for the Friendless. Not long after that, the woman who got her in there went to see her, and the child refused to pay her any attention: pretended she didn't even know her. The social workers were awfully good to her when she was in jail here. She had a birthday and they brought her gifts of every kind even to a cake with 11 candles on it. However, the welfare administrator here got mad because I told the child what her trouble was.
"This girl we have in jail for vagrancy now is the laziest thing you ever saw. She wouldn't clean her room or bathe herself to save your life if you didn't shower down on her. She likes Mr. Ashford, but she hates me, because I make her keep herself clean as well as her room. I had a round with her this morning about scrubbing her room. One day I passed her room and saw she had worked an iron pipe loose from the steam heat register, and had her window propped open with it. I said to her, 'Nell, give me that piece of pipe. You know you are not supposed to have such things as that in your room.'
"'I'll be damned if I do and I'd just like to see you get it.'
"'Now, Nell, don't talk that way. You know that's no way to talk.'
"'Well, I don't care if it ain't, I'm not going to give it to you.'
"'Yes, you will, and I'll give you a stick of wood if your window really needs to be propped open.'
"'I'll see you in hell first.' At that, she went to the window and threw the stick to the ground. If anybody had been passing below it would have hurt them and we would have gotten the blame for it. After she did that she began to scream at the top of her voice and kept it up for 30 minutes or more. The only way I could get her to stop screaming was to pretend I was going after the sheriff and my husband to have them put her in the padded cell. After I had convinced her I meant to have her put there, she screamed for about 15 minutes more and hushed.
"Once my husband had some Federal prisoners out on the roof to walk around. That night when he put them back in their cells two of them hid back in a doorway on the roof. Re failed to count them and didn't notice that all of them were not in. They took the rotten old rope off the flagpole that had been out there for years, and tied inner tubes to it to make it long enough to reach the ground. It broke and they fell on the second-floor drain pipes. One of them was hurt and the other one got away.
"The authorities didn't make s desperate effort to find him, end soon gave up the search. It wasn't long after that before the escaped man gave himself up and no extra charges were made against him. When their time was out they left on the same day.
"About the crazy woman; she lost her mind about money. Her husband died and left her some Insurance money. Her father begged her out of it, so he could buy a car with the money. She was running an advertisement for a second-hand car, when she came to jail. She would yell out, 'Go down to the bank and tell the man to give you a thousand damn dollars: I want to buy a car.' We had an awful time trying to keep clothes on her.
"We had to put her in a padded cell at night. If we put a mattress in there for her to sleep on she would tear it to pieces. She was the funniest sight you ever saw the morning after her first night in that cell. She had torn up the mattress and made a tall cotton hat, and had the tick wrapped around her. Her old coat with its fur collar had been made into boots. The poor thing called me and my husband 'Ma Ashford' and 'Pa Ashford.' She would laugh as loud as she could and say, 'How do I look?' We always told her fine. We have to give crazy people something to make them sleep or they would wear themselves out and us too. The only way I could get her to take it was to pretend I had stolen it from my husband and the sheriff. She would reach for it and drink it in no time, then I would run, and she would laugh and say, 'The damn sheriff didn't see us, did he?'
"There was another woman who lost her mind over religion. She brought her songbook to jail with her. At midnight she would take off her clothes, climb up in the window, stick her legs through the bars and sing at the top of her voice. The manager of a hotel across the street would often call us up and ask us to please have her stop. My husband told him if he could do anything with a crazy person he was welcome to try it.
"Another woman went crazy when her peg leg husband died. At that time we had a woman in jail who went crazy and killed her sister. She had been in the insane asylum two years, and was sent back here to await trial, after she was cured. I got her to help me give Peg Leg's wife a dose of medicine so she could sleep. In our haste to give her the medicine we never noticed she had a snuff box in her hand. The murderess could sew beautifully and had on a lovely robe she had made out of Turkish towels. She was holding the woman while I gave her the medicine. In some way Peg Leg's wife got the lid off the snuff box and threw it all over that woman helping me. That made her piping not, she told me to wait a minute until she could get the snuff out of her hair, eyes, and face, and off the robe she was wearing and she would be back in a few minutes. She soon returned saying: 'She made me mad. Now I'm going to give that medicine to her or die trying. I have had dung thrown in my face and hair at Milledgeville, but I have never had snuff thrown on me before.' The medicine was given and the murderess went back to her cell. Her trial never came up as the authorities were afraid she would go crazy again if she had to go through all that grilling about the killing of her sister. So she was put in the custody of her people. The last time I heard from her she was working in a cafe in South Georgia.
"My husband noticed the commitment papers of a woman prisoner listed her home town as the place where I was reared. I did not recall the name recorded on her warrant and her face was not familiar. 'What is your real name?' I asked her. 'This is old Sally Jones,' she said, 'what is left of her.' I 'most fainted, because as a girl she was a lovely person and from a nice respectable family. Her husband was mean to her, she said, and that caused her to start drinking. He left her and she got to drinking that much harder and finally lost her mind. You know I have never been afraid of any of the crazy people we have ever had up here in this jail.
"Some of the prisoners are real smart, and often they beg me to give them something to do. A woman who killed her young son was in jail six weeks in all, and she had been here three weeks before I saw her face. She sat in the corner of the cell with her back to the door from morning until night. Every morning when I got up her cell was in order and she was sitting exactly as I saw her the day before.
"I was determined to make her talk, so one day I asked her if she wouldn't like to have something to read, she said, 'No, but if you have any sewing to do I had rather do that.' It was about the time the dresses were being worn shorter. She shortened every one of mine, and did a beautiful job altering a coat for me. I save up all the scraps I can and when the prisoners want something to do I let them piece quilts for me and now I have at least twelve quilt tops the prisoners have pieced for me. The time passes quickly if they are occupied at reading or sewing. I tip them sometimes; not more than 15¢ at one time, and I give that to the ones I know whose people are not able to give them money.
"There is a man in town who wants the county to employ a matron to supervise the prisoners and to plan and direct jobs for them to do. I see no reason why it couldn't be done. Seems to me it would save the county money to use the prison labor instead of employing outside help for cooking, cleaning and other things. We just nave two helpers, the cook, and the man you saw in the men's side sweeping the walkway. However, I don't get one cent for my services, and am glad to help the prisoners, as well as the county, in any way I can.
"We have had little Negro boys up here as young as six years old for stealing. Once we had 7 white boys whose ages ranged from 6 to 13 years old for stealing the grates out of empty nouses and selling them for junk. They made so much noise they 'most ran me crazy. They got so restless I would take one of them at a time and make him run the full length of that long corridor six or eight times until he was tired then take turn about until I had given all of them their exercise. I did this twice a day as long as they stayed in jail. I found that these boys were reared under the wrong environment and their parents had failed to give them the proper training.
"Once someone smuggled a hacksaw to some men prisoners. They hacked out of their main walkway and when the night watchman unlocked the first gate and entered their 'bull pen' they made a dive for him and in the scuffle they knocked the master key out of his hand. They didn't take time to look for the key, but bound end gagged him, took his pistol, blackjack, end the elevator keys from him and made their escape.
"The watchman rolled over and over until he got to our corridor. He couldn't yell very loud on account of the gag, and it's a wonder he was able to wake us. I heard him first and woke up my husband. He jumped up and ran out in the corridor, in his nightshirt without any protection whatever. It scared me to death, and I begged him never to do that again. He said he was too startled, waked up so suddenly, to think of a pistol or blackjack. While he was busy cutting the watchman loose and taking the gag out of his mouth, I was calling the police and sheriff. I told them to surround the courthouse so they could see the prisoners if any left. But they had a 30-minute start on us. All but one was recaptured and brought back to jail. It is a thousand wonders they hadn't tried to break into our apartment and kill us. No matter how careful you are with prisoners there is no jail in the country that can hold some of them when they take a notion to break out.
"Now I could sit here all day and tell you one experience after another, but they would all be very much like those I've just told you.
"I joined the Baptist Church in my home town, but when I came here to live the person who was my best friend was a member of the Christian Church, so I went to church with her, end attended that church for a long time after I married. My husband don't belong to any church. When I begged him to join, he told me one thing sure he would not join the Christian Church, so I began going to a Baptist Church. Do you know as good friends as that girl and I were, she was so narrow-minded about religion that she wouldn't have anything to do with me after I stopped going to her church so regularly. I told my husband about this, and he said, 'Just don't pay any attention to her: the Baptist religion suits me.' So I'm sure if he ever joins any church it will be the Baptist.
"I believe your office is on the floor beneath us in this same building. Do you hear much noise coming from the jail?"
"Not much," I told her. "Sometimes we hear a little singing, and occasionally a woman screams."
"That is funny to me. Other people have told me the same thing. The noise goes down I am sure because I never hear a sound from the side where the men are.
"In the summer our apartment is unbearably hot. It never gets cool until toward morning about the time we have to get up. Do you see that shelf I have built up there by the window? Those artificial flowers are the only kind I can have in this hot place, as real ones don't last a day here.
"Now, come with me I want you to see the padded cell." I followed and watched her unlock the door. Then we went inside. The quilted padding on the walls, ceiling, and floor is so thick that the room seemed as though it might be lined with mattresses. "This," she said, "is where we put the violently crazy people. I have seen many of them come and go, end those cases always leave sad memories for me. Now, come with me right here. Just walk up these steps. This is the place where we let the Federal prisoners out in the daytime to walk around. They give us less trouble than any other class of prisoners because they seem to understand that they'd just as well accept their sentences and make the best of conditions."
There are three steps leading up to the door where I looked out over the roof of the building. Mrs. Ashford continued, "We call this little alcove our balcony, even if it is just a door opening on to the roof. The way the iron is curved to form the door is pretty. This roof space would be a grand place for a juvenile section of the jail. The Women's Club is trying to get the county to enclose the roof for that purpose; whether it will go through or not is yet to be seen. It will cost at least six or seven thousand dollars or maybe a greet deal more than that. But I do think something should be done to separate the children from the older people. of course that is the county's own problem to work out, and it is not becoming for me to express myself about it. However, them that don't live here are not in a position to see those things as I see 'em. I could tell 'em plenty.
"I don't believe there is anything else I can tell you that would add to the story." As I was leaving her apartment, she asked, "How did you feel visiting the prisoners?"
"Oh, it gave me the creeps a little until we got to your apartment and closed the doors," I replied.
She laughed. By this time we had reached a metal door at the top of a narrow flight of metal steps leading down to the third floor. She unlocked the door, and said: "You can get to your office quicker this way than by waiting for the elevator. I'm glad you came, and I hope you can use at least some of my story. You'll be a good one if you remember all I have told you."
I thanked her, and as I hurried down the dark stairway, I could hear the jailer's wife locking the barred door.