GREEK STUDY NORTH CAROLINA
Statement by Gus Constantine Geraris
Prop. Fort Raleigh Grill
Elizabeth City, N. C.
"We like olive oil for frying our food; we used nothing but olive oil in the old country. Over here olive oil pretty expensive, we use mostly Wesson oil. We use some lard too, but lard not so good. Many small Greek restaurants get a bad name for greasy foods by using lard. Lard burns easy and smells bad. I don't like lard.
"Oh yes, we are very fond of garlic; we use it on all our roasts and in our gravies -- just a little bit, because most American people don't like to taste the garlic in their foods.
"Now, if you want something good, stuff a fish with a bread dressing with lots of garlic in it and make a sauce of olive oil and lemon juice whipped together like mayonnaise and highly flavored with garlic. That's the way I like my fish; wouldn't go so well in ray restaurant -- most of my customers would walk out on me."

W. O. Saunders
Nichols Lykiarbopulos was his name before he got his citizenship papers in the U. S. Court at Elizabeth City in March 1939. He is not Nicholas Harry Polus; the middle name from his rather whose baptismal name was Haralambos, the Greek equivalent of the English Harry; the last name Polus is from the last five letters of his native name. He is a native of the rocky isle of Cephalonia, in the Ionian Sea between Greece and Italy.
"I left my home in Cephalonia when I was 15 years old," says Mr. Polus. "Cephalonia is a beautiful place to live if you have money; but its all rocks, you can't make money there. That's why most boys in Cephalonia leave home and go to sea.
"I was a seaman when I left home. My ship landed at Philadelphia on Sept. 1, 1916. I decided to leave the ship and see some of America. I didn't have a nickel when I landed. May pay on ship was $35 a month, but I spent it all except a little I sent home to my people.
"I had an uncle in New York. I wired him for money to get to New York. He sent me the money and when I got to New York he got me a Job in a restaurant, washing dishes. The job paid $55 a month and the hours were twelve hours a day, seven days a week. Hard work but I didn't mind. I stayed on that job six or eight months and then went to Akron, Ohio, to work in a rubber factory.
After four or five months I went back to the same restaurant in New York as a night cook. I and worked up to cook's helper before I left to go to Akron.
"I had a cousin of the same name, a sea captain, who was building a small ship at Elizabeth City. He told me I'd work myself to death if I stayed in that restaurant; to come down to Elizabeth City and he would pay me $55 a month just to lay around.
"I came to Elizabeth City in June 1918. But I just couldn't lay around; I wanted to work. In three days after I came here I had a job as head cook in the Busy Bee Cafe at $80 a month.
"In 1924 I opened my own restaurant and lunch counter, just a little place on a side street. I made money. "In 1927 I formed a partnership with another Greek, George Lekas and we opened the Central Cafe on McMorine, Street just around the corner from Main Street. We spent a lot of money on the Central and it was the finest restaurant in town. We made money for several years -- $12,000 in one year. And then we ended the partnership. I bought the business.
"In 1935 I moved around on Mein street in the best business block, next door to the leading theatre, with a side entrance from the theatre lobby. The New Central was a finer restaurant. In 1939 I remodeled the Central, modernized it.
"I married an Elizabeth City girl whose parents were German-Americans, in 1926. We have built our own home. In 1937 my wife visited the old country with me. First time I had been back since I left as a boy 15 years old.
"It was almost like a new country to me. I left home so young that I had formed flew ideas about it and when I went back after 21 years I must confess I was vary ignorant about my country. But we enjoyed our visit. Wish I could go back once a year.
"Of course I wouldn't want to go back to stay. Work is more plentiful here, living conditions much better here, and plenty opportunities to make money if you want to work. I want my children brought up in America.
"You ask me about my religion, I belonged to the Orthodox Greek Church when I was a boy but it doesn't seem to me I got much out of it. I got more out of religion taught in schools, Religion is taught in the schools in my country, an important part of our education.
"I belong to no church in this country. I go to all Protestant churches when I find time. The nearest Orthodox Greek Church is in Narfolk, Virginia. I do not belong to it;I give them money when they send their collectors around; it's the same thing. They don't send a collector around often; sometimes twice a year, sometimes only once. Sometimes the priest comes with him. I wouldn't takemy children to the Greek Church. They still stick to the Greek language in their services and it wouldn't mean a thing to my children. Tell you the truth: I think the Greek Church in America will soon be a thing of the past if they don't change to English. The old timers are passing out; the Greek language doesn't mean much to the young Greek language doesn't mean much to the young Greek grown up in America.
"I like your Protestant churches; everything plain, simple, friendly. I want my children to choose their own church, if they want to join a church.
"We Greeks are criticized because we speak in our own language when talking to one another. I think we would speak better English if we dropped our Greek altogether. But when we talk among outselves our own language is much quicker; it's easier to find the words to say just what we want to say. In giving orders to my help in the kitchen they get my orders better in the Greek language than they would in English".
It seemd to me that I had heard of infant baptism in the Orthodox Greek ritual at Nick's (about the only name he is known by locally) home. I asked him, about this. "You tell me you belong to no church end that you want your children to choose their own church. Why then do you commit them by baptism to the Greek orthodox church?"
He smiled, shrugged his shoulders and said, 'Oh, I don't know; just an old custom; my people in the old country expect it; and it's a fine thing; sort of holiday for us; the priest comes out from Norfolk, there's the Greek Ceremony, lots offriends come in, we drink Greek wine; reminds you of the old country."
