The following interview was either never sent to Project officials in Chapel Hill, or they never saved a copy. There are, however, other interviews by Bernice Kelly Harris with individuals with the family name of Balmer. See for example "The Drapers 'Set' Till Bed-Time."
Approximately 4,432 Words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: HESTER BARNES
Date of First Writing	January 5, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. D.B. Stone
Fictitious Name	Hester Barnes
Address	Fairlee Street, Marion, S.C.
Place	Marion County, S.C.
Occupation	Widow of Sewing Machine Agent
Name of Writer	Annie Ruth Davis
Project # 3613
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, S.C.
January 31, 1939
HESTER BARNES
(white)
MARION, MARION COUNTY
(Town)
SOUTH CAROLINA
A alight rap on the front door of the little Barnes home brought the sound of hurried footsteps down the narrow hall. Mrs. Hester Barnes, dressed in a bright print dress and clean gingham apron, appeared at the door and bid her visitor a friendly welcome. When she learned that the caller had not come to offer her a few yards of hemstitching to do, whereby she might earn a little Christmas cash, a faint shadow of disappointment lingered in her eyes. To one side of the room stood a large hemstitching machine ready for use, while above it hung a printed sign: "A Pleased Customer Is Our Best Advertisement." But on hearing that one wished to have her tell a true story of her own life, she declared that wouldn't be any trouble at all for she knew she had a lot to tell.
"Come right in here and have a seat in that rocking chair. Seems like it sets easier than this here straight one and I like that bench over there side the wall, but I'm scared you might get lost on it being there ain't nothing of you. I reckon I better fetch my heater out here, so as to get the chill off this room, 'cause I know you ain't used to no such cold place as this. No, no, I've got one of these oil heaters that cooks and heats both and it's not a bit of trouble to roll it in here. I've been back in my kitchen a-fixing to stir me up a fruit cake for Christmas. You knows, it takes such a long time to get all them fruit cut up like they ought to be. Well, I wouldn't want to carry you back there like things is looking, 'cause I ain't got the wherewith to fix up my kitchen noways decent.
"I'm not in no big hurry to stir up that cake nohow 'cause I can do that most any time. People don't bring me much hemstitching to do these days and being there ain't nobody here with me but Jake and Jerry, I have more time laying heavy on my hands than I can shake a stick over. Jake's my boy and Jerry, he's my daughter Delia's son by her first husband. I ain't got nothing to do 'cept running around doing this and that, but I've sho' got to get out and hunt me a washwoman. I had one awhile back, but she got so sorry till I had to let her go. It's not now like it was fifty years ago, I'll tell you.
"I've been living in Marion near'bout thirty years, I reckon, and things sho' have changed up since we come here. When me and Dave was first married, we lived to St. Pauls, North Carolina, where Dave had a job carrying the mail from St. Pauls to Hope Mills. He didn't get but forty-six cents a day, but we thought that done good for Dave, being that was the first job he went on after he lost his arm. You see, when Dave was fourteen years old, he got one of his hands tangled in a cogwheel while he was working in the cotton mill to Hope Mills. The doctor had to take his arm off halfway between his hand and elbow. The company, he was working fox at the time he got hurt, offered to give him a business education and a bookkeeping job time he finished the course, if he'd promise not to sue them. Well, Dave wanted to learn 'cause he had to work so hard, he didn't finish high school, so he took up with their offer. He went to Buies Creek Academy and got his diploma, but he never did get the job the company promised him. It wasn't long till he got that mail job though and he never did get out of work no more long as he lived. It's a mystery how he did get along with that one arm, but he handled them jobs mighty well. Cose he missed his arm a lot, but he had the will to get up and do and that's what it takes.
"We lived to St. Pauls a year and if the mail hadn't changed hands, I reckon we might've been there yet. After Dave quit off carrying the mail, he got work in the cotton mill to Hope Mills again, so we pulled up and moved over there. He was superintendent of the spooling room that time and got something like a dollar and a half a day, I think. We bought us a right nice little place with a right good garden spot on it and had room to raise our own chickens too. Yes, we got along pretty well to Hope Mills them first two years, but it was hard the last one we stayed there. Dave was put on night work to the mill and I was just plum scared to stay home by myself with nobody but a two-year old youngun on the place. That was my boy, Jesse. He was born the first year we moved to Hope Mills - that's the oldest child I've got, you knows. That year I taken down with typhoid fever and, such a lot of people died out with it, the mill was forced to shut down for a spell. I just up and told Dave that he might as well hunt him another job 'cause I couldn't stand that night work no longer. He didn't like it neither and set out trying to get a job here, there, and yonder. Finally, he wrote off to the Singer Sewing Machine people and they give him a job selling machines here in Marion.
"Well, we sold out our place to Hope Mills and got a little to give us a sort of running start when we come here to Marion. My Lord, times was sho' different then from what they's like now. I remember, Dave rented a little blue house over on Pine Street from old man Nat Jones and we lived there eleven months. He never paid but seven dollars a month rent for it, but we didn't have no eleotric lights and no running water neither. Had to use this old time well water for everything. Delia, she's my second child, was born while we stayed in that blue house and it was some job tending to two babies, you might say, with nothing convenient like.
"Why, child, when we come here to Marion to live, there wasn't no sewing machines nowhere 'bout this country. Dave sold his first sewing machine to the old lady Charity Altman. She paid him sixty dollars for it and that's been thirty-four years ago. They've not gained much in price, but there's so many of them now till they don't sell like they used to. Sewing machines was just starting out at that time and, I remember, Dave bought a horse and wagon to haul the first machines he sold anybody on.
"When Delia wasn't no more than two months old, we bought us a little place over to Rose Hill on the edge of Marion. We had a right good place there, but it looked like trouble was just setting on my doorstep to that house. Sarah was born on the hill and when she wasn't but two and one-half months old, Delia took a stroke of paralysis. Oh, I know I had the hardest time in the world with them two babies together. I was so nervous till I couldn't do nothing to suit nobody. Sarah, she had the growing colic awful in this world and she'd squawl like it was near'bout killing her. Delia was the most helpless creature along with the housework and everything on me. We kept on seeing so much of trouble on the hill, we sold that place and bought this one. We wanted to send Delia to school and she couldn't hold out to walk no far ways. Then it was bad in damp weather too. Yes'm, it's sho' been better with us living in town 'cause Dave could do a whole lot more business after we moved here.
"We wanted to give all our children a high school learning, but only two of them ever went clean through. Yes'm, I've had five children in all - Ruby and Jake, they come after we moved to this house. My mother died while I was little and I never saw no chance of a education. My father kept all nine of us children there together on the farm and made us work most of the time. Lord knows, I craved to get a education bad as anybody ever did, I reckon, and so I was crazy for my children to get what I didn't.
"Seems like Jesse was always right easy to learn. He took a business course in the eighth grade and got a job time he was through the ninth grade. Yes, that child's told me many a time that his stenographer job's learned him more than any school he's ever went to.
"Sarah, when she was just three years old, she died with the whooping cough. She taken down with the measles and the whooping cough on top of that; it put her in the grave too. Poor little thing, she sho' had more than she could stand.
"Delia, she got far as the eighth grade, but somehow she couldn't never learn no algebra and history. Being in the fix she was in, she was so nervous till I thought I would go crazy to see her suffering like that. I went to her teacher and she told me not to push Delia. I taken her word and let Delia do as she pleased and she quit school. But she went back and taken shorthand and typewriting and when she finished, she got a job working just for the practice. Her boss was so crabbed, she come home crying one day and never went back no more. It wasn't long from then till she got to going with that sawmill man living over Catfish yonder. Well, she married him and he never lived with her but 'bout three months. When he quit work over there, he left this country. At first, he just commenced coming here two and three times a week paying his respects to Delia, but we didn't think nothing would ever come of it. Don't reckon her daddy would've agreed to her marrying him neither, but both said if he didn't, they'd run away and get married anyhow. He was making pretty good then and Dave said, looking like he was able to take care of her, we might as well let them marry. Then time they was married, he wanted us to let them board here. We said we couldn't do that, but he begged us to let them stay here a few weeks anyhow till he could get a place for them to go. Well, we let them come on here. And we kept expecting him to get a place soon and he kept putting it off - didn't want to find no place. I thinks when a person gets married, it's right for them to go to themselves. Two families in one house just don't get along 'cause their minds don't never run alike. Yes, that man walked right off and left Delia here on us in awful shape and it wasn't long till Jerry, Delia's baby, come along and we had all that trouble on us. Had her and Jerry both to look after, but we pulled through that like most everything else.
"Ruby, she finished high school and went to Floriday (Florida) and taken a course in beauty culture. She got her diploma, too, but she never could get a job being she never had no experience. She clerked in a store for a time and then she married a lumber yard man down in Floriday. They've bought a home down there and tells me they's living close to pay for it.
"Jake, he was the other one that went through high school and he stays home with me. He don't go 'bout much and if it wasn't for him, I don't know what I'd do. He ain't got but one fault and that's keeping his father's old noisy Ford in the road all the time. It makes so much racket, I'm afraid he'll be run out of town for the fuss, but he has to get some pleasure, I reckon. Jake's working on these paved streets with the W.P.A. now and that's what keeps us running - that pay check he gets from the W.P.A.
"We've had such a lot of trouble with sickness all our married life till it just keeps me under the weather all the time. I'll tell you the truth, this eye near'bout killed me. I taken a pain in it one day and it hurt me so bad, I like to went crazy. That's how-come I wears this paper over my eye now. Dave carried me them twenty-three miles over to Florence every other day for treatment two whole years. Dr. Lucas said he didn't know himself what ailed it. Cose he got the inflammation stopped, but I ain't seen none out of it since. It sho' took everything me and Dave could do to keep up all them high-priced treatments and we ain't never paid it all yet neither. We'd carry the doctor a little along and along, if it wasn't but one or three dollars, and he'd keep on treating me. Dr. Lucas was mighty nice and worked faithful, just the same as if I'd been paying him a big amount. Lord knows, I sho' would love to pay it all to him if I could.
"But long that time, look like Delia got to walking worse and worse every day that come. Then Miss Lelia Johnson come here to the house one day and advised us to take Delia to the Mason's hospital in Atlanta for treatment. 'Bout everybody around here knew Delia was crippled and her foot was a turning bad. Miss Johnson, she got into this information and, I think, it must've been she was just interested in Delia. Yes, she come and explained everything to us just as nice. It was mighty thoughtful in her, I think, 'cause if it hadn't been for her, we wouldn't never known nothing 'bout that place.
"Well, we talked things over and Delia's daddy taken her to Atlanta. Oh, they helped her wonderfully, but I went through pure agony that year. I'd seen a boy that had his foot out one time and it just wobbled all after that. When Delia left home, I begged her not to let no doctor cut her 'cause I was scared she might come home with her foot a flinging like that boy. But Delia and her daddy told them to operate without asking me yes or no. She's sho' proud now that she went 'cause she couldn't get 'bout like she does today if she hadn't been. Still, she ain't never got over it, but they did straighten her foot.
"Them Masons, they's sho' good-hearted people; they paid for most everything. All Delia's hospital expenses was free. Everything we had to pay for was getting her there and back and buying her clothes. Cose when the cast come off, we had to buy her two pair of shoes so as to get a big one and a little one. You see, her crippled foot was a size littler than her good one. Delia said everybody was mighty nice to her there - said they had shows for them right in the hospital. And Delia got the same treatment and had the same doctors as the pay hospital to Atlanta. Cose she suffered a right smart, but she had some friends in the room with her and they could talk. I'm sho' glad Delia could go there for we wasn't able to send her to no pay hospital. I've a mind like this, if a thing comes your way and you can get some good from it, it's wrong to deny having it.
"I know my husband worked hard every day that come, but he couldn't never make enough to lay up none ahead - always used it time he made it. Sewing machines sold for $60.00, but Dave just got a commission and his business wasn't never certain - worked just as luck would have it. Cose his repair work, that was all his. He always made enough to feed us and put some garments on me and the younguns' backs, but that was far as he could make it. When he was first starting out in Marion, he was burdened with the expenses of getting the where with to haul his machines on. Long 'bout 1924, his wagon give out and his old horse was 'bout broke down, too, so it looked like, inspite of all our trouble, he was obliged to get him a car. Somebody come along and sold him an old Ford on time and he run that right on for 'bout ten years. It was 'bout give out then, but he patched that one up to haul on and got him another Ford to travel in. The children promised, if he'd mortgage his house and lot to buy a car, they'd help pay it off. But they never did get it all paid for. Ruby, she had a case of appendicitis and we had to make a bigger mortgage on the place to pay her doctor's bill. Dave's health went had and seems like the less work he got, the more the expense piled up. But along that time, Dave was made truant officer for all Marion County and that helped us along a little. He got a $100.00 a month on that job, but after he paid all his expenses of traveling to all the schools in the county and to some of the homes out of it, he didn't have much left. Being he was traveling so much selling sewing machines anyhow, that's how-come him to get the job; he could do it cheaper than another man could with the one job. If it hadn't been for the insurance money I got on the death of my husband, I don't know how we could've got along. I took that $1750.00 insurance money and paid the mortgage off this place and got everything clear of debt 'cept that what I owes over there to Dr. Lucas. Now, it's just to work our living out the best we can and keep up the taxes and such as that.
"My husband, he's been dead now 'bout five years, I reckon. He had the flu and couldn't never seem to get over it. It settled in his bronchial tubes and the doctors couldn't get no medicine to reach it. He was not able to be working them last few years, but he kept on going. I begged him to stop for he might've lasted longer, but still the doctors said they couldn't do nothing for him. I'm here to tell you though, me and him got along mighty good together all our married life.
"I'll tell you, there ain't nothing on this earth like having a little bit of insurance coming to you in a pinch. If it hadn't been for fire insurance, I wouldn't have no house today. That laundry over there, it's set our house afire six times. Yes, we thought we was fixed with the house and everything clear of debt till that laundry was put up cross the street. The most they burns in it is this here sawdust and you just ought to see how the wind flies them sparks out that smokestack over on my roof. Why, I've stood out there many a night and watched the fire just a raining down on my house. The insurance company fixed my roof three times and then they canceled the policy. It worried me Bo bad, I couldn't hardly stand it, so I got out to hunt me another policy. It was something hard to do, too, with the house a catching so much. Finally, one man let me have enough to patch with. But it wasn't long till the roof caught afire again and that policy was canceled. I tried everywhere to get some more insurance, but I couldn't get nobody to give me none to save me. The town people, they got after Mr. Brown - he's the one what owns the laundry - and made him put a cover over the top of the smokestack. But he had a lever fixed on the top of it somehow that let the fire fly just the same. I got so nervous, I decided I better go and see Mr. Brown myself. I went to him several times and talked as best I could. I asked him how-come he was continually setting my house afire and keeping me from getting insurance on it. Well, he said he didn't do it. I said, 'Mr. Brown, nothing else done it but the cinders a flying out your smokestack.' I explained to him, nice as I could, that he was the cause of me losing my fire insurance and I thought he ought to cover my house with something that wouldn't burn. He said I couldn't prove he done it and that wasn't no satisfaction to me. I offered to sell him my place, but he wouldn't give me nothing like the worth of it. I'd love to get away from here anyhow 'cause the smell, soot, and noise from that laundry's something awful. Them chemicals they uses smells so bad till I can't hardly keep my wits together. But I know he's sho' got to do something 'bout it soon. I've got me a lawyer to get that fire stopped and he's got a case coming up in this next court.
"Child, I wonder why there's so much of trouble in the world these days. I've had my share of it, if anybody has. Delia, she married again 'bout three years ago and lives over on that other edge of town. She run away one day and married a widower with three younguns. When he begin to come to see her, I tried to keep her from entertaining him, but she just would do it. She sho' stuck her head in the fire that time - braver by a far piece than I would've been. Delia never did have to worry with the work none here, but she's got her hands tied now, I'll tell you. Yes, my Lord, when I heard what Delia had done, it like to killed me. They run off to Florence and got married and went on to Floriday for something like a month. Seems like that was just one thing I couldn't get over. You Bee, I was sick then myself and him with those children - then I knew she went off with a man that wouldn't do. He's one of these kind what runs around and them kind don't never treat their wife good. I'll tell you the truth, you might say she's just existing now and that's all. He's gone to drinking awful bad and when he's drunk, he's crazy as a bat. I'm so scared he's go kill her, I don't know what to do. Cose she's sorry she done it, but it's too late to help it now. I never have seen so much of trouble in all my life as I've been through - never would've thought I could've stood it.
"No, Jerry stays here with me and Jake. He was awful mad 'bout his mamma marrying again and he stayed on here with us. He's fifteen year old and he's such a nervous child, he don't go to school none now. Yes, Jerry was all the time getting in some kind of foolishness and him and one of the teachers fell out one day. She run him out the room and told him to never come hack again. He says, if he was living some wheres else, he'd go to school, but he ain't going back here no more long as that same teacher stays there. He's big as I don't know what and I just ain't able to do nothing with him. Still, I hates it mighty bad 'cause a boy without a education can't get nothing hardly to do these days. He works a little now and then wherever he catches a job, but he's a-rambling and a-roving 'bout all the time - worse thing he could do, I reckon.
"It's a shame, to be sure, but don't none of us go to church these days. We're Baptists and I think it's right to go every Sunday, but I've just got out the habit, I suppose. The boys stays out so late of a Saturday night till they wants to sleep on a Sunday morning. Then there just ain't nobody to say, 'let's go.' Yes, when Mr. Barnes was living, we used to go right regular He'd get up early of a Sunday morning and would be after the children to hurry and get ready for Sunday School. You knows, my husband taught a class down there to the Baptist Sunday School long as he lived in this house. We everyone belongs to that same church, but just don't go like we ought to.
"Well, it ain't hard for me to say what I think of the government these days. It's sho' helped us a lot keeping Jake in a job along and along. I'll tell you, machinery's knocked so many people out of work these days till if it wasn't for the government giving people work, I don't know what would come of them. Why, child, I bet I could 'bout count on my fingers here them people in this town that ain't had somebody out their family working on a government job. Yes, it's give the people something to do and that's something. Long as people can get work, they'll do to get provisions, but if they can't get work, they go steal.
"Jake, he's mighty good to me and we manages to get along somehow or another. Cose we don't have nothing to hire no help with but we makes out. Seems like somebody's give me bad luck this last year. I just don't get no hemstitching much to do these days since people ain't using it like they used to. I used to get ten cent a yard for all the hemstitching I done and I can't get but five cent for it now. If I make two dollars a month, I do well, and I don't do that - never made a cent last week and just fifteen cents so far to the middle of this week. That other side of my house over there, it's been empty since June gone. It's just like one of these apartments and anybody can live over there and not never know what I'm doing over on this side. It's lots of help to me to know somebody's in there even if I don't be right with them. I always got along good with my renters and if I could rent them rooms, that money sho' would come in good.
"When you come here, I was setting back there by myself thinking what I might do to bring in a little cash. I sho' needs it for I ain't had nothing for myself all this last year but this here permanent wave. My hair, it was getting so long, I couldn't do it up noways decent - just had to do something with it. I wanted to have it cut and I knew it would look a sight without I got a permanent. The first one I had, it growed out and I got another. Ain't hair a mess when it gets too long to hang and too short to fix up? I was getting ready to go to Floriday to see Ruby and I wanted to look decent as I could, so I went to the beauty parlor to get my hair trimmed a little before going. Well, the beauty woman said, if she cut my hair, she'd cut all my curls off, and advised me to get another permanent. Didn't neither one of my permanents cost but two dollars and a half and mine lasted good as any, I reckon. The beauty woman told me there wasn't a bit of difference in high-priced permanents and low- priced ones no more than the stuff you put on your hair. Then she talked me into getting one of these hot oil shampoo treatments and that done, me the most good to be sure. I got two treatments and paid a dollar apiece for them. I reckon I'm getting too old to get permanents, but I believes a person ought to try and look good as they can. People don't go by ages nowadays nohow."