Grayson W. Peschau
Maurice B. Haskett
ANTONIOS ROONDOS
Antonios Roondos, owner and operator of the Puritan Cafe, one of Wilmington's most popular eating places, was born in Trikkala, Thessaly, in 1888. The son of a farmer, he attended the public schools of his native village, ending his schooling at the end of his second year in high school.
In 1906 Antonios decided to come to America. He borrowed the necessary fare from his father and came over, traveling in the steerage. He had $12 when he arrived in New York and a taxi driver relieved him of five of that only to take him two blocks to a Greek restaurant. He had no relatives in America, but he learned at the restaurant that Greek workers were needed in the factories at Lowell, Massachusetts.
Antonios left for Lowell that night, arriving there with only twenty-five cents. He managed to get a job pretty soon sweeping floors at $4.60 a week. At the end of two months he had learned to spin and was paid $7-50 a week for that. At the end of three months he was able to send his father the amount he had borrowed for passage.
For two and a half years he lived in Lowell, but he decided that there was little opportunity for advancement there. After reading an advertisement one day in a newspaper he went to Indiana and started making candy. And there he learned to make 106 different kinds in six months. After this Antonios went into business for himself in Owensboro, Kentucky.
In 1912 Antoaios sacrificed his business in order to be able to return to Greece. He arrived there with $100 and a diamond ring. There he joined the Greek Army and thought against the Turks. He remained in the Greek Army until 1915 when he received an honorable discharge. Then he sold his diamond ring and returned to the United States.
This time Antonios went into the confectionery business in Lynchburg, Virginia. He saved about $250 and returned to Indiana and opened a business for himself. Then he sacrificed his business and volunteered for overseas service in the U.S. Army. He became the censor of Greek mail. After the Armistice he was appointed cook and remained with the Company until it returned to the States. Instead of returning with it Antonios became attached to the American Y. M. C. A. He helped to establish about thirty-five huts and was trying to make them popular with all the Greek soldiers. But the Greeks are suspicious of anyone bearing gifts and have been since the days of Troy.
In 1921 Antonios returned and spent most of the next three years in Alabama and Florida. Then in 1925 he went back to Greece and married an old neighbor of his, Evagelia Vezeris. They own their home, and the furniture is American with the exception of some tapestry.
Their son was born in Massachusetts in 1927, and he now attends public school. In 1928 they came to Wilmington.
They have remained here since, except in 1933 when they returned to Greece at the time both their fathers died.
Antonios became an American citizen the day he was discharged from the U. S. Army. His wife expects to get her naturalization papers in October. Antonios has been successful in business here, expecting only a reasonable return on his investment. He employs only local labor and only those in need of work. His ambition is to see his son some day operate the business successfully. Antonios thinks the United States the greatest and sanest country in the world today. It is his belief that the future Greek-Americans will take their place among the most useful citizens.
