June 14, 1929
George Cornelius Chandler (Negro)
Huntersville, N. C.
Blacksmith
Mary P. Wilson, writer
The Old Blacksmith
Original Names	Changed Names
Arie	Carie
Bruce Abernethy	Luke Christenbury
Charlotte	Riverton
Graham Street	Washington Street
Mr. Cross	Mr. Battle
"White chile, you write all day if you thinks it'll help wake up these no-account blacksmith customers I got. I done went and put shoes on three horses and sharpened six plow points already today and I ain't seen the first penny for my work yet. Yeah, I know prezactly what you're thinking, that I ain't no good my own self or I'd make folks pay me.
"It's just like this. I have to get all likkered up 'fore I can argue with them but yet when I gits like that I ain't worth a cuss for nothing.
"You know yourself I'm 'tirely too old to be a-working like this but it's all I can do. I've been at it going on forty-five years. 'Course I got some good customers what pays me just as soon as I do their work but I done told you now, I got three bad ones for every good one.
"Me, I was born in '66. Maybe I had a pappy and maybe I didn't, but if I did he went on and laid down and died 'fore I was old enough to know anything about it. My mammy had me a step-pappy when I got up old enough to work. He did make me work. If there's a crook in my back now I just plain got it working for that nigger.
"I was twenty-one the 15th day of March and married the 13th day of May--that is, the first time. You see I done married three different women. One of them got a divorce from me, married again, and was dead and buried 'fore I knowed what had happened to her. One of my wives, the first one, died when my chillun was small. I was working on the railroad then but I quit so I could look after them. I never did have but three chillun. They was by my first wife. Two of them died with the measles. The other one, Carie, lived to marry a no-good Negro name of Luke Christenbury. She lives down in Riverton some place and canes to see me 'bout every Sunday.
"I would have been glad to have a big family if I was able to feed them. Me and my wife both is working now, and then seems like we ain't gitting nowheres. We have to live here in this little old two-room shack where they's rats as big as kittens, and try to make the best of it. I has tried to kill them out but looks like two comes in the place of every one I kill.
"Maybe if I'd got more education I'd have got along heaps better but I never went to school but two sessions in my life and that was after I was past sixteen years old. You had to pay to go to school after you was sixteen. I think I'd have kept on going if I hadn't had a little trouble with my teacher. She whipped me and my girl laughed at me so I quit. That teacher had no right to let my girl know anything about me getting a licking.
"I can read and write though. I studied at home. Didn't you see the policeman come in here awhile ago with a check for me to sign?
"I seen I was going to have to learn something if I ever expected to amount to anything, so I got busy with the old blue back spelling book. I wish I had one now, I'd still study up on it.
"I ain't owned my own home since I sold everything I had in Oconi County, South Carolina. That was in 1899 when I was doing carpenter work on the railroad. I helped build the last wooden overhead bridge there on Washington Street in Riverton. When my wife died I bought me a blacksmith shop so I could be at home more. There was a shop in most every forks of the road in the old days but as far as I know I've got the only one for miles around. I trot myself to death going around trying to keep up with my work. I used to think nothing of making fifteen to eighteen dollars a day but I'm lucky if I make that much in a month now. The bottom has shore fell out of this business. I can do most any kind of work that anyone can bring in my shop. I ought to know something about it after all these years.
"I voted a Democrat ticket this last time, cause old Hoover was so mean just to see if I'd get along any better. I'd be well satisfied if I could get the old age pension so I wouldn't have to work so hard. It won't do me no good if the government puts me off much longer for I'll be dead and gone. I won't be a-needing a drink then. I have seen lots of whiskey hid in a cemetery but Lord, that don't help the dead ones none.
"The police just told me the next time I got drunk to stay out of his way. It cost me six dollars and twenty-five cents last time. I worked it out, cutting grass for twenty- five cents an hour for the town. Mr. Battle is mighty good about letting me work out my fine. I don't believe he likes to keep anyone in the lock-up. I was really drunk 'but they's lots around here that get that way. There was two white men locked up when I was turned out.
"I do think the world would be a better place to live in if more people had religion. Religion is all right but I don't bother it and it don't bother me. I guess God Almighty can do everything but I heard a drunk fool say one time that he'd love to see Him hold a handful of eels under water.
"I get right smart of work but this ten cents down and the rest when I can catch them is done got me down. The only remedy I can see is to get me a still and go to making whiskey again. That wouldn't help much for I'd be fool enough to drink up all my profits."