Worker: John H. Abner
Person interviewed: Joseph A. Michaels,
Rt. 5, Burlington, N. C., at the edge of Mayfair mill village.
First version written Nov. 15, 1938
THREE BIBLES
"All right," seed for michaels. "I guess I can tell you what life in a cotton mill is like. I ought to know for I worked in cotton mills for fifty years; off and on. I would still be working at the textile trade but I got laid off when the social security law went into effect. They found out that I was 68 years old, so they laid me off. I have not been able to find a job since. I am only seventy now, and hale and hearty, as you can see. There is plenty of work that I can do, but no mill will give me a job on account of my age; so I am forced to live off my sons. I get the old age pension, but it is only nine dollars a month; and that is not enough to live on. If I'm going to tell about myself and family I better get out my Bibles."
He went into another room. Soon he returned with the Three Bibles.
"You see I raised twelve children," he continued, "or rather eleven, one died in infancy, and the family record overflowed into Three Bibles. I have ten children living, and sixteen grandchildren. This old Book," he held up a small, worn Bible, "is the beginning. I bought this Bible in 1879, and I have kept it ever since. I was only eleven years old at that time, but I paid for it with my own money.
"I was born in Burke county, North Carolina, in 1868; and I went to work in the gold mines there when I was nine years old. I crushed rock by hand, and we got a part of the gold, I have no idea how much we earned, but it was not much. They were not underground mines; just open slits in the hillsides. I reckon I worked at that until I was eighteen years old.
"In 1887 me and my father went down to Glendale, South Carolina, and helped build a cotton mill there. They only paid seventy cents a day, and a day was from sun up to sun down. I reckon it must have beat the gold mining, or it might have been that we needed a change.
"Many cotton mills were built along about that time, and in the few years following. When the job at Glendale was done we went on over to Clifton, South Carolina, and helped build a mill there. When the building was ready I helped put down the machinery; and was then offered a job in the mill. I learned to weave. I worked two weeks for nothing; then I was paid at the rate of twenty five cents a day for a while. Finally I got a set of looms, but wages were so cheap I could never earn more than forty five cents a day. The work was so hard and the wages so low that I quit and went back to Burke county. For sometime I mined gold in Burke and Catawba counties.
"While I was working at that the Germans come to this country to buy monzonite sand. A cleaning plant was set up at Shelby, and the Germans bought all the monzonite sand they could get. I have heard that they bought it for sodium; and I have also heard that they got a trace of radium. The monzonite business kind of played out along about 1900. I think they found a cheaper way to get sodium.
"In 1895 I married and moved to Converse, South Carolina, to work in the cotton mill. My first child, George, was born there in 1896. Life in the mill was hard. The wage was low; seldom more than seventy cents a day, but often less; and a day was twelve hours. Groceries were cheaper in price then than now; but the cotton mill hands had to trade at the company store; and they charged high prices. The mill always owned the village and all the land around it; and they would not allow anyone to build or rent a store on their land. Sometimes a bold spirit would open up a small store just at the edge of the village, but they hardly ever succeeded. The mills fought such competition fiercely; and with both fair means and foul. Also, mill hands had little money to spend. When a family did draw a little cash money, which was seldom, they were supposed to spend it at the company store. If a family was caught trading elsewhere they were disciplined, or discharged.
"Long hours and low wages made it hard for mills to get hands, and to keep them. Most mills had labor agents, they called them, slave dealers would have suited better, and these labor agents traveled through the surrounding country searching for tenant families that were in hard luck. If a bad crop year had caught them, or if death or sickness had struck; so much the better. They would be in debt to the landlord. If it was a large family, with many children, the mill would pay off the debt, and move the family to the cotton mill; charging a high price for the moving. The debt might be only thirty or forty dollars; but by the time the family had learned to work in the mill it was likely to be two or three hundred. They were not paid while learning, and of course they would have to trade at the company store. As a man could earn only about seventy cents per day, and a child twenty five cents, you can see that a debt of even one hundred dollars was a millstone. I have known families to work in a mill for years and years without ever drawing a cent in cash. On payday the father would be given a blank ticket, showing the family earnings for the month, and the amount of the debt.
"Some mills specialized in widows. They would send their wagons as much as two hundred miles to move a widow woman with a large family of children. A widow with many mouths to feed could be brow-beaten much easier than a man. Sometimes a man, or a family, would rebel against mean treatment, and beat up the superintendent and his bosses, but that was bad business. They were nearly always sent to the chain gang for long terms; and being away from their families they were worse off than before.
"The mill owners were none too anxious to have the debt paid off quickly; and wages were so low that they could not have been so paid. They were largely falsified, and built up by overcharging at the company store; and by the fact that the family was required to work several weeks as learners; and without pay. The mills were well satisfied to let the debts run on and on, because the debt was the chain with which they bound their workers to the mills.
"The chief profit of the mills came from the sale of cloth; made by cheap labor, and under conditions which many people still believe was worse than slavery. The landlords had owned the slaves. They were property, and were usually treated as good as the mules and the other stock. The mill operators did not own their hands; and felt no responsibility for their well being. Sometimes a person would get sick and die because they were not able to have a doctor. In a way I suppose the debt was sometimes of benefit to a family. If a family owing a large debt got sick the mill would sometimes send a doctor to see them, lest part of the family die, and cancel the debt.
"The mills were content to keep the debt hanging as a sword over the heads of their hands. The debt was the club with which they beat their help into submission. By means of the debt the mill could hold the family to the village. Having no money, and being heavily in debt, the family was dependent on the company store for supplies. If any member of a family showed a disposition to protest the hard conditions under which they were held, the mill superintendent would notify the company store to cut off that family's supplies. By this method the family could he quickly starved into agreement with whatever harsh terms the superintendent chose to impose upon them. If a family tried to gain their freedom by leaving the village, they would be stopped; and even if they succeeded in getting away they could be brought back. The laws were so writ that a cotton mill worker, or tenant farmer, who owed a debt, was a serf. That, of course, was unconstitutional, but so far as I know no one cared about that excepting only those who were so persecuted. At the present time this country is making a great hullabaloo over German oppression of the Jews. Of course that is wrong, but in my lifetime I have seen American cotton mill workers as badly oppressed by the mill owners; and merely because they had dared to object to intolerable working conditions, and starvation wages.
"The mill companies had a deputy sheriff in their pay; and that deputy took his orders, not from the county sheriff; but from the mill owner, or superintendent. There was also a justice of the peace, and he got his orders from the same source. The post office was in the company store, and the manager or one of the clerks was postmaster. Even the railroad station agent was usually a part time employee; taking orders from the mill; and getting a part of his pay from the mill. He might, and often did, work part of the day in the mill office, and the balance at the railroad station. Under this system a mill could keep close track of their hands; even knowing when, and from whom, they got mail.
”I recall a family that got in hard luck from sickness. The wells were full of typhoid germs that summer, and the whole family had typhoid fever. Some died and some got well and returned to work. But their health had been undermined by the typhoid, and they could not stand the hard work and long hours. All winter they dragged around, working when they could, and they got heavily in debt. In the spring the father wrote a friend some distance away, and asked him to locate a farm where he might share-crop; in the hope that the outdoor work would improve his and his children's health. The friend did so, and wrote for them to come on. The landlord would advance money to pay the freight bill on their household goods. The man went to the superintendent and explained his circumstance. He told him that neither he nor his children were able to stand the mill work after the typhoid fever; and asked for an extension on his debt. He told the superintendent that he would use his best efforts to pay off the debt; and offered to give the mill papers on his planned crop. The superintendent would not agree for the family to leave the village, so they decided to steal away secretly. They had the railroad company to set out a car for their goods, and they loaded them at night. They were to sleep on the floor and eat with neighbors until the car was picked up by the train. But of course they did not escape. The mill superintendent had the mill justice to draw up attachment papers against their household furniture, and the mill deputy served them on the mill station agent. Then the mill station agent notified the head of that family that the railroad could not move his goods. The man went to claim his furniture, but his claim was not allowed. There was demurrage on the railroad car; there was the cost of serving the attachment papers; there was the cost of the deputy; and the goods could not even be moved from the car until these costs were paid. That man was compelled to go to the mill superintendent. In consideration of the family's returning to work; and on condition that they cut their grocery bill at the company store to the bone; the superintendent released their goods, and let them be moved back to the same house. Instead of gaining their freedom the family had only added another fifty dollars to their debt.
"I was a young man at that time, with only a wife and baby to support. I resolved that I would never let a mill company get me in debt; because the laws were so enforced that a mill could virtually hold a family in slavery. While the life of a tenant farmer was hard he could at least get fresh air; and even that was denied a cotton mill worker. The mills of that time had no system of ventilation; and people breathed the same foggy, lint-laden air, over and over. Naturally consumption, or T.B. as they call it now, took a heavy toll from the cotton mill workers. Typhoid, consumption, long hours, insanitary closets, insufficient food, impure water, and many other evils were his lot. It was nothing uncommon to find half of a family down with typhoid fever in the summer time.
"The wages were so low that I was never able to get much ahead; and, in fact, a cotton mill worker who was able to keep up was considered very fortunate; and, I guess he was at that. As I look backward I cannot understand how I ever lived through it; and I cannot understand how me and my wife were able to raise ten children out of twelve. It must be that the Lord blessed us.
"I varied my work in the mill with farming. In the spring of 1898 I moved to a farm in Spartanburg county, South Carolina. There, in that year, my son Dewey was born. I only raised three bales of cotton that year. It was red land and the first bale got soiled from a heavy rain. The buyer docked it two cents a pound, and I only got five cents for it. The other two bales brought seven cents a pound.
"Well, I had not made enough to live through the winter. The landlords operated on the same system as the mills, and I could have gone in debt, but that I did not intend to do as long as it could be avoided. Instead of going in debt I worked in the mill that winter. I had raised some corn, beans, and potatoes, and we had a cow, so I guess we got along better than some. I farmed that place three years, working in the mill during the winter. In 1900 Della was born, and that fall I moved back to Burke county and lived for four years. Jasper was born there in 1903. The monzonite business was fair. By working long hours a man could make a living, and it seemed like that about all he could do at any kind of work. But the price of monzonite kept going down, and in the spring of 1905 I moved back to a farm in Spartanburg county. James was born in that year. I had a pretty good crop, made six bales of cotton. When I had picked and sold my cotton I moved to Fair Forest, South Carolina, to work in the mill. Harvey was born there at Fair Forest, in 1906.
"In 1908 I moved to Belmont, North Carolina. George was twelve, Dewey ten. I then had a wire and six children to support; so me and George and Dewey all went to work in the mill. I ran cards and made one dollar per day. The boys made twenty five cents each per day. The total weekly wages for a family of eight was nine dollars a week, so you can see that we had to skimp mighty close.
"Times got so hard that I moved back to Spartanburg county, where I could farm and work in the mill too. I stayed at that place three years; farming in season, and working in the mill during the winter. Clarence was born there in 1908; and in that year I got the offer of a good place over near Boiling Springs. Several of the children were now old enough to help me on the farm, so I moved there. Pleasant was born there in 1910, dying the same year. She was the only baby we ever lost. She only lived ten months. After Plessie's death I moved back to Spartanburg county. There I lived for two years. Carrie Mae was born there in 1911.
"About that time a new mill was begun at Chesnee, South Carolina. They paid fair wages so I moved there and helped build the mill. When it was finished I helped set in the machinery. Then me and all the children that were old enough went to work in the mill. I made one dollar a day, and the children made twenty five cents each. William Jacob was born there at Chesnee, in 1914. In that year I moved to Pacelot, South Carolina.
"In 1915 I had an offer from the Saxon mills at Spartanburg. I moved there, but on the day that we left Pacelot Della complained of a sore throat. At Saxon she took sick. We called a doctor and he said she had diphtheria. He gave her three shots of antitoxin. Della seemed to get a little better, but she kept urging me to move on up to Converse. We only stayed at Saxon a few days. As I remember none of the family ever went to work. After a few days I moved up to Converse, mostly to please Della. The whole family was worried about her, and we were chiefly interested in seeing her restored to health. Della had never been sick before and she did not like to give up to her illness. Della seemed to be a little better after we moved to Converse; then she had to take to bed. We had a house near the dam, and Della's bed was placed so that she could see the water pouring over the dam. Some thought that was why she expressed a wish to be baptized; but I have always thought that she must have known that she was going to die. I had two other doctors at Converse, but neither seemed to know what the trouble was. Also, Della would not give up. One day she would be able to be up and around, and the next day she would be bedfast. I know now that she was nearer death than anyone thought. She wanted to be baptized and I got a minister to come and pray with us. The doctor came that day, and both he and the minister told Della that she was too weak to be baptized. She was only fifteen, and while she would not give up to her sickness, she must have had an inward knowledge that she could not get well. She still wanted to be baptized, and when that was denied her she asked me to carry her to a spring near the house; around which she had played as a small child. I carried her there on my back. She drank a glass of water, and washed her hands and face in the spring branch. Then she seemed happy and content. I carried her back home. A few days later she choked. I rushed to the bed and lifted her head; but she had been seized with an internal hemorrhage, and she died in my arms.
"We were all discontented at Converse after Della’s death so we moved to a farm. There Thomas was born in 1916. Soon after this country went into the World War, and started drafting men for the army. Wages went up a little bit, so we moved back to the mills; going down to Apalache, South Carolina. That was the first time in my life that either me or one of my children had ever earned anything like a decent wage; so we were all well pleased. The cotton mills were making money so fast that they could not count it, and hands being scarce they raised wages some. Not much, but we were thankful for a little.
"Then Congress passed some kind of law that was called the excess profits tax. That law set a high tax on unreasonable profits, and the mills were not allowed to keep all their blood money. It was blood money of course, for the whole world had gone crazy from murder. It is my humble opinion that that is the cause of our present distress. We are being punished by God for our past and present sins.
"Well, the mills were on a spot. They could not help making the money on account of the war, but they were not allowed to keep it all; so they went on a spending spree; hoping that they could spend the money and thus escape the tax. They built new additions to the mills; bought new machinery; had the old machinery overhauled; but there was still money left. They built new houses; had the old houses painted; put in water systems and electric lights; but there was still money left. It was against their way of doing business to raise wages, but they finally decided that as they could not keep the money they would divide a little with their hands. They did not raise wages again, but they put on the bonus. A man might earn as little as ten dollars a week, yet draw twenty five because of the bonus. However, they kept a string tied to the bonus, and if a man got sick and lost a day it might cost him fifteen dollars; notwithstanding he only made two dollars a day. They would dock him for one day at two dollars a day, and then they would dock him all the bonus. After the war the excess profits law was repealed. Once again a mill could keep all they earned. They cut wages in many mills more than half, and they got some of their tax money back by charging their hands high prices for water and lights; and by raising the rent on their houses.
"Cotton was also bringing a high price, and in 1920 I got a chance at a fine piece of land over near Chesnee. I moved there and made a good crop on shares. I picked twenty four bales from twenty acres. But 1920 was a bad year on the cotton farmer. I got thirty two cents a pound for the first bale, but the price went down faster than the cotton could be picked. I hurried the picking all I could but between the first bale and the last bale the price dropped twenty two cents per pound. The first bale brought thirty two cents a pound. The last one brought ten cents a pound. When I had paid all my debts there was little left to count, so I moved to Ranlo, North Carolina, to go back to work in the mills. There Lucille, my last child was born.
"An epidemic of wage cutting had set in in the cotton mills, and by the end of the year 1920 some mills had more than halved their wages. In January 1921 a large landowner down in Saluda county, South Carolina, wanted to hire me and the boys to clear and break in a big cotton plantation. The work was to be partly cm shares and partly at day wages. He set in and cleaned up the place and got it ready for planting. He paid us day wages for that and then we put two hundred acres in cotton, on shares. That was in 1921, the great boll weevil year. The boll weevils moved in before the cotton was ten inches high, and it never did get much higher. I saw that the boll weevils were going to eat the cotton up and that there would be no crop, so I settled up with the landlord and moved to Spindale to work in the mills again.
"For the next ten years times were kind of up and down. The depression hit the textile industry and everybody connected with it. I have always thought that it was the Lord showing His disapproval of our evil ways. During that time me and the boys worked around wherever we could find anything to do. In 1930 I moved to Belmont, North Carolina, and there I lost my wife. She died in 1932, and no man ever had a better wife. In 1933 I moved here to Burlington, and have lived here ever since. And I wouldn't be sitting here telling this story if I had a job to work at.”
