F. c.
Rose Shepherd
March 5, 1936.
Interview # 25.
II - HISTORICAL
PERSONAL INTERVIEW
Mrs. Mary D. (Bernard) Burroughs, (Mrs. J. H)
851 oak-st.
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mrs. Burroughs is a native of Jacksonville, and with the exception of four years spent in Virginia in the late 90's, has lived here all of her life. She is a great-great-grand-daughter of Dr. Andrew Turnbull, who conducted the expedition from Smyrna, Greece, the home of his wife, and from the Minorcan Islands, which ended on the East coast of Florida and resulted in the colony which founded New Smyrna. She has in her possession many clippinds and documents bearing on this Venture - some original, others copies; including a <text not clear>of Dr. Turnbull's will, dated 1775 - the original among the re-<text not clear> of the Court House at Charleston, South Carolina, to which point <text not clear>- returned when the colony ceased to exist and where he died, preced<text not clear> his wife by several years. They are both buried in the old cemetery <text not clear>. St. Philip's church yard.
Mrs. Burroughs has in her possession a beautiful pair of silver <text not clear>-sticks belonging to Dr. Turnbull's daughter - Jane Turnbull, who was born in Asia Minor in 1760. Jane first married James Marshall, who died, and she later married John Holland, in the old Cathedral in St. Augustine, Mrs. Burrough's maternal great-grand-father. Their son, Dr. Henry D. Holland, was born when his mother was fifty-two years of age. Jane Turnbull Holland is buried in the old Laurel Cemetery in Savannah, Georgia.
Dr. Turnbull's son, Robert Turnbull, was horn in New Smyrna. He wrote the Nullification Act" of 1827 which later became the text-book of the nullification Party, and when President Jackson's proclamation was read in South Carolina, where he was then a citizen, Robert Turnbull was the first to enlist when volunteers were called for.
Mrs. Burroughs has an attractive photo of a famous portrait of her great-great-grand-mother, Maria Turnbull, Dr. Andrew Turnbull's wife, who was an accomplished musician, and she has letters saying that friends would rather hear her play and sing than to attend any professional entertainment of that period. Mrs. Turnbull was quite a linguist and a brilliant conversationalist.
EARLY JACKSONVILLE.
Dr. Henry D. Holland's Home was on Bay-st., where the Realty Building now stands, while the stables were further back in the same bleak. Dr. Holland practiced medicine here for many years, and is recorded in local history as being the second Mayor of the City of Jacksonville. He died the first year of the War.
Mrs. Burroughs says one of the early aristocratic residence sections of Jacksonville was in "LaVilla" where she had a lovely home after her marriage. Many of the old families - the L'Engles, Marvins, Drystales, the John Hartridges, the Bowdens, and others were her neighbors.
An interesting memento is an invitation to a family funeral - dated June 30, 1873 - at which time there were no newspapers in the City, and such notices were written by hand and delivered by a family servant on a silver tray. It reads as follows:
"The friends of Mr. and Mrs. C. O. Bernard and Mrs. H. D. Holland are respectfully invited to attend the funeral of Mr. C. O. Bernard at St. Paul's M. E. Church, at 5 P. M., in Jacksonville, Florida." (This is now the location of the First Methodist Church, corner Duval and Newnan-sts.)
Mrs. Burroughs has a photo of a colored woman, Jane Brinson, who was the family laundress for forty-five years, and whose husband's mother was a slave, serving as a seamstress in her mother's family before the War between the States. She also has a photo of another servant, Nero Reed, a houseman in her family for twenty-five years.
She has an excellent photograph of the old Duval High School, located on Washington and Church-sts., from which she was graduated in 1883, of which class of eight she also has a picture. She is the only member of the class now living.
From the papers in Mrs. Burroughs' collection, the following <text not clear>leaned:
Early Grants in Jacksonville and vicinity.
About the year 1790, John H. McIntosh moved from Georgia and occupied lands on the North side of the St. Johns River near Cow Ford. Ha was appointed to some office by the Spanish Governor, but was later arrested and imprisoned for intrigue. After his release from prison, he collected a band of adventurers and attacked and destroyed the Spanish post at Cow Ford (San Nicholas) together with the "boats of the royal domain" on the River. What complications this attack produced is not a matter of record, but McIntosh and the Spaniards seem to have made settlement an amicable Settlement of the affair, since some years later he was granted more land near Cow Ford, where he became engaged in executing large contracts for the exporting of lumber, and incidentally lived like a lord. This is the same McIntosh who afterwards was one of the organizers and prime movers in the "Patriots'' disturbance in Florida.
On January 3, 1791, ROBERT PRITCHARD obtained a grant from the Spanish Governor for 450 acres on the North side of the St. Johns River opposite Fort St. Nicholas. A regular survey was made and Pritchard took possession immediately, erecting buildings and planting crops. He died a few years later, but his heirs thru authorized agents continued to cultivate the tract until driven away by the "Patriots" in 1812. They never returned.
On February 14, 1793, WILLIAM JOHHS was granted 216 acres on the South Side of the River at Cow Ford, and on May 18, 1797, this land was re-granted to William Hendricks.
In February, 1804, Isaac Hendricks received a concession to a triangular tract of 350 acres coming to a point at the mouth of McCoys Creek. In 1823, this concession was described as being bounded on the South by McCoy's Creek, East by the Taylor grant, and on the North-West by public lands.
That there were a number of bona fide settlers near Cow Ford prior to the year 1800 is certain, but they left when the "Patriots" came in 1812.
PATRIOT'S RAID
At the outbreak of the War of 1812., a band of persons calling themselves "Patriots" assembled at the St. Mary's River and marched into Florida, seeking to seize the country from Spain for the purpose, they said, of establishing a representative form of government, with JOHN McINTOSH as Governor and Director-General. There seems to have been some understanding between the crowd and the U. S. Government. The routed the Spanish Governor at Fernandina, came on towards Cow Ford from which section the intimidated settlers had already fled. The "Patriots" disbanded in 1813.
L. Z. HOGANS - FIRST SETTLER OF JACKSONVILLE.
The lands on the North side of the River were unoccupied for three years. The houses had all been burned and the fields ware overgrown with weeds. On September 13, 1816, Mrs. Purnal Taylor, widow of a Spanish subject, who had been killed in a skirmish with the "Patriots" was granted 200 acres of the old Pritchard grant, bounded on the west by lands formerly granted to Isaac Hendricks, and on the North by public lands, and East by the present <text not clear>. Mrs. Taylor, about this time married Lewis Zachariah Hogans, and late in the year 1816, they moved across the River from the South Side and occupied a new house built by Mr. Hogans on the property recently granted to his wife. The house stood on a high point of land overlooking the St. Johns River. The exact location was immediately West of the Duval Hotel, North West corner of Forsyth and Hogan-sts. Hogans cleared land and fenced it, and in the following Spring planted crops, from which he gathered in abundance.
L. Z. HOGAN IS GENERALLY ACCREDITED WITH BEING THE FIRST SETTLER OF THE SITE OF JACKONVILLE.
JUAN MAESTRE - SECOND SETTLER.
Juan Maestre a "skipper on the boats of the royal domain" representing himself to be in straightened circumstances obtained a grant for 100 acres of vacant hammock lands on the North side of the St. Johns opposite the battery of St. Nicholas. His application was granted December 13, 1816 for only fifty years, as that was all the time that be booked under the Spanish law. This grant joined the Taylor <text not clear>unt on the West, was bounded North and East by Hogans Creek. A later survey put eighty acres to this tract. Maestre took possession of his property in the Spring of 1817, and built his house in the center of the North East quarter of the square hounded by Forsyth, Liberty, Bay and Market-sts. Large spreading oaks stood around his dwelling. He cleared up and planted it. In the Spring of the next year when the Carthaginians took possession of Fernandina, the Spanish garrison at Fort Nicholas <text not clear>the "boats of the royal domain" in the River were withdrawn to St. Augustine. Maestre thereupon abandoned his new home, leaving the lands and his crop. He did not return after the scare was over, and on June 21, 1820, sold his land to John Brady.
EAST JACKSONVILLE
Daniel Hogans obtained a concession under date of March, 18, 1817 of 255 acres situated on the St. Johns River opposite the Fort of St. Nicholas and East of Hogans Creek. Hogans did not hold this tract long, selling it November 11, 1818, to E. Hudnall. This is now East Jacksonville.
RIVERSIDE.
Philip Dell on February 11, 1801, received a grant of 800 acres adjoining McCoys Creek, and embracing most of Brooklyn and old Riverside. Dell must have had a large family and a number of slaves to be able to secure such a large grant. This land went into the possession of John McIntosh January 11, 1805, and he held the tract until 1823. It is strange the Spanish Government did not confiscate this property when McIntosh was creating such a disturbance with the "Patriots".
SPRINGFIELD.
During the latter part of the year 1820, John H. Hogans under the donation Act, received title to 640 acres North of Hogans Creek. Three years afterwards he sold this to W. G. Dawson, who, in the meantime had settled here, and opened the first store. Springfield is built on this tract.
IMPORTANT NOTE:
Mrs. Burroughs has traveled extensively, has collected intelligently and arranged in chronological order a vast assortment of papers, documents, clippings, giving historical data from the landing of Columbus, arranged in three enormous volumes - an "historical goldmine" which so far as she knows, has never been made public.
The arrangement covers the early history of America, the Colonial period, the Revolutionary War, the early settlement of the South, the War Between the States, and modem history up to and including President Franklin D. Roosevelt's administration.
One volume covers the history of her family and that of her husband, who came from the Berrien family, of Revolutionary War fame. The other two volumes, she plans to give to some Museum. This matter belongs to Jacksonville and should not be allowed to leave it under any circumstances. (This for files).