THE FIGHTING McCONNELLS
Conversation within the room was for the moment suspended. Bach head was bowed in thoughtful silence as the words, by means of the radio, poured into the room. They were jerky hysterical words and the speaker was the Reverend Otis Smith, pastor of the Church of God. !'And I'm atellin' you, Brothers and Sisters, just one letter like that from a dear, believin' brother would've been enough to raise me from a bed of pain and brought me here to speak to you again. Not one but a hundred of you wrote tellin' me how you missed hearin' my voice on the air. Thank God, I've been spared to carry on the work of the blessed Lamb. Yes, Lord Jesus, you've spared your servant and I'm standin' today before your people givin' witness to the truth. Let the Holy Ghost enter your hearts, Brothers and Sisters, oh be sanctified today."
The voice of the Reverend Otis Smith continued to flow into the room. But now instead of words it carried along a weird, broken wave of sound. There was in that sound something of the cry of the jungle, a little of the rolling chant of the tobacco autioneer and a large measure of the pleading of a terrified soul. The Reverend Otis Smith was speaking the unknown tongue.
Rhody McConnell, known to her neighbors as MaMcConnell was the first in the room to speak. She sat in a chair fitted close into the left corner of the fire place, her elbow firmly planted in her big aproned lap, her face a deep study. "It's some sort of spirit that gets 'em, that's it," she said. "Spirits speakin' through 'em. They's nothin' wrong with their religion though I myself don't have it."
No person, for the time being, added further to Rhody's words. It was Sunday afternoon and this particular room of Rhody's house was filled with her family and three visitors. We sat, all except two of us, in a semicircle which extended from Rhody's chair to the bed on which Willa, her sick daughter lay. Next to Rhody sat Maudie Thompson, a neighbor, prim and neat in a "black and white ensemble. It was she whom I had expected to give verbal support to Rhody's assertions, and she had indeed made ready to speak, thought better of it, and tilted her chair backward a little as if to gain a more steady hold upon her silence. My chair was not far from Maudie's and next to me sat Jim McConnell, known to his neighbors as Pa McConnell. He had a narrow little face dominated by a big crooked nose. His eyes were small and receding but registering still a great amount of determination. With the radio on the other side of him it had been his privilege to turn to the station to which we were listening. He was looking now at his son Ralph, the biggest of the McConnells, red-headed and restless-eyed, who sat with his back to Villa, giving a sharp finish to the semicircle which we made. Beyond him, Willa, startlingly pale, was propped against her pillows, and moved her long, graceful hands slowly across the cover's edge. She smiled dreamily as the sound coming into the room grew louder.
A large portion of his congregation had now joined the Reverend Otis Smith in speaking the unknown tongue. But out of the unknown there came at frequent intervals a word spoken, a plea uttered in recognizable phrases.
Ralph twisted his broad hands together and declared, "I like to hear them Holiness because they go down after the truth. Some said that Greenway was a Holiness but he wasn't no such thing. He was a skunk."
A pleased titter ran around the room. The two persons who sat opposite the semicircle looked at me to see what I had thought of Ralph's words. One of them was Blake, another of the McConnell boys, and the other was Frances Young, Willa's mother-in-law. Jim, sensing that coversation was about to begin in earnest, reached over and. turned off the radio.
"Nov talk about writ in'," Ralph said, looking directly at me, "if I knew how to say what I feel I'd write a book called "The Skunks of the South."
"And whom?" I asked, "would you include in this book?"
"I'd put in there first," he answered quickly, "the cotton mill folks that's too scared to belong to the CIO and right along side them I'd put such preachers as Greenway that spends their time preachin' against labor unions instead of givin' out the gospel."
"Ralph aint fur wrong on Greenway," Rhody declared. "He come here to Greenville, histed his tent, and spread the word far and wide that he'd come to stomp out the CIO, stomp it so fur in the earth it'd never rise again."
"And who brought him here?" Ralph declared vociferously. "These mill owners and the Chamber of Commerce. Wasn't it talked all around that the Chamber of Commerce give him seven thousand dollars to bring his low-grade religion to this town? Oh yes, they denied it but I know it's so just as well as I know my name's Ralph McConnell, the fightenest of the fightin' McConnells."
Ralph's voice was pushing forward now in a great eagerness to tell his story. One word was not completely said before another tumbled forward and his tone was one moment angry, the next indignant, and presently cut through with sarcasm.
"We'd worked hard, awful hard, gettin' the folks ready for a CIO election. I pled and my brothers pled and others that's got sense enough to see labor's got to organize pled, and we was gainin' ground. The McConnells was fightin' out in the open like they always fight ---- I'd be ashamed to tell my name if I belonged to somethin' I was scared to own ---- and the company was doin' everything they could to make the people believe they'd shut down the mill if their workers joined. Then one day in come Greenway and started his lyin' meetin'. Night after night he told the poor fools they'd be ruined if they joined the CIO, and finally one night he got up in his pulpit and read what he said was a letter from Chief Justice Highes wrote specially to him tellin' him that the CIO wasn't lawful and if the company turned a man off for joinin' it they wasn't any chance for him to get his job back. He'd give out a night or two before that he was willin' to give any CIO organizer in the city a turn at speakin' for the union and prove it wasn't what he said it was, addin' at the same time they wasn't any would dare to try to defend it in the House of Cod. So Dr Dodge, he took the challenge. He used to be a preacher himself till he saw what was happenin' to labor and decided to be a CIO organizer. But do you know what that skunk, Greenway, done? He got the people so roused they took to disputin' among their- selves and nobody could hear Dr. Dodge when he first started off speakin'. And then before he'd half finished Greenway popped another question out at CIO organizers, never givin' anybody chance to answer and then hollering out they wasn't any answer that could be made. If ever there was a stir at a meetin' they was one there that night. CIO members gettin' mad with non-members, and non-members callin' CIO members heathen and Communists. Yessir, I think men like Greenway ought to be took out and beat within a inch of their lives. Money-grabbin', low-down skunk of a hypocrite."
Ralph's words were like an electric shock within the room. They seemed to be literally present long after the last vestige of sound they'd made had died away. Ralph himself had ceased speaking with dramatic suddeness but his mind had not come to rest. He sat there now twisting his hands and shifting his restless glance about the room while he waited for his thoughts to catch hold upon further words to express themselves. And while his search for words went on Villa Stirred slightly upon her pillow and began to speak.
There was in her voice as she spoke a note of humor not far removed, from compassion. "You've run up on the hot-headedest of the McConnells," she said as she smiled at me. "Ralph sometimes talks awful mean but he's got a good heart. His biggest trouble is he tries to force folks to believe like he does, and it's not done that way. I hope you'll stay till Dutch comes. He's a heap better learned than any he rest of us and he can talk without gettin' mad. He was the first in the family to finish high school, and he's never let up on his education since. They's very little on the labor movement he hadn't read and he knows how to talk about it."
Willa paused a second, looked at Ralph. "Ralph's right," she said, "when he tells you Greenway stirred folks up with union talk. There was somethin' funny about that last meetin' though. Some had been holdin' it against the CIO leaders for gettin' together on Sunday, and lots of 'em said they thought it was a sin to attend a labor meetin' on Sunday and they'd not be caught at one. After Greenway had held his big Sunday meetin' talkin' nothin' in the world but CIO I laughed and told some of my neighbors they'd let down the bats and attended one labor meetin' on Sunday so they'd just as well keep it up. They never did see anything funny about it but it can still amuse me."
Those in the room laughed mildly at what Willa had said, and as the laughter died away Ralph began to speak. "What amused me good and proper," he said, "was us winnin' the CIO election after all the lies the company had put out against us. The preacher wasn't the only one we had to fight; we had the Ku Klux Klan lined up against us threatenin' people and scarin' some of the poor fools. Paraded up and down the streets in their cars --- had the tags covered up so you couldn't get the numbers --- and their ignorant faces smothered behind great big old white hoods. Over at Brandon they burned a cross in front of one fellow's house, and it's a wonder they hadn't tried it here. But I reckin they knew buck-shot might go through them snow-white hoods they was wearin'.
"I want to ask you one thing, Lady. When you walked up the street while ago and passed by all them dingy houses what'd you think when you come to this one, painted all fresh and new? You never thought you'd find a CIO family livin' here, did you? One evenin' not long ago I was comin' by here after I was done at the mill to see Ma and Pa for a few minutes, and a fellow hollered out at me, "Old CIO McConnell,' and I yelled back, 'Yeah, why don't you join up so's your house'll be painted too?' I guess I was braggin' a little cause the house where me and my wife live aint been painted yet. You see, this house here is rented in Dutch's name and he's a heap more active in the union than I am He's out somewhere this evenin' with Mr. Coope, our reglar organizer in this part of the state. The old man, there, he fell out with this company and works over at Brandon. Dutch is the only boy left at home now, that is, aworkin', so that's why he is the one to hold the house.
"Now, you saw the outside painted up so fine, but I want you to look around this room. Dingy, aint it? These walls has not had a drop of paint on 'em since they was first painted thrity years ago. This house is as good a example as I know of to show what the textile industry is like. A little whitewash on the outside to cover up a heap of dirt and dinginess on the inside. Yessir, the house is the spittin' image of the company.
Blake laughed as he shifted himself in his chair. Ralph, encouraged, was soon speaking with increased vehemence.
"Yessir, if labor in the South don't organize it'll soon be nothin' more'n a pack of dogs kicked around and stomped on If they hadn't been so many poor ignorant cowards we could've protected ourselves from the stretchout. I done my part and joined the union then. Over at Brandon. What'd I join for? Because I wasn't makin' enough to live on? No. I was a single man then, and makin' enough to take care of myself and strong and able-bodied enough for the stretch-out not to do me so powerful much harm. I joined because they was layin' off men with families, men with little children at home cryin' for bread, men that had give all their life to the mill. Yes, I joined the union then and if all the cotton mill folks had done the same we wouldn't be in the fix we're in today.
"Lord, how I wanted to lay the strop on old man Hatch, the general manager of Brandon. And we'd planned to do it, too, a crowd of us had, and would've done it if his father-in-law hadn't hurried him off to a hospital in Philadelphia. He would've been bedfast in a hospital somewhere for a year or two if we hader got our hands on him. We struck but what good did that do, when all the law of the state was lined up against us? What ought the laborin' class of people do when such a thing happens? They aint but one answer. Take the law in their own hands, and beat up a couple of so of them heartless fellows at the top.
"Take old Bronson down here, he's the superintendent ---- that man's not got no heart atall. Does he pay any attention to little hungry mill children runnin' around barefooted in the dead of winter. It don't meet his eye much less his heart. A little girl goin' from house to house tryin' to sell candy to buy her sick mother some medicine, would that touch him so's he'd put her father back to work again? No, he'd see the whole family starve first. But a preacher I know was touched by it. He took her into his house and fed her, and his wife hunted her up a old pair of shoes to protect her poor, cold feet from the ground. And he was a preacher that says a man can be a Christian and belong to the CIO too. A good man if ever they was one. Rev. Alton Malone has had hard knocks hisself and he knows what the poor man is up against. I've heard him say from his pulpit that when he was workin' in a factory up north, sendin' hisself through school, he belonged to the union and he never had to make no compromise with his soul to join. Don't but a handful come out to hear him. I'm ashamed I've not been in such a long time, but I'm goin' again soon. He took little Susie Grey in and fed her and give her shoes for her half-froze feet and then he give her fifty cents to buy her poor mother some medicine with.
"A child, a innocent child havin' to live any such a life as that. Lord, no, they've not got no heart or they'd do somethin' to help a helpless child."
Ralph was overcome with the sadness of his story. He batted his eyes furiously but his effort did not restrain his tears. In a few short seconds, though, he was again master of himself and his voice was racing foward in a deep and angry tone.
"I hope some day," he was saying, "to see old Hatch and old Bronson in just such need as little Susie Grey was in when the preacher helped her."
Each of the other McConnells seemed to be searching for words which would to some extent lessen the tension within the room. It was Rhody who brought laughter to the crowd. "Susie Grey was by here yesterday," she said, "and she told me to tell you she thanked you fur them eggs you give her to put in the commodity puddin'"
The McConnells laughed loudly now and their visitors joined in. Rhody turned to me to explain. "Last winter when the mill curtailed, Ralph was makin' a few cents too much to get compensation but not enough to live on. The WPA give him and others in the same fix commodities to help 'em make ends meet. Well, in ever sack they was more rice than anything else. Sarah, Ralph's wife, tried to cook it in different ways so's her children would eat it and she took to makin' puddin's. One day, Clarice, the oldest child, said just as solemn-like 'Mama, if they's any commodity puddin' left, can I take it to Susie Grey?' Sarah never corrected her but let her take what was left over to the Greys and she told 'em she'd brought 'em some commodity puddin'. Well sir, them Greys was awful down and out then but that sure tickled 'em. Old man Grey come over to Ralph's house, just dyin' laughin' to tell him what Clarice had said. It's been a joke with us ever since."
"It's the only laugh I ever got out of government charity," Ralph said, and fell into an easier silence than he had known since he first began to talk.
Conversation became more general now, little remarks which led nowhere, a word from Mamie Thompson, a monosyllabic answer from Kate, an inquiry from Jim concerning some neighbor whom they all knew, a low-voiced expression from Villa, a now-and-then chuckle from Blake as Rhody related some prank or some remembered childish saying of one of her eleven children. In this fashion we continued until men's voices were heard in the street fronting the house, and Willa, quite pleased said, "That's Dutch and them now. I'm glad they're comin' before you leave. Dutch is calm and level-headed and he can set down and discuss the union just like he was talkin' about the weather or any such thing."
They were presently in the room; Dutch, young and eager-looking and with a magnetic smile, Mr. Coope, the CIO organizer, calm and with a candid gaze, and Willa's husband, Joe Young. They brought chairs from the adjoining room and with good-natured laughter sought out places in which to put them. Meanwhile, Mamie arose to make her departure, and Rhody went with her to the door, returning presently to remark, "This lady here come to talk with me about the family but Ralph's been so busy talkin' up the CIO and talkin' down what aint CIO I've not had chance to say much."
Mr. Coope burst into a loud, quick laugh and said, "Ralph, I hope you haven't told the lady you'd like to whip anybody, have you?"
"Oh, yeah, he's had two or three whippins goin' on," Jim McConnell answered for his son.
Mr. Coope turned to address me. "Now, Ralph sometimes expresses a view that's not a union view. Maybe he's been doin' that this afternoon." Ralph was ready with his reply. "I've not tried to claim I was doin' union talk specially while ago when I said I'm waitin' for theday to see old Hatch and Baity beggin' for bread."
"Well, old boy," Mr. Coope began, "maybe you'd better let me talk for the union. If the lady has a question to ask, perhaps I can answer it."
"Are you having much success organizing in South Carolina?" I asked Mr. Coope.
"Yes, a great deal," was the prompt reply. "Of course, we work under terrific difficulties but the people are beginning to realize that the right sort of organization can open up a new life for them, help them have for their own use a few of the things they produce. I wish I were as young as Dutch there. He'll live to see a new and different sort of world. It won't come in my day probably, but it's a pleasure to realize I'm havin' a part in the fight.
Dutch was speaking, a quick smile lighting up his face. "It might, Mr. Coope. If reactionaries bring on a revolution the change may come pretty quick. Or on the other hand, a revolution at the polls? Can't it be done in twenty years' time? What do you think about it, Lady? Do you think it's possible in this country to get enough people to thinking so that a legislative revolution can take place, one that will give the man who produces the goods a fair share in their consumption? Can we have that kind of revolution here in the next twenty years?"
"I don't know how long it will take," I answered Dutch, "but in my opinion the only sort of change really worthwhile is that which comes through the ballot and that only when the ballot expresses the considered opinion of the people. It must be a ballot cast without a threat behind it to force its direction."
"You're thinking now, I guess, of the force they use in dictator countries," Dutch said promptly. "I hate dictatorships and the things that go with them but did you know that here in our own country the laboring people are very often subjected to dictatorship methods? Did you know that out of a certain number of 310 organizers to do down to Alabama several have never been heard from since? What became of them? Were they killed? Are they on the chaingang and cheated of the right to communicate with the outside world? Can we speak of democracy at the same time we relate the tragic fate of hundreds of people back in '29 and '34 guilty of nothing more than joining a labor union? Oh well, change is coming one way or another and it could come peacefully if the man with the money could conquer his selfishness and recognize the rights of those who produce his wealth."
"We've waited long enough for the big man to give us our rights," Ralph declared. "It's time we took 'em. Why, I want to ask you, just any of you that can answer me, why don't I have a right to own a few of what some calls the extrys? Say, a piano for my little girls to play. They's plenty idle people could make pianos if they was given a chance. Would be happy to go to work tomorrow makin' pianos, or anything else for that matter that'd furnish 'em with a pay check so's they could live decent and respected. The big man out there is sayin' labor is wantin' to rule the world and it aint fitten to rule itself. They've got a heap of room to talk, aint they, When you think of the human sufferin' in the world today that aint got no business bein' here --- I'm not speakin' of things that can't be helped ---- it puts you to wonderin' how them that's always had the sayso could have the nerve to talk about other folks not bein' fitten to rule. Labor aint wantin' to be the whole hog but it's sure aimin' to be a part of it and I aint speakin' of just the rooter neither. Why in the world every workin' man ---- I mean every man that does honest-to-goodness work can't see it's for his own good to join the CIO is more'n my mind can understand."
Willa, in her slow, compassionate voice, was speaking again. "It does seem strange," she was saying, "how two people livin' under the same conditions, drawin' the same pay, can have such different notions of things. The man right next to Ralph in the mill hates the CIO. He says it's nothin' but a racket. And I think Mr. Vick honestly feels that way about it too."
"Just like old Joe Young settin' over there," Ralph said with good-natured sarcasm. "It's a wonder we'd have anything to do with him and him too cautious to join the CIO. Married to a McConnell and stayin' out of the union like any sap that don't know what the union's for. I wish Willa was able to work again; I'd sign her up for sure. What'd you say to that, Joe?"
"T'wouldn't be my duty to say nothin'," Joe answered. "I joined up with a union once and got bit. I reckin she'd have the right to do the same. I was gettin' along pretty good back in '34 but I joined the AF of L like my friend Ralph there ---- to help them that wasn't doin' so good. Well, I walked when the strike was called like I'd promised, but it was a pretty lonesome walk I took. Me and eleven others. My overseer was my friend and took me back when things quieted down. I made up my mind then that I'd never join another union until I was right sure the rest of the folks in it took their promises serious too."
"We'll get you in the CIO yet," Ralph declared, "and make you ashamed of yourself for waitin' so long to join. You put yourself in the class with some of the poor ignorant fools around here that don't know no better."
"Yes," Dutch said with a mischievous smile, "some of our neighbors haven't got any more sense about the CIO than Roger Babson."
Mr. Coope gave his chair a quick push backward and burst into loud laughter. "He thought he was knocking us today, didn't he Dutch and he was really praising us He said the AF of L had been able to get an average annual wage of $1800 for its members whereas the CIO's average had been $1200. Right there he was touching on the weak spot of the AF of L, the reason it lost out so. It organized the skilled laborers and neglected the little man underneath. The little fellow at the bottom doing unskilled labor with no chance much of rising because somebody's got to do the unskilled work. The CIO has gone after him, wants to get him in a position to demand a decent living for himself and family. He's just as important in the scheme of things as the skilled worker and has a right to a fair wage, something he's not getting now."
"It's a hard fight but we're just beginning," Dutch declared. "One of the strongest forces against us is the American Press. Newspapers owned or controlled by political bosses paid off by capitalists to maintain the status quo. And then there are the radio stations owned by the newspapers. All tied up. Yes, we've got a fight but one that most people don't understand. Labor is not fighting for its rights now but for its existence. If you want to know just how willing the manufacturer in the cotton mill industry is to respect our rights you should have seen the counter proposals offered by this company to the ones drawn up by the CIO after it had won the right to act as bargaining agent at this mill. If we had accepted their proposals we would have practically agreed to let the company have its private Ku Klux Klan to keep us subdued. Mr. Coope and I are to meet with the mill officials tomorrow to try to come to some terms but we won't get anywehre. They don't inted to recognize the CIO until they're forced to."
There was a brisk step on the porch, a rap on the door, and Jim said, "The Doctor." He arose, crossed the room, and invited the doctor in. The other Me Connells greeted him as he advanced into the room, each one speaking as to a friend who had dropped by for a brief but welcome visit. Villa smiled, looked up at the doctor standing by her bedside. "You're not goin' to take me to the hospital, are you, Dr. wingate?"
"You wouldn't mind going to the hospital, would you Mrs. Young?" Dr. Wingate asked as he seated himself in the chair Ralph had vacated. "Your sister Sah has had a good time there. By the way, she told me to tell some of you to come for her tomorrow at three o'clock."
"That must mean she's right anxious to get out of the hospital, don't it Doctor? Else she'd wait till night. I hope you can treat Willa at home this time. Aint it five times already you've been in the hospital since you've been married, Willa?"
"Five times," Willa said slowly. "When I hear people say they've bought a frigidaire I think to myself," Mine and Joe's frigidaire money went for my last hospital bill. Or when somebody buys a car I think, 'Cars and doctor bills can't come out of one person's pay.' It's right discouragin', payin' hospital bills all the time."
"Maybe you won't have to stay long," Dr. Wingate encouraged. "You should go tomorrow and have xrays made though. I'm calling Dr. Brown in for consultation in the morning."
For awhile after the doctor's departure conversation was slow, unconcerned with the union and its problems, and presently the burden of talk was with Rhody who spoke of things from the past.
"Insurance has surely been a blessin' to us. Now back yonder when Blake had his tonsils took out we cashed in his policy and met the doctor's bill that way. Same thing when Maude had her 'pendix operation. Year before last when the mill was shut down my children wouldn't have had no clothes to start to school with if it hadn't been we had a policy to sell. Insurance is a good way to save.
"'I never knowed anybody to save so much money in a quiet way as my own ma did. She always kept two cows and though they was six of us children she had milk and butter to sell. Then when different ones of us that was workin' would give her money she'd put part of it aside, but none of us ever thought about her 'cumulatin' no big pile of money. Come Christmas time one year and. my youngest brother asked ma to loan him ten dollars to buy Xmas for his children. Ma'd never let nobody go in her trunk before but she was bedfast then, been in bed for over four months, and she give me the key and told me to run over the things till I come to a old stockin' with money in it. well sir, I couldn't hardly be lieve it when I seen the money stuffed in that stockin'. 'lake them things off the center table,' ma said, "and you and Arthur count it out. Put aside what you think it'll take to lay me away, and then divide the other up amongst the six of you. Poor ma had save up through all them hard years she'd lived five hundred and forty-one dollars. She died about two weeks after Xmas, took bad off one night and died before I could get word to any of the others.
"Ma and pa never sent none of us to school to amount to anything but ma sure done well to provide as good a livin' as she did for us out of the little money we made.
"Me and Jim's tried to give all our children a decent education. Them older boys used to take year about goin' to schook, Ralph'd work while Blake went and then next year Blake would work. Both of them got to the ninth grade. I reckin all the younger ones'll finish up."
It had grown late now and Ralph becoming suddenly aware of the time of day got up hastily and said he had to go. "I'm goin' to church tonight to hear Rev. Malone," he added. "Are they anybody that wants to go with me?"
"You can stop by for me, Ralph," Jim said. "I've got a heap of confidence in Malone."
Dutch watched me as I got up to leave. "There's one more thing I'd like to say about most of us who are working through the CIO for what we believe will be a better world," he said. "We believe just as Abraham Lincolm did that no man was born to be another man's master."
