SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: SPARTANBURG'S CHINATOWN.
Date of First Writing	December 24, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Joe Shing (Chinaman)
Street Address	114 North Church Street,
Place	Spartanburg, S. C.
Occupation	Laundry Proprietor
Name of Writer	Ruth D. Henderson
Name of Reviser	State Office
SPARTANBURG'S CHINATOWN.
Out of a population of nearly thirty-five thousand, a sole individual, Joe Shing, constitutes Spartanburg's "Chinatown". Despite the fact that there are a number of first-class laundries in Spartanburg, he is able to hold a host of patrons. Joe Shing might be taken as typical of the Chinese who have lived in the city, Although Joe is reticent concerning his customs and habits, he is gentlemanly and courteous.
When first approached and asked for an interview, he was busily engaged in ironing a shirt by an old hand-roller machine. He surveyed me with a scrutinizing eye before he agreed to see me at all. I explained that I would be glad to call at his home or place of business at any time which would be convenient with him, but he just looked at me for a moment before speaking. He did not tell me that his little laundry embodied not only his business, but also his home and all his worldly possessions. He merely told me, "Comee back Saturday, I velly busy now; I no muchee busy Saturday."
On the appointed day, he greeted me in a very friendly manner and remarked, "I see you no forget to come, but I tellee you I no talk much, I no understand the English velly good. If you come back sometime, my friend, Joe Ling, he tell you good stoly, allee you want to know. He been in University of Texas, he understands velly much." Joe could not explain, however, when, if ever, he expected his friend to return, for he was in far-away China. I told him that I wanted his story and not that of his friend, who was a very highly educated man, probably a graduate of the University. When I got out my paper and pencil, Joe questioned me closely as to what I wanted with the information and why I had chosen him. This I explained for the second time to him - the day I made the appointment and now - for he seemed to be a little afraid to talk with me.
Standing by the little window to his little office, he did not offer us a chair, and he also remained standing all through our conversation, We concluded that this must be the proper way to entertain self-invited visitors. Many interruptions occurred during our stay with Joe - customers. Watching and listening, we learned that he was very intelligent. None of his customers had to tell him their names, for as soon as Joe saw them approach he would go into his little "cage-like" office, pick up a package and hand it to its proper owner - who would in return pay and bid Joe "Good-day". He smiles incessantly, but the somber glow of his small, dark, penetrating eyes leaves one with the feeling that he is, in reality, melancholy. (How do you know?)
The main floor of Joe Shing's laundry cover's a space of approximately 20 by SO feet. A typical Chinese lathe work, <text not clear> finished in a dull brown color, is so arranged as to shut off Joe's office in the front left-hand corner of the room. This office is about 5 by 7 feet, and on the back side is a row of shelves extending from the floor to the dingy ceiling. These shelves are well filled with pack features ages of laundry, neatly wrapped in brown paper and each adorned at the end with Chinese symbols. He knows where every package is and has it ready so as to put his hand right cm it before the customer steps up to the window. Joe explained that he did not depend upon his marking entirely, for he remembered what was in each package and always to whom it belonged. The only office equipment is an old cash register, from which he gives change without hesitation or error.
On the right side of the room at the front, a staircase, enclosed, leads to a floor above, where Joe makes his sleeping quarters, and where most of his time is spent when he is not engaged in work. Two long ironing tables occupy the center portion of the room. At the left of these tables is a dummy elevator, supported by a large rope, apparently so arranged, in order that articles can be carried from the basement, where the washing is done, to the main floor. Joe showed no inclinations to expose the operations which were performed in the basement, although at the time he was not asked. In the rear of the room are a gas stove, a small cooking table, and a laundry around which are a number of flat-irons. This portion of the room serves as Joe's kitchen.
The only brightness in the drab surroundings is supplied by the Chinese calendars which occupy the most prominent places on dingy walls. All the numerals of the calendars are in Chinese, and the pictures portray beautiful Chinese girls. One calendar shows two Chinese high school girls dressed in athletic shorts with large numerals on their shirtwaists. Joe explained that this is the manner in which Chinese girls dress when participating in exercises. He then called attention to another picture on the other calendar which shows a Chinese girl of what he termed "old China", dressed in a long dress or "shan tung". He said that this was the kind of costume that the girls used to wear in all exercises, which was compulsory, both indoor and out. "They velly muchee likes America, now", he said. "Everything they do in this country, they do the velly muchee same in China, but not long ago been muchee different." All of the calendars come to him direct from Hong Kong, where they are printed.
Joe says that this little laundry which he is now operating, has been in successful and uninterrupted operation by members of his race or some relation for nearly fifty years. Joe whot, a cousin of Joe Shing and the first known Chinese resident of Spartanburg, began it "manyee years been ago".
Contrary to Chinese traditions, a narrow door, inconspicuous and simple, opens directly to the sidewalk, over which hangs a sign designating the place as a laundry. When asked if he did not believe that a bright neon sign would attract more customers, Joe quickly replied, "No likee blight lights muchee, that sign allee light. People find our work good. Our work no cost much; they find us quick." He said that he charged twenty-five cents for two shirts, twenty cents for dresses, and two cents apiece for collars - his prices, averaging approximately twenty per cent cheaper than modem laundries.
Joe employs two Negro women who do all the washing and most of the ironing, too. Joe said that he did the special work; that is, for those who were hard to please and particular with every little thing. "Lots of people likee that" was the way he expressed it. He pays one of the Negro women $4.75 a week, and the other, $5.50, as she has extra work of house cleaning on Saturdays.
When asked to tell more definitely of his life, he replied: "I was born in Polo, a small town near Canton, China, in the month of October, forty-five years ago." When told that he did not look nearly that age, he smiled and said that his "easy living" was responsible for his not aging early. He said that he had had two or three brothers - only one living now - but would never state whether or not he had had any sisters. If he ever had they were, perhaps, dead, for when asked the name of his parents he said that he could not ever tell, "it muchee bad luck to tellee the names of dead ones."
His childhood was spent on a farm, where he helped his father and brothers eke out a bare livelihood. From the description of his home, it must have been a little shanty; but he said never had suffered from cold, for frost had visited it never, as it was a little too far south. They raised cotton, corn, potatoes, and other produce similar to the things that are raised in this country. They got - he emphasized that - they got very little money for their crops. They were fortunate enough to raise nearly everything that they needed to eat; but the people in the cities, he said, often suffered from hunger, and some even starved to death, so scarce was the food supply at times. Farm implements were very crude, most of them being made by hand; and farming was very tedious and far more laborious than it is today.
The schools he attended were radically different from what the children of China attend today. The hours were long and the rules stringent. The teachings consisted largely in the history of patriotic and religious leaders. He mentioned Confucius and Sun Yat Sen, as examples. Asked what religion the Chinese believed in, he replied that the old China worshipped idols and some still did, but few. They have many Protestant and Catholic churches and other denominations too, "just likee America".
He told us that he did not know much about Christ, but that he believed "In God muchee the same way Americans do". He does not attend church regularly, but when he does, he goes to the First Baptist Church. This is due to the fact that Joe Whot, who at the age of seventy-three has returned to his homeland, was once a member of this church, and Joe Shing often accompanied him, though he himself, never joined.
Soon after missionaries began to come into China, his family, like many others, learned something of the things in America. They began to have hope of coming to the "great country where you can live easy and do likee you want to". The family worked hard and finally saved enough money for the father to make a trip to this country. Then months passed before they had any word from him... While back home, they were beginning to believe that the father had been lost at sea, or killed after he had arrived here. Finally word came that he was working and would send for the family as soon as he had secured the required amount. Joe remarked that when this word came, he was the happiest boy in all China, "Maybe in allee the world".
On account of his parents being dead now, Joe will not relate any single detail of the family arriving in America. He just explained that it was "velly muchee bad luck".
"Are you very superstitious, Joe? Do you believe that lots of things bring bad luck?"
He smiled broadly and answered, "Yes, lot of things been much bad luck."
"Do you believe that a black cat is bad luck when it crosses in front of you? Or if you walk under a ladder or say, break a mirror - is that bad luck?"
"Bad luck? No, black cats them velly muchee good luck. Ho life in things, no bad lucky; it's the things with life and death that makee muchee bad luck."
"Well, Joe, you can tell us of your arrival here in America, can't you?"
"Without answering the question, he turned around and entered his little office, picked up a package and gave it to the man that had just approached to the office window. Words of greeting were exchanged between the two while Joe was changing the dollar bill that was handed him. The old worn cash register rattled shut and the door closed behind the man. Then Joe resumed his position and told of his coming to America.
He was around eighteen years of age when he arrived in San Francisco. He did not have any trouble with the English language, for he found so many of his own race that it was not necessary to learn to speak it just then. It was not long after that he discovered that this would not do; if he was to make a living in America, he would have to learn the language. He declares that this was the hardest task he ever confronted, and, that, by no means, has he finished the job. He is very sensitive about his inability to speak English fluently and seems to think that Americans look askance upon those who do not readily speak and understand their language. He confessed with great pride to spending several hours daily trying to put the Chinese symbols into English letters, although he deplores his slow progress. It was several years after he began before he felt that his efforts were proving fruitful.
The difficulties Joe met on coming to this country were many, but the advantages so overshadowed them that he has never regretted his coming. In San Francisco he got his first job. It was as clerk in a Chinese grocery store which was located in a Chinese neighborhood, and he considers this as one of the greatest factors in giving him a start toward making his own way in this "great country". Here he met young people of his own race and became fascinated with America, and he, even, considered marriage. Whereupon after deeper consultation with himself he decided that he had better wait until he had "plenty" money, so that his wife would never have to work. He can not remember how much his earnings were, but he does recall that they couldn't have been "velly much", merely paying for his food, clothing, and shelter.
After staying in San Francisco for about three years, he found business getting dull so he went to Chicago. San Francisco was "great". but Chicago "been velly muchee greater" than San Francisco. Another reason Joe went to Chicago was that he had a cousin there. His cousin who ran a Chinese cafe readily gave Joe work, and soon his brother joined him in Chicago. Together they both worked hard for three years and saved every penny that they did not need for their livelihood. Finally, they accumulated enough to start them in business; so they went to Athens, Georgia, and put up a laundry which they ran successfully, for nearly two years, having "velly good luck". Then news came from China that the father was dead. Both Joe and his brother sent money to the family. This trend crippled their business and they began to have "velly muchee bad luck".
"What was your father's name, Joe?"
"No, I solly, I can no tellee you. He been dead now long timee, no one in my homeland tellee name of dead" was Joe's reply.
"Joe, is the China of your youth very different from the China of today?" He had made three trips back to his native land, the last being in 1932, and he has kept abreast with the times and improvements in China.
"Old China, it muchee changed. Twenty-five year ago, China had no schools, no roads, no automobiles; now new China, it likee America - has high schools, good roads, manyee automobiles, some universities, too. Everything likee this country."
"Your brother is still living, isn't he, Joe?"
"Oh sure, he been living, but he go back to China."
"What is his name? You can tell it, can't you?"
"His name Joe Hand, samee mine Joe Shing."
"How is it that both you and your brother have the same first name 'Joe'?"
He was expecting this question which was revealed by the smiling expression that covered his face, and was ready to explain it, as he probably had done a thousand times or more during his twenty-five years in the United States. His smile became broader as he replied:
"You no understand Chinese name, I see in China the last name comes first and the first name last. In America, my really name been Shing Joe, and my brother been Hand Joe. You remember Joe Whot; he been in Spartanburg thirty, forty year? Well, his name been Whot Joe the way they call it in your language."
"But I thought that 'Joe' was an American name and was given to you here in this country; you don't call it 'Joe' in China?"
"Oh sure, it been 'Joe', no matters what country; we call it same way in China."
"Joe, would you write your name in Chinese? I would like to see how you write it your way, I know you don't write it the same as we do."
"Sure, I writes name velly quick, then can see how look." Joe picked up from his counter one of the little cards on which customers must write their names, and wrote in a large bold hand his name in English; and then, under it, he wrote the same in Chinese symbols.
"I would like to keep that signature, Joe, and see if I could learn to write it mayself."
"No, no, I keepee it", he announced quickly as he crumpled it in his hand; "you no needy, it no good to you."
"Tell us some more about yourself. Are you a war veteran, I mean did you fight in the World War? Were you in Spartanburg at that time?"
"Oh sure, I been here, 1917; I sign up, but no go to war."
"But why didn't you go if you were signed up? Were you ill?"
"No sick, the man come here, my place, but he no put me in class A and B; he puts me in class 5, and they no callee me."
"What do you think of the war in China - do you think Japan can ever take China?"
"Nobody tell what will happen, but China, too big for Japan to take. Japan maybe take, can no hold, China too big. China no likee fight but when somebody comee allee can do is take 'em, throw 'em out. Changed China now. Not old China anymore; New China now, just likee America. China now republic, they been changed lot in twenty-five years." With everything Joe explains, he repeats that China is now new and is similar to America.
"Didn't you like the old law - of having an emperor - better than the new system of government?"
"Old law no good, it been muchee better now. I go back to China three times and see, China lot better. Houses good in China; railroads, trains, and ships allee new now. Everybody have good timee now, China got new theatres, too."
"What kinds of sports do they have in China - are they like the ones here?"
"Muchee same, but no much ball games. China has lots wrestling and boxing, that been biggest sports."
"Do the Chinese drink much wine and whiskey, and do they still smoke opium; or do they smoke tobacco as they do in this country?"
"They no likee whiskey; velly few drink at allee, maybe a little wine. Some smoke lots of tobacco likee Americans, no smoke opium at allee. If anybody smoke opium, they just…"
Here Joe made a motion as if cutting his throat. He said that anybody who was found guilty of smoking or using opium was sure to lose his head, or face a firing squad.
"But they still make opium in China, don't they?"
"No opium made in China now; allee opium comes from England, Japan, or India. Maybe some other place, but no Chinese opium."
"Are marriage customs about the same there as here?"
"I tellee you about everything same in China now as in America. Used to man in China had seven, eight wives if he could takee care of 'em. Now man just have one wife. Old law no good, no can have more than one wife no matters man have plenty, plenty money."
"Have you ever been married, Joe?"
"No been married, can no take care of wife. I been too old now to marry, won't ever marry."
"But, Joe, don't you know the old saying 'Two can live as cheap as one'? You know you get lonesome here all by yourself."
"Say no good, no can do. Sure, get lonesome sometimes; used to have good time when Joe whot here, him gone back, no good timee now."
"Do any of your friends ever invite you out to eat with them, or to their homes?"
"Oh sure, lots of friends say 'Come out to eat dinner', but I no talk velly muchee, so I stay here."
"Would you come out sometimes if we asked you, Joe? To dinner or to a movie, eh, Joe?"
"Velly Solly, no can go out; but you, maybe you both come back and talk more when no busy?
"Of course, we'll come back, Joe; and thank you so much for the story."
