Names of all persons and places have been changed.
Date of first writing:	February 20, 1939
Person interviewed:	Robert Gray (White)
Address:	Raleigh, N. C
Occupation:	Harry H. Fain
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 7, 500
Hobart Boswell, Editor
Hobart Boswell's family background is legal and he himself was educated for the practice of law. After a few years of active practice he gave it up to follow the newspaper business, and for thirty years his work has been that of an editorial writer and newspaperman.
He lives in an apartment house located within two blocks of Washington Square. The apartment house is a white frame converted dwelling, unpretentious but well-kept. There is a private entrance leading to the second floor and Hobart's apartment.
His apartment was furnished with old pieces that bore the marks of long but gentle usage. They blended perfectly with the bookcases that lined the walls solidly, except for the openings. The cases were filled with an infinite variety of books--some new; most of them venerable. There was a quiet mellow atmosphere about his home.
He makes his daily trips from here to the State Library and to the newspaper office where he personally delivers his own copy. His day at the newspaper office is finished by eleven-thirty. From there he goes to the tavern for drinking. He was seated in one of the booths alone as was his habit. Before him sat a large goblet of beer.
"Come over and sit down, " he beckoned. "Have a beer and we'll talk for awhile."
His cane and his old mouse-colored overcoat with velvet collars. Hung on the rack of the booth.He was a small man slightly indifferent to his dark clothing. The heavy lines of his face showed his long years. His blue eyes were watery but they had not lost their alertness and the spark was still there.
"This is my time of day to relax, " he remarked. His false teeth clicked as he spoke."I hate these things, " he added. With that he took them out and laid them on the table with privilege and dignity--next to the pretzel bowl.
He smacked his lips and breathed a sigh of relief."Jack, " he called to the bartender, "bring us another beer. New man here, " he added, looking at me.
The bartender came over with the beer; nearing the table, he saw the false teeth. He was so startled he nearly dropped the glass.
The old man laughed with gusto, saying, "He shied like a horse seeing a piece of paper in the road!
"Had a fine piece of luck yesterday morning. Got down to my last quarter and at the office I found a check in an out-of-town envelope--some outside work I'd done--for $100! Made me very happy, by God, I was tickled. I needed that money very badly and I didn't know what move to make." He laughed and took a gulp of his beer.
"Well, my wife and I are playing a duet now. Charles gone to Delores to practice law. Think he'll get along better there, that's where all my people came from. The profession's not so crowded either. $o we're alone now, " he chuckled, "but after thirty-eight years the quietude is about the only advantage; everything else is just slightly belated, " he laughed.
"Oh well, " he continued, "what's the difference. Every time you got on your feet and going there would be another baby. Just kept me down. Not the baby but the idea of more responsibility and the time you lost.
"I got out of the University in 1892--took law. Didn't take any academic courses. All I know I've got from my books. Oh, of course, I did go to the old Madison Academy as a boy. It was about like our high schools now--only much better. Old Man Madison would give us fifty words a day out of the dictionary to spell and learn the meaning." He laughed and added, "That was a hell of a job, but it taught me how to spell.
"Dick Spenser and I took one year--about that much-while we were in Chapel Hill and caught a cattle boat for Europe; didn't have any money but just worked our way on our wits. That was about 1891. We saw the sights on nothings about like two boys would see them at that age. Got to France and England. By God, when we got back to Chapel Hill we were somewhat celebrities--it swelled us up like poisoned pups, " he laughed. "Look here, I'm about out of spirits; got a little package that they keep for me behind the bar.
"Jack, " he called, "Henry keeps a little sack over there for me. It has my name on it. Would you be so kind as to bring it to me?"
The old man was tapping his teeth on the table in a sort of drumming tune while he mused. His gray hair was parted on the side and fell to his eyes. It came out from underneath his hat in a shaggy fashion but not unkempt. The barkeeper brought the small brown bag.
"Now, " said the old fellow, "I'll see what happens when I take one of these." He raised his eyebrows in amused anticipation. He examined the pint of whiskey carefully. It was half full. "Well, " he added, "that's just about right.
"You know, I've got my own system about lodging my whiskey. I keep a bottle here because frequently I'm up the street before the liquor stores open. If I have a bottle here I can be comfortable in the thought. I keep It at home, but sometimes at night I overshoot the mark and there's not enough left to start the day I always get up at daylight, have my little drink, make the coffee, and go to work. I don't like to have that system broken, " he laughed and rubbed his small slender hands with neatly triamed mails.
"Did I ever tell you the story about the honest witness, " he asked, taking his drink. "It was when I first started practicing law over thirty years ago.
"Jerry Hines' fine bird dog had been poisoned—at the same time that John Tinkle had charge of the Washington grounds He was really more of a gardener Seems that he was having a lot of trouble with the dogs and his shrubbery, so he proceeded to set out some poison meat to discourage their visits.
"Jerry Hines was extremely fond of his dog. One morning in December the dog was found dead on the Washington grounds. Jerry was so incensed that he immediately indicted old Tinkle for killing the dog. The case created so much attention that the courtroom was full. James Crutcher was defending Tinkle, and the only witness was Tom Miles.
"Crutcher was a great big man with a roaring voice. He had Tom Miles on the stand.
"'Now, Mr. Miles, ' he thundered, 'what possible reason can you give this honorable court that John Tinkle is responsible for the death of this dog. Tell it in your own words, ' he said fiercely.
"'Yes sir, ' answered Miles, 'I was walking around the square about six-thirty in the morning. I saw this dog, and I knew it belonged to Jerry Hines. The dog was running around over the grounds, smelling here and there. I saw him pick up a piece of meat and gulp it as hungry dogs do. Then he ran a short distance and dropped dead.'
"'Now, ' bellowed Crutcher sneeringly, 'I want to ask you to tell this honorable court why in the name of all reason a man would leave his warm bed at home on an icy morning to wander around the Washington grounds—it's incredulous and unbelievable! Answer the question!' he snapped.
"'Yes sir, ' answered Miles quietly, 'if it please Your Honor, and the Jury'--he hesitated--'I was waiting for the barrooms to open.'
"Well sir, " said Hobart, bursting with laughter, "it put the whole courtroom in an uproar--bedlam broke loose. Old Crutcher said meekly, 'Come down Mr. Miles, that's all.' The Judge and the Jury knew they'd heard a truthful witness, " he said, still amused at the story.
"I practiced law uneventfully for several years. Then I did some work for a bonding concern in New York. After two or three successful ventures in ironing out some difficulties for them down here I became actively connected.
"The trick was buying up bond issues from the various states in the South. The bonding house would set its bid to me in confidence--say on a county or a state that was preparing an issue. I would then, being on the ground, make my bid according to my own judgment--I usually had sub-rosa information as to the probable figure it would bring, This was nearly always lower than my authorization from New York. If I bought the issue for $5,000 less than my authority from New York the $5,000 was mine, " he chuckled and fumbled with his false teeth.
"Once there was going to be a considerable issue by the State of Louisiana. The bidding was going to be very heavy. The state was in excellent condition and the yield was 4%. It was choice business in every respect. I went down for the letting and as luck would have it I made a bid that secured the business, and by God, it was $10,000 less than my authorization from New York! That's the largest amount I ever made on any issue. Looked as if flood tide had come in my affairs, but things were destined to change, as they do. Didn't last very much longer. There was a rift in the partnership in New York and I found myself without a connection. I took up my practice again with the little money I'd saved--but the trouble was I hadn't saved any--not to speak of; my God, how I'd spent money during that bountiful period.
"Foolish, but we all do those things. I had married Elizabeth then and the children began coming. I was having sharp difficulties in making ends meet; began doing a little skit here and there for the papers. With a bookish background and what seemed to be a natural flair, I began climbing again.
"Bart Davis was editor of the Menchly magazines then. I had struck up quite a little acquaintanceship with him. The stuff I was doing netted rather meager returns at times--but the expenses of an increasing family were more constant!" He laughed, brushed his hair out of his eyes, and lit a cigarette.
"Bart offered me an assistant editorship--Menchly had six magazines then--so I moved the whole family to New York, including the damn dog. The salary was $10,000 per annum, " he laughed and smacked his toothless mouth.
"Jack, ' he called to the bartender, "it's time for two beers now. I always fortify myself with a drink of whiskey and then cool out on the beer. Great many people don't approve of this practice, but I find it very satisfactory."
The bartender brought the beers, this time resigned to the spectacle of the maroon colored dental plates resting on the table.
The old man put in his teeth and began munching on the pretzels.
"I can't, " he said, "manage these things without the damn teeth." He smacked again. "Now, I'll take them out again and enjoy my beer, " he added, taking a generous swig.
"When I started to New York I had all three children then. Roberta, my daughter, was the oldest; Hobart Junior and Charles, the youngest.
"I was very much deluded, though, about the salary. Cur standard of living matched it to the penny. It was very disheartening, and I wasn't at all happy.
"The offices were on the eighteenth floor of a building at 280 Brightway. The work was reasonably simple and interesting; had an abundance of readers and I only got the stuff that wasn't too foul. If it wasn't right I'd mark it NG and throw it out; otherwise, I'd initial and pass it on to Bart Davis. But I couldn't get along with that crowd. The arrangement simply didn't appeal to me--and the income was no particular inducement since it provided no margin above my living and entertainment expenses.
"The bars were very attractive then, too. Those were great days for me. I was young and full of the art of living; only thing, the responsibility of a family terrified me at times, especially if anything went wrong at the office or at home. At those upsets I'd hie myself to a bar and meditate on the woes of man. I did some colossal mental writing at such periods. Afterwards, the thoughts produced by these mental orgies were so beclouded with the peat bogs of Scotland that I relegated them to the basket. I would then take up the lighter task of making a living.
"The crowning reward for the year's stay in New York, however, was the acquaintance I made with a young woman down on the twelfth floor of our building. That was the most delightful experience; just a quiet venture--seductive without responsibility or entanglements, " he reflected a moment, then laughed. "Yes sir, that was what I would call the piece de resistance." he chuckled and looked inquiringly at me, taking a deep draught from his goblet.
"I was very satisfied to leave New York, however. Began doing editorial work again for the papers, Followed the various papers, once being on the old Baltimore Sun, and finally I came back here.
"The children are all grown now; got four grand-babies--two singles and one set of twins. I love to have the grandchildren visit us. I get a great kick out of them; wouldn't be surprised if they're not more genuine amusement than my own when they were coming along. Guess that's due to a sort of divided responsibility.
"I have a very peculiar habit--not a bad one either. Whenever I get a few dollars over the line I usually hide dollar bills in several of the books. This comes in very handy at times; my wife will come in all excited, saying that the milkman is at the door for his money or the grocery-man or somebody. 'Hobart, ' she'll say, 'here's so-in-so for his money, and we haven't a penny in the house!' I can then answer with a great deal of self-assurance that I may be able to produce any reasonable amount. When she goes out I go to the bookcase and look in a volume of Byron. Page 162 will produce a dollar and everything is quiet again then and domestic tranquillity is restored." He laughed.
"Roberta came with the twins not long ago for a visit. I was very glad because I hadn't seen them in sometime and I was anxious for a touch of youth. The twins were playing around the room with me. Finally they became a little weary and apprehensive about the usual gifts--which, of course, is part of the game. I sensed this. Unfortunately, I hadn't bought anything downtown because it was raining. As usual, I was sang funds, he said rather gloomily. Then he took another drink of beer.
"Nevertheless, I can always rely on the books. I remembered after some difficulty a little session with Plato. So I said to the twins: 'Grandpa didn't buy a present for you all this time. But tomorrow, if it's not raining, I'll let you go downtown and buy yourselves one. Now listens see that green book over there on the third shelf? It's the third one from the door. You get that book down and look on page 48 and see what you can find.'
"Well sir, they found the book and opened it to the page. There they found a dollar bill--fifty cents each--and of all the amazement you ever saw it was on the expressions of their faces. Think they were so shocked at the procedure that the idea of the money of the presents completely escaped them. I was besieged for sometime with all manner of questions." He smiled and lit a cigarette.
"You know, it's rather strange and amusing, " he digressed, "to find out the situations you can run into when doing this local writing--at least seventy percent of it deals with local matters, Even a harmless skit will get you into an embarrassing predicament sometimes. I'm doing this 'Ten-Twenty-and Fifty Years Ago' for the paper.
"Young friend of mine here in town married about ten years ago. There was an announcement of his wedding. I promptly printed it, not giving the circumstances a thought. I can't burden my mind with such details--fact is, it simply didn't occur to me. That was all right.
"But this fellow had a pretty rough time with his wife. They didn't hit off at all--most untidy domestic life; came very nearly ending seriously. After a great deal of trouble and expense he finally extricated himself. Well sir, " he continued, laughing and taking a sip of beer, "after getting his divorce and going all clear, he married some years later the second time. Second wife is characteristically jealous-hell, they all are, second, third, or first--but he's doing very well with it this time I understand.
"As luck would have it, two weeks later another personal appeared in the ten-year sheet. By God, it still didn't strike my mind. The personal was simply a trip he and his first wife had taken. I put it in. He found out who was doing the skit and came to me. 'God Almighty, Hobe, ' he said, 'what in the hell have you got against me. Two weeks ago you print my first marriage. It took me a week to quiet things down at home--and you know, I do love a little quiet-- and I no sooner get that straightened out, ' he said, 'than here you come along and print a pleasure trip that I took with my first wife. I'll let you guess what jam I'm in.' "
"Well sir, the goddam thing was so absurd that I had to laugh. Of course, it was all a joke on his part, but it does show how damned easy it is to step on somebody's feelings, " he said thoughtfully
"Jack, " he called abruptly, "two more schooner please--we've run aground over here."
The old man put in his teeth again and started on the pretzels.
"I'll tell you a funny thing that happened over at the house the other night, " he said, "when he gets here with those beers." He was chuckling as he did almost habitually.
"A young woman came over to visit us. I say young-- about forty--that's young to me. She's still very appealing. Got chestnut hair, a fine figure of medium height, and, better than all, she's blessed with a rare sense of humor.
"We'd had a few drinks and talked along for sometime. She's very fond of books, Went through my store which is very sizable, if I do say so myself. The talk finally drifted around to authors and writing--as usual." He laughed and raised his eyebrows in character. He could raise them to an unusual height. "They disappeared under his hair.
"She asked me if I knew telegraphy, associating me with the newspaper. I told her I did--that is, the old Morse code. That was the code she knew.
"'Well, ' she said, 'if we had some instruments I'd send you a message.'
"'That's very easily overcome, ' I told her. 'If there is one thing I do nowadays it's click.' She laughed-- thought I was making a pun I suppose. 'I mean it, ' I assured her, and clicked my false teeth.
"'Oh!' she said.
"I knew she'd heard them before, but during the course of the evening had got used to the abominable sound.
"I told her to draw her chair up close and I'd click out a message to her. She did, and I prepared to do my very best clicking, so I started. She got it and laughed herself nearly out of the chair. I very boldly sent her an improper proposal --matter of fact, I just asked her for some of it!" He laughed loudly.
"'Now, ' she said, 'I'll return your message. Give me your hand.'
"I did, and the reply was: 'wholehearted acquiescence!'" He again exploded with laughter, and added, "Nobody else in the room knew what had taken place.
"I can't, " he continued, "conceive of anything more unromantic and disgusting to a woman than having to kiss a toothless old grey-headed bastard, " he chuckled.
"Oddly enough, " he reflected, "I did not learn telegraphy in the newspaper business. I was never in the operating department except to deliver my copy. Reminds me; I have a very fine linotype operator now. He's getting along in years, but he can turn it out in an emergency. Likes his drink; don't think he can work without it. Very often I have to call on his indulgence when I'm late. Whenever I do I always leave a drink in my desk for him. He's with the Department of Justice, too. Gets a regular salary.. You know, the linotype room is the worst place in the world for gossip. Lot of it is sound information-- might be valuable to Mr. Hoover sometime. All the undercurrent information somehow gets in there.
"Oh, I was going to tell you about learning telegraphy. Years ago, when I was a boy in Delores, most of the residents lived up on top of the hill known as Fay Street--it still goes by that name. It was quite a distance from that point down to the village where the general stores were--about where the old Slave Mart is. I'd say it was well over a mile and a half. Anyway, it made quite a trip by foot, especially if one needed just a pound or two of sugar for supper--wasn't any way to order it, so there was no choice left but a round trip to the village from the top of the hill.
"We conceived the idea that it would be very convenient to set up some means of communication. Once the message was in the store there was no trouble about having it delivered. They had plenty of colored help for that purpose, but mental telepathy won't work on the groceryman--don't know about elsewhere.
"The only thing left to do was to put in a telegraph system. We did that from the house and then get about learning the Morse code. It was very amusing at first—you might ordera seek of flour and have a chicken delivered. In time, though, several of the clerks learned to be first-class operators. Our line was the only one is the beginning, and it because the vogue to come over and have me send the orders down.
"Surprising thing: that fad grew until there were a dozen houses wired on the hill. In turn, it developed some first-class operators, too—men and women.
" Move over to the outside or your seat now: I see the crowd is beginning to come is and we don't went to get mixed up with a lot of bores. It tires we beyond-distraction.
"You know, Delores was my home—that is my mother-s home. My father was a lawyer. He migrated back and forth from Morrison. My mother was a Home. My father, Colonel Boswell, as they called him, practiced law in Morrison most of the time.
"Some or the other Boswells migrated toward the old town of Doyle. Some of then because very successful, as money goes.
"I suppose Raymond Boswell was outstanding. He's my cousin. Very strange compound of a man-indefatigable worker. He'd put in twelve hours a day at the office every day. You know, he was president of the Raynor Tobacco Company--imagine he left an estate of over forty millions. He had one vice--if you want to call it a vice. Every night he would go home, get on his couch, and sip Scotch whiskey.
"Back in the twenties it was getting scarce. He just set out for Scotland, bought a boat and loaded it with Scotch whiskey and steered it for the coast of Huckston. He landed it and trucked it to Waltham, and, by God, do you know what happened? Ships were scarce then, so he sold his. Got enough out of the deal to pay for his expenses of the trip and the whole load of liquor." He laughed heartily. "He was a genius for making money.
"Have another cousin out of the same strain. Bill Carmines, vice president of the Leghorn & Mayhew Tobacco Company, came over here several years ago and called me up. I knew he took a drink, so I asked him to meet me and have some of mine. It ended up that I had to go to the hotel and drink Scotch liquor with him. All the time he knew how I was getting along.
"'Hobart, ' said he.' I know the difficult time you're having. I have, as you know, several million dollars and I want to let you have $10,000--get you on your feet.'
" I was a little startled at the offer. I told him I didn't want his money--course, if he wanted to leave it to me in his will that was a different thing, but I couldn't accept the $10,000 If I had, then I wouldn't have been Hobart Boswell any longer---sort of a twig or branch of Bill Caraine's.
"That was along about December and I was very much in need of $150 for Christmas. I have ay own little banker. Don't have a bank account, but I want to Willie Boss—great many people don't like his—supposed to be the tightest and most peculiar of the whole fraternity.
"'All right, Hobart, ' he said, 'who can you get to sign your note?"
"Why will, I don't know of anyone I'd ask. Do you know of anyone who would?"
"He smiled, picked up the telephone, and called Alex Craig. I was very much shocked—Alex is fanatical about whiskey. It seems that it was a pleasure, " he laughed. Then he said: "I got all right, saved Christmas for my family.
"Well, some have a genius for walking money, " he changed abruptiy. "Don't ever get it in your head that you will write anything, drinking—except in your own mind and that will rade with time. The most indelible dacn' fallacy implanted on the American mind is the iden that Byron, Keats, or any authors wrote when they were in their cups to the chin. Why goddam it--it would have been a physical impossibility! Imagine Byron with a combined volume of five inches thick having the time to get drunk and still turn out that much work in a lifetime.
"The origin of the fallacy, " he said reflectively, "probably lies in the fact that the contemporaries of these men only saw them for a few days at a time after months of seclusion--they'd come out for several days liquored up to the gills --then just as suddenly they'd turn in again for months at a time. The natural assumption of their contemporaries was that they had to stay in an alcoholic stupor to write--rot and nonsense." He finished pouring himself a pony of whiskey and chased it with a long draw on the beer goblet. He smacked his lips and lit a cigarette. Then he wrapped up the pint very carefully.
"Well, " he said, "it's still a quarter full for tomorrow. That's all I'll drink of that now.
"Jack, " he called to the bartender, "bring us two more beers, and I want you to put my package away for tomorrow, please." He sat quietly lost in thought.
The tavern was not actually a bar, since only beer could be bought, but it did have the regular set-up, however, with bar on the right as you enter and a line of booths on the left. In the rear behind a panelled partition was a scoreboard for horse racing results. It covered a space eight by ten feet of the rear side wall.
"I don't know, " he said as he came out of his reverie, "whether I should have let young Hobart go on a paper. Too late now, though. He's doing very well--editor of the paper in Dolores. I guess he'll get along all right; seems to be more even natured than I was. Still, it's quiet on a small town daily. He won't always be there. If he goes up I shall be watching his nerves.
"Reminds me of the time I was working in Richmond-- Times-Dispatch. Been a great many years ago. Bob Howard and I had struck up quite a friendship. One time I very nearly got killed. We were in the old Carmen bar. It was a very long bar, Opening almost into the street. Bob and I were standing up--we'd had several rounds, just gassing about this and that just as we're doing now. A crowd of steelworkers came in and stood just below us. They were very close; our conversations overlapped. I heard one of these burly steel-workers, apropos of some city work they were doing, say 'muni'sipal.' I made the very sad mistake of repeating that fellow's mistake in a most caustic tone; I was feeling very erudite that night, accentuated by three good Scotch highballs. Well sir, that fellow struck at me with a fist as big as a ham backed by an arm as big as the calf of a man's leg. It came straight to my face--by the barest second I jerked my head to one side and he got me at a glance. It was with such force that I slid ten feet along the bar and right out of the door on to the sidewalk. That was a 'Spartan lesson' to me. If that fellow had hit ne the full blow it would have broken my neck without a doubt. To this day, I have consistently avoided barroom conversations except with my most intimate friends.
"Oh hello, " he interrupted himself, "here comes Old Man Murphy; let's have him over for awhile. He, a very harmless character, has bought me some beers on occasion. He motioned to Mr. Murphy.
"Mr. Murphy, " said Hobart, "is the postmaster out at the Catholic Orphanage."
Murphy wore a derby very straight on his head. He had on a dark suit with a white stiff collar that was too stiff and too high. He was very chubby with crimson cheeks and a full white mustache well-cropped. He was heavily and firmly built for a man in his late sixties.
"Well, Mr. Murphy, " said Hobart, "you look like the typical Englishman with all your formal attire. Goddam if you don't make me very uncomfortable." They both laughed.
"Just as Irish as Pattie's pig, " replied Murphy, smiling.
"You don't, " asked Hobart, "object to my teeth being on the table--or better still, why don't you take yours out and rest the hard hat and be comfortable?
"Oh well, " Hobart said, "if you want to be formal, all right, but I know at your age those are not your teeth.
"Mr. Murphy, " continued Hobart, "has the distinction of being the father of thirteen children. That would be a record in any community nowadays. Of course, he comes from the North—maybe that makes a difference." He chided him good-naturedly.
A gentleman came up to the booth and spoke. "Colonel Hobe, I see by your editorial that you are trying to raise the governor's salary, " he said cordially.
"Oh well, " answered Hobart, "maybe the next one will need it even if this one doesn't--anyway, I had to write something that morning, " he laughed.
"Now, " he continued, "after a number of beers I find it necessary to go back to the wailing wall and relieve myself. Mr. Murphy and I, at our ages, still find a use for it. As the Latin says it: flecti non frang." he laughed heartily, "which means: 'bent but not broken!'"
Everybody laughed as Hobart slid out of the booth, "Watch my teeth; please, " he said, as he walked unsteadily to the back.
"Wonderful fellow, " said Murphy. "Too bad he didn't make more of a success with the mind he has. I don't suppose they pay him over $35 a week."
"No, he makes $40 a week, " interrupted the newcomer.
"Well that was a very delightful relief, " said Hobart returning.
Murphy excused himself and walked toward the rear.
"Murphy's a good fellow, " said Hobart. "I like to tease him. He'd be very immaculate if he'd just clean his damn' fingernails." He laughed, then continued: "He's very proud of his record as a father. What happened probably was, and he doesn't Know it, every time his wife thought she was going to lose him she would prepare her position for the full charge and bang!--she was en ceinte, " he laughed wryly.
Murphy returned without comment.
"I had a fine morning Tuesday, " said Hobart, "got up before daylight, found my half pint where I placed it the night before, took a good drink, and looked out of the back door. What a sight! the whole stellar universe must have been having a party. There was Venus, Orion, Mars, and all the rest of them just galloping up and down the ways. I thought once Orion would catch Venus, " he laughed, "so I promptly decided to write an editorial on the gross error of the weather- man who had predicated rain. I did, and it hurt Lan Danson's feelings very much--which remainds me, I must go by and pat him on the back. He's good friend of mine, but he's goddan sensitive about his predictions."
"You see, " said Murphy, "I don't believe you have very much religion." He finished with a thin smile in a futile attempt at banter. "I have to confess the use or such language, " he laughed quietly.
"Oh, I don't know about that, " Hobart answered smugly "I just mentioned some of the other stellar Lusineries: when I consider our own little earth, a planet a thousand times smaller, I'm a little embarrassed. I feel a certain timidity in asking or expecting too much, " he chuckled. "oh hello, " he continued, "it's raining: that means I've got to spend a quarter for a tazi.
"Jack, " he called, as he finished the lost of his beer.
"Get me a taxi, will you please."
He put in his false teeth and rose unsteadily to get his overcoat. Jack came over to help him.
"Jack, thank you. You are a very good fellow. How, I need a quarter for taxi fare. My wife has my money and failing that I know a man named Suetonius who owe me a dollar. I'll pay you back tomorrow."
Hobart wavered his way to the door where the rain was now beating in.