VETERINARIAN, POET, AND POLITICIAN
Written by; Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by; Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Field Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Georgia
July 18, 1939
June 29, 1939
Dr. W. M. Burson (white)
130½ Oconee Street
Athens, Georgia
Veterinarian
G.M.
VETERINARIAN, POET, AND POLITICIAN
Dr. Mercer was idly watching traffic from the vantage point of a window in his office on the second floor of an old brick building when I arrived. "What can I do for you?" he asked in exaggerated professional manner as he peered around mischievously. "You must be the patient, for neither the dog nor the cat seem to be along. You're looking mighty well, though." I explained that I did not come for medical advice, but for the story of his life.
"I'll tell you all sorts of experiences," he promised. Then the telephone on his desk rang. The one-sided part of the conversation that I could hardly avoid overhearing was something like this; "Yes, yes, this is Dr. Mercer. - - Oh, yes, I went to see your cow this morning. — She's doing fine now. — Yes, I think she'll be all right. — Yes, yes, she's a mighty fine little cow. — Yes, just call me if she doesn't get along all right."
He laughed heartily as he hung up the receiver. "That's typical," he said, "Everyone has the very finest cow, mule, dog, or cat in the world. Human nature's the same everywhere.
"Come over here by the window and make yourself comfortable before we start this story," he Invited. "You'll find it much cooler and this little table at the window will be so handy for your notebook. I admit I like to be comfortable myself, and I like to see folks at ease around me. Well, to begin at the very beginning, I was born in Ohio, way back in 1874. You can figure my age if you want to. I'm not going to tell you how old I am. You might say that I was reared an orphan, for both of my parents died before I was six years old, and I just lived around with different families - if you call that being reared.
"I went to country schools, for there were no other kind then, and as I can hardly recall how many different farms I lived on from time to time in my childhood, I really don't know how many of those country schools I attended. They were quite different from what grammar schools are today. We went early in the morning and stayed until the latter part of the afternoon. I guess I did pretty good - nothing extra. I managed to get by. I never got but one whipping in school and that was entirely my fault. I well deserved it, but I didn't make the mistake of getting another - one was enough for me, I'll never forget the time when I refused to take a whipping," he chuckled. "I can laugh over it now, but it was no laughing matter then. The ground was covered with ice and snow, and just before the bell rang for school to take in a girl threw a snowball at me, and it missed me and went over my shoulder and hit another boy in the head. As it came from my direction he accused me of throwing it, and when I denied it, he was so mad he made the mistake of calling me a liar. We went together then, knocking and beating each other for all we were worth. The teacher separated us before we found out which would have won the fight, and he marched us inside the schoolhouse to whip us for the disturbance we had caused. While he was whipping the other boy I made up my mind not to take a whipping that time. When my turn came I told him I didn’t throw the snowball and that I was only fighting to protect myself after the other boy called me a liar. He was just as determined to whip me as if I hadn’t explained the matter to him, and started at me with the switch. I picked up a big iron poker from beside the heater in the center of the room and told that teacher to come on. Now I really don't know if I'd have hit him, but I was mad enough to. Anyway he slowed up when he saw that poker and then the girl that had thrown the ball spoke up and told the teacher the whole story of how she'd tried to hit me and the ball missed me and hit the other boy. I think that teacher was as glad as I was to get it over with.
"That doesn't mean I wasn't a fighter, for I had plenty of fights. An orphan boy in strange schools gets more bumps along the way of life than other boys, and I didn't miss any of the hard knocks that usually come to unprotected orphans. I was about thirteen when I whipped the bully of the school I was attending at that time and from that time on I didn't have to fight for my rights. Oh, but that was really a fight! I was skinned and beat black and blue. I just did manage to stay up on my feet while they were carrying the other fellow home on a door.
"During grammar school days I worked on the farms where I lived, but I received only my clothes, food, a place to sleep, and schooling - no cash. I did the average work that goes on on a farm. That meant getting up before daylight to feed the stock. We only had 6 months schooling in the year, and that came in the fall and winter after work in the fields was practically finished and before time for spring plowing to begin.
"After my grammar school days in little country school-houses I did have the advantage of two years in a small academy. During the first year, I lived on a farm 4 miles from the school. I had to get up before daylight to feed and water all the livestock, end that included horses, mules, cows, and hogs, in addition to the poultry. Then I had to help do all the countless other chores that must be 'tended to around a farm place before leaving to walk the 4 miles to school. It was about sundown by the time I walked back home from school and started out to do the same chores again.
"After supper I studied for two or three hours before I went to bed. After all we had good times, and if I wanted to go to some church service, a neighborhood entertainment, or perhaps a singing, I thought nothing of walking from six to ten miles there and then making the return trip on foot the same way. I didn't have the privilege of using a horse and buggy. If I wanted to go to town on Saturday, I walked, and the other boys did the same. Snow, ice, and rain didn't mean a thing to us as far as going where we wanted to was concerned. Not even frostbitten ears, toes, and fingers stopped us. It was nothing unusual for us to have frostbites, for you may not realize it but we were several hundred miles north of here, and up in eastern Ohio winter is winter. Some mighty famous Americans lived in that same section when I did. I'll tell you about my acquaintance with President McKinley and others later on.
"My second year in the academy marked a well-remembered period, for that year I boarded in the little town and was quite near the schoolhouse. That was lots of help, and I got a great deal more out of this year's schooling because it was more convenient, and then too I was 17 years old and that's a good age to make progress in your studies. My schooling then stopped until a couple of years later when I started a business course. I meant to learn bookkeeping, but I didn't finish. After I learned that the graduates were working at $5 a week I was quick to stop preparation for a job that would pay no more than that. Pshaw, I'm getting ahead of my story. Let's go back and pick up those first 2 years after I left the academy.
"When I left school I went on back to the country and divided my time between care of farm animals and work at a sawmill. Sawmilling was much more dangerous then than it is now, for we worked with crude old machinery that had none of the safety devices of the modern sawmill equipment, and then too the sawmill business is under strict safety regulations now in many states. I had some mighty narrow escapes from death, but I was never really injured.
"My last 8 months on a farm was certainly a full season of work, and much of it was in spring and summer in the blistering hot sun. You might not know it, but the sun gets just as hot up there in Ohio in summer as it does down here, even if Georgia winters are not as cold as those in the Buckeye State. Throughout that farm season I did a full man’s labor, plowing with two mules or horses, whichever was assigned to me; running the cultivator, driving the mowing machine, and operating the grain binder. I did it all - just anything and everything that came to hand. At the end of that 8 months my account was figured out and I received $65 for my work.
"Now, wait a minute! Don’t get the idea I was clearing $65 a month. I just received a total of $65 for what was due me at the end of 8 months. Of course I had drawn a little money along during those months, but that amount of cash paid me at the end of the time was enough to buy a suit, an overcoat, and a good pair of shoes. I was satisfied with those earnings, small as they may seem to you for a boy who had done a ’full man's labor.' I realized that I had cleared and saved this much in addition to getting my board, a place to sleep, and all other expenses. I knew that many a white-collar clerk in town on a good salary had not saved a cent in the same period, and was probably in debt. I didn’t owe anybody a cent, and had cash coming to me at the end of that farm season, even if it wasn’t but $65.
"That was when I started that bookkeeping course. I went in for house painting when I quit business school. That $1.50 a day I made painting houses looked like big wages to me. One-fifty a week would have sounded more like what I’d been getting. I painted about a couple of years. Honestly, I’ve tried ’most everything and every way to make a living.
”My next venture was the grocery business. I tried this out for 3 years in partnership with a friend. I made very good money, and many friends and loyal customers. Among them was the McKinley family and that friendship did not fade when William McKinley later became President. I've delivered groceries from our store to his home many a time, and in 1898 I was his guest at the White House. The McKinley family were fine people and I always liked ’em very much.
”I had left the grocery business when I became a member of the National Guard. In the 5 years of my service as a guardsman, I worked my way from private to first lieutenant. During the Spanish-American War, our old company L, 8th Infantry, was a part of the regiment known as ’McKinley’s Own.’ Most of the men in it came from the President’s home district.
"My first call to active military service led me to the coal mining district in Pennsylvania, where a big strike was in progress among the miners. The experience I got quieting the coal miners was of great help when we had to go to real honest-to-goodness war. We let 'em know that old McKinley’s Own Regiment was there, even if most of the fighting really was over before we landed. Most of the worst fighting we did was battling with mosquitoes and the fevers that followed their bites.
"It was during the Republican Administration in 1901 that I began work on my first job with the Federal Government. I was an inspector of meat and livestock, and this work kept me in close contact with the Veterinary Bureau of the Department of Agriculture. A college for veterinarians was operated by this department, and when I learned that many of the other inspectors and workers in the bureau were graduates of this school I was encouraged to enroll. It seemed to me I'd taken care of stock on the farms all of my younger days, and I had always wanted to know how to ease their sufferings. On graduation I was awarded a better job with the Veterinary Bureau and I also did part-time teaching in the college.
"In my veterinary work with the Government I had more different assignments than would be supposed could originate in one bureau, but that's because so few people realize the scope of our service. As the studying for my degree was on a part-time basis while I was holding down a full-time job as inspector of meat and livestock, I really had 6 years of good practical experience before they handed me that certificate to show that I had completed the course. I was often sent out on trips investigating diseases that sprang up in livestock over the country. Sometimes the purposes of these trips was largely to diagnose the trouble, and then at other times it was to help in planning methods of handling large herds for treatment of some well-known malady. During my last 3 years in college I was supervisor over a large working force, and between my studies and time spent on the job, there was but little time left for social pleasures and recreation. The period of my service as inspector of meat and livestock was from 1901 to 1910, inclusive.
"In February of 1909, while I was still connected with, the United States Bureau of Animal Industry, I was sent into the mountains of Pennsylvania to inspect stock for the dread hoof-and-mouth disease that was raging among the stock in ‘most all sections at that time.
"A veterinarian was stationed in each town and had to go from farm to farm examining cattle. We traveled by buggy, usually hiring a driver with the horse and conveyance.
"This was a coal mining section I was working in at the time of the experience I am about to relate. There was considerable money in circulation there for dairying, general farming, and coal mining were proving profitable at that time. We drove up to a particularly nice looking place, and the driver said that the woman who operated this farm had the reputation of being mean and hard to do business with. The girl who answered our call, said, 'Maw’s out to the bam.' I found a hatchet-faced woman, who appeared to be about 40 years old, driving cows into a stable.
"'I don't give a damn who you are,' she said as I attempted to introduce myself, 'I'm running this place.'
"'I knew some good woman was running it,' I replied.
"'How'd yer know?' she snapped. 'Yer hain't never been here before.'
"'Because everything looks so well-kept, is so nice and neat,' I replied, and this remark seemed to kind of please her, for she asked:
"'Who’d yer say yer was?’ I again introduced myself as an inspector of livestock for the United States and for tile State of Pennsylvania.
"'Yer won’t kill my cows, will yer?’ she suspiciously asked.
"’No, mam, I wouldn’t kill even one of your cows for anything. I came to help you,’ I answered, but I didn’t tell her that killing the infected cattle was not part of my job.
"She helped me get the cows out of the stable and tie them up. Soon she was talking glibly enough, telling me the whole life history of each animal in the herd. She hesitated a moment when I let her know I was going to carefully examine the mouth of each cow, but agreed to let me go ahead on my promise that I’d not hurt them. Fortunately all of her cows were healthy and I could conscientiously congratulate her on their fine condition. She seemed much gratified over my praise of a large flock of ducks I spied in the barnyard just as we finished with the cows, and by the time we went to her kitchen for hot water to sponge off the outside of the rubber clothing I wore when working with cattle, she was in a congenial mood. As I completed the cleansing process she drew a box of duck eggs from under a kitchen table for me to admire, and again I congratulated her on her excellent management.
"On the kitchen table I’d spied a newly baked, 4-layer cocoanut cake, and I made up my mind to have some of that cake, and so I commenced to pour on the flattery and to bemoan the lot of a traveling supervisor who had to eat hotel and restaurant meals with no chance ever to enjoy a good home-cooked cocoanut cake. She not only offered cake to me but went out and invited the driver to come in and share the treat and sent her daughter to the cellar for cider. Before we left there we'd eaten about half of that delicious cake and with it we drank all of a half-a-gallon of cider. As we left, after profusely thanking her for her hospitality, she said: 'Well, mister, if yer pass down this road again, be sure'n stop by and get more of my cake and cider.' We promised in all sincerity to accept her invitation. When we had passed out of earshot the driver wanted to know, 'Mister, what in thunder'd you do to that woman?'
"'Not a thing except brush the old cat's fur the right way,' I replied. Then he told me that the neighbors had reported in town that this woman, who had just permitted us to eat half of her nice fresh cake, had been boasting that she intended to run the first cattle inspector that called at her place off with a shot gun.
"It was in 1910 that I was recommended for the post of veterinarian when the University of Georgia determined to organize a veterinary department in connection with the College of Agriculture. Dr. Barrow offered me the position, and I accepted the appointment, and for 10 years was in charge of that department. That’s how I came to settle in Georgia. For 2 years I was the only veterinarian at the university. The first building we put up was a veterinary hospital. As soon as we were sufficiently equipped we took up the study of hog cholera and its serum, and that necessitated an assistant for me. Four years later - to be exact, in 1916 -we offered the first veterinary course leading to graduate work. The faculty was built up until we had six veterinarians.
"My work really got started in a big way in Georgia in the drive for eradication of cattle ticks. Those experiences with the dipping vats and enraged farmers would fill volumes.
"Our next campaign was to educate the public in the use of serum for hog cholera. We had spent years of laboratory and experimental study on this and the next 8 years were used in trying to get the public to reap the benefit of what we had learned. During that time, by means of an agreement with the chief of the U.S. Bureau of Animal Industry I was able to establish in Georgia a Federal County Demonstration. Only one county was selected. The Federal Government furnished three veterinarians, one clerk, an automobile, and a sufficient supply of hog cholera serum. On behalf of the State of Georgia, the College of Agriculture furnished one man to work with the Federal men.
"In order for a farmer to have his hogs given free injections of cholera serum, it was only necessary that he fasten them up in a pen at the time specified for the appointed veterinarian to come and administer the treatment.
"The county selected for the Federal Home Demonstration had three hundred square miles of territory bordering on the lines of Alabama, Florida, and Georgia. In this way the demonstration served as an object lesson in three states and was the only demonstration of its kind ever conducted in the South. It resulted in placing the swine industry of that section on a profitable basis. Billions of dollars of swine have been raised and marketed in the South because of the encouragement given by this project.
"Will Rogers said: 'A veterinarian has to be a good doctor if he finds out anything, for his patients can't tell him what the trouble is.’ I’d like to add my experience and observation to that. My patients not only can’t diagnose their cases for me or give me incorrect answers to my questions, but they have to obey the doctor’s orders' They have no chance to refuse to take medicines and other treatment.
"I have no hospital connections. There really is not sufficient work of this kind to justify two veterinary hospitals in this town and there is already a very good one here. They are expensive to build and equip and then too, the upkeep is to be considered. It’s necessary to have attendants on duty at all hours to look after the sick animals. A veterinary hospital is a great thing. Just think of the animals that have been healed that would have died in the past when no one knew how to treat them and there were no hospitals for their care.
”I keep my charges down on a very reasonable basis, particularly to those who aren’t able to pay for professional services for their ailing livestock. Oftentimes a cow means the greater part of a poor family's living, and a rusty-looking, seemingly contrary old mule can mean much to a family that’s depending on it to plow the crop. I usually charge according to what has to be done and the distance I have to travel, I never expect to be able to collect same of the accounts on my books. I just let 'em go, for it would cost more to hire someone to collect than the accounts amount to.
"Yes, I love my work, and my patients aren't as had to wait on as you might think. Gats are about the worst patients we vets have to contend with, and believe me, they really can do some biting and scratching when they get excited and mad. As a usual thing dogs try to be nice and friendly as long as you handle them in the right way. However, if one does get rough, I tie a strip over its mouth and go right ahead. You can't help noticing how everyone has the best animal of its kind in the world. Each pet owner has the finest pet to be found anywhere, and I guess I'm just about as extreme in my devotion to mine."
A man came in to report that his dog wouldn't eat. It was not very sick the owner insisted, but just had no appetite. The doctor led the animal into his small laboratory and consulting room. Through the door, opened for a moment, I saw a tidy room. Shelves along the walls were laden with bottles and boxes. A few more bottles rested on the one small table. The door closed and I looked around the rather large room where the doctor and I had been sitting for the past hour. A high stool was close to a tall desk. In another corner was a modern, flat-topped office desk that held a telephone and a typewriter. A large heater occupied the central space. The walls were lavishly decorated with pictures of domestic animals of the species most popular as pets and in the barnyard.
Soon the doctor came from the consulting room and was telling his caller to be sure and follow directions for giving the medicine he was prescribing for the dog. "Feed your dog plenty of salmon and sardines," he told him. The man and his dog went down the steps and Dr. Mercer returned to his chair by the window. He is tall and thin, and his hair is quite as gray as the cotton suit he wore. There was a merry twinkle in his eyes as he resumed his narrative.
"The first dog I ever treated was a large collie named Laddie," he began. "Laddie's owner was a rich and popular young lady. She informed me that the hair was coming off of a small place on his nose where he had apparently scratched himself. Laddie was a fine and very friendly dog and I immediately diagnosed his case as a light form of mange. His owner was indignant. ’Why, doctor,' she protested, ’That’s just impossible. Laddie's a pedigreed dog - a thoroughbred - and he’s too well cared for to have such a thing as mange. Why, his diet is as carefully watched as a child’s and he’s not allowed to play with common dogs. This is just a little sore place where he scratched himself on the nose.’ There wasn't any use to argue with that spoiled young woman. Laddie had scratched his own nose, but my mange treatment very promptly cured it.
"One day I was looking out my window and saw a Negro coming down the street leading a mule. ’That mule has lockjaw,' I remarked to my office girl. She marvelled at my being able to make a positive diagnosis at that distance, but it turned out that I was right. I found a splinter deeply embedded in his flank, so I sent him to a veterinary hospital. The mule responded to treatment and recovered. He has plowed many a day since then.
"Just about the easiest of all the animals to treat is a cow. They are docile and easily handled. That's fortunate, for cows can very suddenly get down to where you'd think they are about dead, and a good veterinarian can have them up and about again in a very short time. They usually respond very quickly to the right kind of treatment. The owners do not always understand this. For instance, I was called once to see a cow that was so ill that a crowd of farm people had gathered around to watch the poor animal die. I administered the treatment I judged necessary and stood around chatting with the crowd while I waited for it to take effect. The owner of the cow decided I wasn't paying enough attention to the patient and informed me that he didn't send for me to come and chat with the crowd, that he wanted some attention for his valuable milk cow. I just let him rave on until he had run down. When he was out of breath and ideas as well, I said, 'Turn around and look at your cow. She's up, isn't she?' He stared in amazement. He'd been so busy resenting my apparent neglect that he hadn't noticed she was standing up and trying to eat. 'Well, doc, I guess you know what you're doing,' he sheepishly admitted.
"I do hate to have to destroy a fine animal, or any animal, as far as that goes," Dr. Mercer continued. "However, now and then it has to be done. I'm thankful that an extreme resort like that is not a frequent necessity. Once I had to destroy a splendid mule that had developed hydrophobia. There wasn't a thing that I could do for it, and then too it was very dangerous.
"We veterinarians are proud of our profession, and we devote years to study and research, but do you know that most people think of us simply as graduates of the mule barn? They never seem to realize that we have to learn all the body structure of the domestic animals, Just as the human body is studied by other physicians. We could tell them that the human race has benefitted from the work of veterinarians.
"Take milk, for instance. The modern livestock man wouldn't feed his calves and pigs on milk that used to be sold for human consumption 25 to 30 years ago. They're afraid of tuberculosis, and they use milk from tested cows only. Then too, it's against the law to sell meats that haven't been inspected. That’s a good law.
"Some of the tortures that were inflicted on cows before scientific knowledge became more general through the practice of the veterinarians, were fantastic as well as cruel. Back in the gay-ninety period if a cow got sick her trouble was usually supposed to be caused by hollow tail or perhaps hollow horn. For hollow horn the common remedy was to saw off the horn, and for hollow tail they split the animal's tail. And when the poor cows died, as they very often did, they believed it was because they were too far gone before someone split their tails or sawed off their horns. Think of the great benefit the veterinarians have been to the poor long-suffering cows, if to no other creature.
"I'm afraid I'm not as good a worker in the matter of religion as I am in my profession. As I told you, I was reared an orphan, living from time to time with many different families, and almost all of these families were of different religious beliefs. Those Baptists, Episcopalians, Methodists, and Presbyterians with whom I lived in my young days had one idea in common though. They were all bitterly opposed to the Roman Catholics. I was taught that all Catholics were more or less heathen. Of course that's no proper attitude for one Christian to have toward another's belief, but those country folks took their religion seriously. They were much more engrossed in that than in education, for schooling was taken as a matter of course while religion was something very especial. I didn't understand their views then, and I don't know. Since I've grown up, some of my very best friends are Catholics and I can't see where there's any more to object to in the Catholics than in the people of any other denomination. I was privileged to learn more about Catholics when I was in the army. If we were anywhere near a Catholic church on Sunday morning the Gatholic members of our regiment always asked permission to attend early morning mass. This was always granted, and those boys would get up long before day and walk miles just to attend a church of their faith. I didn't see any others who were so loyal to their own denominations. I have tried to rear my children in the idea that they must respect all denominations and that the matter of personal creed is something for the individual to work out. As to meddling with other folks' religion, I'll leave that to better men than I am.
"In 1930 I was appointed supervisor of the census for this district. That's a job that you can't get without plenty of political pull. Our office was in the post office building, and I supervised the work of three hundred people who were in the different localities of this district. Of course only a few months are required to collect data for a census, but the work pays well indeed while it lasts.
"And, you say I haven't told you anything about my family? Sure, I have one. I married when I was twenty-three - that was a long time ago - and I still have the same wife. We've shared our hard times as well as our good times, and we're still going along together. Four girls and two boys were born to us. Two of our daughters died, and the other two have married and moved away. The boys still live at home with us. Now figure this out if you can. My youngest daughter is old enough to be the mother of my oldest son.
"We were able to finance college educations for each of our daughters, and we want both of our sons to finish college too. We want them to be able to make their way through life without having to take so many of the bumps that are inevitable for uneducated people. We have made no definite plans for the time when the last of our children are through with school and college. I guess it'll be time then for my wife and me to lie down and die, but I don't feel like I'll be old enough for that. I believe in the old saying, ‘A woman's as old as she looks, hut a man's not old as long as he can look.’ My eyesight is still pretty good.
"I'll bet you didn't know I wrote poetry, did you? Why, it's one of my greatest hobbies, and that's the way I pass away the dull time here in the office. I don't keep anyone to help me in the office now, and when there are no patients on hand I could get right lonely if it wasn't for my poetry-writing. Just as I am rounding out a good verse, I'm apt to be called out to see a patient, for you know veterinary practice is good, bad, and indifferent. At best it comes in fits and starts."
In response to my questions as to what kind of poetry he had been writing and if he had published any of it, he replied; "Well, I still retain amateur standing, for I have never sold a poem, but many of my verses have been published in local papers. I write about my profession, my patients, and my practice chiefly." He chuckled. "You know the kind of patients I have inspire one to write poetry. Most of it is done just for my own pastime and for the amusement of my friends." He permitted me to read several stanzas on the life of a mule end another short manuscript that depicted one side of a conversation with the owner of a sick cow. Both were amusing. Then he smilingly announced, "Here's one I'd like to read to you. I wrote it on my trip to the last convention of our old McKinley's Own Regiment. As I stood alone on the camp ground one night, thinking of how many of our comrades had passed on, this all came to my mind and heart, and I scribbled it down. The boys liked it so well they had it printed and many copies have been distributed among those of our old regiment who still survive." In a reverent voice, vibrant with emotion, Dr. Mercer read a touching tribute to his comrades of Company L, 8th infantry.
For several moments after reading his poem, he did not speak. Then lifting his head, and clearing his throat, he again took up his story. "I suspect I got more pleasure out of writing this than from any of my other verses. Of course having to be around here so much I cannot go visiting, and my time is subject to so many interruptions that there are seldom any periods when I can concentrate, but I do love to put my ideas down in verse when I have the opportunity. However, I do have some recreation. I belong to several social clubs and fraternal organizations, but I think the meetings I enjoy most of all are the assemblies of veterans of the Spanish-American War. I guess it's because I run across so many of the old friends I knew in my younger days in Ohio at those gatherings, and how I do love to talk with 'em about the old days in school and the later periods of our young manhood together.' They once brought me news of Scott McBride, the Mark Hanna family, the McKinleys, and others of my old friends as long as they lived, and there are still many whose names would not be so familiar to you, about whom we love to exchange reminiscences. I'm not the only one of the old crowd that's lived in Georgia. The Mark Hannas had a grand home in Thomasville, Georgia."
With a derisive grin, he continued: "I sometimes think about making application to the government for one of those jobs with a large salary and no work attached. I've even been inspired to write a lively poem about the job I want and the salary I think it's worth. Of course it's all a joke, and my friends and I have had many a good laugh over it. They tell me my spelling and punctuation would ruin all chances I might have for such a job, if they weren’t already blighted by the outlandish sentiments expressed in my poems. I'll let you read that one if you want to, provided you’ll promise in advance not to take offense.”
He rambled through his desk until he found the paper, and when I had read it and laughed with him, he said in a more serious tone: "No, I'm not in politics any more. You can’t think and vote the way they all want you to all of the time, and as it takes political pull and lots of it to land a worthwhile government job, there’s no chance for me at the present. No one who expects to do business with the public, year in and year out, one decade after another, should let himself get mixed up with politics, for sooner or later the tide is bound to turn in such a way that he'll eventually come out on the bottom. You can't stay on top permanently in politics."
The telephone rang, and Dr. Mercer listened, then replied, "Swell! I'll be there in a few minutes." Turning to me he said, "That was one of my sons. He’s uptown and wants to ride home with me. I'm sorry I have to go now, but anyway, I think I've told you about all there is to know about my life, and I’m sure it’s been much more than you really wanted to hear. About all I could add to it, would be to read more of my poetry to you, and that would ruin me quicker even than politics."
