Another version of "Albert and Anne Denman," entitled "Life History of Albert Denman and Family, Proprietor Country Store," can be found on pages 13106-13120. In a deleted version of this life history, lines three and four on page 972 and thirteen and fourteen on page 974 were omitted. Otherwise, the deleted version is identical with the life history included here.
February 7, 1939
Bob and Anne Franklin (white)
Hicoria, Florida
Country store proprietor and farmer.
Barbara Berry Darsey, writer
Veronica E. Huss, reviser
ALBERT AND ANNE DENMAN
"Anne, my wife," said Albert Derman, "she has gone to town this mornin with another lady. They ain't come back yet. I'm sorry she ain't here, and I hope she come back before yon gets gone; she'll be plum glad to see you."
We were sitting on the front porch of Mr. Denman's home near Hicoria, Florida. He was out of breath from hoeing in his garden and sat panting. While he panted, he wiped his brow with a dingy bandanna.
"She don't get to go to town much for we ain't got no car, nothin 'ceptin my old track, but I always lets her have it whenever I gits the chancet. It's a right nice change fer her too, and gives her a chancet to get away from things. She works so hard."
Upon my arrival I had found Mr. Denman in his little vegetable garden between the front of his house and the back end of his grocery store which faces the main highway. I had told him what I wanted, so he laid his hoe aside and insisted on coming to the porch, adding that he needed a rest anyway.
He was a tall, thin man, with light hair and clear blue eyes. He assumed a serious attitude toward the interview, but talked freely of himself and his family. His manner was pleasant and friendly.
"Talkin about Anne though, makes me think of how she's been suffer in lately. She has a lot of pain in her side. I think she works too hard, tryin to keep us all clean and fed right.
"Sometimes she washes as much as twicet a week, especially when the younguns is goin to school. Did you notice all them clothes on the back line, dryin? Well she put them out before she went to town this mornin."
There was a mixture of pride and sadness in his voice, but he wait on with his story.
"She keeps the house clean too, and wears herself out scrubbin floors. I try to tell her not to do too much, but she won't listen.
"Of course the children all help, we are raisin them that way. But when they're all gone off to school, there ain't much they can do. We try to teach our younguns to be mindful of their home, and feel a responsibility in it. And lots of times they take right a-holt of things and do them without bein told. We ain't got much of a home now, or much furniture in it, but we like to take care of what we got, I hope to fix up some day, but there don't seem much of a chancet now. Would you like to see what we got? As I told you before, it ain't much, but it's ourn and it's clean."
He led me indoors. In the living room a center table with a linen cover caught my attention at once, on top of this was a large Bible. Other furnishings included several chairs, a cot, a trunk, and kerosene lamps. The bedrooms had little more than a bed and one chair in each. But the beds were clean, neatly made, and covered with hand embroidered muslin spreads. High shelves draped with muslin served as clothes closets. In the kitchen was a wood stove, some shelves for groceries and cooking utensils, besides a table and three crudely made benches.
There weren't any modern plumbing facilities. A pump in the yard, supplies them with water, and a large galvanized tub, hanging to the side of the house, serves for bathing and washing. I saw an old fashioned.
In an otherwise identical version, lines thirteen and fourteen on page 974 were deleted.
Cuthouse about 150 feet beyond the house. We walked back to the front porch, and seated ourselves in one of the old, unpainted and weather-beat- an rooking chairs.
"The younguns ain't home now," he explained, "they're off to school. I'm alone. So bein there warn't no business at the store, I jest been hoein in the garden. It was good time I was gettin to then beans, cabbages and okra, they shore needed it. That's how come you to find me there. I gotta another piece over back of them pines in yonder, but the land ain't any good; I jest don't seem to have the luck farmin hers to what I had in Alabama. I always made a pretty fair livin there till the last few years before we come here. But it seem that everthin has gone wrong in money matters now, for a long time."
We talked along on general economic conditions, then he reverted back to his own problems.
"Anne and me was both born in Geneva County, Alabama, and lived right near each others farms. I'm 45 now and she's 37, or I'm thinkin that's what she is. I never can keep up with dates and ages exactly; seems like it takes a woman for that anyway.
"We both learned to farm and our fathers both raised lots of corn and cotton. We married back in 1919, and I think it was then that we some to Florida for the first time and locked around for a place. We heerd they was some fine farmin land down around Lake Okeechobee in the muck, but we didn't get no farther when we seen this place. I jest up and bought it. It was all jest pine land when we first come. We didn't like it much though, and Anne was homesick all the time so we went back home and farmed up there for a while.
"Yes mom, up in Geneva County, I raised the finest corn and cotton you ever seen. I done it fer nigh on to three year, and I made right good money at it too. Then the dry weather come, and the bugs started in and killed everthing we planted. After about three years of then troubles we got up and come back to Florida.
"At that time I still owned this place, it was jest raw land, but I started right in to clearin a spot for the house. I went in more debt to get lumber to build jest this front room Then we moved in, and I kept a clearin more land till I get that little patch there done, and ready to plant. Then I started on that larger one over yonder back of them pines. Anne, she kinder likes them big tall pines and the wind a-whistlin through then, that's how come I left them."
Mr. Denman sighed deeply and a reminiscent look came into his blue eyes.
"Then all of a sudden we tuk a notion to go back to Alabama agin, and see ifen we couldn't stay there. You see, mam, its been our home all our lives, and all our relatives were there; we jest felt like we wanted to live there if we could. Anyway we wasn't sure jest what to do. All my people have lived right in Geneva County a mighty long time, I reckon. And I've heerd my pa tell that his grandpa come over from England and come to Georgia first, then right on to Alabama. My pa was named Albert, and so was my grandpa.
"Well we didn't stay long that trip fer things was sure in a bad fix up there; seemed like the farmers jest couldn't make a go of crope no more. So we come back again, and we stayed. I think that was late in 1925, <text not clear>, but it mighta been in '26, I ain't real sure.
"I was this time I started to raisin corn and cabbage. The cabbages done all right, but the corn jest woldn't grow. So I tuk to workin out on farms for other folks around here, and I found out for myself jest what to plant and how to raise it best. I kinda figured I'd like to be a good farmer like I use to be back in Alabama. But it didn't do no good. This Florida land ain't like land is other places, and when you larn to farm it, you jest got to start from the beginnin and do it all over agin. Well, that's what happened to me. Even when I'd larned folks said my land was new and sour, so I planted cow-peas for a crop, to sweeten the land. While this was goin on I still hired out to other folks and managed somehow to live and take care of my family. But this takin care of them wasn't nothin like I had expected to give them.
"Well mam, along about '33 I got $50 unexpected like. It come from some work I had done in Alabama, and had left there with it a-owin to me. So with things goin so bad in the farmin, I reckoned I'd take that money and start a little store right here. I got enough lumber, the rough kind, to build that little hack you see over there. I had to go more in debt for it, but was the onliest way. The lumber man, he knowed I was tryin my best to make livin, so he was willin to help me.
"I used most all of that $50 for groceries, and was sure glad oven though I didn't get to sell many. It jest meant that I could get my feed for my family wholesale, and that was cheaper livin. But, with what I did sell, and what I made with other work, I managed to stock up agin and keep a-goin. Anne tended the store times when I was hirin out.
"I don't make much in the store and never have, but it helps us and gives us a chancet to give the children some of the proper food they need, like milk. Sometimes the milk is tho canned kind, but they get it, and that's what counts most. Then too, we kin give them dried fruit, apples and bananas, and things like canned tomatoes. I never could buy all them things at retail prices, especially the way prices is up now."
He paused for a moment is thought, then resumed: 'Then, tendin the store gives us all work to do, and it's better to keep tryin to work than to give up and sit down and do nothin, ain't it mam?
"The young-uns can all help too. They can farm, help is the store and with the house. And believe me, they do it! I was raised that way, for my pa believed that everyone should work. So I'm raisin thee that way.
Just then a large car stopped at the store with a raucous blast of its horn. Mr. Deman excused himself and went out to see what his customer wanted. I heard a petulant voice demand a Coca-cola and a five cent box of crackers. When he returned there was a wry twinkle in his clear blue eyes, he said: "Well I made three cents that time. When I seen that fine car stop I hoped they'd buy out the store, but it never happens. They comes here and only buys five or ten cents worth at a time."
"My folks useter tell me I had a head fer business, but it don't look much like it no more. I reckon if I'd had a better education I mighta done more. I think I went as far as the sixth grade in school, and that ain't much. But it was different is them days and nobody cared much whether they got an education or not. I can remember when we had a little oneroom sohoolhouse with only one teacher for all of us. Every youngun brought just any kind of school books he had, and that's what he studied.
"I never did care much for school and was always glad to stay at home and help with the farmin, for I loved that work. Yes mam, I had to stay home a lot and work. Sometimes pa had a nigger come in to help, but you can't depend on them, they're always gettin up and leavin without notice.
"You know, when I was young and jest married, I figured I'd be a rich farmer in no time, but it aint never gonna work out that way now." At this Mr. Darman sighed regrotfuly. "And it's all because I ain't got much of a education.
"You bet I believe in education Ever since I've been growed I've tried to get all I could. I read and study all I can, and I like to talk to educated folks. I read the papers and good magazines, when I can got them. Then trashy ones I wouldn't let in my house, and I'm hopin my younguns never get to readin than neither. Why do they let them be printed, they don't do no good, and in the longer run they're bound to do lots of mischief.
"We got five children. Letty, she's the oldest, she's 18 now, and in high school. I'm hopin she'll be a teacher when she finishes. And if I can, I'm a aimin to send her to college to study fer one. Grace is 15 and she's about ready for high school I think. I jest ain't sure of their exact ages and grades in school, mam, but I reckon that's about right. Earline is our youngest girl and she's ll now. I got two boys too, John who's 13 is a pretty good farmer if I do say so. But ifen I can help it I don't want my boys to be farmers, there's too much. hard work and too much disappointment in it. Gene, who is the baby, is nine. Gee: You'd better not ever call him a baby, he don't like that, and he gets awful mad.
"Yep, we have a good size family for bein sech poor folks, but the younguns all behaves and gits along good in school. Their teachers, and oach one has a different teacher, it ain't like we useter have it, tell me that they don't never have no trouble with them. Well, both Anne and me, is aimin to bring them up right and in the fear of God and the Baptist Church.
"Sometimes I wish I had more boys, then I'm glad I ain't got no more, for they're such a responsibility and cost a lot to bring up. Mine don't always have everthing they want, and not always what they're needin neither, but I do my best fer them. Right now they're needin some work on their teeth. John needs some tonic too, he's been right puny lately, but jest ain't got the money. I always say the Lord don't send no more younguns than what a man can tend, and it looks like that in my case.
"I want my younguns to have a better life than what I had, and I'm hopin that educations will fit them proper fer to make decent livins. I don't know as yet what all of them is aimin to do, but I'm tryin to put the idea of some special kind of work in their heads. Letty of course wants to be a teacher, so ifen I can get her off to college she will be fixed, I sure hope I can.
"The schools out here ain't so bad neither, they teach all kinds of things I never learned. They even got business courses and the like, it makes me wish I could go sometimes. The teachers is pleasant too, and comes to visit Anne now and agin.
"My younguns all like school, so I never keep them home. They always have parts in all the school entertainments and do mighty well. Anne and me always attend these doins and most of the time we enjoy them. Then of course the younguns like fer us to be on hand. I don't know how to say it, but it seems that with the things I jest mentioned, and their readin and writin, they jest learn more than we ever did. It seems they're fitted better to meet the world and do their part in life when they get through.
"Of course I don't know whether I can get them all well educated or not, they ain't much tellin until its all done, but I'm aimin to try. If I was makin the money now what I useter make in Alabama when I first started workin for myself, everything would be all right. But these times is different, and when I do make somethin I have to spend it right away for things we need.
"We like it better here in Florida now that we've been here so long. The weather is better and things are a mite cheaper. We also don't have to use so much wood in winter. We don't never even buy no fuel, all we have to do is take the truck and go pick up all we want. And of course the place is all paid fer, so that's a heap ofen my shoulders."
With the future of his children still in mind, he added: "Anne and me both, always tries to see that the younguns have the right food and clothes. I don't mean fine vittals, nor fine clothes, but the right kind and ones what's always clean. We have both studied diets, so as to give our children the best as we know how. They like milk even when it's the canned kind, and they like vegetables too, that is, all but carrots. They eat corn, batter-beans, string beans, and okra. Now they shore do like okra, and it's good fer them too. I never did cars much for vegetables myself, but since the kids come along I've larn to eat a lot of things I never like before. Sometime I have to take part pay fer my work in vegetables aroun here, so then we had to eat them.
"No, mam, when I was gettin started here, I didn't sell no groceries much fer tradin, unless it was fruit. Some of the folks out on the creeks aroun here, raise good bananas though and when they'd bring then in I'd trade fer tham occasionally. But I couldn't do it much and stay in the business. Then agin I'd take some grapefruit or oranges, because ifen I couldn't sell them, the younguns could always eat them, and they're good for them. Mostly thought, I sells for cash, that's the best way. I also don't give no credit, because I jest ain't able.
"Havin this little store sure has lots of benefits, fer it helps me buyin clothes and other things besides groceries. I can usually get a discount, whereas ifen I weren't in the business I'd have to pay the same as other folks. And them younguns of mine, shore use a heap of clothes. Shoes too, they jest don't last no time at all. You may not believe it, mam, but these here clothes what I've got on are the best I've got, but I don't need no better. Blue work shirts and pants are plenty good enough for me. It does make me feel kind a bed though, when my folks can't dress up like the rest of the folks. I even wear these here clothes to church, Anne keeps than all wasted and ironed and I don't mind for myself if I ain't got no suit like other men have.
"I couldn't say exactly, mam, jest how much it would take fer us to live comfortably. I ain't figured on that fer a long times, and of course it would take a lot of money fer us-uns to have all the things we really need, besides those what we want. Well I reckon as how if we was to start life all new agin, and to have the proper clothes and feed, and maybe see a doctor, like I always plan things fer my family, it would take nigh on to $75 if it was regular. Then agin, maybe that might not be enough, I jest dont know. I wish Anne was here, she could tell you right quick, and she's better at that than I am. And it's mighty hard to say with prices goin up all the time.
"Sometimes I sell a few vegetables out of my garden, but prices fer them is so bad it ain't hardly worth the trouble to tote them to town. Besides we can always eat them. Sometimes I think I'll jest give up farmin all together, it's so aggravatin; and jest let the land go back to woods and trees. But I do love the work, and when I gets to thinkin of all the time I spent in clearin and cleanin, I jest can't let go. Seems like there's somethin about be in a farmer oncet you get into it.
"We all likes the store too, but it would be a heap better ifen there was more business and we could stay busy all the time. The childrens can keep store as good as Anne and me, and they knows how to weigh out grits and the like, and make change. Most folks never thought I could make a livin with this here little store way out here on the highway, but I shore have, even when it was so far from town.
"I get that there little old truck too, and I can use it sometimes when I get work, especially ifen it's county work. We've done right well in spite of all what folks said I couldn't do. Anyway we ain't starved, and that's somethin big."
Mr. Demman then spoke of life in towns "I wouldn't want to live in town, but I do like to go in sometimes and watch to see what the rest of the folks are doin. But I ain't never seen none what looked happier than we are. They always seems to be in sech a hurry.
"I think out here's a better place to raise younguns too, they got plenty to do an no time to get into mischief. In town they want to stay on the streets all the time. I've seen little bitty younguns in town roamin around all by themselves. 'Pears like they'd be akeered, but they ain't, and they jest go walkin right down the streets. I can't keep from wonderin what their parents is like when I sees it.
"Out here it's much cheaper to live too, no wood to buy, no electric lights and not even no water. Jest think of havin to buy the water you drink and wash in, it gets me I got one fine deep well outside my kitchen door, and I aim to build another room around it sometime fer the kitchen. And there it is, all the water a body could went, jest for workin the pump handle a little. I don't believe the Lord intended for people to buy water, do you mam?
"We get up so early in the mornin sometimes, that we have to light a lamp until sun-up. But we have plenty to do when we get up so early, anyway it seemed like folks that gets up early feels better than those what stays in bed. I always been use to gottin up like that though, fer when I was a boy on the farm, we always got up long before daylight, my pa wouldn't have it no other way."
He then discussed the political aspects of the country in general: "Anne and me, both is good Democrats, like we was raised up to be, and like I'm raisin my younguns to be.
"Anne and me both vote, but Anne don't take much stock in it, she's timid and don't like to go to the polls. I am a Democrat from the ground up and mighty proud of it. It sure looks like the Democratic Party is the only one for the country. Anyway it's the onliest one what ever looked on for the poor folks. Nothin much was ever done fer the likes of me until the present Administration. I sure do admire Mr. Roosevelt and I sure hope he runs fer a third term; this country needs him. And if other meddlin folks will let him be, without so much interferin, he will do a heap betterin that. Why, mam! He studied for years to be the President some day, so when he got in, he knowed jest what was to be done, and how to do it. We ain't never had no President like that before.
"Folks can't help bein poor and in a rich country like this, it looks bad. It also looks like folks could be helped a lot when we're so rich. I think Mr. Roosevelt saved the nation when we come in office. Before, folks was gettin discouraged and so despirited. There was jest about to be a war right here in our own land I'm thinkin. If he hadn't been elected, they ain't no tellin what would have happened. I'm prayin fer him to run agin next time. And if he does I'll sure work for him.
"Anne likes him too, and we both read all we can about him. We try to keep up with affairs as best we can. I tell her she ought to be glad to vote fer it shows that she is an American citizen, and that's a lot to be mighty proud of.
Mr. Denman paused and rocked excitedly for a few minutes. A slight flush crept into his pale face. It was evident that he was interested in the future of his country and was willing to fight for what is right.
"With all them countries in Europe a-fightin, we got a lot here to be mighty thankful for. And we ought to do jest what the President tolls us too, for he knows what is beat. He sure is interested in his country anyway.
"Of course I don't understand much I read about them furrin matters, but it looks like war is headed this way and we oughta be ready. I don't believe in war, but if it comes we can't jest let them furriners come over and take our land. And believe me we got lots of fine things to take care of here too, but Mr. Roosevelt would mind them for us, if them meddlin folks would jest let him be."
The political discussion ended with this, so I ask him about his church. He - said. Yes, mam, I'm a Baptist. My whole family belongs to the Missionary Baptist Church at Star. We go every Sunday as regular as we can. Not havin no car makes us go on the track, but we piles the younguns in and goes right ahead.
"We give towards the church, whatever we can, it ain't never much, but we do our best. Preachin is the minister's work and he has to be paid the same as the rest of us. Sometimes I give groceries, or Anne bates a cake for a dinner or a social, but we can't always do that, when we want to. They like for Anne to bake cakes for socials for she's sech a good cakebaker.
"We are tryin to raise our children up to be good church members. Seems like the world, needs a lot of that today. I mean more real religon and love for each other in it. While there is so much hat in and dishonesty goin on, it ain't no wonder there's fightin and trouble everywhere.
"I think the church is mighty important, and bein a member and havin that responsibility helps lots of people to keep steady and behave right. Maybe we can't always like everbody in the church and sometimes even the minister don't even suit us, but we ain't in the church for a club, we gotta keep adoin fer the Lord's sake. That's another thing I admires in President Roosevelt, he goes to church and he prays too, and he ain't afraid to speak of God when he talks to us people. Yes, mam, he's right!"
Albert and Anne Denman - Country Storekeeper Very Good Farm children - married, bought and cleared land - decided return Alabama- then returned Florida - day laborered - realized little money - began storekeeping - realized lack education - encourages children - try to give children advantages - feels that he has reasonably wall - poor store and business - stanch Democrat - admires Roosevelt - religious Features a basically decent hardworking unexciting type Names changed.