WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION
RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA
GEO. W COAN, JR.
STATE ADMINISTRATOR
Federal Writers' Project
Elizabeth City, N. C,
November 30, 1938
Mr. W. T. Couch
Regional Director
Federal Writers' Project
Chapel Hill, N. C.
Dear Mr. Couch:
In the excitement of getting married, Ruth L. Riddick, a writer on this project, left an unfinished manuscript in her room which she vacated Saturday night. Her landlady has turned the manuscript in to me and I have endeavored to cure its unfinished state and I am sending the result to you herewith.
Sincerely yours,
<text not clear>
W. O. Saunders
WOS/b
Copies to
Mr. Bjorkman and
Mr. Andrews
From: Ruth L. Riddick Life Story of Mrs. Susie Decker
Elizabeth City, N. C. Byrd Apt. Riverside Avenue
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Nellie Carter
Nellie Carter is a woman of 26; tall and fair and with an unusual philosophy of life. She was the youngest of nine children and the hardships of her family did much towards forming a fixed opinion that she has. Nellie believes that everyone should be born equal, with no differences between laborer and employer. She dislikes what she calls "society people" and considers her more fortunate acquaintances who have obtained college degrees, "snooty.
She was born on a little farm on which her father was a tenant. Possibly the complaints that her father was continuously voicing about the injustices of his landlord, planted the seed firmly in her mind, that people with money were unjust and that those without were badly treated. Without doubt a feeling of inferiority and resentment had its birth at this time.
Nellie's father decided to give up the struggle to make a living by farming and moved to Elizabeth City when she was a four. He got a job with very poor pay in a lumber mill. His wages might have been sufficient for the needs of a small family, but for himself and wife and their brood of nine children it was all too inadequate.
With eight brothers and sisters, life wasn't monotonous, for Nellie. Speaking of her childhood she says:
"Of fights and fusses, there was no end," she said with a rueful shake of her head. "Why, sometimes the noise in our house reached such a pitch that the neighbors complained. We did have fun thought we didn't have desserts often, and when we did there was never enough for a second helping. And you know, even now when I reach for a second piece of cake, I have a decidedly smug feeling of well-being. Seems strange doesn't it, that a lack of desserts in my childhood should make such an impression on me?"
Nellie recalls with bitterness the complaints of the neighbors arising from the noisiness of her family to Speaking of the neighbors she says; "Oh, I suppose they meant well enough, but the neighborhoods that we had to live in were so mean and shabby, that I think it must have soured our neighbors' natures. Then, too, nine children can make an awful racket, you know. Even when we studied our lessons at night you could hardly hear your own voice above the noise."
"What about your childhood was the most annoying or distasteful to you, Nellie?" I asked. "I'm sure there must have been a great many trials in such a huge family."
"I believe that never having anything new to wear was my greatest worry. Do you know that I didn't have a single article of clothing that was not a hand-me-down, until I went to work in the mill at 16?"
"They couldn't give you handed-down shoes to wear could they?" I asked.
"I should say so," exclaimed Nellie with surprise in her glance. "I was the youngest and my sister, who 'is a year older than I am, always outgrew her shoes, so naturally they became mine."
"Getting back to the subject of food, Nellie," I said, what was your mother's usual menu for meals?"
"That's an awfully easy one," she laughed, "Mother had certain things on certain days. On Sundays, she always had what is called a pot roast. She had to buy pounds and pounds of it to make it go around. She made a stew with potatoes and onions. We had greens and corn meal dumplings and hot biscuit and molasses to sop them in. Now that was on Sunday. On Monday we always had soup made with meat stock left from the Sunday roast, and thick with onions. Mother always used rice in the soup, it made it go so much farther and it was nourishing too. During the rest of the week, we had boiled beans or peas with bread. We have always eaten very little meat and a great deal of starchy food. I can't understand why we wern't all fat from the amount of potatoes and rice we consumed. Mother often made dried peach pies and prune pies. We were as fond of them as my little boy is of strawberry shortcake now. I'm glad he doesn't have to live like I did."
She looked at her little three year old, with adoring eyes. I couldn't help but notice that David's sturdy, fat little feet were shod in conspicuously new shiny, black patent-leather oxfords and his rompers the last word in what well-dressed tots are wearing.
"Tell me about your procuring a job at the mill. Was it difficult to do? and what made you decide to quit school?"
"I'll take your last question first," she smilingly replied. "My father was really responsible for my not graduating from high school. He left my mother at that time. I hated him for it then, but since I've grown older I realize that he was a much weaker person than she, and simply couldn't help it. I guess he must have been awfully tired of struggling along, trying to raise us. Since we were all old enough to take care of ourselves, I suppose he thought his job was done. He just left one morning, that's all. We've never been able to understand it."
"So that was why you decided to try to get a job?" I asked.
"I felt so sorry for mother, that I wanted to do things for her. You know, give her pretty dresses and permanent waves and things like that that she'd never had."
"What salary did you begin with?"
"I started at $8.00 a week, that is the set rate for all beginners, but as soon as the workers learn more about the work they are raised."
"Did it take you long to learn, Nellie?" I asked.
"No, I think I learned easily because I tried to so hard.
I was working for mother and when the inspectors bawled me out, I just worked the harder."
"How long was it before you got a raise?"
"From my first day in the hosiery mill I've been doing what is known as topping. That is joining the leg of the stocking to the foot. It is very difficult to learn but after you know the work thoroughly, there is nothing more simple. I have been raised from time to time and my salary now averages $30.00 a week. I know the work so well now, that it has become automatic to me. My hands are so well trained that they seem a separate part of me. They perform the work while I settle my problems and decide whether I should trade the in again this year. The other day I rearranged and painted the kitchen, in my mind, while my fingers were joining stocking legs to their feet."
"Do you ever grow tired of your work," I inquired.
"No, not tired, exactly, but in the past eight years since I've been married I feel more independent of my job and perhaps it is not quite as fascinating for that reason. Uncertainty makes anything more interesting I think."
"You don't always feel sure of your work when labor disturbances arise, do you, Nellie?"
"It doesn't worry us very much. There have been several strikes since I worked there, but they are always smoothed out in a week or two. It is awfully hard on those who have no other source of income though. Whenever we strike it is usually for a very good reason and we feel that it is worth fighting it out."
"What was the reason for the last strike at the mill?" I asked.
"Everyone had a cut in wages and we thought since we were doing more work and there was a great deal more business, that it was unfair."
"How long did the strike last?"
"This one lasted only a few days. They told us if we came back our cuts would be returned; then when we went back we noticed that all of us who belonged to the union were being fired one by one."
"Did they give you walking papers too?" I asked.
"Yes, they did, and when I asked than for a reason they dept beating around the bush. I finally asked them if it was my work that was unsatisfactory. I didn't see how it could possibly be that, but I had to find out."
"What reason did they give you?" I urged.
"Of all the silly things! They said that I should be at home with my child until he was six years old at least. I told them that I had a nurse for him, but that didn't seem to make any difference to them."
"Why did they decide to take you back?"
"As I said before I belonged to the union, and the leaders are supposed to look after the members. They made the officials take me back. I was so mad I didn't want to, but the union leaders said for me to return and work for a while anyway, just to show the officials that the union had strength and really stood for something."
"Was it unpleasant for you when you returned?" I asked.
"No, it was exactly as it was before. I went back to my same machine and my old job. It gives me a different feeling about the mill now though. I felt before that it was a second home to me. You know, ten years is a pretty long time to work in one place and you form attachments that are not easily broken. The place just doesn't seem friendly to me anymore."
"Does the mill have any sort of insurance policy for the workers?" I probed.
"Yes, they offer the workers what they call "Group Insurance." It is 72¢ a month. In the beginning everyone carried it but the amount grew each month and seemed so unfair that we all, with the exception of a few, dropped it."
"Do you carry any insurance of your own?" I asked.
"I should say I do. That's my main investment. I've made up my mind that I don't intend to ever be poverty stricken again so I've provided against it."
"Would you mind telling me how much you pay a month, Nellie?"
"No, I'm very proud of it. My payments altogether amount to about $25.00 a month. I have every kind of insurance except fire insurance, and if I owned this house I live in I'd insure it. I hate to think of my husband or son dying, but if they did everything would be provided for. Sometime when I think about how little I had when I was a child, and how much I have now, I can't realize my good fortune. I can't seem to help giving David nickels for ice cream even though I know he's probably eating more than is good for him, because I never had enough when I was child."