Greeks in Asheville
Practically all of the 150 (est., 1939) Greeks in Buncombe County, N.C., live in Asheville, the county seat. Some of those who reside in the rural districts have businesses in town; the others are mostly retired business men. The 1930 census listed 66 foreign-born and 57 native-born Greeks in the county, 113 of whom lived in Asheville (60 foreign-born and 53 native-born). There are approximately 30 families, averaging slightly more than 4 persons each, and the balance are single men. Several of the men have native-born American wives, but there is no known instance of a Greek woman married to an American.
The entire Greek population is bilingual, and a few of the men know several languages. All but one or two are literate, but the educational average of the immigrants does not go much beyond grammar school. One man (S. Demos) was educated in a British school in Egypt, the others in public schools in Greece, Turkey, and America. The man employed by the Greek families to run the Greek school, where Greek history and the Greek language are taught, was educated in Greece and America, and holds a college degree. The local Greeks pay him a stated amount per pupil, but guarantee him a minimum salary of $150 a month.
In addition to the Greek school, all of the children attend the public schools, and their competence is relatively high. Some are above the average of native American pupils. The parents generally are ambitious for their children to finish high school at least. Many send their children to college. It is common practice for the father to take his son into his business, where the son does not go beyond high school, but if the son cares to do so, he may branch out for himself, often with financial help from his family.
In their personal contacts and social intercourse, almost all of the older Greeks use the Greek language exclusively. Among the younger people, the tendency is to employ English except when conversing with an older Greek. If an American should be engaged in conversation with a Greek, and another Greek joins them, the two Greeks will speak in their native tongue, unconscious of any discourtesy or breach of etiquette. If it seems to be indicated, one of them will interpret for the American from time to time, but only rarely will the Greeks lapse into English altogether. The immigrants learned English from other Greeks, word by word, as the occasion demanded, and from their contacts with Americans (with the exceptions of the teacher and the man who attended a British school). Some of the older ones know English so imperfectly that they are nearly unintelligible to the average American.
The first Greek in Asheville settled here about 1890, and operated a cafe near the railroad station, it is believed, but precise information cannot be secured. There was never a concerted or group immigration; merely individuals, or, at the most, one family at a time. Some few have left the community from time to time, but for the most part they have remained, and the Greek population has increased steadily, if slowly, from year to year.
There has been practically no direct immigration, nearly all coming from other States. Some came because of ill health, hoping to benefit from the favorable climate; others came because there seemed to be good business opportunities. One Greek (G. Demos) came here to settle up the business affairs of his sister's husband who had died. He liked Asheville, set up a business of his own, and married. He now has two children, and considers Asheville his permanent home. Born in a small town in Old Greece, as a young man he emigrated to America via Italy and France, landed in Boston, was employed in a drug store, and later moved to New York City, where he drove a taxi, worked for a commission merchant dealing in bananas, and acted as a bookmaker. He came to America because his sister had written him that he could "make plenty of money" over here. Her husband was doing well in business, and she was anxious for her brothers to succeed also. The brother and sister (who has since remarried, and has two children) live side by side in nearly identical houses, which they own, in a first-class residential district. The other brother joined them here, was set up in business, and married a local American girl.
Another (I. Arakas) came here with his brother because there was a good candy, tobacco, and soda-fountain business for sale on easy terms. They prospered, accumulated considerable real estate, and then went bankrupt when the real-estate market collapsed. The younger brother left, but the older is still here, operating a cafe, and is beginning to prosper again. He is married, and has one child.
Two other brothers (Pappas, or Pappadear) moved to Asheville to take advantage of a favorable business opportunity. They were born in Lynn, Mass., of immigrant parents from Attica, moved to Atlanta to live with their married sister when their father died, entered business there, and then later came here hoping to make more money. The older is married, owns his home and an automobile, and has three children. He thinks it is "bad luck for a bird to fly in the store." They operate a clothes-pressing, hat-cleaning, and shoe-shining business, and are successful.
A cafe man (N. Peterson) moved here from Norfolk, Va., to enter business with an American and another Greek. He and his wife were born in Old Greece, and migrated to Norfolk because they were ambitious to succeed economically. Their three children were born in Virginia. The cafe, which is open day and night, does a good business. It is very popular with the other Greeks because exotic dishes are prepared for their benefit. These are never listed on the regular menu, but may be ordered by anyone.
A few Greeks who have succeeded elsewhere, and retired, have come to Asheville to spend their last days because they like the physical features, or for other personal reasons.
The local Greek community is loosely organized, and the members are widely scattered as to their places of residence. An effort is being made to effect a closer organization, and it is meeting with some success in spite of intermittent bickering. The Greeks have bought and paid for a church lot, and have established a building fund. The church will not be started until sufficient funds are on hand to complete it and pay for it in full. Each member of the community has contributed to the cost of church and lot, and most of them contribute regular amounts at stated intervals.
Most of the Greeks are engaged in business; largely cafe, restaurant, and lunch-room, pool-room, shoe-shining, hat-cleaning, refreshment-stand, and similar enterprises.
