Isaac Johnson,
Happy Hill Community,
near Chatom, Ala.
Jack kytle,
Editorial Department.
JOHNSON: CAJAH TURPENTINER
There is a desolate stretch of gullied, sandy land on the western banks of the Tombigbee River, in Alabama's southwestern corner. The land is poor, covered by cutover pine timber and scrub oaks. Raw gashes, with tin turpentine cups nailed beneath them, are on all the pines; but the resin drains sluggishly. The trees are too small to produce a steady flow.
Threading through the region are dim logging roads, neglected for years, and filled with stump ends and brush. They are flanked by forests inhabited by razorback hogs, wild turkeys, deer, and other game. And far back from the roads, in isolated places and sometimes as many as ten miles apart, are squat, weathered huts that house a people of Haque racial origin.
This is the land known to Alabamians as the "Cajan Country." Here for more than a hundred years dark, solemn men, women and children have existed on what they earned from turpentining and lumbering. Now, with these resources almost gone, many of them admit that they are facing an uncertain future.
The Cajan houses never have more than three rooms, and most of them are either one or two-room structures. The windows have no glass panes, no screens. Plain pine boards nailed to hinges keep out the winter winds, and in summer, flies swarm through them unmolested.
Many of the Cajans have withdrawn so completely into isolation that they are unable or unwilling to obtain outside aid. Their means of earning a livelihood her almost disappeared and most of them live in bitter poverty. Others struggle to better their condition and are unwilling to admit that the future is without hope. Isaac Johnson, is one of these.
He is a wiry Cajan, nervous and guick He is his early thirties and has lived in washington County all of his life. As long he can remember, he has worked in turpentine and lumber. His father was a turpentine and lumber worker before him. The sometimes managed to pay all his debts and still have some money left, Isaac says he has not been able to do this. The father even managed to buy forty acres of land; but trees were larger and more plentiful then, and prices were better.
These Johnson and his family of three live in an unpainted pineboard cabin of three rooms in a community called "Happy Hill." Like several others of his people, he married a white woman, and they have two children; a girl twelve years old and a baby boy. Johnson is proud of his people, claiming good Spanish and Indian blood.
He stood surveying his land with solemn eyes, Ms dark head bare and erect. Ditches pierced the sandy earth between the slim pines. The land looked as though it had never been turned by a plow, but Isaac Johnson said: "Maybe I can a-grow something here; I theenk it might make corn; yes, and some cotton."
He turned as he stood in the weed-flanked trail and looked back upon his cabin, some fifty yards away. "See," he said, "I have jus' built her. She's a purty house, I theenk; better anyway, than the one we moved out of about three miles over yonder. She still needs steps and a ceiling. Maybe I can a-get to that later on."
The cabin stood, stark in yellow newness, among the small pines, some of whose branches brushed the roof. All of the windows were without panes. The weeds and brush had not yet been cleared from the yard, Johnson explained that he would get to there tasks later. A large circular block of pine, apparently sawed from the stump of a tree, was placed "before the front door to serve as a temporary step.
Johnson walked with his visitor up the newly beaten trail, and together they entered the cabin. In what he called the front room was an iron-post bed, better than those usually found in Cajan houses, and a somewhat battered dresser. A rag rug, gay in its red and blue coloring, was on the floor in the center of the room. His wife sat on the edge of the bed, her baby cuddling at her breasts. She said loyally; "One good thing about this country: it may be lonely, but we never have to worry about being robbed, as you people do in Birmingham. We never have had anything stolen from us out here, and even when I am alone, I never bother to lock a door."
She shifted the baby to her knee and bounced him until he laughed gleefully. "Of course, our place isn't pretty now," she admitted, "but we will improve it as we go along. I teach over at the Happy Hill Cajan school, you know, and I have very little time now to tidy things up. I just have to leave a girl here with the baby, working about the house. You see, I have not even had the time to pictures."
Johnson led the way from the front room into the kitchen, where a squat wood stove stood in one corner. In the center of the room was a long pine table upon which was heaped a small cluster of commodities. These included salt pork, lard, salt, a paper sack filled with flour, and another with com meal. He explained that they eat only the simplest things, "Because, you see, I am the cook; and I can't a-cook much. My wife, she too tired for anything when she gets done with the kids up there in the school."
The visitor was not taken into the other room, but a glance through the open door revealed only odds and ends of furniture. These included a chair bottomed with calfskin, and a washstand. Several pictures yet to be hung were on the floor, leaning against the rough walls.
Returning to the 'bedroom, Johnson drew up chairs about the Iarge open fireplace, in which burned a blaze made of pine knots. He talked then about the turpentine business. "It's a-no good," he explained. "It hasn't been for a long time. A man, he can't a-live on fourteen cents a day, and that is all the turpentine brings gallon. It brings only 'bout four cents a pound.
"One time there was a-money plenty to be made in these woods. Some people got lots of it. But now the trees, they are jus' too little. It will take years 'fore they grow up to be any good again."
"I used to get some work in the sawmills 'bout here, but mos' of them have a-closed down now. It's got to where there's no work for anybody. I sometimes walk all the day around to my turpentine cups, but it's awful to fin' such a, little bit of resin. It makes me theenk that we're a-jus' wasting our time fooling around with it.
"I theenk maybe some big Industry should a-come down in here, even if I don't know what it would be. So many of our people could be helped that way. Some thing's got to come, or else they must go away somewhere. But they're all like me, I guess. I was a-born on this place; I helped my father here, and it would be a bad thing to leave. I don't think any of us will a-have to leave. Something's hound to come along.
"We've been lucky in a way, me and my family. When my wife's teaching, we get along as well as mos' anybody. That gives us better'n twenty dollars a month. I jus' don't know what i'd a-done without her."
Lucille Johnson glanced at her husband, drawing the baby closer. She smiled a little, saying: "we never suffered for anything, and we've been together more than twelve years."
She is a sturdy woman, short and a little plump. Her eyes are. Brown and frank, her hair dark and done up in a knot at the back of her head. Fourteen years ago she came to Washington County from her home in Bessemer, Alabama, to teach in the Cajan schools. And teaching here, she fell in love with Isaac Johnson, "Because he was the most considerate and most lovable man I had ever known." They were married, and she said proudly: "We agree on about everything; we never have any quarrels." She glanced again at her husband, "brushing strands of hair away from her face with her free hand, and he nodded solemn agreement.
Isaac and Lucille Johnson have never minded the antagonistic attitude of some people living in washington County who oppose the marriage of whites and Cajans. In this county, Cajans are classed as "colored people," and a great t deal of concern has "been aroused by intermarriage, which is by no means rare. The Johnsons agree: "Our marriage is our own business. So long as we are happy together, why should it concern anyone else?"
Their' daughter, Norma, attends the Happy Hill Cajan school, where she is in the fifth grade. The school has only seven grades, and after she finishes, the Johnsons hope to send her to high school; perhaps to college. They realize that she can never attend high school in Washington County, where anyone with a trace of Cajan blood is forbidden to enter the white schools; but they have made plans to complete her education, even if she is forced to attend school outside of Alabama.
She is a shy girl, large for her age, Her features are like those of her mother, but her eyes and hair are a shade darker. She hopes someday to study music although there is not a piano in her community. She has no means even of obtaining the latest sheet music, because Cajans seldom venture into town, and they never have the money to buy anything except necessities. But she hums the few religious hymns and spirituals she has learned.
Isaac Johnson, like nearly every other Cajan, has only a limited education. He can read, and he says that he can do fairly well at the task of writing a letter; but he admits that most of his learning has come from his wife. She is a graduate of Jacksonville State eachers' College, and she taught him to write after they were married. He says that he wishes he knew more, and for that reason he is anxious for his children to have an education.
"What we need here," he said in his drawling tone, "is a high school for my people. If we could a-get the high school, then we might someday have a college. The Negroes have their college up at Tuskegee. Why can't we have one?"
"Why, those kids over in my wife's school are bright as they can be. They learn everything fast. Jus' think what it would a-mean to them if they knew they could keep learning past the seventh grade. How would you feel if you knew the State wouldn't a-give you a chance to get any further?
He shook his head slowly, looking into the fire, but his wife said: "I have children over there who would grow into fine men and women if they were given a better chance. There is no thing lazy about them, no matter what the people over in town (Chatom) say. They want to learn. I tell you, when children come to school without any breakfast, and many times without enough clothing to keep them warm, they have something about them that you won't find in every child.
"You were over at the school to see those children," she said to the visitor. "You saw children who were without shoes, and it was cold this morning. You also saw that some of the children's eyes are very bad; that they need glasses badly." She paused a moment, looking into the fire. Then she said; "I wish I had enough money to take all of them to Mobile and buy them some glasses. It must be terrible with your eyes hurting you all of the time. Isn't it asking a little too much to expect cold and hungry children to learn a great deal!
"Of course, we are always planning some thing better for them, but it seems that we never have enough money. We are talking about setting up a lunch counter, to be run on something like a cooperative plan. I don't know whether it will work, but it's worth trying. Anything would be better than watching them stand about the grounds at Iunch time without any lunch to eat."
Isaac Johnson, like his wife, resents the change that his people are shiftless, and unwilling to help themselves. "You will find lazy, people everywhere," he said, "and you will find some smart people, too. I don't a-believe anybody could call me lazy. Since I was a boy, I have teen up before daylight, and I never stop a-working until it is after dark."
He flung a glance at his wife. She smiled and nodded.
Neither Isaac nor his wife take any active interest in either local or national politics. They do not vote, and as Isaac explains: "I guess the people who do the electing know what they are a-doing; anyway, I hope they do. I think that Mr. Roosevelt has done his very best to help the poor class of people, but one man can't a-do everything. We need hundreds like him, and we need some of them right a-down here in Washington County.
"Why, I tell you, if people knew how some of us have to live, they'd be dumbfounded. There are lots of Cajans who'd a-get out and do something if they had somebody to set them on their feet just once. But you know it's hard to do anything when you are kept busy trying to jus' get up something to eat. If these woods weren't full of wild game, lots of Cajans would be hungrier than they are. But it won't take no time a-down here to get a 'possum, rabbit, or squirrel. And now and then, we get a wild turkey."
Johnson says that he has often been without meney but that he has never asked anyone for help. "I have always a-managed to get along some way or other," he said, " and I guess I can a-keep getting along that way. I found out a long time ago that most people won't a-help you unless they are a-going to get something out of it. But I guess that's jus' people's way. I don't a-blame them none for it. I'm not the kind that runs about asking favors.
"I tell you, when things was so bad back in 1932, I'd a-get up in the mornings, and I swear I didn't know where I was a-going to get something to eat for the dry. But I got it, jus' the same. I guess life's like that; you got to scratch for everything."
Isaac believes in religion, which is not true of many Cajans, but he says: "I've never a-seen much good in setting up in church and listening to a man talk. And anyway, I'd rather stay at home on Sundays. It's so far to the churches that we don't get a chance to go much, but my wife always says that she would like to go every Sunday. I guess that she would, because she used to go before she came off a-down here. She way see it, if a man a-lives right all the time and does the best he can, he'll a-get to Heaven right along with the church-going people."
It was getting late now, and the visitor rose from his chair to leave. In the kitchen, there was a sound of meat frying, and the pungent odor had come into the front room. The daughter, Norma, was cooking supper. Without rising from his chair, Isaac said: "You can't a-leave without eating. Stay with us and get something under your ribs before you go." Mrs. Johnson seconded the Invitation, apologizing: "You won't find much to eat, but you are welcome to anything that we have."
when the visitor explained that he had to get back on the highway before good darkness, Isaac followed him to the door where the circular block of pine served as a step. He said: "When you come back maybe I'll a-have my house done. I want to ceil her and clean up the yards good. I theenk then she'll be as good as could want."
11/29/38
S.J.
