TITLE:  SALLIE SPITFIRE
Date of First Writing December 28, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed  Mrs. Sarah Taylor (white)
Fictitious Name Sallie Spitfire
Street Address  1013 Whaley Street
Place Columbia, S. C.
Occupation  Housewife
Name of Writer  Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser State Office
Mrs. Taylor, a wiry, little, gray-haired woman, whose welcoming smile revealed practically toothless gums, greeted me with the statement that she didn't have much time to talk this morning as the water was already hot for her washing. But when I again baked for just a few minutes of her precious time, she put several pieces of wood in the heater and drew up her two chairs, so that we might sit and talk. Her snappy pale blue eyes danced at the idea of any one wanting to know the story of her life, and, when assured that her true name would not be used, she suggested that we call her "Sallie Spitfire."
"I ain't got much story but just a hard time. You better go to some others in this house. There's plenty living here in this here old barn. Let's see, there's five families upstairs and three downstairs. Most all of 'em have chillum and not much else. I been here 'bout six months. I live 'bout and move when it don't suit me.
"I was born four miles from Columbia, on Quinine Hill, on the Jim Dent place, 'way back in '69. My father and mother was named Le Grande, and they was divorced when I was a little bit of a chap. Then my grandmother took he to raise. Never went to school more than two months in my life, but I can read a little and write my name. My grandmother petted me, and she was scared I'd get hurt going so far by myself.
"There was a young couple, John Taylor and wife, moved into our neighborhood from North Carolina. He was a carpenter. One day his wife died and left him with four little chillum on his hands. After a time, he began coming to our house, and we'd take walks. Didn't have nothing to ride in them days. Then when I was fifteen, we decided to get married. This here Mary Donahue right here was his baby then."
"Yes, ma'am I shore was," said Mary who was sitting on the pile of wood behind the stove. "I shore hated for Pa to git married again. And all the neighbors kept tellin' me not to mind her, because she didn't have nothin' to do with me. Yes ma'am, I shore was a mean youngun. Then when their first baby come, I resented that, because I had been Pa's baby and he petted me. They tried to git me to go to school, but I was too mean to go. I'd tell them to let me stay home and tend the baby, and just as soon as they wasn't looking, I wasn't tending no baby."
"We moved to Columbia," continued Mrs. Taylor, "so he could get more work. He made from a dollar to a dollar and sixty cents a day. I got work in the cotton mill in the spool room for fifty cents a day. We had eight chillun, but there's only one living now. They all died when they was babies. We kept two cows, had plenty of milk and butter, and during war times my husband made as much as five dollars a day. We was living good then - can't live now, and it goes hard. We didn't pay but eight dollars a month rent for a house, and we saved save money.
"My husband had a good education. His brother, the Rev. Thomas J. Taylor, who was a Baptist minister and preached in the same church for forty-seven years, was his teacher. He knew the Bible from lid to lid; didn't miss it. He could tell you where to find any part you'd ask him."
John Taylor died about six years ago. He had not been able to work for several years before his death. As Mrs. Taylor explained, "They set him off his Job on account of his eyes. My eyes is bad how, too, and I shore need glasses."
"Oh mama," chimed in Mary, "I see in the papers where you can git glasses for one dollar down and one dollar --- uh - when they can catch you."
After her husband's death, Mrs. Taylor worked on a Federal project until two years ago when she was cut off as being disabled.
"The doctors downed me; said I had high pressure and kidney. They said I must rest and live longer. But there shore ain't no time to rest, with all this here scrubbing and cooking and washing. And I tell Henry I been splitting so much wood I got it patterned out just right. This is the visitingest house; they starts before breakfast and keeps it up all day."
The presence of three girls in the room, visiting before breakfast, probably provoked the spitting remark. Thus relieved, she continued.
"I'm getting eight dollars and forty cents a month from the old age and has to pay two dollars a month rent for this room. I b'longs to the Broadway Baptist Church, but I don't git to go much. When some of 'em ask me why I don't come, I tell 'em that when I have a dress, I ain't got no shoes, and when I have them, I ain't got no hat.
"I didn't go to school much, and I couldn't get Henry, that's my boy, to go much either. He just picked up 'laceration and bricklaying, and When he works he gets six dollars a day. His wife went off with another man when their little girl was four years old. And I took her."
Bernice, the small granddaughter, was standing by the heater open-eyed and listening with intense interest.
"Henry likes to have a good time, and, when he's got money, he don't remember his mother. He just 'fans it out,' giving the girls a good time. Henry got married again about four weeks ago. They live 'bout four houses right up the street. I tried to raise the chillum the way they should go, but they didn't always go the way I trained them. Those days the younguns are raising the parents."
Just at this time the fire in the heater needed replenishing, and Mrs. Taylor picked out an armful of wood and left the room to split it. While Mrs. Taylor was out with the wood, Mary Donahue told something of her varied experiences.
"Cliff Donahue is my second husband. First, I married Jim Borsh. We knew each other when we was children and then met again after we was grown and working in Granby Mill. Jim was making two dollars a day and I was getting a dollar twenty-five. The first nine years we was married we boarded for six dollars a week. But when his mother was paralyzed, we moved there so I could take care of her. Jim got to drinking real bad and quarreled and mistreated me. He didn't beat me, but he gambled and wasted his money. I got tired of it. So I went to Augusta, Georgia, and got a divorce. That was fifteen years ago. Oh, yes, he got married again, but he got mad when he heard that me and Cliff was going to be married. His mind was off for a long time before he died. He was in the State Hospital for two years and died there last summer.
"Me and Cliff was married four years ago."When he works at his job in the machine shop, he makes eighteen dollars and thirty-five cents a week. When this job runs out, he makes his own job. We got a little cabin, made outer tin and scraps of boards, down on the river, and we go down there and fishes. Last time we was there we stayed two years. One night we got a message that the market wanted a hundred pounds of fish next morning. We got up at midnight, cooked, ate, and went fishing. By daylight, we had caught fourteen dollars and forty cents worth of fish. Sometimes we go to fish at Lake Murray. If we can get ready, we are going out with a carnival in April. That some one that was here during 'Fair' week. Cliff made his plans with the manager then. He calls it a 'grease Joint;' you know, sells hot dogs. I ain't going to have nothing to do with it myself. I'm just going along with him."
Mary Donahue is a tall, gaunt woman with a pale, sailor complexion, high check bones and sunken cheeks. She entered the room eating her breakfast. In one hand she held a great thick sandwich of bread and meat and in the other hand a heavy porcelain cup of strong black coffee. The pewter spoon remained in the cup, which had no handle, all the while she drank.
"The doctor says I have T. B." Mary went on between bites of sandwich and sips of coffee. "Cliff's good to me. He says he's going to boat that old T. B. yet. He makes me rest and drink lots of milk. We have the corner bed room with three windows, so I get plenty of fresh air. Cliff's sixteen years younger than me, and I'll be fifty my next birthday. I'll tell you Cliff is good, man, and bad: but he's cute. He drinks some, too. W-e-l-l, yes, he gets retty drunk sometimes. When he's drinking, he calls mama 'Sook,' and says 'See that old woman Sook? I'm going to live with her yet, if I have to tomp her'."
"Yes, that's my dog. Sometimes I say I'm going to get rid of Buster, but I can't: he's so much company. He's supposed to be a fox terrier, but he ain't no fox terrier. He's just a dog.
"We bought an old second-hand Plymouth the week before Christians. Before that we had a Buick. He has to keep some kind of a car. Sometimes it might be a pick-up, so we can go to the river or lake to fish.
"Shore did vote. But wouldn't have voted if it hadn't been for Johnston."
"Come on, Buster, it's time for us to go scrape out. What do I mean? I mean I got to clean up that room before Cliff gits here for dinner."
Throughout my visit, a pen of dried beans had been simmering on the oil stove, and now the little granddaughter put some in a saucer and, taking several rolls from a package, eat at the small table to eat her belatod breakfast. In the meantime, Mrs. Taylor came in with her armful of wood and excused herself so that she could go on with her washing."
