Campobello, S. C.
Route 1
December 30, 1938
A. G. M.
MAE WILLIS
"Tellin' about my life won't make no pleasant story, for I've had. nothin' but trouble and sickness all the time, and. seems like from now on what I've got to look forward, to is hard, work and hard times. After all I've suffered I ain't got much heart left. Course we are a-livin' here with Pappy now, and he's awful good to us but he's a sick man too. It troubles me for him to have us on his hands with all he has to keer for, and if he goes I can't say what ever will become of us from then on.
"It's always been a queer thing to me how people who work hard and try to get along for the 'selves 'thout askin' for help, just can't seem to make it somehow. Pappy is willin' enough to shelter and do for me and mine, but I'd a heap ruther keer for 'em myself if only I could. I wisht I could live to myself too. Not that it's ever been throwed in my face all I've had to bear, but seems like no house is big enough to be a real home for more'n one family. I'm always havin' to hush the children for fear of trouble and it don't seem like the time ever comes when I can please myself. It's always somebody else first. I ain't ever growed up to Pappy and Ma yet. They just ack like I'm one of the girls."
Mae stopped talking long enough to stir up the fire in the open grate and scold the "least one" for coming in so often.
"You go out'n here and shet that door, and if you show your face in here agin whilst I'm a-talkin' I'll have Pappy strap ye good, you see if I don't."
The "least one" disappeared and Mae resumed her story.
"Pappy, he says Great Grandpappy Jim Higgins come to this country on a big boat from Ireland. He can't rightly remember just how he come to settle in these parts, 'less it was because he tuck up huntin' and trappin' for his livin'. Jim Higgins was a powerful hunter and made good money out of the hides from the critters he caught. He would hunt and trap all winter, and come spring, when the hides was cured enough, Great Grandpappy'd start down over the mountains from Burnsville to Charleston, South Carolina. He made a great to-do out of this journey, and the hear-tell was that Jim Higgins mixed his business with his pleasure, time he hit Charleston. It seemed as if the Irish in him would out after all them dreary months he had put in a-huntin' critters back there in the mountains. 'Twouldn't s'prise me none if Great Grandpappy didn't have himself a time frolickin' in Charleston. He kep' this up till time come for him to take a wife. Her and a passel of children shore was his settlin', all right! Seems like he lost the hankerin' for huntin' or goin' to Charleston either, after that, and he bought him fifty acres of good growin' land up in Yancey County, and went to farmin' instead.
"Mr. Zeke Hampton let him have the land for his promise to give fifty good days work as its price, and made the deed long before Great Grandpappy had worked his time out -- just went on a-givin' him credit as he worked till his promise was up. Workin' days then was from sun-up till sundown, and I wouldn't be surprised if Great Grandpappy didn't earn that land. He come to be a mighty well-thought-of man in his late years. Folks honored him enough to name the town for him, and. it's Higgins yet. Tain't much of a place, just a little settlement yon side of Asheville, but Pappy is awful proud to tell how it was named for his folks.
"I can't call to mind much about Pappy's other kin if he ever had any. Him and Ma, they had ten children. Pappy was named for his Pa, Tilmon Higgins. Folks 'round here call him "Til" for short.
"First I can remember, we all lived in a four room log cabin on side the mountain near Burnsville at this place I been tellin' ye about what was named for Great Grandpappy. Some times I wished we'd a-never left out from there.
"Great Grandmammy died long afore I was borned, but I've had handed down to me a passel of quare lookin' things that were hern. Most of the clothes she made from critters' hide and hair. She done the weavin' on a loom, home fashioned, that Great Grandpappy made for her use. Seems like, after lookin' at some of her work, there ain't no substance atall to cloth these days, like to what she made.
"Pappy ran a saw mill, also a grist mill, on the waters of Cove Creek, there at Higgins. I was only three year old when we left there and come on to Polk, but I can remember all same as if it was today, how we rid the logs down stream far as the feeders, and how, if Ma cotched us, we all got a lickin'! One time Brother Woodrow likened to got drownded. We was all ridin' the logs when hisn turned over and throwed him into the water. When he come up seems like he musta hit his head on the log, for we couldn't see him no more. We all hollered for Pappy to come quick. I can see him yet, just as plain, a-tearin' down the bank from the mill a-scatterin' stones as he come, all dusty from flour and his hair all bristlin' and white lookin'. He got Woodrow up on the bank and worked on him a long time afore he come to hisself, and that's shore one time He plumb wore us out! She even whupped Woodrow when Pappy had got all the water out of him.
"Melvin, my oldest brother, he died in 1924. He never was to say well. Woodrow, he's twenty-two now, George is twenty, and Jackson's fifteen. Bessie is next to me, she's twenty-four. Kate's twenty-three, Mary Mag'alene's seventeen, Ruby's sixteen, and Margie, the baby, she's thirteen. I'm Ma's first. I'm forty-five.
"Sister Bessie married Willis Gregg. They live in Spindale. Her man's got heart trouble and can't work to do no good. Bessie works in the WPA sewing room and he cares for the younguns to home whiles she's a-workin'.
"Katie married Clarence Allen and went to live in Laurens, South Carolina. Clarence is a-farmin'. They ain't got no children. Doctor says they never will have none. Ain't that a pity?
"Mary Mag'alene and her husband, Woodrow Branch, works in the mill at Shelby, North Carolina. They've got a baby 'bout ten months old. The rest of us live here at home and help Pappy make crop and tend the stock.
"Jackson, he can't do much. He's got sugar di'betus same as all Pappy's folks done had. My boy is afflicted the same as them, he ain't never knowed a well day since he was born, pore little feller. He's first up then tuck down agin', and Doctor says he can't never get no better. 'Twas this here sugar di'betus killed Grandpappy. Some days there's as many as five of us all down sick in "bed. Ma says she gits plumb wore out a-waitin' on us, and it takes a sight of money for doctoring.
"When Grandpappy Higgins died, Pappy sold all to pay for his sickness and moved to Melvin Hill, nigh where we are now. Said he got tired of battlin' with cold of a winter, and was a-seekin' somewheres warmer. When we come to Melvin Hill all we brung was a two-horse team and wagon, the plow and such, our bed clothes, and a few pot vessels. Pappy had ninety dollars over and above debts, and he took this cash money to get a new start on. He bought a cow and some pieces of house furniture and went to sharecroppin'. We moved in an old tenant house on the place Pappy was farmin'. It shore was crowded too. Seems like them two rooms just run over with Higginses, big and little.
"But Pappy done well from the first. He tuck the $300 he made clear and bought twenty acres of land in Greens Creek Township — that's nigh to Melvin Hill. Pappy just kep' on a-workin' and tradin' farms 'till now he owns this 'un we're livin' on. It's nigh onto eighty-eight acres and debt free. The man who tuck the census last year said we'uns had the best garden in Polk County, and that Til Higgins was the best farmer. Pappy don't owe no man, and if he's got anything he shore worked for it. Last year we thrashed 478 bushels of wheat, made eight bales of cotton, killed six hogs and made enough garden to keer for the family and have some to sell, besides the honey and chicken and egg money which is. always Ma's.
"I do wish Pappy could quit work, so's he could rest and get well. He says no man can favor his ills with such a load on his shoulders, and that's what hurts so, 'cause I know me and the children are part of that burden. I give him every cent I get each month from the Gov'ment for child's compensation, and the little rations we get at Columbus twicet a month from WPA, and I'm thankful I can do that.
"I never got no help at all for nigh two years from the Gov'ment. We kep' a-goin' to Columbus and they kep' a-promisin', but nothin' come of it till one day Pappy got tired and he set down and writ the President himself and told him how bad things was with me. And we shore got action. Folks come to see Pappy about the letter, and told him he didn't have to write, that they was aimin' to keer for us real soon, but Pappy had already done wrote.
"I'll tell ye now how I come to be in such a fix. It all started from the day I run off when I was about fourteen and married Willard Bennett. My folks nigh about died. But I never knowed such happiness could be. Willard was awful good to me. At first he farmed with his Pa, but we lived at home cause Pappy said it had to be so, but Willard got a chance to go to work in a mill at Spindale and Pappy let us go on after Laurie was born, and Ma had learned me how to keer for her.
"Corrie was born six years after — she come just before Willard died. He never had to say been strong, and work in the mill seem to be agin him from the first. He come home from there one evenin' awful sick, just a-sufferin' sump'n turrible with the toothache. I done all I could, but he just kep' a-gettin' worse, and before a week passed Willard. died. Doctor said he had took the menagitus. Seems like I couldn't bear for 'em to take my man away and bury him. I begged to the last for 'em just to let me stay right by him. I thought when they carried his casket out of our little house I shorely would die too. I just couldn't believe he was gone and I was not to see him no more.
"I tuck on so it made me and little Corrie both sick. Pappy come and tuck me and the little'uns to live with them again, so's I could get a-holt of myself. I'd just set and rock Corrie and cry till I was plumb sick and couldn't do nothin'. After I got to feelin' calmer Pappy got me a job in the mill at Spindale where he was a-workin'. Ma kep' house and keered for the young'uns.
"I stayed single about three years, and if I could a-knowed all I know now, I'd be single till yet. I set and piece quilts and study, and it seems like no woman could go through all I have of trouble and sickness, and live.
"It started when I tuck a notion to marry up with Charlie Willis. He was a-workin' in the mill along with me and Pappy. He just kep' on a-talkin' about me bein' too pretty and sweet to be livin' single, and 'bout how he aimed to do for me and the little'uns too. Pappy never favored Charlie from the first, but he was awful handsome and I guess I musta just got carried away with the idea of a man of my own, him sweet-talkin' like he done. That and wantin' a home of my own so bad.
"Betty Lucindy was born the first year and I was awful happy. About four years after that, Charlie, he got tired of mill work and tuck the idea to go West. We sold out for what cash money we could get for our belongin's, just keepin' out our clothes, some quilts, and a few pot vessels. Charlie had an old two-model Ford tourin' car he swapped house things for. Pappy nigh tuck a fit 'bout our goin', but Charlie was set on gettin' on to new parts and seein' somethin' of the world besides what he had done already seed, so we started out early one mornin'. Ma, she just throwed her apron over her face and hollered fit to kill, and Pappy wouldn't say goodbye, he was that out-done.
"We went through the mountains, and our first stop was Irvine, Tennessee. Charlie fashioned a tent for us to sleep under of a night out of tow sacks, and when we made camp he just driv stobs in the ground and stretched the sacks over them for shelter.
"At first we all had a fine time. It just seemed like a frolic. The children was a-lookin' here and yon and hollerin' 'Ma, looka there!' till I'd get plumb addled with the racket. But we'uns got awful tired before we got as fur as Twin Falls, Idaho. We was two months a-makin' it that fur. We decided to stay there a while and pick apples. Charlie set the tow sack tent up real good when we made camp in the woods nigh the orchards, and me and him set out to work. We left Laurie -- that's my oldest, by Willard -- to mind the children. All that fall we picked apples, and when that crop was done we found a job gradin' 'taters. When winter set in it got too cold to use the tent any longer. Charlie got a man to let him move into his tractor barn. Charlie rigged up a chimney for a stove we bought second handed, and people give us furniture and such. Seems as if I never was so glad to get inside of a house before, pore as that'n was. We got it fixed up right nice after a while and lived there two years, harvestin' for a livin'.
"It looked like to me that ever since Charlie set out from home his ways got wilder as time went on. I had a sight of trouble with him runnin' around with women. His folks kep' a-pesterin' us to come home, and it shorely seemed best to do so. I kep' a-talkin' to Charlie 'bout how maybe somethin' was wrong at home and the family just wouldn't come right out and say so. After so long, Charlie got in the notion to start for home. We got rid of our possessions same as we did before and left Twin Falls for home. Time we got to Manhattan, Kansas, the old car, it just give out teetotally. There just weren't no more fixin' Charlie could do. The whole back had fell out and it wouldn't run no more. Not nary one of us could find work, and it come to such a pass we had to go to the County Home for a spell.
"I hated that so bad. I hoped Pappy'd never know we was in such a state. Inez, my pore little sickly baby, was born there. She just lived a few weeks. Seems like I couldn't take losin' her hard as I oughta, I hated so bad to tell folks where she was born.
"The County wouldn't pay for the buryin' and we had to stay on there for three months. I found washin' to do and got up all the money fur the baby's buryin'. I've always been glad I did, too.
"Charlie worked when he could find anything to do. When spring come he traded the old car for the worst lookin' old horse and wagon ever you seed. We gathered together what little we had and started for home onct more, workin' our way as we went. We camped same as we did before. When we got to Crossville, Illanoy, Charlie got a good job and decided he'd stay there a spell.
"Well, we was there a year. The young'uns never liked, it a hit because they had to go to school with niggers, so soon as we got together some cash money we struck out agin for North Carolina. We got fur as Plato, Missouri, when I come to my time and birthed Levi. We stayed on there till he was nine months old, and Charlie says 'If we're ever to get home, we shorely better get started.' I sort of thought it was quare, his takin' such a suddent notion. I hated goin' right then, Laurie seemed so awful puny.
"Lord, you don't know the feelin's I had when she took bad sick and the doctor come. He asked me a lot of quare questions, and I know now he shorely musta thought I was crazy or plain dumb, for four days from that time Laurie birthed a still born baby. And likened to died herself. We had to leave Plato soon as she could travel. I had a hard time keepin' the crowd from doin' somethin' to Charlie. I guess I don't have to come out no plainer and tell you who the baby's Pa was.
"I just sat beside Laurie and prayed and moaned. Seems as if I'd never done nothin' in all my life bad enough for such a sorrow to come upon me. I didn't know which away to turn, but seems like people tuck pity on my state and held back for a while from harmin' Charlie.
"Then one day Laurie was able to travel. We put a mattress in the wagon for her to lie on and got started again. Things went awful bad from then on. Seems like we couldn't earn no money any way we tried, and time come when we had to sell the horse for eatin' money. We pulled the wagon ourselves till Laurie got so she could walk, and then we come to the mountains and just give out and couldn't pull it no longer. Charlie swapped the wagon for vittles and we set out a-footin' it home, me with Levi in my arms.
"I toted him from then till we got to Greens Creek, and I was so wore out I likened to died after I got there. We'd walk till we would all get so tired we couldn't make it no further, then lie down by the roadside and rest. There was so many of us folks didn't often give us a ride. We camped at night near a stream if we could, so's I'd have water to wash and cook with come day. I'd dry the clothes when I washed 'em, best I could, but most of the time we just had to put 'em on wet and go on travelin'. It took us two months and three weeks to make it home. The children begged for food but me and him never. We just earned or went hungry. Folks was awful good to us along the way, and we never got in no trouble for trespass or stealin'. We was awful lucky, I think, considerin'.
"One mornin' about seven o'clock we got to Gilkie, North Carolina, where Charlie's Pappy lived. They shore was glad to see us, and tuck on powerful. We stayed there till we could get rested up some and eat our fill of food, then I wanted to get on to Ma.
"We walked on down to Spindale and come to Sister Kate's house. She told us Ma and Pappy had done gone back to the farm at Greens Creek I likened to cried I was so disappointed. A friend of Katie's seed how sorrowful I looked and he says to me 'Why, Miss Willis, I can take you'uns right on home now in my truck, good as not. It won't set me back none to speak of, and I know you're a-wantin' to get home.'
"That ride was the last of our travelin'. Brother Woodrow was a-standin' on the porch when we driv up. He hollered, 'Ma run here quick! Mae's done come!' Ma hollered hack, 'It ain't no such a thing!' But time she come to the front door I'd done hopped out of the truck and there we stood huggin' each other and just a-bawlin'.
"We stayed with Pappy and Ma till we got rested up. Pappy said we must all eat hearty and get fleshened up some. Ma cooked everything she ever remembered hearin' me say I liked, and Lord, how we did eat!
"Come evenin', we'd all set out under the trees and tell the folks about our trip. I never onct let on about Laurie. I just wanted to fergit all about that if I could.
"After so long a time Charlie went to Bostic, North Carolina. His Pappy let him farm a hundred acres on shares. Soon as he could get a tenant house patched up, me and the children went there too. Brother Woodrow took us in his truck. The folks all turned in and give us enough to start house keepin', and was mighty kind.
"The day I left for Bostic I felt awful thankful to every body, and I was glad to be gettin' settled once more. Seems like I'd gotten awful whipped out, never havin' no place of my own to lay my head. All summer we worked and planted. Ma sent me a shoat and some chickens, and we done right well. We had a real good house after it was fixed up, and a fine deep well. The water was cold like it was iced. It seem as if things was goin' right for me at last. I milked the neighbors' cows and got enough sweet milk to do us for all our needs, and we all helped at cotton pickin' time.
"After I come back from the West I couldn't get a-holt of myself. Seems like I was ailin' most of the time. I just moped about and doctored on myself the best I knowed how, but didn't get no better. Charlie he'd fuss about it till I near cried my eyes out, he was so cross to me.
"One day he says to me, 'Mae, I want you to get out and go to Shelby and see the doctor. Get somethin' done for yourself. I'm gettin' doggone tired of your all the time complainin'.'
"So I got up early one mornin' and fixed vittles to do for the day and tuck the bus to Shelby. Dr. Jordan said I was awful wore out and was a-sufferin' from gwoiter. He couldn't do much for me right then, but told me to go home and rest much as I could and take the medicine he give me. I was awful troubled to have to tell Charlie how things was, and I come back sad like about such news.
"Soon as I come in sight of our house I heard the children just a-weepin'. I started to run hard as I could. When I could make 'em hush 'nough to talk so I could understand 'em, Bettie Lou says 'Pa's done tuck Laurie and went. He said he'd kill any one of us that told till you come and when you did, to say they was gone for good -- 'twouldn't be no use to look for 'em.'
A long pause followed. It seemed as if Mae couldn't go on. Tears filled her eyes and she struggled for composure.
"It's been four years since they left. I ain't heard tell of 'em but once, when the law seed 'em in Richmond, Virginia, and sent me word. I wrote right back and told the law if they caught 'em to put Charlie in jail and Laurie in the reform school and send the baby Laurie'd done had to me to keer for. But by the time the letter got to Richmond they couldn't be found. No, I wouldn't have minded keerin' for Laurie's baby. It couldn't help how it got here. I didn't want it to suffer. Seems as if I ought to be pitiful to the pore mite.
"I used to lie awake and grieve so at night. I do yet. Some days I get plumb wild worryin'. If I knowed how things was with Laurie, or whether she wanted to go on or not, I wouldn't keer. I ain't never had a line from her since she left. Seems like she could'uve wrote, but maybe she was too shamed, or maybe Charlie wouldn't let her. If she ain't sorry for what she's done to her pore Ma she shorely will before time comes to die, for the Lord don't put up with no such doin's as that. Some says they can't write nor come back, for the law would get 'em. Wonder is that so.
"Well, when Charlie lit out, Pappy come after us one more time and fetched us home. I never raised my head from the piller from time I got home till Jerline was born about three months after.
"Ma, she'd say 'I wouldn't be such a fool, Mae. It don't seem right to grieve after no man and gal would do what they've did.' But I was too sick and wore out to reason with myself.
"There wasn't nobody with me when Jerline come. Ma and Pappy was in the fields droppin' sody round the new com. I was tuck suddent like. I hollered till Ma heard me and she come a-runnin', skeered most to death, but I got along all right. The baby did too.
"I've been workin' in the WPA sewing room at Columbus makin' twenty-one dollars a month, but it's closed now. So I ain't got nothin' to do but help out here at home and piece quilts. I've got ten done, but I ain't got no money to buy cotton nor backs for 'em. Reckon if Pappy writ Mr. Roosevelt he'd send me some?"
Mae Willis (Relief) S. C.
Excellent
Mountain farm reared- path grandfather and father worked and bought land - father had sawmill and grist mill-she married early - husband had menin - gitis-she remarried doubtful character -husband tired of mill work- family went west- following harvest seasons –he had by child daughter - journey home epic - finally ended on fast - went back to farm- one day husband ran away with daughter - never seen since - she worked WPA - no work now
Features: More has happened to this woman than to most whole families - but she goes on.
