Federal Writers' Project
Room 36, Federal Building
Greensboro, North Carolina
March, 1939
Mrs. Robert Dorset (Maiden name: Miss Bessie Husketh.)
Hanner Street
Siler City, N. C.
School teacher
Katherine Palmer, writer
--------, reviser
LIFE OF A SCHOOL TEACHER
Bertha Medlin had a plain little face, but the grave sweetness of her expression made people love her. Two prim brown "pig-tails" hung nearly to her waist. Her eyes were blue and looked at you directly, "Here I am! Am I all right? Am I pleasing you?"
She was seven, and lived with her family on a farm east of Siler City. There were two brothers, Ted and John, and an older sister named Lucy. The child loved the open country life. She would have been entirely happy had it not been for her parents' constant talk of poverty. These discussions puzzled and bewildered the small girl. She became acutely conscious of being poor.
But what could mother and father mean? They all seemed well provided for. There was enough to eat and drink. Bertha had sturdy shoes in winter and wore warm home knitted stockings and caps. In summer there were vegetables and fruits. There was good milk. Didn't old Daisy, the cow, see to that?
Still the wearying grown-up talk went on until Lucy would stick out her pretty underlip and flounce out of the kitchen. Later, when the house had grown quiet, Bertha would hear her crying in the attic. Lucy "didn't wish to work and help out". The spoiled girl wished fine clothes and trips. Most of all she wished to marry Stuart Paine whose family thought he was too good for her.
Bertha grew to dread the long winter nights. Father looked stooped and solemn. Her mother, worn out with early rising, ironing, and cooking, would put her face on her arm and cry softly. The two brothers sat sullenly. They "couldn't get jobs at the mill". Father said that they "didn't want to". There was a mortgage. The Medlins couldn't make things meet.
"There's a mortgage, and I can't make things meet," the little girl told the animals in the barnyard.
When Bertha was barely six, she had learned to help her mother with her endless round of farm chores. She helped sort the vegetables to be sold to the markets in town. She gathered the eggs, helped Father carry his axe to the woods, and could even churn and make the rich butter.
Helen Medlin looking up from the steaming stove would smile, upon seeing the small figure weighed down with chips and kindling.
It was soon, "Bertha would want a job, Lucy, if she were old enough", or "Ted, pick up that well bucket and wood. Bertha can't lift them." The mother gazed at her with love and pride in her eyes. Father patted her hair and said "good girl". But Lucy disliked the eager open-faced sister who enjoyed her parent's affection and trust.
In May when the fields were sweet with spring, the child would throw off the sad thoughts of winter, as the maples in the yard exchanged their shabby robes for new tassels. She loved to pick creases down by the branch. The buttercups turned their yellow faces to the sun. Silver fish flicked their shining tails in the shallow water. During the long hot hours, Bertha lingered until her mother's voice would startle her. "Come on back, girl, the creases won't be done in time for dinner."
She would receive her mother's gentle scolding. "I do get so worried with you sometimes, you dreamy little thing." Helen Medlin's voice broke off abruptly for the small daughter had gone into the garden.
On mild spring evenings Bertha would go with her father to milk Daisy. They walked down the fragrant lanes. Redbud and dogwood brightened their path, and the sleepy birds twittered together in the dusk. The mules would be drowsy too, allowing her to stroke their dusty heads; The new colt nozzled her hand. Patting Matthew, the goat, who had grown feeblish she returned with her father to the lamp-light and supper.
Apple picking time was gay. The ladders leaned against the laden boughs. When the fruit fell, it made a "plumping" sound on the leaves beneath the trees. This autumn an exciting event awaited. Bertha was going to school. The days dragged by, the hours crawled. Finally it was the morning to start. She was to be enrolled as a pupil in the Siler City Graded School.
Mother was up early packing a lunch. An egg and half sandwich and an apple were put in the brown paper bag. Everyone was excited. Father tied his shoe laces crooked, and Bertha dropped her glass of milk. As they left the house, even Lucy came to the door and waved goodbye. The two boys, who had hated school, lay sleeping heavily.
Bertha held tightly to her father's hand. Hansel and Gretel, the purple ducks, accompanied them a short distance down the road. As they went past the white picket fence, Dempsey, the brown rooster, spread his wings and crowed.
"He's saying goodbye", the child nodded gravely to her father.
The years of grammar school passed uneventfully for Bertha Medlin. There were better days she would always remember. The occasion on which she won the box of wonderful new pencils for reciting The Children's Hour was one of the never- to-be-forgotten events.
She was a favorite with her teachers. The other girls liked her, but the little boys never pulled her straight "pig-tails" as they tweaked the golden curls of Sallie Merritt.
There were hurts to be remembered. The night of the Basket Party was a painful memory to the sensitive child. They were all gathered in the decorated class room on the last day of school. Lined separately against the walls, the boys were to choose a partner with whom to share the supper baskets. One after another, the other girls were chosen, but no one picked out Bertha. The teacher, Miss Allen, who was fond of the plain child, called to her gaily, suggesting that the two of them eat together. They could talk over the fun to be had at the church picnic Sunday. Bertha joined her gratefully. Two large tears fell slowly out of the blue eyes which peeped drolly through large spectacles.
Conditions at home had improved. Lucy had married a prosperous farmer years her senior. John had been working at the mill regularly. A sister of her mother had come to stay. The hated mortgage seemed less of a spectre.
Through the summer months Bertha stayed on the farm, helping with the housework and cooking. Helen Medlin had developed a pain in her side which alarmed her continually. Suffering, she would speak sharply bringing the tears to Bertha's eyes.
The long days passed slowly. The meadows were heavy with the scent of thyme and clover. At noon there seemed a sensuous quality about the woods and fields. The insects kept at their low humming.
When her share of the work was done, Bertha sat motionless beneath the maples. There was an abstracted air about the girl these days. She started nervously at the least sound.
Bertha had indeed a dream. It was to teach. To go to high school in the fall would make this golden plan come true.
"I can't see my way clear to letting you go this fall."
"But why, father? I'll work so hard, and things are better here."
"Mother isn't well, and needs you."
"But Aunt Sophie is here, and mother wants me to go."
The victory was Bertha's. Toward the end of vacation time, her mother and aunt sewed busily on sensible school clothes. Aunt Sophie put a frill or two on one green and red plaid silk. "For parties and boys" she said sweetly and was puzzled to see the wistful expression which came over the girl's face.
The years at high school were spent in careful application to her work. Continued study seemed to increase Bertha's interest in mathematics at which she excelled. This became her favorite subject. A page of uncompromising figures to be solved seemed a stimulating undertaking. Learning to love the English poets, she could recite lengthly passages with ease.
Bertha's appearance had changed only slightly as she had grown older. The blue eyes gazed at the world frankly and openly. She was slender and trim. The plaited braids were bound neatly around her head.
Recent low market prices and poor tobacco crops had caused life at the farm to lapse again into a perpetual struggle against poverty. Her mother's health was a constant source of anxiety to her. Helen Medlin had become a semi-invalid, whose monotonous existence was relieved only by monthly trips to a clinic.
Bertha was often near to giving way to nervous irritability and despair. Had it not been for her strong ambition to teach, which diverted her mind, she would in all probability have developed a defeatist attitude caused by the misery of the people surrounding her. She clung to her determination to be a teacher and brushed all obstacles aside which would have seemed insurmountable to a person of a weaker character than that which she possessed.
Graduation day arrived. Bertha had led her classes in mathematics. She received her diploma and was lauded by the principal for her record.
In order to get any sort of teaching position in 1909 it was necessary to take an examination under the county superintendent.
These tests were passed without difficulty. The problem of getting a position now confronted her.
On a spring morning, Bertha stood before Bert Oliver, a petty bully and tyrant, but the position could only be obtained through him. He soon realized that he was facing a young woman of strong will power. Ambition had filled the girl with courage and self confidence. Bert Oliver had expected a cringing country girl who would grovel for the job. He was forced to give in before the direct gaze focused upon him. The little figure standing before him commanded his respect.
The only place that was open at the time was at Hickory Mountain in Chatham County. The salary was thirty dollars a month.
Bertha Medlin left home one crisp Saturday morning in the fall of 1909. She was to live with the Henry Branches. Her board would be eight dollars a month.
She was met by a smiling, long-legged man, and was driven in a dilapidated old fashioned buggy to his house. Nellie Branche was froved of her.
The Branches had no children of their own, and they welcomed the idea of the quiet pleasant girl living with them for the winter. Henry was not strong enough to work. He and his wife lived on a moderate inheritance left him by a relative. They had plain food and hoped their new boarder would not expect anything "fancy" to eat.
"She's a sensible good girl. We'll have no trouble with her, Henry."
"Yes, Nell, that's what I was thinking."
The following Sunday Bertha was up early. She scarcely touched her breakfast, so eager was she for a glimpse of her school. Nellie Branche smiled at her eagerness.
"Go on with her, Henry; she's not hungry."
The school house was a mile away. The road was rough and stony, but the jolts were not noticed by the prospective young teacher.
A small white wooden building stood beneath large oaks. A bell hung in a belfry on the grey roof. Pine groves surrounded it on either side and a cinder path led up to the door.
There was one large room, heated by two fire places, containing forty desks, their surfaces marred by initials and crude drawings which had been cut by knives. The teacher's desk, placed in front of the blackboard, was shabby and inadequate, but to Bertha it loomed large and important.
All of her life Bertha Medlin would remember her first day as a school teacher. The questioning faces which regarded her as she sat behind her desk bore expressions of every nature. There were friendly, trusting faces, hostile and suspicious faces, each representing an individual to be met on its own particular terms and coped with as successfully as possible.
There were thirty pupils, ranging in age from six to twenty-one. Bertha was, of course, the sole teacher. There were no grades, instead the room was divided into classes. From eight thirty in the morning until four in the afternoon, the struggle went on to imbue these simple-back- woods children with love of learning. Her problems and hardships were innumerable.
One of the older boys was supposed to come early and start the fire. This he usually failed to do and the discouraged teacher would arrive on the grey winter mornings to find an icy room and a few shivering pupils awaiting her.
It was hard for the children to be on time during the bad months. Some of the smaller ones could scarcely get through the snow drifts which made veritable prisons of their homes. There was little cooperation from most of the parents.
"Well, go some, and stay home some. Just don't worry me none about it, or about buying costly books."
"Yes, Maw."
The ones who attended regularly did so because they had grown fond of Bertha and wanted to please her, rather than from any deep rooted desire to learn. They were bribed with promises of gold stars opposite their names upon the blackboard. The rewards for a fair grade in spelling were a tablet and new pencil to replace the grimy stub generally in use.
There was Mary Belle Tate, age eighteen who could not learn simple verses, nor to add. There was hulking Joe White who tormented the younger ones and put the room to confusion.
Characteristic of children the world over, Bertha found that they loved gaiety, needing only the slightest excuse to laugh. One rosy-cheeked boy was late even on the pleasantest days. He would fling himself into his seat and look around him with mischievous eyes.
"Well, here's Better-late-than-never- Johnny come at last!" Gales of laughter from the room.
"What do you expect has made Johnny so late today, children?"
"Counting the tassels on the oak. trees maybe."
"A' looking at the sky."
"Picking you some flowers, teacher", said Johny, producing a crumpled bunch of dog-toothed violets from beneath his ragged coat.
Bertha showed no open favoritism, but she preferred the little boys. She was touched by the consumptive boy, Gary Fletcher, who could move even the unsympathetic students with his husky voice.
"A thing of beauty is a joy forever."
"What's a tiling of beauty, teacher?"
"That oak out yonder, the little brook you wade in in spring."
"I thought you said Keats lived across the ocean."
"He did, but he meant the Hickory Mountain oaks and brook too."
"Yes'm"
By Christmas time, matters were going as smoothly as possible under all the handicaps. The children had been promised a tree. On the afternoon of Christmas Eve she and Johnny set out to gather it. They found a large pine which suited. Bertha was as interested as the eager child by her side. Together they dragged it to the school house. A group of excited pupils were waiting. The girls. had gathered holly, mistletoe and running cedar.
By four o'clock the bare little room had been transformed. It could only be lighted by oil lamps but the flickering dim glow blended well with the decorations. The defects were hidden and the smell of crushed cedar was penetrating.
The parents and friends began to arrive, Henry Branche and his wife occupying seats on the front row. There was to be a Christmas play, or rather a series of tableaux. Mary Belle dropped the china lamb, and Johnny forgot his little verse, but the program went off well for the most part.
As spring came on, reports of her mother's condition were disquieting. Although she had been offered the Hickory Mountain School the following term, Bertha felt that it was her duty to remain at home during the coming fall.
She was familiar with the custom that was practiced on the last day of school, and was prepared for it. Arriving in the morning, she found the school door locked. There was not a sign of a child. This had been expected, but the teacher feigned astonishment.
"What can be wrong! Children, I can't open the door! Then softly to herself, "There's not a single pupil here."
Suddenly a veritable chorus of voices sounded from the barricaded building.
"Treat! Miss Medlin Treat! You can't come in unless you've a treat!
"Treat, children, treat! Let me in! I've a surprise."
Joe White, who was greedy, sprang to open the heavy door.
Bertha stepped over the threshold. Smiling mysteriously, she went over to her desk and unwrapped her packages. A variety of cakes and candies were spread before the enraptured group.
Helen Medlin lingered on in a grave condition from year to year. Fearing that she was soon to die, her daughter found it impossible to leave her. From 1910 until 1917 the girl stayed on the farm. In the spring of 1917 her mother died.
When the first grief had worn off, Bertha's thoughts returned eagerly to her work.
She was anxious to get a position in a better school than the one at Hickory Mountain, and begged her father to be allowed to go to college. There was not much money at her disposal, but she felt that once established at school, she would be able to get some sort of work to help pay for the tuition. It was finally agreed that she was to enter Woman's College at Greensboro in the fall.
During the seven years spent at home Bertha had received letters of sympathy from Henry and Nellie Branche. They now wrote asking her to come and visit them before she left for Greensboro. This Bertha wished to do and so on a day in June she arrived at Hickory Mountain.
A young man was also visiting the Branches. He was a distant relative of theirs and his name was Fred Andrews. He was the simple honest type of person whom Bertha admired. Fred felt drawn to the girl whose eyes regarded him so earnestly.
On Sunday mornings they walked together to the Love's Creek Baptist Church where they both sang in the choir. Before Bertha left Hickory Mountain, it was understood that they were engaged and would be married in a year or so.
Greensboro seemed a city to the country bred girl, and Woman's College an impressive institution. Bertha made friends easily, and was popular on the campus. Being enterprising, and having earned a reputation for honesty, she was able to get various kinds of work. A position in the school library was offered and accepted. There was work in the dining room. Having earned the respect of her teachers by her good grades, Bertha was given term papers to correct. The money earned by these occupations, coupled with the small amount her father sent her, financed the four years at college.
At bedtime, during her few moments of leisure, Bertha would lie across her small iron bed and listen to the other girls talking of dances and beaux. The morning letter from Fred Andrews, tucked securely under her blue sweater, kept her from feeling neglected. A warm glow spread through the girl as she thought of him. Fred had recently sent her a small diamond which she kept hidden in a bureau drawer. This ring she brought out only occasionally when her room-mate, with pride wanted to show it to the others.
Bertha graduated in June, and the following July she and Fred were married. The living room of the farm house was decorated sweetly with summer field flowers. Nellie and Henry Branche came from Hickory Mountain. If the Baptist minister prayed too long, the tediousness was relieved by the pleasure of seeing neighbors and childhood friends again. Lucy who was fat with a pretty faded face, played "Oh, Promise Me" on the old organ that had belonged to Helen Medlin. Lucy's two plump children passed the homemade ice cream and cake with sticky little fingers.
Fred Andrews had bought a white frame house on Homer Street in Siler City. He took his bride home that evening. Any thought of a wedding trip had never entered their heads. As they stopped at the gate of the neat small house the honest clear eyes of husband and wife shone happily. They went together slowly up the path, and stood for a moment enjoying the clusters of late jonquils which bloomed along the fence.
Fred called himself a "lumberman". He had gone into business with the sheriff's son. The two of them owned a moving sawmill, and went from place to place to cut lumber as they got orders and were needed. They made a good profit at Bob Van's place and at Little Brush Creek. Fred and his friend didn't mind a drink or two when the air was raw and chill, but they always turned in a satisfactory day's work, so people didn't mind the whiskey. Or if they did, they never said anything. Fred also owned a farm near "Siler". A tenant farmer was in charge of it.
Bertha was teaching at Silk Hope seven miles from Siler City in the third grade. She held this position for seven years. The children were eight and nine years old which to Bertha had always been the most interesting age and her salary was seventy dollars a month.
But the next year she was offered a better salary and changed to the school at Staley, which was located over the Chatham County line. The other teachers and the pupils love a "Miz" Andrews, who was patient and friendly. She Kept the position at Staley for ten years, and earned seventy-five dollars a month.
"I always say that the smell of chalk is to me what the smell of sawdust is to a circus performer. I love it. It makes me want to do my best", Bertha was fond of saying to her friends.
Toward the end of her last year at Staley, Fred Andrews died suddenly, leaving Bertha childless and alone in the house. He had caught cold on one of his trips with his saw-mill and pneumonia had developed.
Bertha missed her husband keenly, but being of strong will she bore this sorrow stoically and with the dignity that was characteristic of her.
The house seemed desolate and the lonely woman began to look around for roomers to share her home and help with the expense. Fred Andrews had left no insurance and the farm brought only a small income. Bertha thought of her father, but the aging man would be miserable away from his farm, and Lucy and her husband had come to live with him.
Finally the town plumber and his wife came to occupy the "side room which opened on the porch", and to snare "Miz Andrews"" meals. Bertha had a negro cook, Hannah, who dipped snuff, sang hymns, and stole the groceries.
The new boarders were named Rivers. They had a new baby whom Bertha loved. When its wail filled the house, she would run through the kitchen into the River's disordered bedroom, catch up the pathetic wrinkled creature, and sing to him in a high shrill voice.
Now Bertha was teaching at Ramseur in Randolph. County. It took her fifteen minutes to get there in the mornings. She had bought a second hand Buick. Leaving home at fifteen minutes of eight, she arrived at school in plenty of time for her eight-thirty classes. School was over at two- thirty or three o'clock. She taught the third grade and the salary was ninety dollars a month.
Spring came early in 1939. As Bertha drove home from Ramseur, she looked out upon the restful hills of Chatham County. The vivid pink of the first peach trees shone in the wet fields; wild plum trees in bloom lined the banks of the small creeks. The jade green of the young willows gleamed in the distance.
This particular mild day in late March found her torn between amusement and exasperation. Yesterday's events passed slowly through her mind.
William Dunlap, age nine was certainly proving a problem to her. The child hated arithmetic, and either could not or would not learn it. Although she had always delt patiently with him, the little rascal had grown insolent of late.
"Add twelve and eight, Billy".
"Sixteen I reckon, maybe a hundred".
(Muffled giggles from the class.)
"Do you want to be stupid, and ignorant when you are a grown man?"
"Yes 'm".
Yet he was not a vicious boy. The Dunlaps were "well-to-do folks" of the upper farmer class, and had tried to train the boy well.
The arithmetic periods had become a burden to the exhausted teacher. Just as yesterday's class had been about to begin, William had approached Bertha's desk, and regarded her with long-lashed grey eyes.
"Please, "Miz" Andrews, Granny is awful bad sick and Mamma wants you to let me off this noon so I can go to Siler to see her."
Bertha had not heard of the old woman's illness. On the contrary, she had seen spry Granny Dunlap sprinting down Fayetteville Street only the afternoon before.
"Why, Billy! Granny wasn't sick yesterday. What is wrong? It's sudden, isn't it?"
Bill's face lighted eagerly, "Yes mam, real sudden. She's awful bad sick."
That William's mother had asked for his freedom during the specific arithmetic period struck her as odd. Sallie Dunlap had been distressed by her son's low grades, and was very anxious for him to do better.
For a moment indecision made Bertha pause before answering the pupil standing before her.
Was the child telling her the truth in regard to his grandmother? The teacher had been aware that he had dreaded the coming test. On the other hand, what if she should refuse to allow him to leave and the old lady were really very ill?
Sallie Dunlap would never forgive her.
"Billy, you're sure Granny Dunlap's awful bad sick?"
"Oh yes 'm" "Mis.". Andrews".
She hated to be "ill" (often used in Chatham County for "unfair" "cross", etc.) with William, so after reflecting carefully she decided to let him go.
A glimpse out of the window showed William's robust little figure running out of the yard, a stray dog at his heels.
At three o'clock, upon leaving the school building, Bertha remembered that she had several errands to attend to up town before turning into Hanne Street.
As she was parking the car in front of the Jefferson Standard Insurance Agency next to the drug store, agile Granny Dunlap turned the corner and spied her.
The toothless old woman hurried over to the car.
"I declare, Bertha, I'm right smart worried over Billy. I just come from over to Sallie's. The little fellow looks all right, cheeks red and all, but his mother was telling me how you had to send him home sick from arithmetic class today. He was telling how you said to him, 'Don't even try to add, Billy with your stomach hurting that bad. "
Bertha eyed Granny Dunlap doubtfully. She could not hurt her. Patting the rough old hand, she entered the Siler City Drug Store.
Billy had not yet reappeared at school. Ah well, such things were discouraging. She had tried hard and the child had failed her.
With an effort, the teacher dismissed the William Dunlap episode from her mind. Other matters weighed heavily upon it. She thought of the present agitation regarding salaries. The newspapers were full of these arguments, and the radios each night loudly blared the details discussed at Raleigh during the day. Bertha heartily endorsed the issues under consideration at the State Legislature. She had a B Certificate, but was anxious for her friends with a higher rating to get a raise in salary. During the latter part of the depression the amounts had been cut, and it was only in recent years that Bertha's salary had been restored to ninety dollars. The Teachers' Pension was an excellent idea, and approved by everyone who understood it thoroughly. The twelve month's school term (with salary) proposition was surely practical and just. Some of the teachers were forced to live on borrowed money during most of the summer. Sick, leave with pay would be wonderful, one realized, remembering the many times during the long years, when dragging oneself ill through endless hours in the class room, the thought of home and bed had seemed heavenly. If the plan for smaller enrollment were put through, it would mean more individual attention for each child. Conditions in some of the schools were very hard indeed. The classes were overcrowded, the instructors overworked and harassed. Well, these problem and questions would soon be settled, one way or another. Although the school system was enormously improved since her Hickory Mountain days, Bertha hoped that she might live to see still more advanced and progressive ideas carried out.
Turning into Harmer Street, she welcomed the sight of the white frame house which had been home to her for so many years. Aching with fatigue she got out of the car and went up the walk to the door. The pale middle-aged face was lined and worn.
Bertha's asthma had grown worse of late, her conversations now chiefly concerned her health and varying symptoms from day to day.
"I've lost eight and a half pounds in two weeks", she had told the patient plumber and his wife only last night.
"Why, "Miz" Andrews".
"I haven't been able to look at a biscuit for a month."
Upon entering the house the teacher sat down heavily on the divan in the small cluttered living room, seized with a profound inertia from which the piercing wails of the River's baby could not arouse her.
The room was dark and its aspect was unlovely. The walls were papered in a lifeless gray color. Piles of shabby books were stacked on the chairs and table. Two paintings depicting furious snow storms decorated the mantelpiece.
She sat on listlessly, leaning against a hand painted Indian pillow, the Christmas present of her class. The eyes behind the gold rimmed glasses had lost their youthful gleam.
Although reports from Duke Hospital now found her chief interest, Bertha felt too tired today to open the box of asthma serum lying upon the desk. It had evidently come from Dr. Ransom in the afternoon's mail. The Siler City doctor had told the teacher to "stay away from horse dandruff, hog's hair and Johnson grass."
The servant sang loudly in the kitchen. "Do hush at once, Hannah."
The figure of the spoiled negro appeared in the doorway. "Miz" Andrews had never spoken to her in such a harsh voice before.
Having no appetite for supper Bertha undressed and prepared for bed early. Plaiting her thinning hair, the frightened eyes of little Bertha Medlin returned her gaze. "Do I get the Hickory Mountain School, Mr. Oliver?" and later whispering to herself in the cold small bedroom at Hemp Branche's, "Will I suit? Will I be able to keep the school?"
She lay tossing restlessly. The young children, whose affection she had always regarded as due her, now clustered round that new teacher from Hemp. Scarcely out of her teens, and knowing far less than Bertha, the girl possessed a pretty empty face which drew the pupils to her.
Next fall an instructor was to be dropped from the school at Ramseur. The teachers huddled together at recess time in the deserted class rooms, and discussed this absorbing topic.
"Will I be the one?"
It beat through the head like a drum until one could not sleep. The ugly possibility gnawed at the mind.
Turning in the disordered bed, she faced the situation. Would Bertha Andrews after twenty years of faithful and unflagging interest in the welfare of her students, be the teacher who was to be dropped from service?