LIQUOR WILL RUIN YOU
Original Names	Changed Names
Zelda	Robert
Zeke	Bob
Bertha	Betty
Helen	Joyce
Date of first writing:	June 1, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	Zelda Williamson
Address:	Wilson, N. C.
Occupation:	Plumber
Interviewer:	Stanley Combs, Wilson
Reviser: Edwin Massengill
No. of words:	About 3,250
LIQUOR WILL RUIN YOU
My name is Robert. They seldom call me that though; it's usually called 'Bob' for short. My schoolmates started calling me that when I was going to school, and I seldom ever hear anything else now, except at home. A lot of my best friends don't even know what my real name is.
I'm not much of a talker, and neither me nor our family has ever done anything of note in life. In fact, we are like most poor folks and lived like most of the other people do. Papa had a farm, and there was nine or us children, six boys and three girls. The oldest child, a boy, died at three years of age, and I am the oldest one now. We kids used to have great times together. I didn't have sense enough to realize it, but them were the best days I'll ever have. I'd give a lot if I could live my life over again, knowing what I know now. I can look back over it now and see lots of things that I would have different, if I had the chance. We all had our little chores to do on the farm and during the summertime we helped work the crops. The hardest work came when harvest was on, but we kids always had time for lots of fun. We really had a good time, but we didn't know it.
Papa moved to town when I was twelve years old and took a job as watchman. It didn't take him long to get enough of that. After he and his job had a falling out we moved out on the edge of town, and he farmed a little on land that he rented. He grew tobacco as a cash crop mostly. He did pretty well at that for a few years until the price of tobacco fell so low that he decided to quit and work at whatever he could do as a laborer. Work wasn't so plentiful then, at times, so he began falling behind.
I stopped school when I was in the seventh grade to go to work to help support the family. School wasn't so interesting to me anyhow, and so when I suggested that I stop and help bring in bacon for the family they readily consented. I worked around town at first one thing and then another, and people began knowing me more and I began getting better jobs.
The first job that I got that was worth much was a job on the ice and coal truck. After several months at this work, I got a chance of a job out at the county garage as mechanic on the trucks out there. My next job or any importance was with one of the plumbing shops. I liked this work far better than anything that I had done before, so I decided to stay with it. I worked as a helper for a long time. I guess I got along pretty well as an Assistant for I got a few increases in pay, and then after awhile I was sent out on a job and given a helper. This made me feel good. I began to realize that I was a plumber.
During all this time I was helping with the finances at home but always had a little money I could call my own and could use as I pleased on myself. I got to running around with the other young fellows and finally to paying attention to the girls. I guess I was having a pretty big time, but I didn't realize it. Finally I got started to going steady with Betty, and after about a year of courting we got married. We both were just kids and didn't realize what it was all about. I was seventeen, and she was two years younger. We thought we were greatly in love with each other, but I know now that what we had wasn't what love really is at all. We just didn't know anything. The constant pulling together and companionship with each other and the roughing it through thick and thin has developed a love that is far beyond anything experienced by either of us-at the time of our marriage. Now it seems like our love then was only a heart flutter.
Betty has two living brothers and a sister. I tell her that I got the pick out of her family. She was raised in town and don't know anything about lire and fun out on a farm. She got along better in school than I did, for I failed to pass a term or two but she didn't. She finished the tenth grade just before we were married. I think we both have sense enough to know now that it would have been better for us to have stayed in school longer.
We have two kids, aged four and six. We sure don't want them to make the same mistake that we did. I think all young people that are physically fit should get married, but I think that they should wait until after their schooling is over and they have saved something towards a home before they tie the knot. There is plenty of time and oodles of water to swim in. Of course, we love our two children as much as anyone could love children, but we don’t have what we want to do with and we can't do for them as we would wish. I tell Betty we just can't afford any more. Some folks think that it's wrong to interfere with God's work or have anything to do with birth control, but we sure are doing all we can to prevent any more slip-ups at our house. It looks to me like it's as big a sin to bring babies into a home that can't afford it, as it is to be cautious and prevent one from making its appearance.
I am glad I was raised in a large family. It seems to me that the children of a large family aren't as spoiled and petted as those in a family where there is only one or two. On the other hand, I think it's better to stop with one or two, if people know that that is all they can afford to clothe, educate, and raise properly, rather than to have a whole house full half-clothed, half-fed, and undernourished, physically and mentally. We sure hope that our two will develop into something more worthwhile than their parents did.
This is our little girl's first year in school. She likes to go and seems to be doing well. I tell Betty that we ought to encourage them in their school work so they will retain their interest and do better than we did. If my folks had encouraged me more, I am sure that I would not have quit when I did. When I suggested that I stop they were only too glad for me to do it, and they didn't offer a single objection, so I stopped. They were having a pretty hard time and were more than willing that I quit. If they had opposed my stopping, I am sure that I would have gone on and probably finished high school. The other kids are dropping out like I did and none of them has gone beyond the tenth grade.
The schools are much better equipped now than they were a few years ago. The State is spending more money on them and the teachers are better prepared and better paid, so if a kid doesn't learn anything now it's apt to be a lot of it his own fault. We sure are giving all the encouragement that we can to our Kids and hope they won't even want to quit before they have each finished high school at least. At any rate, we will raise some objections if they want to just stop at the legal age.
There are lots of things that we would like to have for ourselves and our children, but we feel like the children should come first since they are just developing and can't afford to do without, while we are already matured and do not have to have. We want to have a home of our own, an automobile, and other things that go to make a home more comfortable and happiness more complete. With our present income and earning capacity, it looks like it will be some time before those things come to pass.
My income has recently dropped down to near nothing. In my work as a plumber I work with various people. I meet all sort of them. Ever so often someone offers me a drink. I always tried and wanted to be sociable, so I started drinking the stuff. It was good. I got to drinking more often and larger drinks at the time. The bossman nearly always had some on hand. I drank with him and thought I was getting along fine in a business and social way. The thing began to take on the portion of a habit and I began buying it and keeping a supply on hand in my ice box. I got to where I would get up in the morning and take a drink before breakfast. At noon, just as soon as I got home for dinner, it was another drink. Just before going back to work it was another, and then when I returned from work at night and until bedtime it was a little drink until I would use up the supply I had on hand, sometimes as much as a quart. Of course, this didn't happen every day, but it was often enough. After awhile, the bossman had a talk with me and asked me to stop so much drinking. He said that my work was satisfactory but some of the customers had complained. Some of the ladies, it seems, had objected to the odor of the stuff on my breath and thought I was drinking on the job. These complaints were mostly from repair jobs, and I can see how they would effect the work that I was doing.
For awhile, I did better, then I drifted back into the same old groove. The boss and I drank together lots of times. He is a grand fellow and wants to help me in all the ways he can. Together we went on doing as we did until finally my health broke. My kidneys began troubling me and finally got me down. Previous to this, I had been unable to make regular time and my income had dropped, and so when the crash came I had nothing to go on with. I went to the hospital for a short time and they soon had me on my feet and ready for light work. The doctors told me I would be all right again if I would let up drinking entirely, and by all means not to drink within the next ninety days. I really thought I was going to stop until I was on a job again and decided that one little drink with a friend would not hurt. I suppose it wouldn't have if I had stopped with one. It's just like everyone else that's tried it has done: that one drink called for another, and that one for another until soon I saw the hospital staring me in the face again.
Papa and Betty decided to take a hand and help if they could. They went to the cops and asked them to pick me up and put me in jail the next time that they saw me drunk. I knew that it was coming, and it wasn't long before it happened. I was not drunk or disorderly when they picked me up and I just stayed in jail from late that night till time for police court the next morning when my case came up. Since I wasn't doing anything out or the way when I was picked up there was nothing the police could do about it. They knew that my folks had wanted me up, out unless they started proceedings against me they coulan't do anything to me. It came out in the trial that my folks wanted me sent to an institute for alcoholics. The police were not in a position to do this, but they turned me loose and informed me that the case would stand open and I was to stop drinking. Since then I have taken very little. I can stop, and would rather do it myself than to be sent away. I feel better and am able to get about a little. Of course, it's played havoc with my earnings. My income is next to nothing. Anyone is a darn fool to let liquor ruin him and his lire as I have done. Maybe there is a way through it all and I will be able to come back. I like my work, and I'd rather do plumbing and steam fitting than anything that I know of. The job pays as good a salary as any of the trades. I used to draw up to $1,500 a year.
We felt like we was living high then. Betty, the kiddies, and myself could get along pretty well on that amount. As it is, we have to share a house with someone else in order to spare expenses. It is not satisfactory, but sometimes it has to be done.
I feel like the present Administration has done a lot to help the lot or the common laboring man. My small social security check has been a Godsend. I am sorry I didn't vote for Mr. Roosevelt. I have never voted in my life. I went to vote once, but my name was confused with someone else and they didn't want me to vote; so I left and never tried again. I don't know what I'll do when my sixteen weeks are out. It looks like one could straighten up in four months. My job is waiting for me. I can go back to it just as soon as I am able. The boss sure is mighty fine. He lets me collect now while I am unable to work and gives me a mighty high commission on all that I can bring in.
We are expecting a big change in everything now. Not so long ago all one had to know to qualify for a plumbing job was to cut and thread a pipe. Now, with copper pipe, lead joints, and all, one has to be able and really and truly experienced. He must be able to take a blue print and work from it. The same is true of carpenter work and other trades. I guess that my boss realizes how impossible it is for me to get other work to do, so he helps me all he can. I will be glad when I am able to do the regular work again and stop this collecting and running down repair business.
The wife needs clothes; the children need clothes and shoes. Betty said just the other day that Joyce wouldn't be able to keep on going to Sunday School if she didn't have some more things. I don't want her to stop. I am not much for attending Sunday School and things, but I do want her to go as long as she can and just as long as Joyce stays interested. Betty goes, too, once in awhile. She used to attend regularly, but since changing churches she don't go as often as she did. I went when I was a kid, but it seems here recently that I'd just as soon see a picture show, play a few games of pool with some of my pals, or just go fishing. There is nothing that I can think of that is better for rest and relaxation than an afternoon's fishing with congenial friends. There is something connected to it that I can't seem to resist. I would do a great deal more of it than I do if it were not for the expenses. One should be earning a little more than a bare living to be able to afford it. I can also play pool once in awhile and not be out much money. We usually play for a soft drink and I try to win more than half the games.
A person ought to be able to live in this great free land of ours and earn a little more than a bare existence. Me and Betty and our two kids need from $25 to $10 a week. With this amount, we could live in a house to ourselves. As it is now, most of our furniture is stored down town. We are forced to live in this small house here with Papa. There are ten of us here, and the place has only five small rooms. If I had a regular salary of $25 a week we could pay $5 a week on the house rent and have $1 a day for groceries. We could put about $1.50 on our little insurance policies and pay the furniture man his $3 on our things. This keeps the house up and in good condition, and we wouldn't miss the cash like we would if we paid it all in one payment. We try to make a small weekly payment on our hospital bills. We find that it's easier to do it that way. The small amount that would be left of the mythical $25 a week would be used on clothes and other incidental expenses. When we were earning this amount we always felt like we were doing quite well and were quite content. I sure will be glad when I can return to regular work. We have endured this period of no income so long that I'm afraid the children's health will be impaired. I tell Betty that I've eaten beans, cabbage, fat back, potatoes, and so on so long that I'll never be able to look them in the face again and enjoy myself. Of course, I'm not saying that they are not all right if one has other things to go with them for the sake of variety. It would keep one's appetite in much healthier condition not to have them so often. Betty don't know much about balancing a diet, but she does try and does the best she can to provide a good variety when the family funds are ample. She finished ten grades in school and took some domestic science one year. Our doctor has told her at various times that she ought to eat this and that and it seemed to her to be a mass of vegetables. Papa has been truck farming for several years and he always has a lot of stuff he can't sell, so we always have as much of that as I can stand. If there's any good in them we ought to be good and healthy six months out of the year.
As I said, we are living here in the house with my parents. I can stand it myself, because I am away most of the day. I loaf down town with my friends a lot. I am there at home to eat and sleep and that is about all. With Betty and the kids it's different, I guess. They are there most of the time. When we all get there there is hardly stepping room. If the house were bigger I still wouldn't want two families in one house. It just makes for trouble. Betty objects as seriously as I do to living here. Since she and Papa had me up in police court for my drinking she has told me that I must decide to stop drinking or she will go back to her people. I love her and our two children and don't want to lose them. I promised her that I would stop and go to work. I asked her to rind a house to suit her and I would arrange to go back to work.
I have made arrangements to start work again the first of the month. I'd do most anything rather than lose my family. Whiskey tastes good and I like it, but a man is a damn fool to let it ruin him physically and rob him of his wife and family and everything that he has in life. God knows that I hope that I will be given strength to resist liquor in all its shapes, forms, and fashions.
