September 26, 1939
Charlotte Greek Study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
GREEK FOOD
While the average Greek restaurant in Charlotte wisely eaters to the taste of their American patrons, serving steaks; ham, prepared in various styles; per-colated coffee, even has and eggs, and sandwiches; they give free rein to their native appetites in their homes and other places where their own people are to partake.
Barbecue lamb Is perhaps the favorite dish. Baked chicken with a rich sauce called Kapasa, is a close second choice Kapama is a combination of tomato and much seasoning. The chicken is simmered or smothered under cover until tender, and the Kapama used often with the addition of various vegetables.
American lard and substitute compounds are not regarded favorably; the native Greek cook uses only butter and olive oil in the preparation of their very special dishes, the oil being imported.
Cheese is very popular and a variety called Feta, made of goat's milk, is most frequently used in a Greek household.
Combination salads, anchovies and ripe olives find conspicuous place on the daily menu and even spaghetti, cooked tender in salt water and served with a side dish of grated Parmesian cheese, is a general favorite.
The usual hot and zesty seasoning found in most Greek food preparations give it a characteristic all of its own, and Greek cooks are Justly proud of this oulinary ability.
The coffee must be ground to a powder and boiled until a certain amount of rich sediment settles in the bottom of the cup, and with this is served, for unexpected company, a small and delicious rich cake called Kouramble.
Wines of many varieties are a conspicuous adjunct of every meat Mastioa and Retsina are light wines for lunch and supper, (the Mastioa requiring a goodly portion of water mixed with it.)
And a favorite with the men guests is always Metaxas, a cognac brandy of rich and tasty quality.
Loaf bread is very important too. Long loaves shaped pumpernickel but made of wheat instead of rye are out in thick slices and piled high on the bread dish.
Foods most preferred by the Greeks may be termed, rich, substantial and tasty; served in combinations which assure a well balanced diet.
