August, 5, 1939
Mrs. Mattie J. Wilson (Mother)
Huntersville, N. C.
Mary P. Wilson, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Danville, Virrginia	Dobbinsville, Virginia
Roxboro, N. C.	Rockville, N. C.
Ida Wilson	Ila Wilson
"Kitty, please come on back here before you get killed by an automobile. I've pulled you out of the streets enough for you to know where you belong. You poor little thing, you got kicked around so much before I got you that you are afraid of everybody."
I marveled at the youthfulness of the little woman whose curly grey hair just touched her shoulders and whose brown eyes twinkled merrily behind rimless glasses as she turned to the little boy, who had succeeded in chasing the kitten into the yard, "What's the matter, Granny?" Said the boy. "I believe you spend half your time looking after that kitten."
"I haven't kept any account of the time, child; it's the only company I have, I'd hate for anything to happen to it."
"Don't you have any children, Granny?" The dirty little urchin was quite a contrast to the immaculate Granny, but he acted perfectly at home talking to her.
"I have six living," she answered rather wistfully, "but they are scattered to the four corners of the world. I've been living alone most of the time since my husband died eight years ago."
"Now, don't you go looking sad, Grann y. You know that every child in this town loves you most as good as if you were their real granny. You don't look right unless you are laughing and full of fun."
"I don't often let myself worry about anything, honey but once in a while I get the blues. Run along now, there's a woman here who wants to get my life story.
She had left me sitting on an old-fashioned setee in a room where most of the furniture was antique and well cared for. An immense potted begona, literally full of tiny pink blooms stood in one of the chairs in front of the window. She carried a dipper of water and poured it into the flower pot before she sat down.
"I was only five years old when my mother died at the birth of my baby brother. My father had worked in a tobacco box factory and after Mamma died he took no interest in his work. He gave his nine children out to different people who wanted them. I have always been very small and delicate, so he brought me from Dobbinsville, Virginia, to live with my uncle near Roxboro, North Carolina. My father died that same year. My uncle didn't want me, as he had a big crowd of his own, so he gave me to a man and his wife who lived nearby. The woman was sickly and I had to do_______ _______the house work. I was so small I had to stand on a box to make bread and wash dishes. The man drank all the time and I would often pour his whiskey out and put water in the place of it. It was a good thing for me that he always took it as a big joke.
"I wasn't in love when I married, although I learned to care for my man. I wanted a home and I thought when anyone married they had a home. I had worked over things belonging to someone else so long that I looked forward to marriage with a great deal of pleasure.
"My husband came after me on a wagon and took me to a one room log cabin that had no furniture ef any kind except one chair and an old corded bedstead. I had to cook our meals on an open fireplace. Time is supposed to make one forget all aches, pains and sorrows, but I'll never forget the trying time I had adjusting myself to that kind of life. I came from a proud family; I would have died rather than admit defeat. The first stove I had to cook on cost eight dollars. That much money was a small fortune then.
"I didn't know anything about birth control so I expected a baby every nine months. A doctor was seldom available and I had to depend on the attentions of a midwife. I gave birth to eight children but only raised six. There's been many a time I had nothing to eat nor one penny to buy food. I sent my kids to school as long as they would go, but all of them quit and went to work excepet the youngest. She graduated from high school and then went to college but never finished.
"My oldest child, a boy, took a civil service examination before the war and got a rural mail carrier job, and still holds the same job. A lot of people worked against him and tried to have him put out because he voted the Republican ticket, but they haven'nt succeeded yet. He owns his home and as far as I know there is no incumberance against it; although he lost a good bit of his savings when the banks closed in '32. He sends me five dollars a month. I guess it's all he can afford, since he has a wife and five children to support.
"My oldest daughter took nurse's training; she married after every one thought she was an old maid. I don't expect much from her because she doesn't work now, but she manages to send me five of ten dollars occasionally. She thinks I ought to get out and find myself a job as housekeeper. Probably she doesn't realize I'm going on seventy years old; tired and worn out.
"One of my boys has been working for the government more than ten years. You needn't as me what he does for I can not tell you. He's been so busy marrying and divorcing the same woman he hasn't taken the time to send me any money, or tell me anything about himself. His wife has married some one else now, leaving him with their little boy and girl. He never has helped me; in fact I feel honored if I get a letter fom him more than twice a year.
"Ila is next. Poor girl, she can't help herself, much less help me. She married a poor man who lost his health. They have five boys and have to live off the welfare. She did work in the cotton mill till her last baby was born. I never thought I'd see the day when one of my children would have to resort to work in a cotton mill much less depend on charity.
"My youngest boy looked after me 'till he got married. He paints for a living and says it's all he can do to make enough for his family; a wife, one girl and one boy. He's had to have his little boy operated on for appendicitis this year and the child is only eight years old.
"I depend entirely on my youngest daughter. She's stuck to me and has given me everything she's made for more than fifteen years. She has been married. She and her husband disagreed because she paid all my expenses. I don't think she has seen or heard tell of her man in four years. It hurts me to thank I was the cause of their separation, but she never mentions him in any way. She doesn't make so much for she is on the W.P.A., but I don't know what would happen to either one of us if she were to get cut off. She's not had good health like the rest; five serious operations and an automobile accident.
"I go to the Post Office every day hoping to hear from my children. It's terrible to grow old and have your off-spring forget you. The younger generation do not treat their parents as I was taught they should. I realize this is a fast age and different in every respect to what it used to be. Perhaps they do not mean to be neglectful.
"I still have nightmares, thinking of the two years I lived alone. I tried to live with everyone of my children but none of them would have me. In a way I am glad. I am too old to be worried with my grand-children. They may not be any worse than mine were when they were growing up, but I just haven't got the patience I once had.
"The school kids pass my door and call me Granny. Some of them are rather aggravating about knocking on the door and then running away. I've had that to happen so many times I don't ever know when some one really wants to see me.
"I'm not much old-fashioned. My daughter-in-law started me to smoking three years ago and I like a drink with my friends once in a while.
"My old man was a strong Republican but I never let him influence me. I have voted a straight Democrat ticket. My family were all Democrats, so naturally I felt they knew better than any one else.
"My husband died in his sleep. It was so hard to believe he was gone as he had never been sick in his life. I tell my children he would turn over in his coffin if he knew how they treat me. They only laugh but they will grow old some day and remember what I say."