Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
SAMUEL F. CASTLES
(white)
74 YEARS OLD.
Samuel Franklin Castles enjoys a distinctive reputation in Fairfield County. Its foundation cannot be properly estimated by outsiders who have not lived and observed his rise from a young plowboy in the Avon section, to master-owner of 1,700 fertile acres in the Greenbriar section.
Mr. Castles is a square-shouldered, thick-set man, about five feet four inches tall. He has a square face, large ears, short blunt nose, and a wide mouth underneath a walrus mustache sprinkled with gray. His soft brown eyes, under bushy black brows, redeem an otherwise plain face. They express tenderness toward those he wishes well and hatred toward those he wishes ill. But no one has ever seen in their depths an emotion of fear of circumstances or of individual human beings. He always dresses after the fashion that Ben Tillman set in 1890. Any color of trousers, a black sack coat, white shirt, with soft turned down collar, a black string tie, a black leather belt, broad low-heel shoes, and his head is surmounted with a ten-gallon, black wool hat.
In 1880, Sam was the mainstay of his widowed mother and family, who lived on a small farm four miles west of the railroad station at Woodward, South Carolina. The family subsisted on $60.00 per annum, and this sum was furnished under the provisions of the old agricultural lien law, by the local merchant. Payment was expected in the production of cotton. He directed this small farm, planting 25 acres in cotton and 10 acres in corn; had a garden spot of one acre, a pig pan, a cow lot, a fowl house, and a small orchard. He toiled and perspired here from the age of fourteen until he reached twenty. In spite of the fact that the land was poor, he cleared money each year and got free of the slavery of the lien law. At the end of 1881, he was on a cash basis. And he says, "I owed nobody anything but bad will."
"My people were Scotch-Irish. They came from Pennsylvania, about 1766, and settled at Sharon, York County. They were Covenantors. They call them 'Psalm singing Presbyterians' these days.
"Before the Civil war, my father, Henry Castles, moved to the Hopewell section of Chester County, and it was there that he married Margaret Sterling. By this union, there were five boys and two girls: James Castles, an A. R. P. preacher, Henry Castles, a doctor, and three farmers, John, William, and Robert. The girls were Margaret and Sarah. Margaret married a Whitesides, and Sarah married a Caldwell. On the death of the wife, father married Mrs. Broome, a widow, and moved to Monticello, Fairfield County. There were three children by this marriage: Hattie, Laura, and Calvin.
"The second wife died, and father married, the third and last time, Elizabeth Russell of the Avon section. There were five children by this marriage: Benjamin, Martin, Charles, Minnie, and myself.
"Our small place at this time was on Little River. In connection with the farm, father ran a gristmill on the banks of the river and made some money by this means.
"I was born on June 25, 1860, therefore I don't remember much about the Yankees. But I do know that they took all of our wheat and corn and destroyed the mill and fixtures. They also searched the house for all valuables, taking them as they found them. We were left penniless, except for the land. Lacking labor and credit, we could not rebuild the mill.
"We suffered a great deal under the United States Military Government of General Canby, placed by President Johnson over District Number Two including North and South Carolina. Negroes were worthless as laborers, and they devoted themselves to begging, stealing, and robbing for their living. Father hired one, and, in an altercation, he had to kill him. The military authorities arrested him for murder and placed him in the Chester jail. Colonel James H. Rion instituted habeas corpus proceedings, and he was released on a $5,000.00 bond, signed by Captain Francis Gerig and Major Tom Woodward. The case came on for trial later, and father showed that the Negro struck him several times with a wagon whip; that he was a burly Negro, far his superior in strength. The jury recognized his plea of self-defense and acquitted him. Father did not live long after this trouble. He died and left me, a boy of fourteen, to take care of my mother and the three smaller children. Before his death, he had started me to school to Miss Jane Wade, a fine teacher. She was educated in the schools of Columbia. Her school was near Now Hope Church.
"Miss Wade did what she could for me, but I was punished weekly, if not daily, for fighting. I went in on the principle, the larger the antagonist, the bigger his fall. And if my first couldn't bring him down, a rock or stick could knock him out or make him take to his heels. Miss wade said I was good in just one subject at school, arithmetic. I quit going to school at the age of fourteen. School teachers in those days received about $50.00 per month. The term was from three to four months long, and the money was raised by private subscription in the neighborhood.
"We had parties and frolics in our neighborhood. Yes, there was a difference in them. Parties were held at Woodward and Blackstock. You might find a preacher at the parties. Frolics were held at Monticello, Feasterville, and Cornwalls Turnout. No preachers attended these frolics. Maybe they were at home writing a sermon on dancing, to be delivered at church the next Sunday. This belligerent attitude toward dancing in those old days has caused a falling off in attendance at churches of the present generation. Of course this is merely my individual opinion. Old Peter Feaster, a Negro, was one of the fiddlers, and the Trussel boys from Cheater County were engaged occasionally. Preacher McMullin turned up one night at a frolic at Cedar Shades, near Fellowship Church. His presence threw a damper on the occasion. Some of the girls refused to dance. While the crowd was playing 'thimble' and 'heavy heavy hangs over your head', the boys went out to where the preacher's fine sorrel horse was hitched and shaved the sorrel's tail. Old ladies deplored it as a sacrilege to shave the tail of the horse of the Lord's anointed, but all the men seemed to laugh and appreciate it as a great joke.
"There is a small attendance at church today, 1938, in comparison to the attendance in my boyhood days. The cause ? Well, I don't know. Maybe it is because the saints have stressed hell fire for some sins and have not been enough concerned about big virtues. An individual should be cornered off and praised for the worthwhile things he has done and encouraged to try to accomplish other good things, rather than singled out and berated for such small things as attending a dance, taking a bottle of beer, or reading a newspaper on Sunday.
"I was a small boy, but I remember 'radical days.' Some white people slept out in the woods, for fear of a Negro uprising. We were submerged with the Negro radical government, after 1868. We tried persuasion awhile, then gifts, then Ku Klux methods, all to no avail. We then adopted a red shirt uniform. I wore one in the parades for Hampton, as did my half brothers. We all voted ten tickets each, at three precincts. The election managers did the rest. I presume what happened in Fairfield in tabulating the returns of the election was about the same in every county. Compromises were made to suit that pious man, Rutherford B. Hayes. He became President, and Hampton became Governor. We have been comparatively happy ever since. But a cloud is on the horizon that foretells that a squall may come upon our political seas in the near future.
"My mother, after a few years of widowhood, married James Weir. They had two children, Frederick and Susie. This marriage was a kind of freedom to me. I looked around the county and found 50 acres of land for sale. It was in the Greenbrier section. I purchased the tract. Shortly afterwards, I married Leila Lyles. She is still living and a blessing to me. We have two sets of twins: James and Hoyt and Estelle and Rufus. Our other children are Herbert Lee, Ernest, a lawyer at Anderson, South Carolina, Marion, of Winnsboro, and Leila, who married Mack Stewart of Anderson, South Carolina. My son, James, is dead.
"How did I acquire my property? Well, I acquired it mostly by farming on the intensive system, diversification and rotation of crops, with corn as the main basis. It has been 40 years since I bought a grain of corn, and there has never been a year since 1898 that I haven't sold corn.
"My place being near the Winnsboro Granite Company Plant, I ran a mercantile establishment and sold goods to the stonecutters and their families. I also put up a corn mill and cotton gin on my place. I found that growing corn, peas, clover and peavine hay, and raising hogs and beef cattle had a better money return than the production of cotton and was not so hard on the land. Today I have increased my acreage from 50 acres to 1,700 acres, and I don't owe a dollar. I have some enemies and am regarded as contentious, because I have taken sides in neighborhood school disputes and in the election of trustees, Magistrates, and State officials. I always state my opinions about men and public questions. I hew to the line and let the chips fall where they may.
"Why am I against the Now Deal? Well, for several reasons. 1. I have 1,700 acres of land and can't call a laborer that I can depend on from sun up till sunset. 2. I have increased wages to 75¢ per day, when we used to pay 40¢ a day. Labor for the farm is scarce, and it used to be plentiful. 3. As long as we have W. P. A. and P. W. A. paying from $1.50 to $2.20 a day on projects, we will have a scarcity of farm labor, which makes it unusually hard on the farmer. 4. It speaks well for the Negro that he is still respectful to white people. But if this New Deal keeps on indefinitely, the Negroes are going to rise, and we will have a social problem in the South. No, I'm not embittered, I'm just hitting out from the shoulder, saying what I honestly believe. I would do away with the New Deal and let everybody go to work - 'root hog or die."'
