Durham, N. C.
October 10, 1938
L .R .[Leonard Rapport]
TOBACCO MARKET -- DURHAM
10 P.M. A block away a car and a flat-bed trailer turn into the street. Men stand on the curb on either side of the car, shouting and gesticulating, The car keeps on past them.
The fat man who has been gossiping from his comfortably shiny canebottom straightback chair in the gutter rocks forward from a rest against a telephone pole, picking up a tobacco stick as he does, and stands. He takes up the shouting. "Come right in to the Leaf first sale in the morning" -- he points with the stick to a yard-tall sign.
1 st
SALE
hanging in front of the warehouse -- "Got 'em. all day tomorrow start at nine and run all day right this way to the Leaf right this way." The sedan is alongside, riding low on its springs, the back loaded with tobacco from floor to top, the windows giving a cross-section of stacked tobacco. The driver's head leans back against tobrcco. The trailer, homemade from T-Model rearend, is piled high with tobacco covered with quilts. The driver grins and keeps going. A kerosene lantern lights the trailer's license down. the street into the dark. "Going to Danville,'"says a bystander.
The fat man sits back in his chair and the men standing or sitting about resume their talk or silence.
Over their heads on the corrugated iron front of the warehouse is painted in big letters LEAF WAREHOUSE and, in letters almost as big, the names of its four owners. The Leaf (not its real name) is one of Durham's twelve tobacco auction warehouses.
Go up some day to the fourteenth floor of the Washington Duke Hotel, named after the man who in 1871 helped establish the town's first warehouse, and from the north side look almost directly down. Lying there are a dozen apparently flat roofs, about an acre each in size. From each rooftop skylights -- four or five hundred to the building -- reflect the sun. Light is important to a tobacco buyer. On a dark day sales may be called off.
Six of the warehouses are on one street, the other six are close by. If you happen to be looking down on these roofs any ay except Saturday or Sunday from September to January or February it is fairly certain that under those dozen acres of roof that day well over a half million pounds of flue-cured tobacco will be sold before quitting time. You can feel pretty certain, too, that up toward fifty million pounds will be sold by the season's end.
A tobacco auction warehouse is an acre of floor, enclosed. The Leaf has a wooden floor longer in any direction than a football field is long. It has wooden sides and a wooden roof, unfinished an' unpainted inside, the outsides 01 corrugated iron, the roof, tarpaper and skylight glass. Some of the others have concrete floors, steel beams, and brick walls -- there is a Star Brick Warehouse in Durham -- but the Lea" is pretty typical.
The roof, a good portion not much more than two man-heights from the floor end at the center ridge only as high as a small two-story house, is supported "by an overhead mass of wooden beams, struts, and rafters, resting on about 125 eight by ten pine posts.
At the front end of the building under the high center is an inside two-story structure extending from floor to ceiling. In it, at the floor level, is the general office of the warehouse. Over this is the "camp," a large room where white farmers can spread their quilts and sleep. Also at the front of the warehouse are the toilets, "White ladies only," "white men," "colored men."
Out of season the warehouses' floor space is useful for political rallies, expositions, dances, automobile shows, boxing matches, dog shows, or roller-skating.
The Leaf Warehouse has a First Sale tomorrow. With three sets of buyers on the Durham market the warehouses take turns at first Sales. If the Leaf sells all the tobacco on. the floor before quitting time the buyers will cross the street to the facing warehouse which matches the Leaf's First Sale sign with a large
2nd
SALE
and finish the afternoon there. If they finish there also they will go on to a Third Sale house, and, possibly, to a. Fourth Sale.
Now the sales re quitting at 4.30. When the markets opened early in the month the sales ran on until five. In a few more weeks, as the days shorten, and the light fades, the quitting time will be moved up to four o'clock.
All night long the Leaf and the warehouses up the street having first sales "pull" the arriving loads of tobacco. So do most of the Second and Third Sale houses.
Now another car and trailer turns in at the corner, passes the shouting men, and, almost before the fat man is out of his chair, is on the two-car wide drive leading into the warehouse. Two or three warehouse employees clear people from the driveway. The welcome is casually noisy and businesslike. The car and trailer moves onto the floor. An employee, walking in front, directs the driver toward one side of the An warehouse, behind a half-dozen other cars, trailers, and trucks unloading.
The driver and his three companions, all young farmers, get out. They are dressed typically; one wears overalls, a blue chambric shirt, no tie, a dark coat, and black oxfords. Another wears a cheap suit; the other two, cotton trousers and coats. All wear slouched hats with moderate width brims; broadbrims are hard to get nowadays. Most of the older farmers on the floor dress like the first young man, overall's and dark coat or jacket, with work shoes in place of the low shoes. The slouched hat is everywhere.
Two Megro employees of the warehouse come over to unload the trailer, but the young men do most of the work thecselves. From the head-high stacks of baskets at one side of the warehouse -- shallow, round-cornered baskets, a yard square, of tough oak strips -- the Negroes bring a half-dozen.
The tobacco is in sheaves of twenty or thirty leaves, wrapped with a leaf at the stem end, and hung on four foot sticks, about twenty-five sheaves to the stick. The tobacco in the trailer is laid in neat layers. The young men pass the tobacco from the trailer and arrange it on the baskets, stem ends out. They draw out the sticks and save them to take back home. The layers in the basket rise, presenting on all sides a flare of symmetrically bunched stems.
The tobacco has been graded at the farm and in the trailer pieces of paper between layers mark divisions of grades. The baskets are loaded by grades, some baskets having several hundred pounds, others a tenth as much. A bunch of low-grade tobacco found in a basket-full of better grade will bring down the price of the whole basket.
As the buckets are filled they are placed on the warehouse trucks -- six-foot long affairs of stout oak, somewhat like two- wheel baggage trucks but bowing up toward both the front and back from the center, under which are two steel, rubber-tired wheels. The design allows easy handling of heavy basketloads.
A truck is edged under a basket and one of the young farmers wheels it to the scales. There are three scales, wooden booths scattered about the warehouse floor. One is open all night. The young men wait, in line. The scales are set to allow for the weight of the truck and empty basket, so the weight registered is that of the tobacco alone.
The, young men wheel the tobacco onto the scales and the weigher in the booth fills out a triplicate ticket with the planter's name or initials, the weight of the tobacco, and an assigned number.
Beginning at the far side are long rows of tobacco, basket to basket, with only walking space between the rows, from the front to the rear of the warehouse. At the end of the line the young men place their baskets of tobacco, the identifying tickets on top of each pile. They cover the piles with the burlap sacks which were over the load as it came on the trailer. Other piles are covered with blankets, quilts, tarpaulins, oilcloth, sacks, or are -uncovered.
There is nothing more to be done now. They unhitch the empty trailer and leeve it in. a corner with a number of others. The car is driven outside and parked on the street.
At eleven o' clock the main streets of Durham are beginning to go dead. A few restaurants catch the late theatre crowd. By midnight the buses quit running and almost nothing is open except small all-night places, mostly at the business district's edge.
But around the warehouses is activity. All night long the cafes are filled with men. Shooting galleries and fruit stands are open until one and two and. later. There is the movement of men walking, riding; an all-night stirring; slow talk, laughter, lights, shouts of drunks, music of guitars, radios, ballying of warehousemen, the grind of an automobile's starter. The wide doorways of the warehouse are open to anyone in the night.
It is warm night for late September. From the warehouse across the way comes the sound of guitar and fiddle and singing, the sound of the old songs.
He was her man
But he done her wrong. Two young fellows in checked shirts, big hats, one with a kerchief. Silver-haired daddy of mine. Somebody name a piece and we'll play it. We know two hundred and ten pieces. listen to the mocking bird. The fiddle imitates the birdsong -- excellently. Forty men standing, listening, impassively mostly, to songs they have known, songs remembered, never any applause, but an audience reaction, an audience response, something that can hr felt, the musicians feel it. Roll on little dories. Play a breakdown. Now, if any of you gentlemen have an extra nickel or dime. The contributions are mostly nickels. Thank you, gentlemen, thank you. Wednesday night walk. Who stole the lock on the henhouse door. Come all you rounders if you want to hear, The story about a brave engineer. I just picked up playing the fiddle. Don't play from music, never studied music in my life. We follow the markets.
11:30. At the front of the warehouse is a drink stand, two girls behind the counter (Almost all the warehouses have stands or cafes; lots of young waitresses in the cafes, swapping talk with the farmers all through the night), a radio going, H. V. Kaltenborn commenting on the Munich Pact signed that "day, six men standing listening, attentively, silently, five white, one -Negro, three of the whites eating 10¢ pint 'boxes of icecreem. The commen- tator signs off, a jazz orchestra begins, the six men gradually drift away. No opinions, no words, listening, thinking. Others, during the night, have opinions.
I	wouldn't be surprised if a war wouldn't run up the price of tobacco; the last one did.
It looks like we're going to get into a war in spite of hell. The American people are peaceloving and Hitler thinks we're all afraid. The radior go around asking people on the street about war-- I don't think they ought to do that. It makes then think we're all afraid.
The Bible says there shall be wars and rumors of wars.
Midnight. Another warehouse, mostly Negroes. An old blind Negro plays a guitar and sings. A listening Negro introduces himself to the blind man. The singer takes his hand. I'm glad to know you, suh. My name is Reverend Davis. Then -- Are you a Christian, suh. Thank you, suh. Most of his songs are religious. An old tin can is passed for contributions. At five in. the morning he is still playing, the can no longer passed. He just plays.
In one of the warehouse cafes is a nickel-in-the-slot phonograph, "piccolo music." The records range from current hits, A Tisket, A Tasket and Plat Flat Floogie to They Cut Down the Old Pine Tree, Seven Years with the, Wrong Woman, Maple on The Hill, and -- surprising- ly -- Hark the Sound, the alma mater song of the University of North Car- olina. The last is played. A waitress says, "I don't like that song." "Why?" "I just don't like it."
Beside one of the warehouses is a tiny shooting gallery, the targets hardly three gun-lengths from the firing muzzles. Three shot? for a dime, shooting for prizes. Cash for completely shooting out with three shots a numeral 5 printed on a card. or placing three shots in three small circles without touching an edge. or five shots and no prizes to shoot at mothballs hung from wires.
Another gallery with a thirty-three foot range. Knock over five ducks in five straight shots (10¢) and get a two for five cigar. Drunk or sober the shooters are almost all good shots.
Hunting lingo. A shooter misses: I was shooting at a doe that time. A friend says: Shoot like that and off comes your shirt tail. Under the counter is a box of wooden bottles and baseballs. It wouldn't be hard to switch over.
Men wait for morning. Some sitting about, talking, listening, eating (Food is not cheap; steaks 70¢ and 80¢, sandwiches 15¢, milk 7¢ a half pint), drinking, watching tobacco arriving, or Just sitting, in the warehouses, on the benches outside, in the cafes. Many sleeping in the warehouse camps, in cars, trucks, on the baskets, on the piles of tobacco, on the floor. In the camps (The Leaf has a camp for Negroes also, under the floor. The low ceiling, the single small light, the stove in the corner resembles a more modern "The Lower Depths.") The usual furnishing is a long sloping wooden shelf, six feet wide. Here farmers may sleep, using quilts brought for the purpose or those brought to protect the tobacco.
A few groups go out into the night and come back with liquor or drunk. There are women also, not too hard to find.
Durham has legal liquor. When the ABC store opens in the morning there will be tobacco farmers waiting. The markets were a potent influence in the liquor elections a year and a half before. When county option was allowed few tobacco market counties felt they could hold out against the handicap of being legally dry while rival markets were legally wet.
There are things that go on in the night. A farmer takes a few drinks; he wakes up with a headache, his roll gone, a season's work lost. A week before in one of the warehouses near the Leaf a grower was drinking with two young fellows. They got him drunk, hit him over the head with the whisky bottle. He had sold his tobacco that day for $135.00; this they took. Then they fractured his skull with a sash weight. He lay all night in the warehouse, apparently drunk or sleeping off a brawl, and, therefore, ignored. The next day he died. Three days later the police had the murderers. One young man worked in a nearby warehouse. The other was a farmer who had come to Durham to get work in the warehouses.
Around the market gather those who live on the shady side of the law. Among townspeople and outsiders has grown up a legend of the farmer's inability to take care of himself. Yet, there is about him an impression of intelligence, of capability, of friendliness, of kindness. The policeman at the warehouse corner says: "We don't have much trouble with the farmers." There is a good deal of official tolerance; too many other markets are within easy driving distance.
The night lightens. Morning brings more and more loads of tobacco, in cars, trailers, pickup end stakebody trucks in rumble seats of roadsters. Most of the cars are recent models, surprising few are jalopies. The horse and wagon have almost disappeared.
"I haven't seen but one wagon this season. The first load of tobacco I remember coming in with was a wagon-load, one of those covered ones drawn around so there was only a little opening at the back. We lived in Orange County, the other side of Chapel Hill. We left home in the morning and got to Durham that night. My daddy got forty or fifty dollars for the load, half in silver dollars. We stopped in Chapel Hill on the way back and he put the money in the bank there."
However, under one of the warehouses is a livery stable. Under another is a temporary stable with corrals, and deep straw; it will remain during the tobacco season. Through both wander farmers to buy, to trade, or just to look at horses and mules. A pair of mares is harnessed to a wagon and tried out. A billy goat wanders about the stable. A Negro currics a mule.
"Man in Richmond hired me and two other boys and told us to curry and brush every mule on the place. There was 350 of them. We took 'm out each one at the time and cleaned 'm. Man would run his hand over a mule and if he found anything he'd say, 'Do it over.' That's where I lenrned to curry mules."
"In the case of tobacco, the present mile-a-minute system of auction selling converts into a sheer gamble the sale of the crop that the farmer and his family have labored both day and night to produce -- perhaps the biggest and sheerest gamble that yet governs the sale of any great American commodity, agricultural or manufactured." -- Dr. Clarence Poe, editor of the Progressive Farmer.
At nine o'clock the sale, "the break," begins. By that time the floor has begun to fill with people, and the characteristic haze of dust is about and above them. Trucks continue to come in and unload at the side of the house opposite where the sale is to start.
The peddlers arrive early. They spread their goods on warehouse trucks, on the ramp walls, on boxes, on the floor. An old man moves through the crowd offering books of needles. Another has a pocketful of watches. An Arab sells shawls and elaborate spreads. A one-armed Jew has razors, blades., shaving cream, fountain pens, socks, pencils. Other peddlers offer patent can-openers, shoes, clothing.
The inside walls are decorated with signs. Pepsi-Cola Company has 10-gallon kegs for sale at 25¢. Six-foot long signs say that
With independent experts...
With, men who know tobacco Best
It's Luckies Nobody in the warehouse looks quite as immaculate as the "expert," pictured in a white suit and hat, holding a sheaf of tobacco. Camels, Spuds, Twenty Grand, Prince Albert, and Sir Writer Raleigh have ads. At the front entrance are tacked legal notices and notices of land sales.
Dealers and individuals have parked in near-by vacant lots raid on the streets used cars, with painted windshields and windows.
A pirn good car For Sale At a bargain
Tralar for sale $30.00
On the side of a warehouse:
Eat with Pete & John Farmer's Cafe Folite Waitresses Open day and night Good Food
And, chalked on the window of a near-by supply store, words with a basic appeal:
flour
meal
sugar
lard
meat
In the warehouse the auction line forms. The auctioneer's chant is heard. The line starts moving. Down the row, the length of the warehouse. A colored waterboy waits with a bucket of icewater and paper cups. Ther back up the next row. That's the routine.
The farmers straggle in a long line behind to see how the prices of the day's break are running.
The auctioneer's chant is a source of wonder to the uninitiated, who include most of the men whose tobacco is sold to its apparently unintelligible song-mumble. But try it yourself -- repeat numbers, prices, words, seventeen dollar bid seventeen seventeen seventeen seventeen seventeen eighteen dollar bid eighteen eighteen eighteen eighteen nineteen dollar bid nineteen nineteen nineteen and so on all day -- and then see how much easier it is to drop into a chant, not enunciating the whole word, out getting a sound intelligible to those who follow the bid. She early auctioneers spoke the bid and gradually, through the years, dropped into the chant. Perhaps they got the idea from the Negro; listen to a gang of Negroes at work.
Ahead of the auctioneer, who is a warehouse employee, goes the warehouse representative, often one of the owners, who starts the bid, expertly feeling, smelling, examining the tobacco. He calls a figure -- say, seventeen, seventeen cents a pound. The auctioneer takes it up, his eyes moving quickly from buyer to buyer as they face him across the baskets. Hurriedly but expertly they examine the sheaves that have been pulled at random from the underparts of the pile by an employee ahead of the warehouse representative. Their bid is a characteristic nod, a raised eyebrow, a gesture of the Land. If none take up the figure the auctioneer drops back a cent or two. Sometimes the warehouseman will buy the basket, sometimes a speculator -- "pinhooker" -- will bid it in, but most of the leaf goes to the seven regular buyers, representing the large American and foreign companies.
The buying is done at a walk. Stuck in baskets down the line are signs, "Sale due here --" and the time, inserted. Nine or ten baskets to the minute is not an exceptional rate. The nickname "Speed" is a compliment to an auctioneer.
The bidding and raising is done with few words, the auctioneer's eyes going from bidder to bidder, watching for a gesture, a sign, the chant always going, and his shuffle carrying him past the baskets. Following comes another warehouse employee, a checkboard in hand and a half -dozen sharpened pencils in a vest pocket. He notes on the tag on the basket the price per pound bid and the name of the buyer. And then the crowd follows, reading the price, examining the tobacco, pulling out more under-sheaves, leaving little of the original outward appearance of neat symmetry.
The seller must very soon decide whether he will accept the price offered. If he accepts he calls by the general office in an hour or so and gets his check. If he rejects the bid he turns his ticket, usually by tearing a piece out of it or by removing it entirely. He can then take his tobacco to the end of the line and have it bid on again as it is, or he can work it over and regrade it and put it back in line, or he can be load it on his truck and go to another warehouse.
Following the line are the companys' men, who examine the baskets bought by their buyers for "nesting," the inclusion of poorer tobacco in the middle of a basket of better grade, a justification for the buyer's refusing to go through with his purchase. If passed they set the baskets on little four-wheel roller trucks and effectively using yard-long steel hooks, haul them through the straggling crowd -- "watch yo' knee-bone" -- end onto their trucks to "be hauled away to storage.
When the grower gets his check he will find the warehouse has deducted the following; 10¢ per 100 pounds weighing fee, an auction fee of 15¢ per lot up to 100 pounds and 25¢ per lot above 100 pounds, and a commission of 21/2%. All day the sale moves on. The warehouseman talks it up. This is good Person County bright, gentlemen. And this next, gentlemen, is Joe Farrow's. Joe alwsys brought a good wagon load, so do what you can for him. Joe's not here this year but young Joe is. Joe'll be here next year. Twelve. The auctioneer takes it up.
A farmer, standing beside his baskets, recognizes one of the buyers. Help me out there, Mr. Mills -- if you can. The first basket, 486 pounds, goes at 25¢. He is pleased. That's a good 'un -- now, right on down. They bid on his other baskets. An old farm woman waits at her two baskets. I raised and cured this tobacco myself. I want you-all to help me; I'm just a poor widow woman, warehouseman: All right, let's help her all we can -- eighteen. Old woman: Here, I want you to try some chestnuts. She extends a paper bag of big chestnuts toward the buyers, but they have already passed. 188 pounds brought 211/2¢, 154 pounds, 71/2¢. She passes the chestnuts around to the men following the sale. That ought to be about fifty dollars.
Into the late afternoon the line moves, shirt-sleeved, Coca-Cola drinking, joking, eating, always moving. Behind and about it move whites and blacks, temporarily equalized by a price per pound mark on a ticket.
And here are their voices.
"I'm going to resell this basket. I got more for it yesterday. There's too much green in it. My tenant regraded it last night but he didn't do it right. He gets half of what it brings."
"Looks like prices would be higher here in Durham since they don't hrve to haul the tobacco here like they 'do when they buy it in other towns."
"We got a colored man carried some tobacco to Rocky Mount and his second tray brought two cents a pound more than his best did."
"Good tobacco is off 10¢ from last year but poor grades are doing better."
"Most growers don't like the allotment. If they get a chance they'll vote it out. It's unfair to the little man."
"I'm going to Lumberton where I can make me some money -- likker, gamblin. I can knock up five hundred dollars in an hour."
"Man this morning had a great big pile of tobacco that brought a good price. We didn't want to haul it, so I said, 'I wouldn't let my tooccco go at that; I'd resell it.' He said, 'Dawg if I don't believe I will,'"
"I know plenty folks who worked hard on farms this year fox forty cents a any. A man can't feed a family for that. Do you know whether this wage bill is going to be passed on the tenth of next month? I heard this fellow on the radio -- Do you know his name? I didn't want to forget his name -- say that everybody was going to get twenty-five cents an hour, in the sawmills and on the farm, too."
"Ihat's what our fo'fathers came over here and fought for -- freedom."