THE LILAC BEAUTY SHOP
Written by: Miss Grace McCune;
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
and
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor'
Federal Writers' Project Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
February 18, 1939
t
February 1, 1939
Orchid Beauty Shop
Miss Farrie Emerick (white)
Miss Edna Seagraves (white)
144 Clayton Street
Athens, Georgia
Beauticians
G.M.
THE LILAC BEAUTY SHOP
When I entered the Lilac Beauty Shop the two partners, who are also the operators of this salon, met me with a cheerful greeting. "Good morning!" they said, "What can we do for you?"
On learning that I wanted to know something about their occupational experiences, one of them with a pleasant grin, said:
"Business is ’Gone with the Wind,’ and we have plenty of time to sit right down and tell you all about our shop. Just stay around with us and you'll see how the average day of a beauty operator goes in slack times.
"Our shop is open at nine, and we close at five-thirty, except on Mondays and Fridays when we stay open in the evenings quite late for the benefit of the girls who work and can’t get here during the day. A good many of our best customers are among the business women, and we are usually kept pretty busy during these evenings.
"Our work isn’t so easy as some people seem to think it is. They don’t realize we are on our feet all day, except for the time it takes to give manicures; but we like it. One of the things we like is the opportunity of meeting so many new people, as well as the frequent contact with customers who have patronized us so long that they have become our good friends. You know, beauty treatment provides the opportunity for knowing the trade more intimately than a business where you work behind counters and merely sell goods with no real personal contact.
"We do have such nice customers! It's a pleasure to wait on them. Each of us has our special customers who call for us, but if either of us are too busy when they run in without appointment, they are good sports and will let the first one who can get to them, do the work.
"A good deal of our business comes from out of town. We have customers from ever so many towns that are too small to support a beauty parlor; they are among our best repeaters. When a customer keeps coming back to us, we feel that we have been able to please and help them, and we do appreciate their patronage, for these regular customers mean so much more to us than the transient trade that we never know whether we’ll ever see them again or not. Our customers come from various walks of life. The daughter of a local banker often tells us that when she opens our door she feels just like she is entering the living room of a friendly home. And men patronize beauty shops more than you’d think. We have quite a few of them among our regular customers.
The door was suddenly flung open, and a young woman rushed in, talking even more rapidly than her little feet pattered across the room. "Did you ever know me to be on time?" sire hailed the proprietors of the shop, and continued, "I’m late, as per usual, and I just must catch that bus to Atlanta. I’m going home today. Can you fix me up in time?" The rising inflection of her tones italicized words in true ’teen-age style. No one asked her about the bus schedule. Everyone knew exactly when the bus for Atlanta was supposed to leave. One of the operators had started preparations for a shampoo and a manicure before the girl ran out of breath, and at first opportunity to speak, she assured her that they would have her "all beautified and ready in plenty of time."
The steady monologue that came from the customer while her work was being done was chiefly in regard to life on the campus and at the sorority house, and the interest displayed by her operator did not seem to be lacking in sincerity.
The other partner asked, "How do you like the color scheme in our shop?"
"I was just about to ask you about that," I replied. I had been noticing that the dressing tables, chairs, woodwork, and even the cushions and draperies were done in lilac and black. "Your color scheme is lovely," I told her, and then I asked, "What gave you this idea for a trade name and color scheme?"
"Well," she answered, "It’s right odd about that trade name.
I hardly know how I did happen to select the color scheme. I suppose it was because lilac is my favorite color. Back in 1933 when I was planning a shop of my own I went first to Atlanta for a course in an old established college of beauty culture, and then I worked for a while in a shop down in the southern part of the state in a section that for the past several decades has been famous as the ’city of roses,’ and roses are not the only lovely flowers grown there. Where people love roses, they usually appreciate the other finer things of life as well as the rare flowers, both old-fashioned and new, like lilacs and orchids. Many of those high-toned customers knew lots more about fine French lilacs than some of the newly rich splurgers can tell you about the most expensive orchids. I ran that shop for a year, and then the death of a member of our family made it my duty to return here.
"For awhile after I came hack I was needed at home all day, so I received my customers for beauty work there. I had an old machine with which I gave permanent waves, and I did many a shampoo, finger wave, and manicure there at home before it was practical for me to leave the family enough to be away all day in a downtown shop. One of my friends had just completed a beauty course and we rented a part of this space we are now using for $10 a month.
"Neither of us had any money, and planning ways and means to go in business was as big a job as the business itself. My brother is a skilled cabinetmaker, and he gave us splendid cooperation. He made our tables, chairs, supply cabinets and our display cabinets too. My partner and I did the painting ourselves, and how we did work to get everything fixed up just as we wanted it. Selecting the color of that paint was just a matter of instinctive choice after my year in a town where flowers were so well loved.
"Coming back to our task of getting our shop started, I've always heard that where there’s a will there’s a way, and long before we were ready for our formal opening, my old customers were coming to our shop begging us to go ahead and do their work.
"Oh, I was going to tell you about how we came to select the name for our shop. Well, a salesman did that for as. He came in to get orders for our first lot of supplies and found us painting our furniture and woodwork. He gave us several valuable suggestions that were of help to us in getting ready to open our shop. While we were discussing the merits of various suggested names this salesman said: ’With your color scheme, I don’t see how you can very well call it anything else except the ’Lilac Shop.’ So he was the one who named it. The very words ’lilac’ and ’beauty' seem to be almost synonymous after you have been in the beauty culture business long enough to notice how many of the best cosmetics have either the word 'lilac.' or the picture of a lilac on their labels.
"We’ll never forget our opening day. It was on May the fourth, 1933, that we had our formal opening. We did no beauty work on that day, but just entertained our friends and visitors in the shop, and served them ice cream and cake. Even those simple refreshments were what you call home-made too." She laughed as she continued, "We baked those cakes ourselves and made the ice cream, and as we served our guests with those home-made dainties in a shop filled with home-made furniture, we were mighty proud of what we had accomplished, and, after all, don’t you think our furniture looks as well as what you can find in other beauty parlors?
"On that opening day, the May flowers were at their best, and our friends had remembered us with the most gorgeous blossoms until all the tables, window sills, and even much of the floor space were filled with baskets and vases of flowers. No wonder we thought it a beautiful shop. That was a happy day for my partner and me.
"At that time our actual beauty implements consisted of one old shampoo outfit, an old-model dryer, and my old permanent wave machine. We had borrowed 50¢ to make the payment down on an impressive looking new machine and then were disappointed for, of course, as would he just our luck, it was not delivered in time for our formal opening.
"We had a hard pull in those first months with so many expenses, and all the problems of adjustment in getting started off with a new business. The hardest part of it all was in trying to live on what we made at first. But we worked hard to build up a good trade and succeeded so well that in December of the same year we had to bring in another partner-operator. She has been here ever since and is my present partner. Beginning with December 1933, three of us owned and operated this shop. How did we manage about salaries? well, we divided the profits into four equal parts. One fourth was for the shop. With it we paid the rent, kept up the payments on equipment, bought supplies and paid other running expenses.
The other three parts were for the three of us. There were times when we had to give back some of our own portions toward the expenses of the shop, but each one paid an equal part of any deficit, and likewise the three of us shared ell profits equally.
"We are proud of the very modern shop that we have now. Have you noticed that our equipment is all of the latest and most improved type? All of our old machines have been traded in for new ones, and we see to it that our skill as craftswomen and stylists in beauty work is developed to keep up to the standard of our modern equipment. We attend all the beauty shows in our section and do a great deal of reading and studying to keep up with all the new ideas and styles in beauty culture.
"About the first of this year my first partner married and left town, so we bought her out. Now there are only two of us in the partnership, but we are able to manage without extra help at the present time."
Two more customers came in and my hostess excused herself to wait on them. The telephone had been a constant source of interruption throughout my interview. Customers were phoning for appointments for the week end, particularly for Friday evening.
Sitting there alone by the circulating heater, I took advantage of this idle moment to observe the reception room and its contents. The room was small and its simple furnishings were apparently adequate. Its most-used fixture, a telephone, sat on a table at the end of a large overstuffed couch that extended along one side of the little room. Before the large double windows was a very modern manicure table on wheels. This could be rolled to any place that it was convenient to give a customer a manicure while other work was being done. Often a manicure is given a customer while her hair is under a dryer or while she is having a permanent wave put in. This portable table is said by its owner to be a "very handy gadget." A barber chair and other equipment for cutting hair were also in evidence.
"Notice our Hoffman dryers with their comfortable armchairs," insisted one of the partners. "Aren’t the magazine racks on the side of the chairs handy? we keep them filled with new magazines and papers so our customers won't get restless while we are drying their hair or giving them permanent waves."
A shampoo basin and an adjustable reclining chair were at one end of the room. On one side of the basin was a table laden with shampoo solutions and rinse preparations end a small cabinet for towels. On the other side was a larger cabinet for towels and aprons. On top of this cabinet were bottles of solutions used in giving finger waves. Another corner of the room was occupied by the permanent wave machine and a small dryer.
Two small dressing tables faced one long mirror. Shelves at each end of the mirror were filled with cosmetics of the various kinds needed in beauty culture. My eye was attracted to some interesting looking curling irons that were placed in convenient reaching distance by these two dressing tables, and an operator took time to tell me they were the irons used for making the once-famous marcel waves.
The young woman who had been so feverishly excited over the prospect of going to Atlanta came over end set down by me. Her beautifying had been successfully and promptly done, in time for her to rest and cool off after her session under the warm dryer. The speed of her constant babble had not slackened in the least. "I do love to come here," she confided, "because they are so nice end friendly and then they do such grand work. I always-feel like I'm just right when they’re through with me at Lilac's. But, now I simply must get out from here, or I'll miss my bus. Bye, everybody, and thanks for the good job you did on me," she called as she rushed toward the door.
It is doubtful if she heard their good wishes for a pleasant trip, for she departed at a rate of speed that matched the rush, of her entrance an hour previous. I wondered if that girl had ever been known to utter a sentence in which her tones did not bear down with strong emphasis on one or more words.
By the time the two customers already mentioned were under the dryers, the door opened to admit a woman who carried one arm in a sling. Both operators seemed very happy to see her, and as they gently removed her coat and net, they told her how they had missed her and assured her of their delight at seeing her able to visit their shop again.
”I know I’m early for my appointment," she apologized," but I came early so there would be time for me to rest a little while before you begin my work." They pulled a big, comfortable chair up close to the heater, and one of them adjusted a cushion for her arm to rest on before they went back to the other customers.
The last customer smiled as she remarked to me, "Aren’t they nice? I needn’t flatter myself that it’s just because they like me more than they do the others, for they are just that nice to everyone. Why, we can even send our children down here without having to bother about coming with ’em, for they can do more with those children than we can, especially when it comes to keeping ’em still while they give a permanent wave. And do the children like these girls! Why, they’re crazy about ’em.”
The dryers gave up their customers, and when their hair had been combed and arranged they paid their bills and went out. Now a new customer entered. She was a very young person dressed in a wine-colored suit. She had not made an appointment, but she wanted a shampoo and manicure, explaining that they were "’specially important," because she was going to a party that night. One of the operators gave her a shampoo while the other was busily employed with the hot oil treatment requested by the woman with the broken arm.
No sooner had they begun work on these last two customers than a woman came in to say that she had told her son to meet her here after school, but she had more shopping to do and wanted him told to wait for her.
Soon the young person was placed under the dryer and the manicure table was rolled in front of her. By the time her hair was dry the manicure was finished and she was ready to go. The other customer received her manicure while her hair was drying too, and I noticed that the hand on the broken am was handled with especial care.
"Lunch time!" both operators exclaimed, as the last customer departed. "Will you have lunch with us?" they asked, and as I looked around, they smilingly explained, "Come on. We have another room you haven't seen yet. That's where we fix our lunches." They opened a door at one side of the workroom and we entered a large room also decorated in lilac and black. It was equipped with a shampoo basin, a dressing table, a permanent wave machine, two large supply cabinets, and another cabinet for uniforms. In one of the cabinets they kept their main stock of solutions used with the waves and the pads with which the mixtures are applied. This was really the supply room, for here were kept supplies of every kind used in their work. One of the cabinets held dishes, cooking utensils, percolator, canned goods, and shelf groceries. Nearby on a small table was an electric plate and grill. I insisted on being permitted to contribute my share toward the lunch. They hesitated, then said, "We'd rather you'd just be our guest, but if you prefer to provide some of the food that'll be all right."
When we had planned our meal, I went out and bought barbecued pork while they me. de coffee, prepared soup, and toasted bread."When I returned with the meat they had set the table near the heater and everything was ready for us to sit down and eat. They had made no appointments for the next hour, and as we ate lunch they told more of their work and their home lives.
One of the partners said, "We measure our dealings with customers by the golden rule; we will not use any cosmetic on them that we would not apply on ourselves. We will not even have the cheaper solutions in our shop unless we are certain that their formulas are, not only harmless, but beneficial. For that reason we use only the safest and best solutions, cosmetics, and equipment. Oh, yes, that policy brings its own complications, and sometimes we lose business on that account. We will not give a cheap permanent wave. Sometimes those cheap waves turn out all right, and then again the hair will be ruined, and we are not willing to take the, risk. It just does not pay.
"At first, some of our customers couldn’t understand this, but when they had tried the cheaper work and had trouble, they came back to us declaring they wanted no more of those cheap waves. We have built up our business by our practice of doing excellent work.
"We hear others talk about out-of-town customers being so prone to want work done at cheap prices, but the customers that come to us from outside our town always ask for the best in the way of beauty work. They are such nice people, these out-of-town customers. Why, there’s scarcely a week that we don’t have an invitation to go out to some of their parties and dances. Whenever it’s possible we accept, for these people really do show us a good time.
”Both of us have to help support our families, and that’s one of the best incentives I know to encourage hard work. My father’s health is bad, and it's necessary for me to help provide for my sister and her little girl. I want to send that child through school - by that I mean college - for I had to go to work when I finished high school. My father had sent all five of us - my sister and me and three brothers - through high school, and if I can spend as much on my little niece as he spent on the five of us, it ought to see her through college. Don’t you think so? Her mother keeps house for us and takes care of our father. Our home is really a pleasant place with friends dropping in for dinner and cards occasionally, and we are happy too when just our family are gathered around the fireside. Being together is what matters most. When I have time to be at home in the daytime I can usually be found in our flower garden, for I love flowers of all kinds, and cultivating them in the garden is such grand exercise. Now and then friends drop in at the shop in slack times to play cards with us, and we sometimes play with our customers. We very often go to a movie after we close the shop, end we like to go off on outings in the car on week ends, returning in time for work Monday morning. Some of these motor jaunts are lots of fun.
'My young partner has lost her father, and she and a brother are trying to finance the education of a younger brother. So you see we both have our obligations to meet, and I think you will agree that we are really very responsible people.
"The season following Christmas is always a dull time in our line of work and the past month has seemed to be the worst we have ever had. Our busiest times are usually just before Easter when all the ladies feel the urge to have their heir fixed up for the new Easter bonnet, and the March winds always leave the skin roughened and in need of facials. The fall of the year is good for our business too, and the last week before Christmas we are nearly always rushed to death.
"We get 'a good bit of work from the school girls when they are preparing for their dances and other entertainments. This is especially true in summer, for there is always something being planned for the summer school students. But business in general is not what it used to be. One reason for this is that there are so many more beauty shops here now than formerly. Yet I guess we do fairly well, considering the dull seasons and the competition. One form of competition that I failed to mention before is provided by the women who do work of this kind in their homes for customers. These operators conduct their business in their homes really do hurt the business of the beauty parlors, for they do not have the overhead expenses of a shop and therefore can do the work so much cheaper than we can. The shops usually maintain standard prices for their work and do not attempt to compete with the low prices of the home operators.
"While most of our work is done on a cash basis, we do run charge accounts for a very few of our best and most regular customers, and it is not often that to lose anything in this way. However, we do occasionally have to take a small loss on work done on credit. We carry a good line of cosmetics that we can conscientiously recommend to our customers and this brings us in a fair volume of profit. Our customers respect our advice in the matter of cosmetics because we have never offered any preparation for sale that we would not be willing to use ourselves.
"After all, I think we have made good progress from our very small beginning in a shop which we had opened on borrowed money, and a very small amount of borrowed money at that. From scant equipment for one booth we have continued to enlarge our supplies until, as you see, we have three rooms completely equipped with the most modern apparatus. Our rent has increased from the original $10 to $25 a month. Our expenses for gas, electricity, and water are reasonable considering the quantities of these commodities that we use.
"A maid comes in and does the cleaning after she gets out of school. She is just a young girl, but she is so smart that we hope we can employ her full time later. We pay her only $1 a week now, but in rush seasons, especially when she works all day on Saturday, we give her more, and in addition we help provide her school clothes. She seems delighted with the work and wants to stay with us.
"We still have to ‘count our pennies’ as the old saying goes. Before we can take out any of our earnings for ourselves, we must first put aside enough to take care of our shop expenses. Now, since there are only two of us, that means more each way. When there were three of us we seldom drew less than $16 to $18 a week net profit. How it is sometimes more end sometimes less; it all depends on how much business we get in. But, as I said before, we are still able to pay our own bills promptly and to take care of our shop.
"We don’t belong to any union or other labor organization. In fact, if there has ever been one here for beauticians we have never heard of it, and we keep in pretty close touch with all the other shops. During the summer months we cooperate with the other business houses by closing one afternoon in each week, When there were three of us, we took one day a week off during the dull season. This gave us the chance to do any work we might want to do around our homes and it was an opportunity for rest and recreation.
"We’re going to have to make different plans for this year’s vacations. Formerly, each partner took two weeks off in the summer, leaving the other two to run the shop, but one person can’t run it alone, so I guess we’ll have to get in some extra help while we take our vacations. However, that's a long way off, and right now we'd better be getting our dishes cleaned up and put sway, for it's about time for our afternoon appointments. One of mine is with a young man."
The dishes were soon washed up and put in their places in the cupboard. I had enjoyed the novel experience of that lunch and the informative as well as pleasant conversation, and I thanked the hostesses. Miss Richards said. "We don’t have time to prepare lunch and relax this way when we are very busy, but we do find it pleasant as well as convenient on occasions like this, and it was a pleasure to have you join in with us so we could talk as we ate. Sometimes we invite customers that we like to eat with us, especially the ones that come from out of town. Very often these women from the small towns are so appreciative that they send us the most delicious home -made candies and great big home-made cakes that taste lots better than anything we can buy in the stores. These things they send us were cooked just to eat, not to sell. And my, what a difference that makes! Cakes and candies are not all the goodies they send us. About the best country ham and fried chicken we ever ate came from our good customers.’'
I looked around to see who had opened the door, expecting to see the young man who had the appointment, but I was disappointed for the moment. The first caller of the afternoon was a salesman from one of the cosmetic supply houses. "Why are you so late?" they wanted to know. "We couldn’t wait on you. Our order was mailed in day before yesterday."
"Oh, that’s all right," he laughed. "I'm sure our house got your order anyway, for I know so well what you girls use, and there’s no other place you can get any better goods at any cheaper price."
After teasing him a little while, they admitted that they had mailed the order to his firm. 'He thanked them, chatted a few minutes, and left.
Miss Goss, the senior partner, spoke up, "He was right at that. We do get our best solutions from him, but what he probably doesn't want to realize is that we also get supplies from at least two other places. There's hardly a day passes that a representative from one or more of the many supply houses doesn't call on us. They come so often that we seldom have to mail an order in."
Two customers arrived. One was a man. I was eager to see what work he would want done. He called for a shampoo and a manicure and was quite particular about his manicure, more so than any of the women who had preceded him. He was especially careful in selecting the nail polish. After he had departed a woman customer commented on the unusual sight of a man in a beauty shop. The operators declared that they have several regular customers among the men.'
The woman came back and met her son. This was evidently not his first visit to meet his mother here, for he was well acquainted with the operators. He promptly displayed his last report card to them and was congratulated on his good marks. His mother said she had feared that it wouldn't be so good this time for he had lost so much time because of sickness that she didn't think he could catch up with his studies. Her work was soon finished and they left his books in the shop while they went out to do more shopping.
The telephone rang. One of the operators answered and I heard her say, "I'm sorry, but I will not be able to take another appointment for today. Would you like to come tomorrow?"Evidently that was agreeable for her next remark into the receiver was, "All right, I’ll put you down for 9:30 in the morning.” Turning to me she said, ”I hated to do that, but it never seems wise to me to take on more work than we can take care of, for I don't think anyone likes to sit around and wait. It's so tiresome.”
While her customer's hair was drying the operator said, ”We're going cut to a bridge party tonight, and I just know we'll have a good time. This week end we're going to a square dance out in the country. You should go with us sometime to one of these old-fashioned dances. I know you'd enjoy it. We work hard, hut we love to get out and enjoy life too, and we manage to get quite a good deal of pleasure as we go along. Don't you think everyone should balance work with pleasure to some degree?”
It was evident that they would have no time for further conversation as they had work enough already started to keep them busy until time to close the shop, so again thanking them for their hospitality and a very pleasant day, I bade them good bye.
”come back to see us,” they called, as I went down the steps.
