
Socio-Ethnic Study
The Greeks in America
Cora Mae Taylor
January 18, 1940
Mabel B. Francis Editor
Miami, Florida.
NICHOLAS HANCIS
1474 SW 1st, Street
Miami, Florida
Mr. Nicholas Rangis, age 60, operates the Riverside Laundry Restaurant near the corner of Flagler Street and southwest Fifth Avenue, assisted by his daughter Helen. She is the genial wife of Charlos Catsaros, the chief cook and co-partner of the restaurant which is occupied with a long side counter and 14 tables spread with red and white plaid tablecloths.
Proud of his location, Mr. Eangis remarked: "Ve are often growled here between <text not clear>. Ve do goot <text not clear> an' do boople lak to eat here."
In appearance, Mr. Eangis has more of the features of a German than of a Greek. His round, full face; small, obliquely set blue eyes; thin hair with a very "wide part" and portly physique easily classify <text not clear> among these who have a "boog abbodito."
Except for his rapid, witty manner of speaking, that makes a sentence sound like one <text not clear> word, and his guttural tone of voice, his English is well-expressed for one who has never attended American schools, although at first, it is quite difficult to understand.
He is very "broud" of his two children, Loo, ago about 25, who is employed at the Florida Coffee Company and Helen, age 29, and her daughter, ago six to whom he often referred as, "Our Mary."
Loo and Helen both graduated from Cosu High School and soon afterwards, Helen and Charles were "bride and groom" of an elaborate Catholic Church wedding, 1931. Helen possesses the charms of a pleasing, versatile conversationalist, witty but dignified and refined. She <text not clear> everyone with an obliging smile, is untiringly busy every minute, <text not clear> care of the cash register and supervising the waiters.
Her flowing auburn looks were pinned back with white forgot-me-not barottes while the top of her head was covered with pin curls. Her now orchid wool-chambray dress was not off with a large heart-shaped ornament at the neck, while her fair complexion, youthful figure and careful grooming made her appear much younger than her ago.
She greeted <text not clear> very cordially, but when I stated the purpose of my visit, she began to make excuses and asked me to call another day, then when she saw that I came in the rain to meet her third appointment, and as she had only a few customers she apparently decided that my visit must be of importance. When her father saw that I was taking a few notes, he came ever to our table and began to talk freely about the Greeks in Miami.
"You Zee," he said, "I knows all Greeks in down. I been druste<text not clear> of Greek Orthodox Church so long and I vos bro<text not clear>ident of boadt of drustees, two years. Dat vone year longer dan gustomary. I get long wid dom so vell doy mate me sorve zo<text not clear> year. It gost $350 month to run our ghurch. Ve bay choir leader, but organist so kin' she donate service."
"Vell, I dink ve do much gudo work ve help our poor but ve have only two viddows in Miami. I him Lolbin' one somedine. Vance I gib her fifo tollar f'r Crissimus bresent. I go zoo, if we gan't get some more money f'r her. Do zooty gif her only dwenty tollar month. I zoo she need more."
He seemed proud of his executive ability to "koob drustees boosy bringing in exhonses" and it was easy to see that he is one of the leading Greeks in Miami.
"Always hat money enough to educate children and do anything I vanted. Gave Helen piano lessons. She blay piano goot. My wife, she never hat t'vork in her life. Ve travel 'rount some. Be here tonight, dare tomorrow. Somedime shut ab boosness for year or two and start ub again. Never vont back to old gountry, - only Helen an' her family vent las' f'r 15 months.
"I voz born in Patras, the second socty in Greece. Father ditto von 1 voz five year olt. Din' go to school much. Vont to vork in distillery von 11 years olt. Don' lak vay day train children ovah dare. All <text not clear> teachers. Kip burnishing all dine for loodle t'ings of f'r nothin' jus' to kip children 'fraid. If got vippin' at school get vun at home, too. They ignorant. Know French and Greek, but not mch also.
"If ve meet teacher on street and not bow to him nice enough, or show best respect he want of us, he vood vip us and give us training how ve act nex' dime. In some schools, ve can take German and English, too, if vo lak. Baronts vip a lot, too, but not so much as teachers.
"Gamo to America, 1906. Only 16 years olt. Didn' exboot t' stay. Yust t'ought earn lot fo money in few months an' go pack, but everybody fin's dis gountry happens to be so nice, dey vant t' stay here all dime.
"Vorked in a restaurant in New York for ten years. Get married in New York and came to Miami to be with Jerry calatis' restaurant for several years and don vant in boosness f'r myself. Vife dite in 1937.
"Ve make better living than Italians. Ve are law abiding. Ve bay dobts, vork hard and make goot scotizons. Ve glf goot <text not clear> to children. Don' gamble. Don't blay horses. Only a few ever do dat.
"I vent to night school only van night. Could answer every gwestion dey asked me. Never vent pack again. Night school, too isay (easy) f'r me. Got scotizonship peppers wit'out going to night school. English language, so issy f'r me. All languages issy f'r me, Italian, all languages issy. I road peppers. Like to read English peppers. I read all do fannies in Sunday pepper. Soldom road Greek magazine.
"Our Mary, she smaht girl. Before she vent on visit to olt gountry, up to von she fife year olt, she talk English so goot, but when she went over to Greece, she poked ub Greek language. Talked good Greek att dime.
"Is the Greek language a difficult language to loarn?" I asked.
"Vel," he replied, with a queer shrug of his shoulder, "she peck it right ub. She speak better Greek than I can. She learned so many Greek songs and stories, but she vouldn't sing for you. She so bashful, if you vould hear her, you would have to be hiding somewheres.
"Ve worry about her. Ve can't get her to talk a vord of English. She olt enough to go to school, but we want her to get her English pack again before ve send her. Ve kip her here in the restaurant so she hear English all the dime, bud venever anyone spick to her, she hang her and runs away."
During the course of the interview, the grandfather gave her several commands to prove that she understands English, for she would do whatever he told her to do. Once he said:
"Mary , go dell Mamma to get you a dish of vanilla 100 crores for the lady." Then he followed near enough to hear her and came back to the table, shaking his head:
"No, she said it in Greek," he said despairingly. "We sure she vill learn to talk von she goes back to school. She bright girl.
"Year ago Grissimas, "Our Mary" hat Grissimas dree jus' same. It vas first Grissimas dree ever on the island of Lotylone. They hat to have it shipped to them. It gost hat money, but they all t'ought is so nice.
"In the church at Motylone Island there is an Icon of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Folks that Lave any disease go there wid gold money, brecious jewels, rings, oh, everything, diamonds, - o<text not clear> to offer to the Virgin Mary. Doy bray to her and lots of them get vell. Doy hang oh. Millions of tollars worth on boog center golumn dat helds ub de church. St. Mary's day is August 15. Boog dine at church on dat day.
"No tainger any jewels be stolen. Doy zay dat once man dried to steal jewels, but fell dead before he gould get oud ob church. Everybody 'frait t' steal anything from church.
"I our down, ve hat Icon of St. T-<text not clear> during World War, Ger<text not clear> or Turks, I don' know vitch, bad dey drop 30 or 40 bombs on zeety, but not van exploded. Dey said dat St. T'<text not clear> helb dom. Exberts 'zamined bombs an' said every one vas geet bomb. If dropped anyvare also vould have exbloded.
"On island of Cophalonia at Gulf of <text not clear> atras day have mummy of st. Jeremiah. On his <text not clear> day someone always gives him now gravo clothes and a new pair of shoes, for the sales of the olt vans always vorn oud. Now how dat happen, dey say he wears oud his shoe's going rount ministering to seek boople. Dey say crezzy (crazy) bouple gun and kiss mummy an' go 'way in right mind.
"May 10th, is St. Nicholas day. At church of St. Nicholas is blace voar water gomes ub pebbling from ground seek folks go dare an' gum 'way vell. Dat is my name day, but not my birth day, so I have birthdays, May 10 and <text not clear> 25th.
"Once man dried steal Icon of St. Nicholas <text not clear> church. He deek id end of church and rode an' rode so fas' all night. It dark night so be not know where he was in morning, but stopped right in front ob church, so he lef' it oudside of church at pino 'dree an' dey say dat Icon can't be stolen.
"As to Evil Eye, I don' pelieve in it, bud I heard of voman wid bad eye saw a vane, oh, such nice beeg vase standing high on floor, very costly. She say, 'Dat vase so nice' and it fell over on floor an' proke all to pieces."