August 9, 1939
Bertie Williams (Farm Girl)
Newton, N.C.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Bertie Williams	Gertie Wilson
Tom Cline	Ed Vine
I left my office for a few minutes and when I returned two girls had taken possession. A blonde, seated on my table was reading my manuscript; while a black-haired one occupied my chair.
”Hello.” They said. ”Is this your table?”
”No,” I replied, "I'm just using it at the present."
"What are you doing? Writing life histories? Do you mind my looking?”
”Not in the least. That’s a story.”
”What do you do with them?” I explained and the blonde's eyes twinkled.” Would you write mine?”
”Sure if you give it to me.”
”Wait till we eat this candy. Here, have some."
The black-haired one giggled and exclaimed: ”Why, Gertie, what have you done to have yours written?”
”Just because I think it's fun. Now,” she said, as she threw the empty candy bag into a spitoon," where do I begin? I’ve got an hour; we’re going to the looping school at four.
"What’s that?" I inquired.
"Don’t you know? They have a room above the five and ten cent store where a woman teaches looping. That’s sewing up the toe of the socks after they are knitted. It cost a dollar a week to learn, but I don’t know how many hours a day they teach. You don’t have to pay till you get a job. We’re going to learn and we’ve been promised a job in a hosiery mill."
"How interesting. I didn’t know we had such a place in town."
"Oh, yes, it’s been going on a long time. Lots of girls are learning. You see the hosiery mills can’t learn you thout pay and they won’t hire inexperienced help.
"My name is Gertie Wilson. I live on the farm. I ain’t ever lived anywhere else. I like it all right, but I want to earn some money. There’s a big crowd of us; it takes a lot to go around. I can’t have the things I want. There’s thirteen in our family counting father and mother. They’ve got two children dead. We do well to live to say nothing of the extra for clothes. We live on Ed Vine's place between here and Littleton. He's a nice man and father likes to farm for him. He raises corn, wheat, cotton, and plenty of vegatables. We have lots to eat. This year we have five hogs to kill. We keep three cows and we have a heifer soon to come fresh. The cows supply us with plenty of milk, butter and cheese. Our hens furnish us plenty of eggs. There's a lot of fruit on the place to eat, can and dry. We alwa can about three hundred jars. Mother makes jelly, apple butter, jam and preserves. I dom't like such eatings, I want things you buy out of the store. I don't like fried chicken, and as for eggs; I can't eat them. Now, I gotta hurry up with this story. Will it come out in the paper? Oh, heck, I hoped it would. It would be so much fun to see it in the papers.
"I went to the ninth grade in school. My parents wanted me to finish; but I got tired of going and quit. Guess I'll be sorry some day.
If I can get a job I won't care. This job I'm going to try to get means the difference between satisfaction discontent. I know I ain't got it yet, but I’m going to learn in a hurry. I want to buy some nice clothes and that ain’t all I want won’t be satisfied till I get me a nice living room suit. Dad don’t have the money to buy such things; he won’t care if I buy them myself. Mother needs things too and the rest of the family. I’d like to be able to help them all."
"Don’t count your chickens before they are hatched," Spoke her friend.
Gertie laughed, "Guess I am going pretty fast. Do you think I’m silly?"
"I think you are to be admired," I told her. "I like your ambition; don’t give up your dreams, keep on improving them."
"How nice, that makes me feel good. Now let me see, where was I?"
"Your head was in the clouds." Black-head giggled.
"My feet are on the floor though. Yes, now I know, I’m going to give a tenth of what I make to the Lord. I belong to the Baptist Church. I go to Sunday School and preaching regular. I like to go, if I didn't I'd have to go anyway. Mother believes in us going to church. I like our pastor very much. The girls in my Sunday School class are mean. They're always fussing about something, and I don't like them. I read my Bible a lot. I've just started to read through it again.
"We have a oar of our own but we never have owned a home. When I get married I'm going to have a home first. If my man don't buy it, I'll work and pay for it myself.
"Down where we live, we have a lot of parties, no dancing, just sociable parties. We play games, have music and refreshments. It's a lot of fun. When we don't have a party on Saturday night, a crowd of us go to the show. I like shows; there's nothing I enjoy more. I'M not wild like some girls I know, but I do like to have clean fun. I'm only twenty years old, I don't believe in petting. Any boy that goes with me has to keep his hands to himself. Some boys will tell you if they can't kiss you, they'll go where they can. I tell them to go. If other girls want to be mauled around and slobbered over, that's their business not mine, But believe me, they can’t get by with it, on me.
"I know it’s not going to be any picnic working all day in a hot mill. I work out in the field at home, hoe cotton and corn all day. It's awful hot but I get fresh air. Dad always gives us a pea or goober patch for our own. This we sell and the money is ours. I buy clothes with mine. In the summer I pick blackberries and sell them. I’m tired of such grubbing around. I want to draw a check every week.
"My father votes on the Republican ticket. I’m not old enough to vote, if I were I wouldn’t do it. I don’t believe in women voting, all it’s good for is to make trouble. My sister voted on the Republican ticket too but she married a man who is a emocrat. All they do is fuss and grumble about who is right. I don’t care which is right, there’s no sense in having such wrangling. I’m telling the man I, marry before the knot is tied, he doesn’t need to expect me to vote. I think men and women are silly anyhow, Before they get married, it's nothing they won't give up or do for each other. After the wedding is over, they try to see which can be the contraiest. And then they have the nerve to say they love each other. That's not my idea of being in love."
"My idea," said the black-headed one, “is to get over to the looping school and learn something sensible."
"O. K.! Said Gertie. "Let's go, it's exactly four o'clock."
