Bringing in the Sheaves
By Kate Warren Hayden
"Well now, ain't you the proud un though, Emmy?" Janie Wilkes walked up onto the front porch of the Morris' log shack and sat in the split-bottom chair Emmy shoved forward. "Thought to my soul you'd bust a-shoutin' when we-uns was a-singin' Beingin' in the Sheaves yestiddy and Dud come up and jined the church."
"Dud hain't never been a bad son," Emmy said, "though I low I was powerful happy to see him took into the fold o' the Lord."
"How's his religion a-settin' with him?" Janie peered through the small front window with old woman's curiosity.
"I can't right off say," Emmy answered. "He acted same as usual this mornin' at breakfast. Then after he'd et he got in the cut-down and went off t'ward town 'thout wayin' nothin' about what he aimed to do."
"Maybe that's him comin' now." The two women listened a moment to the banging of a flivver in the distance.
"Hit don't sound like Dud's car to me," Emmy said.
After a minute of steadily increasing noise, the rattle-trap of Enos Watson stopped in front of the house, and the man's excited words came to the women or the porch.
"Dud's religion has drove him plumb loony," Enos said, "I overheered him a-talkin' to Sheriff Perkins a little while back, and he was sayin' sompen about turnin' in a still. Said he was a Christian man and wanted to do what he could to help clean up the wild-cattin' in these here parts.
"Dud Morris has made more liqour fer his age than any two men in the valley." Enos snorted disgustedly.
"I'm a-warnin' ever'body to git their copper coils and boilers buried afore that crazy fool gits here with the sheriff. Pass the news on," Enos shouted as he released the brake, allowing the motor to catch as the flivver rolled down the hill.
Emmy watched a cloud of dust tumble down behind him and stop at the next house, where Enos yelled, "Sheriff's a-comin'."
"Too much religion, Dud's got, iffen you ask me." Janie got up and walked down the steps. "I'm a-goin' to help my men folks," she called over her shoulder as she broke into a rheumatie lope.
Emmy stood up, caught her faded gray skirt in her hand, and shuffled her stringless shoes through the house sad down the back hill as fast as she could. She did not wait to open the pasture gate, but flopped prone on the ground and rolled under the barbed-wire fence as quickly as possible.
It was not until she reached Dud's still at the bottom of the hill where the branch curved that she stopped to catch her breath and wonder what she could do.
"I've got to git it buried," she said, and she reached down into the barrel of water to try to pull the curling copper worm out. After a few fruitless tugs, she felt a rheumatic hitch in her back and half straightened up with her hand pressed to the pain.
Emmy looked over her shoulder to see if Dud and the sheriff were coming, and then she stood, straight, with a sudden toothless grin on her face.
"Well, iffen I hain't a crazy old fool, now," she said aloud. "Iffen I hain't plumb crazy." and she turned to go back up the hill.
Me a-puffin' and a-tuggin' to git Dud's still buried when hit's Dud a-bringin' the law out. Dud hain't a-goin' to take him to his own still. Dud hain't a-needin' to have his still buried."
She reached the top of the hill once more and sat on the porch to wait for Dud and the sheriff. Across the valley she could see Sam and Enos Watson running with a pick and a shovel, and just as they disappeared into the swamp where their still was, Emmy heard the clattering cut-down of her son.
"They'll ketch Sam and Enos at their still, shore as shootin'." Emmy thought swiftly, and then, "I've got to do sompen to make Dud and the law wait."
In a moment, the skeleton of Dud's car, followed by the shiny black sedan of the sheriff drew up in front of the house.
"Ain't no sense in this." Emmy thought, as the two men got out of their cars. Ain't no pint in Dud a-turnin' in his neighbors' stills. They'll burn us out fer this. They'll burn the house right over our heads some night iffen I don't do sompen to stop this foolishness."
"Good morning, Mrs. Morris." The stout sheriff removed his hat and then took advantage of the courtesy to mop the sweat from his bald brow.
"Howdy, Sheriff," the old Woman answered sullenly.
"Reckon we better git goin'." Dud put in.
"Where is it?" The sheriff replaced his hat and stuffed his white handkerchief into his hip pocket.
"Dud," Emmy screamed, "I got awful ketch in my side!"
"Ain't fur." Dud said. "Jist down at the bottom of this hill, whur the branch curves. What say, Maw?"
"Nothin'." Emmy clutched the arms of her rocker in new terror as the two men went around the back of the house and down the hill.
"Oh, Lordy," she breathed to herself. "Oh, Lordy Jesus and the angel Gabriel, what air that fool boy turnin' in his own still fer? He could a-quit wild-cattin' iffen he'd a-wanted to, but that hain't no pint a-tall in him a-turnin' hisself in to the sheriff, Ain't goin' to help his soul none fer 'im to be in jail."
She ran through the dog trot to the back porch and watched Dud take a pick and swing it over his shoulder as the two started down the hill. She closed her eyes and saw in her mind Dud and the sheriff coming back, handcuffed together. From the bottom of the hill came the sound off copper and wood being torn apart by the blows of a pick. Then there was quiet again, and she knew they were coming back.
"Maybe iffen I do sompen to the sheriff's car ---" She ran back through the open hall, with hasty plans forming in her brain. From the porch she saw Sam and Enos recrossing the valley with their pick and shovel.
"Oh, Lordy," she said, "and I was a-worfyin' about them two."
She started down the steps toward the black car, but just as she put her hand on the bright door handle, she heard a loud burst of laughter from the back yard. Terrified, she ran back onto the porch and sat down quickly in her rocking chair. As the men come around the house, she closed her eyes, trying to put off as long as she could the sight of the steel bracelets on Dud.
In a moment, curiosity got the better of her, and she opened her eyes to see Sheriff Perkins reach into his pocket and draw out a black leather billfold.
"Then you haven't any idea at all who the still belonged to?" Perkins asked.
"Ain't got no idee a-tall." Dud said."Jist run acrost it yestiddy evenin' a-settin' thar on my land big as life.
"Well," the sheriff sighed, "I wish more men would turn 'em in when they run up on 'em in the woods. That's the only way we'll ever get 'em cleaned out." He took five crisp ten-dollar bills from the leather case. "Here's your reward." Perkins said.
"Much obliged, "Dud said, taking the new bills and wadding them in his overalls' pocket.
"Thank you," the sheriff said. He shook hands with Dud, got into his car, and drove off.
"Well, I never," Emmy gasped from the porch. "Fifty dollars for a old outfit not worth more'n fifteen! What you goin' to buy with all that money, Dud?"
"Well. I reckon I mout look in the wushbook and see."Dud went inside and took the Sears Roebuck catalog down from the mantel.
"Reckon I could git you them spectickles you been a-hankerin' fer so long, Here's a good pair fer fifty cents."
"Shore 'nough, Dud?" Emmy came to look over his shoulder. "What you goin' to git with the rest o' the money?"
"I hain't jist decided yet," Dud said, and he ruffled through the thin pages of the book. In a moment he began whistling Bringing in the Sheaves softly to himself and sat gazing a long time at the
