Isaac Hathaway (Negro),
Tuskegee Institute,
Tuskegee Institute, Ala.
Sculptor.
Rhussus L. Perry (Negro)
Macon County, Ala.
ISAAC HATHAWAY, SCULPTOR
In the ceramics division of the trade's building, Tuskegee Institute, I found Isaac Hathaway, a little brown-skinned man, about five feet tall and weighing about 130 pounds. He has keen, searching, clear eyes and a gentle, firm look. As I advanced toward him his eyes met mine and he smiled. His smile was full of kindness and understanding. All around me were students. On the floor were small piles of clay of various colors.
Mr. Hathaway greeted me with a warm handshake and gave me permission to watch the students working.
I wanted to know something about the little piles of clay, just where all came from. I was told that the clay, which is in seven hues is found right on and near the campus. A group of girls were mixing the clay so as to get a purple color. Some of the lumps of clay were streaked with four or more colors, and the students using a knife, separated the streaked pieces into color groups.
Two large tubs had been placed close together. One was full of water; the other contained clay with just a little water above it in getting clay ready for use it is first put into this tub almost full of water and is left there until wet through. It is then run through a very fine mesh which separates the clay from the sand.
Hathaway used a parable to explain: "Just as the good and the bad live together in this world, so do clay and sand," he said. "Just as the good Lord promised to separate the wheat from the tares when he comes, so do we separate the sand from the clay by use of a sieve."
When he had finished I asked just why the clay was put over in another tub of water. He explained that there was no water in this tub but that the clay is quite soft and it is put in here to settle.
"The water, you see," he said, "is from the wet clay; just strained." He then instructed a student to take a ball of clay to a plaster vat. This was the next in the process in removing the water. A student then took the clay and pounded it for several minutes on tightly stretched cloth that was fastened to a work table. Mr. Hataway explained that this gets the air bubbles out. If holes or bubbles are left in the clay, heat penetrates the air holes when the clay is placed in the kiln and will cause the pottery to break. After the pounding a student took a piece of the clay and carried it over to a fine string of wire which was stretched tight, attached to a table. He tossed the piece of clay through the wire so as to cut it in two pieces. In this way the wedging of the clay is tested. If it has been wedged enough the cut will be smooth; if not the cut will show air holes.
We walked over to another group of students and I watched them as they cut small coils from clay, rolled them, stacked and shaped them as desired. With wet knifes they would smooth the pieces together and shape them. Mr. Hathaway said, "This reminds me of our duty to our children. They should be shaped into usefulness as they grow."
Since we were very near the kiln, I asked Mr. Hataway if he would let me take a peep into it. "Oh," he said, "the door must not be moved ever so little until the oven is thoroughly cooled. If it is opened before it is cool the pottery will crack and break. Through a little hole covered with glass I looked into the oven and saw several small conical objects along with the pottery. They were leaning like candles when warm. These, Mr. Hathaway explained, serve as a thermometer. They stand according to heat." We read the heat by the cones. When the cones go over or collapse, the oven is as hot as we need it to be," he said.
When I noted a beautiful white swan sitting on a shelf, I inquired, "Is this used as a model?" He smiled and said, "One of our students made that." He led me to his office where there were several shelves upon which were pieces of finished work. "All this is work done by students," he told me. There were dogs, buttons, plates, cups, saucers, vases, lamps, toys, book ends, busts. A student had almost completed a bust of Dr. George W. Carver, Tuskegee's famous Negro scientist "You see," he said, "students who take up this work are fitted to work in factories or begin a little business of their own." "That's great, Mr. Hathaway; you must have been inspired to so this work," I said.
He offered me a chair. I made myself comfortable for I could see that an interesting story was coming. He narrowed his keen searching eyes as a smile played over his face, and began: "When I was quite a small boy my father, Rev. R. E. Hataway, took me to see an art exhibition in Cincinnati, Ohio. In the crowd I was lost from him and when he found me he scolded me severely for not keeping up with my sisters who were in our party. I told my father that I was trying to find a bust of Frederick Douglass. Dad said, 'Son you will not find a bust of Douglass here.' I said to my father 'Teacher says the truly great people are perpetuated in marble and bronze. And Douglass was truly great.'
"My dad replied, 'Yes, son, I know, but we shall have to produce artists of our own race to portray, our own great men."
Drawing his shoulders up and with a determined look Mr. Hathaway continued, "Well, I made up my mind that day I was going to make busts and statues of our great Negroes and put them where people can see them.
"That day my dad set me to thinking. I began to feel a responsibility to my people. Yes, I would perpetuate our great men and women in marble and bronze. Despite the hardships that I have met, the opposition and lack of confidence shown by my own race. I have devoted my time and money to taking masks and modeling busts of my people. You will find them scattered in schools and colleges throughout the United States and some in South America, the West Indies, and Canada.
"But back to Douglass," he was saying as a look of deep concern passed over his face. "I modeled Douglass under trying and peculiar circumstances. In Washington, D. C., beset with rent and food problems, I had worked in vain for three days trying to produce even a semblance of a likeness when suddenly God led me to the Washington Zoo. I say God led me because when I am working at a problem of any kind whether that problem is in clay or finance I pray for guidance; then go as far as I can with the means I have at hand, and invariably something turns up a solution.
"So I know God led me out to the zoo that day I was trying to model Douglass. The minute I walked in the zoo, a lion stood tip as if to say. 'Take note!' I noticed and cried. 'There he is! My model, at last I have you."
We both laughed heartily as he continued. "From that day, I formed a theory that all human beings resemble some animal, bird or reptile."
I said, "Your dad gave you the first inspiration to model and the lion gave you help to model your first truly great man."
"Yes," he said, "That dad of mine was great. His name was Elijah. Even though he was a slave, he managed to learn to read and write when a boy. He was a slave of United States Senator Garrett Davis of Bourbon County, Kentucky. Senator Davis had a son who was about the same age as my father and frequently they would fight. One day dad gave Garrett Jr. a whipping which caused the boy's nose to bleed. Young Garrett's mother didn't like it and told my dad that she would see that Garrett. Sr. whipped my father for that. The Civil War was being fought and although a mere boy, my dad wanted to join the army. To avoid that whipping from Senator Garrett, he decided to run away and join the army. Oh, but he tells of ease blood curdling experiences. My dad joined the Union side of the army. One of the men on the opposing side was fighting and tried to take dad for a servant. Dad barely escaped being killed. In the fight he got a sword belonging to one of General Morgan's men. I have that sword now. I cherish it as a precious heirloom, and intend to keep it as long as I live.
"Believe it or not," he said, and his face beamed, for he seemed happy as he talked of his father, "fate brought my dad and Garrett, Jr. together after they had grown up. It happened that Mr. Garrett Davis, Jr. was chief clerk in the pension office in Washington, D. C. My father was now a popular minister. I was working for Dr. Hrdlicka in Washington, D. C. when my dad visited me, and informed me that he had learned that Mr. Garrett Davis, Jr. was chief clerk in the pension office and suggested that we go to see him. I replied, 'What? After bloodying his nose, running away and all that? Besides you know he is grown up now, and aristocratic and all. Aren't you afraid you will get a cool reception!'
"'I can't help It', said dad. "I want to see that boy.'
"So we went over to the office. Dad told the attendant to tell Mr. Garrett Davis that there was a man to see him, and in a few minutes a rich-looking, stout, handsome fellow came our way. My heart grew faint, for I hated to see my fine, proud old dad's feelings crushed. I just knew Mr. Garrett would receive a Negro caller cooley.
"He approached us, looked at each one of us with a stern but kind stare. Then my dad spoke. 'You don't remember me, do you?'
"For a second he gazed in wonderment at dad. Then Garrett, Jr. grabbed him in a close embrace. There were tears in their eyes, and they were living boyhood days over again. I walked away a few steps to avoid more of the scene, for I, too, was becoming sentimental.
"After they had talked a while, Dad called me and told him I was a sculptor and that I was working there for Dr. A. Hrdlicka, the curator of the division of physical anthropology in the national museum. Mr. Davis said, 'You must be good if you work for Dr. Hrdlicka. What are you doing?' I told him that Dr. Hrdlicka had hired me to assist Mr. Frank Mischa in modeling the government exhibit for the Pan-American Exposition. (We were photographed by the Pathe weekly Co. while working on this exhibit,. Later this became part of the exhibit in the San Diego Museum in California.) As I related the story of my work for Dr. Hrdlicka to him, he seemed as interested as my own father. He said, 'Well, well, Elijah, just look what you have produced! You beat me.' He insisted on dad dining with him but previous engagements prevented. We both were happy. Dad had lost and found again a friend.
I interrupted him to say, "It must be wonderful to enjoy association with fine people like that." "Well, yes it is," said Mr. Hathaway. "It is pleasant to remember." Then he continued with a recital of his experiences in modeling.
"I assisted Dr. J. W. Pryor, head of department of physiology. State College (white) of Lexington, Kentucky, for two years in illustrating anatomy for a textbook, and Dr. Burris A. Jenkins, president of the old Transylvania University, Lexington, Kentucky, in making a miniature model of the main building of the institution, to be sent to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition at St. Louis.
"Then Guiseppi Moretti, an Italian sculptor, had me to assist him with one of his important commissions.
"An industrial company hired me to model a replica, two inches in height, of the Columbus Memorial which stands in front of the Union station, Washington, D. C., to be sold as a paper weight on Columbus Day.
"I have enjoyed working with teachers also in several of our colleges and schools," he added. "For two years I taught ceramics at the State school. Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Professor B. F. Hubert had me to give a course in correlated art in the Steamer school, 1932, of Georgia State Industrial College, Savannah, Georgia. Professor H. Council Trenholm, president of Alabama State Teachers' College had me to give his teachers a similar course. Dr. Joseph J. Rhoads used me as guest lecturer on fine arts at Bishop's college, Marshall, Texas, in 1935 and to teach art in the Summer school of 1935 and 1936.
"It seems a paradox, that notwithstanding my avowed intention to devote my life to modeling busts and figures of Negro life, my best commissions with the exception of two have come from the white race. Two things my race must develop; confidence in the ability of their own race, and appreciation of art. A Negro artist who must depend upon his own group for support is to be pitied.
"I cherish the fact that John L. Webb gave me the job of modeling Judge L. J. Winston, founder of the Woodmen, in bronze. It is now in the cemetery in Natchez, Mississippi. For this he gave me $1500.
"I have modeled busts of Booker T. Washington, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, Frederick Douglass, Rev. C. T. Walker, Bishop Richard Allen, Bishop John E. Hurst, Mr. John L. Webb, Rev. E. C. Morris and many others.
"Last year Father Bruno Drescher, a Catholic priest of Chicago, commissioned me to model and cast one hundred statuettes, one foot in height, of Blessed Martin DePores. Father Drescher wrote me these kind words: 'I do not believe there is a sculptor in the United States who can excel you in producing a likeness.
"In 1903 I was called to Louisville, Kentucky, by Attorney William Marshall Bullitt to make a plaster cast of a trunk of a tree and the surrounding ground where R. C. Whayne, a merchant was alleged to have committed suicide. Two white sculptors had been previously offered the Job, but both considered the venture impractical since plaster poured upon the ground will not relieve. On my arrival, I went to Mr. Bullitt's office, and found him alone. While I was consulting with him, in rushed a white man exclaiming, 'Eureka!' and signalled Mr. Bullitt to follow him in to another room. After being out of the room a few minutes the two men returned and Mr. Bullitt explained to me that the gentleman present had been offered the job first, and had now found a way to do the work. He further explained that this gentleman who was a sculptor whould spread a sheet upon the ground and that the weight of the plaster poured upon it would cause it to conform to the various configurations. He further volunteered to repay my railroad fare and also to pay for the loss of a day's work. I replied, 'That will be all right if you want a reproduction of the sheet rather than of the ground.'
"The sculptor said, 'That's the only way that it can be done.' Mr. Bullitt turned to me and said, 'He says that's the only way that it can be done.' I simply replied, 'I heard him.'
"Mr. Bullitt asked, 'Can you make the direct copy without the sheet?'
"I replied that I could.
"The sculptor exclaimed, 'He can't do it!
"Mr. Bullitt said, 'Hathaway, he says you can't do it.'
"Again I said, 'I heard him and again Mr. Bullitt said, 'Now, are you sure that you can do this?' Whereupon I replied, 'I can.'
"Turning to the sculptor, Mr. Bullitt said, 'We will have to employ this other man since he says he can do the work.'
"Here I was fully convinced that the color of your skin does not always matter with a white man. It is the ability to do a desired job well that counts. 'Get your hat, Hathaway,' he said: let's go.'
"We sat on the street car silently for eight slow miles. We finally arrived at Jacob's Park where I was shown the spot to be reproduced. The work was finished and set up in the court room as an exhibit in the evidence. So realistic was the ground and tree here represented that the opposing council, Attorney O'Neal, accused the defense with mutilation of private property, his view being that I had literally undercut the ground and tree and brought the natural scene into court.
"When I was called to the stand Attorney Bullitt asked, 'Hathaway what is that?' pointing at the cast.
"'It is a plaster cast,' I replied.
"'Can you prove it?' asked Attorney, Bullitt.
"'Yes sir,' I said, taking a knife from my pocket, sticking it in the tree and revealing a white spot of plasterl This aroused quite a commotion in the court room as there were many others beside Attorney O'Neal who thought the cast was an actual figure.
"Two things in my early life prepared me for this successful undertaking. One was the accident of poverty so that I could not afford to buy modeling clay, and had to use mud. In making my casts from the mud I learned by experimenting how to make the plaster relieve.
"The other was a thing that happened when I broke a limb from ay father's favorite peachtree. Overcome with the temptation to secure a peach I leaped high into the air to lower the limb so that I might get coveted fruit. To my consternation the whole limb came down, peeling the bark for several inches knowing that my father would soon return from his church duties I hastily instructed my younger sitter to gather all the peaches from the limb while I ran into the house, secured my box of paints and painted the scar a deep Van Dyke brown. It looked as if it were almost decayed. The scar was retouched with turpentine several times until it did not shine, and the detached limb was hastily deposited in a rock quarry several yards from the house. When dad came he missed the big limb from the tree but for his life could not account for it as he did not see any scar. To this day, although this incident helped me in coloring, I always feel guilty of having deceived my father." I joined him in laughing the matter off.
"I will tell you this and then I will let you go." (He was too polite to say he would have to go). It was now ten minutes past twelve, and the class had been dismissed by his assistant while he lingered on to give me the information which I so eagerly sought, "I can never forget the words of Booker T. Washington when I took his life mask. He was dictating the answer to a letter received from a man who had asked him to state the thing for which he was most thankful. Mr. Washington began by saying, 'First, let me say, I am thankful that I have something to do. A man who has something to do is to be envied. A man who has nothing to do is to be pitied. I would not care to live in a world where there are no difficulties to be met and no problems to be solved.' These words have stayed with me," Mr. Hathaway, exclaimed.
"I would love to see that mask, Mr. Hathaway," I said. Readily consenting he reached down, picked up a hand bag, opened it and carefully lifted the mask which was wrapped in a black cloth. The mask looked so much like the head of a real man that I was amazed. Smiling he said, "Does it look like him?"
"My, but it does!" I assured him.
"See the pimples, the lines and the expression of his face." There they all are as in life.
Mr. Hathaway said he was graduated from the Chandler Normal College, formerly located at Lexington, Kentucky. Then he studied two years in the art department of the New England Conservatory of Music at Boston, later spending two years in the Cincinnati Art Academy. He also studied pottery making, glazing and firing in the Summer school of the Pittsburgh Normal School in Pittsburgh, Kansas, and has taken various extension courses.
2/2/39
S.J.