Date of first writing:	January 3, 1939
Name:	Robah and Lola Bowden (White)
Address:	Pine Hall, N.C. (Stokes County)
Occupation:	School Janitor and Holiness Preacher
Writer:	Louise L. Abbitt
The Holiness Preacher
George Elkins swung open the heavy iron door of the school furnace and threw a shovel of coal into the fire. Then he clanked the door shut and threw the shovel over into the coal bin. His wife, Minnie, sat quietly in a bottomless chair near the furnace, dipping snuff with a gum tooth-brush.
"We done ’bout everything a body can do to make a livin’, I reckon," Minnie said as she accurately spat a stream of juice through the furnace draft. ”I'll bet you wouldn’t think George is a Holiness preacher. He’s been preachin' for ten year, until he come to be a janitor here at the school, we had it hard all along.”
George bit off a chew of plug tobacco.
”We ain’t so bad off now,” he said between chews. “Minnie always kinds took things hard. She couldn’t see how I got along as good as I did with my hands like they are.” He held up a stump of a hand ...the fingers were grown together. The other hand had no fingers at all.
”We been rentin’ a farm for a spell now. Seems like we always been able to meet our bills and come out on the crops after dividin’ up with the landlord. Course we don’t raise much along now, what with me workin’ here at the school most of the day. We got a nice psssel of chickens....thirty, and a big hog. We killed him yesterday...got enough meat to last through the winter.” He paused a moment to spit toward the open draft. Minnie took up the conversation.
"If it hadn't been for me, I reckon we wouldn't o' had no chickens a-tall. I always have to look after 'em end feed 'em."
She stopped and began digging her toothbruth into a tin of snuff. George leaned back in his squeaky chair and looked at the ceiling in a reminiscent stare.
"I recollect when Pa used to own his own land....that was back in Virginia, years ago. I reckon me and Minnie'd have a farm now if Pa hadn't 'o been a drinker. After we moved from Virginia up into Stokes County, Pa drunk so much corn likker, he run through all he had. We went to rentin' after that. I was the oldest o' the young'uns...they was nine of us. All of 'em managed to get some schoolin', but I got the most. I finished the seventh grade. After that, I had to quit school and go to work. The first job I got was at the Southside Cotton Mill. I worked there awhile, then went to the Kerneraville Mill. I recollect earnin' six dollars every two weeks. I had to turn the money over to Pa 'cause he was always at the gate when I got through work of Saturdays. 'Course he bought my clothes and fed me, but I never had any spendin' money."
"I reckon it's a good thing," Minnie interrupted. "I think we been better off on account of it."
"Mebbe so," George agreed. "Well, when Pa died, I met Lola and we got married right off. We moved out in the country and rented old man Ed Hewett's place. I never could stand to live in the city...Too crowded for me."
"I reckon that's one reason he come to be a Holiness preacher," Minnie said. "Bein' out there in the country with all them poor folks aorta ends him see how bad they needed comfort, so he took to preachin' to 'em when he had time."
"I reckon that's right," George added. "We never had no certain church to preach in. I just preached anywhere they was a crowd. I recollect preachin' one night in a old empty school-house down near Elderville. We had to furnish the benches and chairs for the people to sit in, and Minnie carried two old kerosene lamps along so we could have light. Perty nigh everybody there that night come up and got converted. It was the best meetin’ I ever preached at. It seems like poor folks are more willin' to come up and accept the Lord's blessin's than them that has fine churches and high paid preachers..." He stopped to throw another shovel of coal in the fire and look at the pressure meter.
George's read the Bible through seven times," Minnie said.
“And that ain't all George said as he threw the shovel into bin and resumed his seat by the furnace. "I aim to read it again when I get the time. I know it pretty good now but it seems like every time I read it, I learn somethin' new. It makes a body feel awful good to know the teachin's of Jesus, so he can go out and convert sinners to God. That's how come we don't mind payin' part of our earnin's to the Holiness Church. We call it payin' tithes. It ain't no certain amount...just whatever you feel like you can give. I'm mighty glad God made me able to get out and preach to the sufferin'. I been preachin' for years and I aim to do it some more when I can find the time. Seems like the Lord just told me to get out and preach."
Minnie rose from her chair and picked up a bucket.
"I'm goin' up and water the flowers. I reckon we'll be ready to go home and feed the chickens when you bank the fire." She went up the steps that led into the schoolhouse hall.
"Minnie's crazy 'bout them flowers upstairs," George said presently, "Sometime I get to feelin' she thinks more of them than she does me. She's been join' up to eater 'em every night for nigh onto eight years. She gets a lot of joy out of 'em, so I just don't say nothin.... and they really are awful pretty flowers, too..." He bit off another chew of tobacco. "And she's crazy 'bout them chickens, too. Gets up early every mornin' Just to go out and look after 'em. Why, not so long ago, me and finals was over to Virginia one day, and when she found out we couldn't get back that night, she spent forty cents to send a telegram to a neighbor, askin' him to feed her chickens next comin'. I figgered that was join' some! She didn't used to care nothin' 'bout chickens, though, not just after we got married. We had ten then. One day I decided we needed a rooster to go with all them hens, so I bought a big, fine one for fifty cents. She got awful mad, and next day, she took my rooster and sold him for thirty-two cents. Course, I never said nothin' 'cause she's always helped me make a livin'. She wouldn't sell one for nothin' hardly, now, she loves 'em so much.
A moment later, Minnie came back down the steps with the empty bucket in her hand. "Everyone of 'em's purty as a picture," she said slowly, "cept'n that little gerunium in the office...I'm 'feered it's 'ginnin' to wilt, and it used to be so purty..."
George smiled and pulled out his watch.
"It's gettin' 'long toward dark,” he said. "I reckon we better get this fire banked and get on home." He picked up the shovel and kicked open the furnace door. After throwing in several <text not clear> of coal, he dug into the draft door, and began piling on the ashes.
At that moment there came the sound of something scratching on the basement door that led into the outer yard. George dropped his shovel and opened the door. It was an old hound dog. He ran in, wagging his tail, and jumped upoon George.
"That’s old Bob," Minnis said as she tied a shawl around her neck. "We ain’t got no child’ren, so old Bob’s the favorite around the house."
"Yep, "George grinned, "He orrtta be good for somethin’. He ain’t caught me no rabbits this year or last year either. Git down, Bob! I gotta get this fire banked, and then we’ll go home." Bob ran over to Minnie.
As George slammed the boiler door shut, he said:
"Come visit us down to the house sometimes. We live in that little brown house down the road a piece...the one with the chicken lot and flower garden in the back. You can’t miss it. Visitors are always welcome at our house. You know, most of us Holiness preachers don’t get paid nothin’, and we don’t make so much here, but we’ve never turned a stranger away from our door. It always makes me and Minnie feel good to see a visitor set his feet under our table and eat....you know, the Lord loveth a cheerful giver..... You ready to go Minnie?....Hi, Bob! Let’s get goin’. The chickens’ll be gettin’ hungry."
