Mary A. Hicks
JAMES THEODORAKAKAS
James Theodorakakas was born near Athens, Greece, sixty years ago. His father was a farmer, but the climate was too dry for him to make anything. Once in about five years there would be enough rain to keep the fruit from parching. Year in and year out the family faced starvation.
James was unable to attend school, for he had to help his father support the other six children. He married young and lived in the house with his father. He tried to find work in Athens, but in vain, and his thoughts kept turning toward America. But he knew if he came that he would have to leave his wife and he would have a difficult time trying to learn English. He discussed the matter with his wife, and it was decided that he should come and then send for her and the child as soon as possible.
In 1908, a very hard year in which to get food, James' father sold his little farm in order to get enough money to pay for James' passage. On the trip he was seasick, homesick, and lonely. Some of the other passengers made fun of his clothes and of his stuttering. When he arrived in New York the only thing that prevented him from returning was lack of money.

After getting off the ship, James walked for hours. He became so tired that he slipped into an old warehouse and went to sleep on some burlap bags. The next morning he went to a Greek stand where he bought a cup of coffee, and there he found a Greek to whom he could relate his troubles. The Greek was sympathetic and offered him a job in the kitchen. He couldn't be a waiter due to his inability to understand and speak English. He didn't make much in New York, and what he did make he had to send to his father. So he began to look for a better job. His employer suggested Chicago, so to Chicago he went.
He had learned enough English to be a waiter, and he was fortunate enough to get the first job for which he applied. He worked there for two years at $15 a week and was able to save $100 in the meantime. Then he traveled through several states, working here and there as he was able to pick up odd jobs. When he reached Raleigh he decided that this was an ideal place to locate a cafe. He had visions of opening a cafe, of making money, and sending for his wife.
He looked around for a place, but he soon learned that $250 would not buy a very nice place and he would have no capital to back him. But he found another Greek who was planning to go out of business because of lack of funds, so he told him how much he had and they became partners that day. He trusted his partner; he had to, for he couldn't read and write. But while he dreamed of sending his family money they were going broke, and they were entirely bankrupt before James realized that anything was wrong. He then lost interest in living for awhile.
He was soon able to get a job in a small place at $6 a week and board, and he lived in a room with nine other Greeks. He was even able to save money then, and he saved enough to erect a fruit stand. From that he makes $15 a week and sometimes a good deal more. He is saving again, hoping to send for his wife and child who is a grown woman now.
James belongs to the Greek Orthodox Church and is very religious. He says that the average American does not have enough religion. He has twice been denied citizenship because of the fact that he cannot read and write the Constitution of the United States.
It is with great feeling that James says, "America, I love her. She good country with plenty of food and plenty of work for all. My country too dry to farm except fruit. This country good land, good to poor Immigrant, but to have her I give up my family all my life and can't never be a citizen of her."
AHB
