February 2, 1939.
John Harrison Summer, (white)
Main Street
Newberry, S. C.
Merchant.
G. Leland Summer, Writer.
My clothing and shoe store which I run here is a small business. I hire only one clerk. Before the World War, I had a bigger business in a large store up on the corner. Then I hired four clerks and a book-keeper. I am getting pretty old now, and can't stand on my feet much. I am 79 years old.
I got up in the mornings about 6 o'clock. Have done this nearly all my life. Get my dinner at about 1:00 o'clock; then, my wife comes for me in the car and we hare supper around 7 o'clock. Close my store at 6 O'clock every evening. Years ago we use to keep opne until 7:30 or 8 o'clock in evening.
My father died in the Confederate Army hospital, Richmond, Va. in the latter part of 1862. He had started a home in 1857, just after he and my mother had married; but everybody talking war, stopped the building, and it was after the war that mother finished building it herself. It is the old two-tory white house below <text not clear> that John H lives in now. I married and lived in that house the first threes, then we moved to Newberry and started a business, that was in 1884. Brother Geo came with me and we went in together, in partnership. About 1888 my other brother came and bought an interest in the partnership.
My mother was a good business woman; besides raising three boys, she completed her home, and then bought another two-horse farm in the enighborhood and paid for it.
In the year 1888 we opened another larger grocery store on the corner of Main and Caldwell Streets, in Newberry, and used the old grocery stand for a dry goods store. We began the lean business, too, and began to grow. In another few years we had bought two additional stores-- grocery, flour and grain, and hardware-- making three stores to operate. Having bought a large clothing business over at opposite corner, we began to do more business each year. During this time, we organized and started the first bonded cotton warehouse in Newberry, which in later years we sold to the Standard ware house Company, of Columbia, S. C. G.M.B. Epting was in with us and we made him the active manager. He liked his work. Negroes who worked around the warehouse liked him. On Saturdays he and his negroes would take a drink of whiskey which he kept in the office. Saturday afternnons and Saturday nights were big times for the negroes.
I was married twice. My first wife had 8 children. My second wife has one daughter.
I didnt get much chance to go to school when a boy, on account of the war. Went to the Cross Roads school and St John Academy. The folks wanted me to go to college, but I wouldnt go. I was a kind of home-boy. Never liked to go to around to places away from home much. But I did like to dance and liked fine horses when I was a boy. Went hunting and fishing little bit.
When the war was over, we had a tough time. Mother was afraid the Yankees--Shermans army-- would come through; and sure enough one day a we heard them coming up the road; with the drums beatin' and the tram of the feet sounding. Mother grabs up the picture of father, takes us boys by the hands, locks the doors, and stopping at a big tree in the front yard and covering the picture under some leaves, we all run over to her fathers place, about one mile away. We spent the night there and when we come back next day, mother looked for the -picture but she didnt find it. It had rained that night.
Yes, we have been here nearly 55 years, During all that time we have helped in every entarise in town. We helped organize and start the first oil mill plant whih was later sold to the Southern Oil mill. We started a little handle and shuttle factory. In 1901 we organized and started the Mollohon Mfg Company, a cotton cloth mill, with capital stock of $200,000.00. A few years afwrads the mill was doubled to its capacity, and the capital stock increased to $500,000.00. Brother George was the first and only President of the mill, until they sold out to Northern interests a few years ago. We started the Newberry Lumber Company which we had bought from the Davis plant.
I'll go back and tell you what kind of store I used to run. I was always the manager of the Dry goods or clothing stores. All the streets had mulberry tress on the edges of the sidewalks, then. The side-walks were paved with large flat rocks, in an irregular and uneven way. The streets had no pavements; only mud when it rained. One time old man poole put some rock about eight inches down under the streets, to keep wagons and buggies from mireing up too deep and get stalled.
There used to be a saloon right in front of our first store. I was standing in our front door one day, and heard a pistol shoot across the street in the saloon. Then a man, wounded and bleeding staggered out of the door, and fell dead in the door. His name was Reeder. They said that a young fellow named Jason shot him. They were both drunk and had been quarreling.
I lived in two different houses when I first come here; but in the present house, a large colonial designed home, I built about 32 years ago, before my first wife died. She died in 1917. She planted lots of flowers, and always kept a hot house for her flowers, in the back yard. My second wife likes flowers, too, and she keeps the lawn green and smooth the year 'round, and shrubbery around the house.
We used to run many croppers in our store, on liens. With the four stores, the warehouse, wagon and buggy storage house, and the seed and fertilizer warehouse over at the depot, a guess we did as much or more business in the State as any other firm. One time we built five brick stores on lower Main Street. In one of them we run a furniture store awhile, but soon sold it out. We sold the stores, too. The horse and buggy days. The clerks used to like to go to the warehouse and assemble the wagons and buggies. It was fun to put them together. We sold coal, too, for several years over at the depot warehouse. One of the clerks made something that he got up, to empty coal quick from rear end of wagon. Made it so bolt slip out and back come open quick. He took another feller and went over to the Davis lumber shop and made it out of oak wood.
I always kept good horses and good buggies for my familys use. I liked good horses. The first little horse I had was a sorrel mare. She was a peach of a horse. Once I had a big bay horse which we kept to the dray, but he got killed when brother rode hits over to where they had a land sale. He must have got the bellows. Our firm had three good horses all the time, two for the large, heavy dray and one for the one-horse dray. We divided up, each one of us taking a horse. My horse was old Dixie which I used for a family horse. Old Prince which I bought later was the best family horse I ever had. I used to have a large, high two seated carriage. I bought my wife one of the low seated sulkies that had rubber tires and wire wheels, steel plated, which she drove old Dixie to for a long time. I bought my oldest daughter a side-saddle when she was seven years old, and she rode old Dixie a few times; but her mother didnt like for her to ride as she thought the girl too young. That was 40 years ago. And you know, a few days ago, I found that old saddle up in one attic of my home. I thought I had sold it a long time ago. Another old horse I bought from Fred Schumpert. I paid $75.00 cash for him. I sold old Prince, the buggy and harness for $175.00. and never bought any other horse. But bought an auotmobile a little while afterwards. My carriage had cost me $200.00.
When my oldest boys were growing up I used to make them work aroun the house, milk cows and do other things, except work the garden. That has always been my job. We had a good croquet ground in the back yard, and they would invite neighbors children in and play. Then the boys played base ball on the ground or in the side streets.
I always went about end attended to my own business. Never went much for vacations. I never-did like to travel; but brothers used to like to travel. Brother Geo who was President of the mill used to go to New York, Philadelphia and other places often. He once had interests in two mills in Georgia and three in this State. He was Vice-President of two of them while he was President of the one here in Newberry. We always went to church nearly every Sunday. Had our children go to church and Sunday School.
My interest has always been in my business. Never took part in any polities.
We used to raise hogs in town. Everybody had back lot with a hog. The twon used to send a man around to inspect it, but soon they passed a law stopping the keeping of hogs in town. Same way with milk cows.
In my store I have seen styles change. Have seen how the people wants for things change. Times are better; but people wont pay their debts like they used to do. You could trust people more in the old days. Too many will beat you now. When I first come to this town, everybody wore black ten-cents hose. Whites and blacks. They wanted no colors in hose. The country people wore red bandanna handkerchiefs, wide brimmed hats, that were gray for men, and women wore hats trimmed with lots of flowers. Men wore leather boots or shoes that they slipped on. The boys wore red-top boots that slipped on and had copper toes. The boys wore copper-toes shoes, sometimes, too. Country people didnt wear overalls then, nor any workers in town, either. They wore jeans pants. They bought jeans cloth, took it home, and the women folks made jeans work clothes out of it. Women wore checkered homespun and outing cloth. Maybe a calico dress. Men and women wore red flannels underwear fifty years ago, made in two pieces, in the Winter time. They didnt make union suits then, and had no silk hosiery. Everything was cotton. Mens' shirts opened in the back; but the stiff-bussomed shirt sometimes opened on side in front, with is studd in it. Fifty cents could buy a good shirt those days.
Folks used to walk to church in town, let their horses rest at home on Sundays. There were not many buggies then, a few old, high carriages. People liked to walk. They dressed up on Sunday Afternoons in their swing-tail coats, silk beavers and walking cones. Walking sticks were the best of style then. The first Summer I was here, I bought for $5.00 a "sear-sucker" coat from a Jew named Moses Epstein, says K. And I bought a striped pair of pants. I had two alpaca coats and vests. In 1880 I bought a black cut-a-way coat, wore it two or three times, and decided I didnt like it. I got married in it, and afterwards sold it. Lots of young fellows used black broadcloth. People then married in black, went to church in black, went to socials in black, and were buried in black. Then the old "swing-tail" coat came into style. I bought one and didnt like it. Then I bought a Prince Albert coat and vest, and later sold it to a negro preacher. I remember when old man E. A. used come up the street dressed in his Prince Albert, his high, I sleek beaver, and walking cane. Then, the square cut coat came in style, with double breast. People then started buying suits, pants and coats same color. The old black frock-tailed coat and striped trousers and white vest with black shoes were still in good style, for few years more. The highest priced shoe in town then was $ 3.00. Some poeple wore "gaiters", with elastic sides but slipped on without being fastened. One fellow bought some "Zeiglar" shoes in the <text not clear> pf Prosperity, and paid $6.00 for them. He said he bought a pair of gaiters that had six buttons on the outside of each shoe, a kind of imitation button shoe, but they slipped on the feet. The buttons on the side were as ornaments. I remember when men wore button shoes. They had to button them up, high shoes and not slippers. One old doctor used to wear "Cecilian coats". Every Summer he had to get his "Cecilian." Or his Mohair. I havent seen any of the Mohair in the last five years. Old Mr. M. used to ride his horse with a frock-tail coat. When he got up on the horse he was careful about spreading- a coat-tail on each side of the horse so the coat woundt get wrinkled or soiled.
People fifty years ago used to have one little ice house in town. Lots every body had to go to the ice house in town and buy their ice. The ice was shipped in in saw-dust freight cars. Later, they had a little cover cart or one-horse wagon, which they drove around to peoples houses, rang their hand bell, like a dinner bell. Then, you had to go out to the wagon with your cloth or small quilt and get your five-cents worth of ice. That is about all they bought at a time, then mostly for sickness. Milk and butter was kept in milk houses in the backyard. The well supplied fresh water to the trough for milk, which was re-filled once a day. Meats were kept hanging up in smoke houses in the back-yard.
On dull days people just set round in stores and talk, or in front of store doors and talked. Some would straighten out stock on rainy days and no customers come about. One man always had a checker board handy and played in store or on street, under the shade of a mulberry tree.
I remember an old negro, a character, who used to be on the street all the time. Everybody called him "Fish Dick". He walked up and down the street with a basket on his arm filled with fish, crying, "Fish, fresh fish," or, "Fresh shad for sale." He kept his fish in an ice box at his fish stand and would take out a few at a time and peddle them up and down the street. Another old negro character was Old Ben, the well-digger. He dug many wells around town and at new houses. Old Appleton Elmore who come from out on Bush River, lived around town, and was a saddle-maker. He made some good saddles. K says he made for his grmother a saddle that cost her $40.00. His gr-mother gave it to her sister.
The young men in those days would shoot targets with shot guns or rifles. Then theybstarted to shooting clay pigeons. I never did hunt any after I come to Newberry. Used to keep bird dogs and a one hound dog on our piece on the farm, and hunted lots then.
I am getting old. Wish I could sell my business, and get out of it. Wish I could do something with some old stock I got up-stairs. Business is not like it used to be. People dont have as much money as they used to have. Maybe the chain stores getting all the cash trade. We got more Jews in town than we very had before, since I been here. They make money. I dont carry high priced goods like I used to carry. I let my son who got a business carry the higher priced lines.