Socio-Ethnic
Greeks in America
Susan Clark
November 1, 1939.
Mabel B. Francis Editor
MICHAEL RAKIS
419 N. Miami Ave.
Miami, Fla.
I called on Mr. Rakis at his place of business, the Seminole Printing and Paper Company, and despite the fact it was during morning business hours, Mr. Rakis received me very cordially and invited me to sit at his desk, when I explained the purpose of my visit.
Mr. Rakis is 45 years of age and came to New York in 1912 from Smyrna, Asia Minor, where he was born and raised. The reason for leaving his native land, "was to avoid military compulsory conscription," Mr. Rakis said. The Turks were forcing young men to do military service at that time, and because of much dissatisfaction among Greek he planned to come to America even before 1912.
His father owned a cafe and wine business in Smyrna, famous for its rug making industry, and he gave Michael a good fundamental education. He attended a private English commercial school in Smyrna and there learned to speak and write English fluently. Now he speaks with no accent. His brother and sister moved over from Smyrna into Athens, Greece, soon after 1912, the brother marrying and having a large family while tho sister was then, and has since remained an invalid.
Mr. Rakis came to New York with a cousin: Nicholas M. Rakis, who was in the fig and date packing business, and continued that business in New York City. Michael worked for his cousin for nine or ten months, but within the year went to work as assistant steward in a "large hotel business," he said "Then within another year I took over a concession for cigars and candies in the Maryland Theater in Baltimore."
While he lived in Baltimore, Mr. Rakis also studied dentistry for some time. When I asked him what degrees in schooling he had received before he came to America, he said that what he went to a School of Dentistry in Baltimore he was given a rating that equaled a four year course in high school.
While there, he had an attack of erysipelas, and this was the only illness he recalls having since he came to America.
Mr. Rakis explained that young men in his country are taught to think for themselves in most families, and he had a desire to be in his own business from the time he was 18. The concession business proved to be quite successful for him, but when the Florida real estate boom became news in the east, Mr. Rakis decided he would come to Florida "to try his luck."
He left Baltimore by boat in 1925 and came directly to Miami where he joined a real estate concern known then as the "Miami Realty Service," but which was later abandoned.
In Miami, he met Mr. A. Haimes, a Rumanian, who owned a small printing establishment on Fifth Street, near the FFC railroad tracks. During 1927, Mr. Rakis began his own small mail order business in Miami soliciting commercial printing and billing his customers for the work from his own address, although Mr. Haimes did the actual printing in his small shop on Fifth street. "I charged a commission for my work and billed the price as though I had done the work," explained Mr. Rakis.
In 1928, Mr. Haimes expanded his business and asked Mr. Rakis if he would take charge of the printing end of the company. This Mr. Rakis did, and has been in complete charge of the printing end of the Seminole Printing Company since that time.
"Usually we like to be the boss in our own business." Mr. Rakis said, "but here I am my own manager in every way, Mr. Haimes takes care of the stationery business and all the retail selling that is included in a stationery and paper house but he does not want anything to do with the printing end of the work."
Mr. Rakis lives in a downtown apartment in Miami near his office. He has never married, and when asked whether he managed his apartment for himself or had a housekeeper he replied smiling that "I absolutely do not have any housekeeper."
He is a member of the Miami Order of Ahopa but does not go regularly to his Greek church, although he pays dues to the local St. Sophia Church. He sends money to his invalid sister in Athens, Greece "because his brother in Athens has a large family and is unable to aid her financially."
He is still a student and enjoys the study of metaphysics. He is a registered voter in Miami and many of his friends are American born. He enjoys reading the daily American newspapers more than the Greek and at present is much interested in the war in Europe. Editorials and poetry are included in his favored types of reading.
His favorite meat is lamb and prepared as a stew, with tomatoes, "makes me a fine meal," he said. Mr. Rakis recalled that when he lived in Smyrna, his people considered Tuesday a "bad day." "My parents never liked to start anything on Tuesday," he said.
"In Greece many people wear a turquoise stone to ward off the evil eye," Mr. Rakis recalled this superstition being common among parents when he was a small boy. As he remembered it, the look of a covetous person "would cast a spell on a person."
Because Mr. Rakis has never married, his story had many limitations, but he was very courteous and as I visited with him, and he was frequently interrupted by business calls in person and by telephone, he would, at each interruption, excuse himself before he left the desk at which we were seated.
When I was ready to leave, he remarked that "it had been so many years since he had talked of himself that he was afraid he had not been of much help."