July 19, 1939
Wilma Cline, Textile worker
Henry River, N.C.
Ethel Deal Writer
Dudley Crawford, Reviser
August 10-1939
Original Names	Changed Names
Henry River	Fall River
Mrs. Cline	Mrs. Cook
Mrs. Cox	Mrs. Cobb
Mr. Armstrong	Mr. Anderson
Nancy	Bessie
Annie May	Dorothy Jane
Clyde Mill	Cole Mill
Gastonia	Golden
Bud Long	Dude Long
Herman	Henry
Roy	Bob
Bettie	Bertie
Gaffney	Gadden
Burke County	Banks County
Newton	Bakerton
Morganton	Morristown
Mrs. Benfield	Mrs Bradfield
"I'm down here hunting a job, and a place to live. I been living at Fall River, ever since I been married. I told the Nounguns this mornin' at the breakfast table it would be jist like pulling a tooth to have to pull up and leave Fall River." The woman, Mrs. Cook, had come from the old cotton mills across the street to where I was sitting on Mrs. Bradfield's porch. She wanted information about the mill section and town. Mrs. Cook was fat and forty, not very fair. She was dressed in a rose colored dress, which matched her face. Her hair was combed straight back and pinned in a knot on the back of her head. Tennis shoes turned up at the toes completed her costume. Mrs Bradfield asked her to have a seat and offered her a glass of ice water. After drinking the water, Mrs. Cook said, "That sure was good, I'm mighty nigh perished. I come down here this mornin' with a man that had to go to court. I told him I'd hunt me a job while I's waiting. This here is my oldest daughter I have here with me.
Well, I can't say I got work, and I can't say I didn't. That boss out there, I forget his name Cobb I think, didn't give much satisfaction. Said he would let me know if he could use me. I tell you I got to work. Nobody at my house has struck a lick in six weeks. I get five dollars of Social Security money a week. That don't go fur with five mouths to feed.
"Mr Anderson, he's the boss at Fall River got peeved at me because I said something at one of his new hands. That's why I'm laid off. And he is too stubborn and mean to take me back. I never said nothin no way, only said I didn't think it fair to make me rest one night out of a week and give the new hand regular work. I need regular work, can't hardly make ends meet then. There's Dorothy Jane next to Bessie here, she's deaf and dumb. I had her up to Morristown five years at the school for the deaf and dumb. Her eyes go so bad I had to bring her home. The doctors said she's going to loose her sight pretty soon if I don't do something; but what can I do? I got no job, can't get one. I told Jake Anderson that and begged him to take me back on. He wouldn't do it. I guess he's got plenty hisself and don't care nothin' about what comes of others.
“I stopped at the Cole Mill No. 1 this morning, they didn't need nobody. Even if I did get a job it's going to be hard moving. Fall River is home to me, I been there so long. The house I lives in seems like my own. 'Tain't nothin' fancy, jest a plain four-room cotton mill house. I tell the children it's the association, not the place.
"Me and my husband, we been separated now fourteen year. I tell you," Mrs Cook continued as she filled her lip with snuff and brushed the overflow from her face with the back of her hand, "I don’t care nothin' about married life. No sir-ree, no married life for me when a man is all the time a-suckin' a bottle instead o' bringing home some thing to eat. When that happens I'm ready to quit. Some women will hang onto them for years, talkin', coaxin' and beggin' them to <text not clear> I look at it this way: If they aim to do better they'll do it without somebody wearing themselves out tellin' 'em to. If I got to go out and make the livin' for the family I don't want some drunken man a-lyin' 'round to help spend it. That's what I tole mine and he got out.
"I been workin' in the cotton mill ever since I was nine years old. The first place I worked at was Golden, at the old cotton mill. Dude Long was the boss, he sure was good. I worked twelve hours a day, made fifty cents a day. That was for running four sides in the spinning room. Now I can run six sides but they pay by the hour. I get twenty-five cents a hour, and work eight hours a day. I make a dollar an a half on the day, and work four hours less. I can't see as it goes much further than fifty cents did then. When I have regular work it takes every penny, there's not none left to go to shows or baseball games like some folks does. My boys like to go to the ball games if we had the money. We aint got it so they go fishing instead. The river is right close to our house. We sure are going to miss it if we move down here.
“Henry is sixteen and Bob is twelve; neither one of them has ever worked a lick to bring in a dollar. That's one law that is bad; lettin' boys run around. After they are eighteen years old they don't want to work; they are too triflin!
"My parents wuz farmers before I was born. I've never lived on the farm and I don't want to. I like Mill life the best. I'Ve raised my children to go to church. None of them don't go but Bertie. She goes to Sunday School regular.
"I was born in Gadden, South Carolina, my parents they moved to Banks County. I've worked at six mills. I can spool, spin and weave. We used to have some big times when I wuz a girl and worked in the mill. The young folks now don't have the times we did, we had parties, singin's and all kinds of gatherin's at home. The trouble now is there's too many cars. When a young man goes to see a girl they go out in a car. Nobody knows where they go or what they do. I'll tell you that I am glad I don't own on. I'd ruther have a home any day. If I can get me a good job in Bakerton, I'm goin' to try to save up and get me a home. Won't be many years before the boys can help.
"I ain't never been to school a day in my life. The only thing I can write is my name. I am lucky to do that much. A W.P.A. teacher learned me how. I'd like for the children to finish school; but I couldn't get books for them to go. I guess they will get along on what they have. I did and I am living yet. Bessie here went to the fourth grade. She'll never see the day she can turn off as much work as me.
"I declare to goodness, why do you suppose that man never come for us. I told him we'd wait right outside the mill here.
"Give me that snuff box, Bessie, I'm goin' to git me a good dip and we'll go down to the court house and wee if we can find that slow poke. I declare it worries me so to be hangin’ 'round all day. I'm afeard to leave Dorothy Jane so long; the boys a not look after her good.
