August, 2, 1939
Mrs. Charles porter (housewife)
422 N. Smith St.
Charlotte, N, C.
Mary P. Wilson, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Mrs. Porter	Mrs. Polk
Katie Lee	Betty Lou
Nina Jane	Mary Jo
Carolina Truck and Trailer Co.	Sou. Trailer Co.
Fruhart Trailer Co.	Tolbert Trailer Co.
Charlette	Riverton
Lincolnton	Lassiter
Sue Betty	Susan
Orange Station	Iron Junction
Kathleen	Katie
Norva Jean	Irma Dee
True Experience	True Love
P and M Cafe	U and P Cafe
"You just don't know what you are missing by notcoming to see me." Mrs. Polk said. "Do you see that girlstanding up yonder in front of the theatre talking to thatbus driver? She has been a problem on my hands for threeor four weeks now."
The person she pointed out was a very attractivebrunette, dressed in bright red voile. I asked Mrs. Polkwhat she knew about her.
"Well, I think I know entirely too much for my owngood," was her reply." One of my daughters told her shecould stay at our house while she looked for a job. Shedidn't even ask me whether it would be all right or not. The girl is a niece of the man who is courting my daughter. I haven't ever been around girls of her kind. She may begood, I'm not saying she is not, but she ought to change some of her actions if she wants me to think so. Don't youthink that if she was a real lady she would have more respect for herself than to stand on the street and talkto men?"
"I never condemn anyone unless I know what theirintentions are." I told Mrs. Polk. "That girl probablymeans no harm."
"Well, I thought she was all right and would have lether stay at my house indefinitely if she hadn't lied tome yesterday. She told me she wouldn't run around with myboys, and then turned right around and stayed off withtwo of them until after one o'clock last night. Maybe Ishouldn't talk about her, for I've got girls of my ownthat don't do right; but I have enough to do to worryabout my own family without having someone else come inand make matters worse. Sometimes I feel like commitingsuicide because my children will not listen to me and mind me. You come down to my house and I'll try to tell you a lotof things."
I arrived at her house about eleven o'clock onemorning and found her in the kitchen filling an enormouspan with biscuits.
"I'm glad you've come in time to eat dinner withme." Mrs. Polk seemed pleased to have company. "I'm notgoing to set you down to a meal of pinto beans. I'll make Bettie Lou go to the store and buy something else to eat."
In spite of my protest, she hustled through the housecalling, "Bettie Lou", at the top of her voice. I heardher talking in another room. "Betty Lou, you can just putthat cigarette down and go to the store for me. I declareit don't do one bit of good to talk to you. I know it's nota disgrace to smoke, but I do wish you wouldn't do it. Hurryto the store now. I've got company and there ain't nothing cooked but pinto beans. I don't care what you get. You kids aren't satisfied unless I have beans every day. Go on nowand stop sitting there asking questions."
"Mary Jo, you come in here and put a clean cloth onthe table." Mrs. Polk looked down at her apron and said, "Get me an apron first, Mary Jo, I don't guess anyone wantsto look at this dirty old rag."
"You know," she says, turning and speaking to meso quickly, I was start led, "I've smelt the odor of pintobeans cooking until it makes me sick, but I just don't have the money to buy fancy eating. My husband makes twenty-fivedollars a week but that don't go tar in feeding a big crowd. He works for Southern Trailer Company. My boys don't help me. They are paying on an automobile that myhusband did have. Theywere always wanting to use it so he just let them take it andfinish paying for it. They work for Tolbert Trailer Company."
She had given me chair so badly in need of repairs thatit kept me busy wondering what it would be like to suddenlyfind myself sitting on the floor. I was much interested in theimmense cooking utensils she used. They were the old-fashionediron kind, and I asked how she happened to get them.
"I brought them with me from the country when I movedhere." She said. "Of course I didn't have much time to talkto you the other day, but I've only been living here three months. My man, Casey, has been working here in Riverton overtwenty years, but it took him a long time to persuade me to movehere. I Wish I hadn't ever done it. We had a nice little farmup near Lassiter. We had plenty to eat. I can't getused to depending on my living coming out of tin cansand paper bags.
"I guess you see that I must have a crowd to feed. Well, I do. There's eleven of us, counting mybrother. Of course, he buys a lot of groceries to payme for keeping him, so he's a help to us all. He worksat a lumber plant.
"Susan is married and I've had her little boy eversince he was a baby. Little Herbert is six now but he's awful small for his age."
"My children are all big and strong, They got ithonest for Casey and I are both big boned.
"They say that if you tickle little abies, it will make them stutter. I don't know whether that is responsible for Casey Jr. stuttering or not, but myoldest girl, Susan, sure did tickle him a lot.
"No m'am, I never practiced no birth control. Ithinkit's a sin and I've got enough to answer for withoutthat. The Lord give me my children and I'm tryingmy best to provide for them, I got along all right untilwhiskey come into my life.
"Casey promised me that if I'd sell our place at Iron Junction and move to town, he would not drink anymore. He kept that promise one month and since he startedback to drinking, he's worse than ever.
"I reckon I've got him stopped for awhile now. I swore out a warrant against him last week for nonsupport. I had the trial last Saturday morning. Old Judge Tufts talked to him mighty kind, but he give himone year of hard labor if he didn't give me twenty dollarsa week for five years. You may think that is too muchwhen he only makes twenty-five, but I have to pay allthe bills and it takes money to keep house rent paidand a big family fed and clothed."
Betty Lou came back from the store at this time. In one hand she had a package, with the other she wasdragging two small boys by their collars. "Mamma, Ifound them out on the streets fighting. I'm going to give them a whipping that they'll not forget." Betty Loureleased theyoungsters. "All right, you boys go andget me a hickory to whip you with, and if you don't hurry
I'll make it harder on you. Mamma, I bought some tomatoesand kraut. I hope that is what you wanted. You knowyou didn't tell me what to get."
"Sure, that's good enough. Tell Katie to run over to Mrs. Smith's and have her open this can. I dowish I could think to buy myself a can-opener." Shelooked as if she was disgusted with tin cans. "Youneedn't think strangs because Betty Lou is going totan those boys hide. If she didn't do it, it wouldn'tget done. I get sick and nervous every time I try towhip one of them, so I just leave it to her. She's seventeenyears old now and almost as large as I am.
I heard muffled cries coming from the back where Betty Lou seemed to be doing an excellent job. whilethat was going on her mother whispered to me," Betty Lou is making out like she's married but I think she'sjoking. I do hope I've raised her to know better thanthat. Let me call them to dinner. I know the two oldestboys won't come for they are too bashful. It don't looklike Casey is coming. I guess he's pouting because he'sgoing to have to give me twenty dollars tomorrow. Come on and let's eat. The others can eat fter we get through.
Mary Jo had fixed thetable. The cloth was freshlylaundered, and ironed, but the little thirteen year oldhands had not been able to put it on straight. I couldn'tenjoy eating for thinking of the older boys, whom I hadn't yet seen being too bashful to eat with strangers. I hurried through the meal, for I was afraid theymight be late getting to their work.
The youngest girl, who sat at her father'splace at the table, took up the conversation as hermother filled the plates. When we lived in the country we were always wanting to come to town. Now that welive in town we worry mamma and daddy to death to goback to the country."
When asked why she liked the country better, shereplied: "I've just lived there all my life and I can'tseem to find playmates here like I had out there. Then Icould go barefooted and wear overalls, but now I can'tdo it."
"It was my grandfather's place," Mrs. Polk informedme. "My mamma did not marry till she was thirtysevenyears old. She had two sets of twins, but mysister and I are the only ones that lived.
"My father was a good man, but a bad provider. Mamma let him sell the place to buy stock in a creamerybusiness. When he died she bought the farm back for fivehundred dollars but she never was able to pay for it, and deeded it to me after I married. Casey and I borrowedmoney from the Federal Land Bank to pay on it, andwhen we left there in March we turned it over to thebank. We were supposed to get one hundred and fiftydollars for it, but we only got one hundred. We had togo to law to get that much.
"I went down to see a government man last week, and he told me he believed I could get it all back thisfall.
"I had to take care of my mother for a good while. She's been dead only eight years. My twin sister wouldn'tdo anything for her. I don't begrudge nothing I ever donefor her. I only wish she had lived and I could have kepthelping her.
"I pay $22.50 a month rent here. I'd like it allright if I could keep the flies out of the house. Thepeople next door keep a can full of garbage all the timeand that makes a lot of flies.
"My children worry me to death. They don't think I know anything. They haven't shown any respect for mesince we moved to town. Come on, we'll go in the livingroom and sit. I don't think there's any flies in there. This is a funny built house. The doors are fixed so youcan't arrange furniture to look like nothing. of course I haven't got much but I'm thankful for what I do have."
In the living room the chairs were upholstered andvery comfortable. Irma Dee was my lying on the sofareading a True Love magazine, and in response to hermother's request that she wash the dishes, replied:"Now mamma, I'll just be darned if I am going to washdishes," Irma Dee was only fifteen but as large as herseventeen year old sister." I get sick and tired of being made to wash dishes all the time. You can just make Betty Lou do it this time, I didn't eat a bite of dinner anyway. I'd rather go hungry every meal than work overthat stack of dishes."
"Now now, Irma Dee," said her mother, "ltd be ashamedto let anyone hear me talk like that. It's bad enoughwhen no one is around, but it sounds so much worse in thepresence of strangers."
"You needn't start preaching to me, mother," Irma Dee replied, "because I'm not going to that kitchen."
"You'd better go if you want me to finish makingyour dress." Mrs. Polk replied and before she stoppedspeaking the little girl was busy rattling pots and pans.
"I've got another older daughter that is stayingwith her married sister. Casey came home drunk one dayand started an argument with her about her boy friend. She talked pretty hateful to him, and he choked her. Shepulled off her shoe and hit him in the head with it. Hemade her leave. I don't know what would have happened toher if her sister hadn't been willing to keep her. Shedid work at the hosiery mill for awhile, but she failedto go to work one day, and when the boss quarreled with her about it she quit. They've sent for her twice to come back, but she's so high-minded and stubborn; she wouldn'tdo it.
"I don't approve of the boy she goes with either, but I know it wouldn't do any good to talk to her. He'sbeen married and divorced, and I'd rather she went witha single boy, but all my girls have done got out of my control. There is a picture on the mantle of a boy she would havemarried if he hadn't got killed in an automobile accident. He was a good boy and an excellent mechanic. They wereplanning to marry and go to New Hampshire to live.
"That girl is gone that you saw on the street theother day. She's the niece of the boy that is going withmy oldest daughter. She did have a job at the U and Pcafe but she lost it and asked my daughter to let hercome here to stay until she could get another. I believein treating everybody right but she's been married and only livedwith her husband one month. I didn't know but what she might bea-fixing to have a baby and try to blame it on one of myboys. I just tell you, the best I can do don't keep me outof trouble. I didn't mind keeping her a few days but I couldn't afford to keep her indefinitely.
"I believe this is a decent street I live on. Asfar as I know there's no mean women on it. Casey keepssaying he will get a better place to live. I certainlywouldn't want a smaller house. There's six rooms here and I think we are too crowded.
"I'd be pretty well satisfied if Casey would stay offof liquor. I never have seen him down drunk but I can't see thatit could be much worse than having someone bring himhome all tanked up. He slept up under the bed the last timehe got drunk. He woke me up about four o'clock in themorning and asked me to turn on the light so he couldsee how to get out.
"I don't believe he runs after no women. I've neverheard of it if he has. I love him and want him to stay athome, but I aim for him to keep whiskey out of him. He's agood provider when he is sober but that doesn't help anywhen he is on a spree. I wish we were back in the country. It's quieter and there isn't as much temptation forchildren."
