[Louisiana?]
Cook
SETTLED DOWN
Granville Brooks, his wife, Harriette, and their 17-year old nephew, Lucien Cotton, are Negroes who live in one of the poorer sections of New Orleans. They have a house with two rooms and a kitchen, for which they pay six dollars a month. The house is clean and the rooms are large. There are no bathroom facilities and the house is not wired for electricity. The front room is Granville's and Harrietts's bedroom. It has an iron bed painted bright green, a dresser with a lace scarf and a dresser set, and a chifferobe with two glass vases filled with artificial flowers on the top. A clean lineoleum covers the floor. In the center of the room is a long table with a pressed glass punch bowl with six glasses hanging from it. Granville is very proud of the punch bowl. He says he bought it eight years ago.
As a result of several paralytic strokes, Harriette is partly crippled and her speech is indistinct. Granville married her in 1922. She was crippled then but has grown worse with the years. She is his second wife. They met when both were employed at a hospital, he as a cook and she as a maid in a ward. In spite of her physical handicap, Harriette is still able to do the cooking and to attend to the house.
"I was cook at the hospital from 1915 to 1935. By the time I was let out I was makin' $75.00. That was the time that they start puttin' all white help in the kitchen. It was jest after the 'lection an' they brought truck loads of mens down from the country to take our places. I got letters of recommendation from the doctors. I was cook in the doctor's department.
"I felt pretty bad about being let out after havin' given satisfaction for twenty years an' felt that I'd never git any more steady employment. Maybe it did me some good to git cut in the open 'cause the heat had got my eyes an' stomach an' I wasn't feelin' so good. Since I been on the W.P.A. an' works outdoors an' gits fresh air I gained health an' weight. I works on the rook crasher an' gits $39.40 a month an' yon know we gits along almost as good as when I had plenty money 'cause I know jest how much I gotta spend an' don't spend no more than that. I got applications in a let of places an' I hopes to git a good job someday.
"Although I don't have any money I got good credit. I can go anywhere in this town an' git what I wants 'cause I always been honest an' paid my bills. When I gits my check I comes home an' I gits the grocery book an' the market book an' if my wife ain't feelin' well enough to go an' pay the bills I goes an' bring every cent of the money back 'cept maybe I buys a little tobacco. One of the curses I got is my pipe; an' in the evenin' when I comes home, I heats me some water an' gits out the tub, takes a bath, an' lights up ay pipe an' sits down an' thinks until it's time to go to bed.
"I'm a foreigner. I was born in Charleston, South Carolina an' when I come here I spoke funny an' had to learn how to talk right. I been in New Orleans 'bout thirty years. You see, I was married before but my wife died 'boot 1905. I got two grown sons that married but I ain't heard from them in 'bout four year s. I guess they wouldhelp me out if I write to them, but I guess they got enough to do to take care of their own families. When those boys married, I bought them a home in Pensacola, Florida. An' it may seem funny to see that a man makin' as little as I am thinks 'bout ownin' a home, but I sho wants to buy one not for myself but for ay wife. I was married 19 years, 16 months, an' five days to my first wife an' she never had to do a day's outside work. Neither has my second wife. I figures when you let them work out, you loses more than you can make. When you got a house over your head, you never will be put out in the cold. An' if anythin' happens to me, I never wants my wife to be beholded to anybody. I got two policies now made out in her name, one is paid out an' the other is a straight life. I had paid 35¢ a week for 13 years in one insurance company, an' when I lost my job at the hospital I couldn't meet my payments an' I lost that policy.
"My mother an' father were slaves in South Carolina an' they stayed on the place after the war an' they died right there. I was brought up on the same plantation an' they sho treated us nice. I tell you if I had money I would buy me a place in the country an' have me a plot of ground. I'd plant, an' have a cow an' some pigs. 'Bout this time of the year (December) they start killin' the hawgs an' you have meat nearly all the year round.
"I ain't got no book learnin' but I's traveled an' I findthat book learain' don't do you no good unless you travel an' you don't know nothin' until you seen the world. I found in my travels that there's more educated people in the pen an' on the street than those that had no learnin'.
"I'm really a fireman by trade' I's fired an' cooked on ships an' on the railroad an' It's education that put me off the road. Although I knew every thin' about my job, I couldn't read an' write so I couldn't fill out my application. I worked as a butler for 11 years for Dr. Eugene Foster at 311 Washington Avenue, Charleston' He was president of the Board of Health an' I saved enough money on that job, because it paid well, to go to Florida. I wasn't fired, I jest left 'cause I got it in my head I wanted to travel around. I was raised up jest like those white people's son an' I can go back today an' be jest as welcome as when I left. When I hit Pensacola, I struck me a good job as a fireman on the road an' I made four dollars a day. Then I moved from there an' went to Augusta, Georgia, an' opened me a restaurant. At that time I had about $2300 saved up. I sold that place an' then I went on the ships an' that's how I come to New Orleans.
"I can't find a lot of the places I been on the maps but I can tell you the shape of nearly every place there is. I seen many things in my travels an' I been in plenty waters but I ain't never seen a mermaid or flyin' horses. I seen devil-fish, cowfish, an' dog fish. I looked all the time for a mermaid but I couldn't find any of them things with hair on their head an' feet like a fish. Lots of men on the boats said they seen them an' I seen them in side shows but that sho was a disappointment to me 'cause I wanted to bring one of them mermaids and flyin' horses home with me.
"In South Carolina when a man gits to be twenty-one, there's a man like a mayor that's gotta hunt you up an' he puts a paper in your hand tellin' you that you is a man an' you got to pay road tax an' poll tax. I remember I was workin' in the field one day when the man comes an' give me that letter. If you can't pay road tax, you got to work three days in the year on the road. If you got a horse an' plow, you only has to work one day 'cause they count the horse as one day work, the plow as one, an' you as one.
"I think that the President has tried to help us that can't help ourselves an' the W.P.A. is keepin' us from havin' a revolution. You can get good suits an' with your ticket you can git food' Now some people kicks 'cause they only give them flour an' no lard to go with it. I says that if anybody can't get out an' make ten or fifteen cents to buy some lard to make shortbread, that they don't deserve the flour. If anybody gives you a cup of meal or a cup of flour or one egg, that sho is more than you had before.
"You see these rags I got in my pocket? Well, I picked them up on the job an' I has a rag bag in the back an' 'when I gets a hundred pounds of rags, I jest has to walk two blocks an' sell them for fifty cents. You know, that statue of the man on the horse by the City Park bridge? Well, I picked up an old shirt there the other day an' that went to my rag bag. People laugh at me for pickin' up them rags but they don't cost me nothin' an' it ain't no trouble to walk two blocks to sell them. If people would only learn to 'custom themselves to what they have an' make use of things that don't cost them nothin' they would be better off.
"I ain't had no children by this wife but I been raisin' Lucien. He ain't no blood kin to me, he's my wife's nehpew. His mother an' father is dead an' they willed him to her so I been takin' care of him' I sent him to school but about two years ago some of the boys came an' talked him into goin' to the country to make crop. He wanted to go so I didn't stop him. He made enough money to buy himself some clothes but now he's back. He only went to the fifth grade but if he's stayed here, he'd a been ready to go to high school now an' I sho wanted him to have a good education' He wants to go to the C. C. C. camp an' I'm gonna try an' get him in 'cause with the money he makes he can send his aunt an' that'll help us out.
"I'm a Baptist an' I was baptized when I was nine years old but I kinda fell away from my religion for a while. We all members of the great Ebenezer Baptist church on Perdido between Roman an' Claiborne. I ain't on any of the boards an' neither is my wife but Lucien he sings in the choir.
"I believes that you gotta love God an' that you have to have confidence in not only your own self but in another man. I don't believe in any man livin' by himself. If he don't have a wife, he should live with another man 'cause sometimes you got worries an' plans an' it's always best to be able to tell them to somebody' I don't know what the world is comin' to. It ain't God that's angry with the people, it's people that gits angry with one another. If you stand together, you will sho live an' divided you will sho fall. You learn in the Bible that God is good an' kind an' He is. 'cause If you knocks right, the Lord will open the door for you an' if you prays right the Lord'll listen to your prayer' Your own sentiment is in yo'self an' yo' worse enemy is yo'self an' don't ever doubt yo'self.
"I'll explain what I means' Now if you passin' on the street an' you sees a barroom an' you goes in an' gits drunk with the men in there, it's your own self that told you to go in there to drink an' you ain't got nobody to blame. That's why we'se an enemy to ourselves. If you goes out an' mix up with boys an' smoke them things that they call weeds (marijuana) it's your own self that tells you to do that an' nobody else.
"I heard people say that there is spirits. I's seen things but not exactly like spirits. Lord, at that hospital they got more spirits then live people walkin' around there an' you can't tell them apart.
"I remembers once when we was livin' on Girod Street, we had jest moved in that house an' I had paid a month's rent. The first night we were there, we could hear noise upstairs jest like somebody washin'. My wife heard it, too, an' I didn't want to let her know I's scared 'cause if I wanted to go out one night, she'd be scared to be left alone. So I jest tells her, 'Oh, it's nothin'. 'Well, the next night we hear that same thing, jest like somebody washin' on a board. They musta been washin' the clothes for the whole city.
"After while my wife goes out in the front yard to git some water an' I was sittin' in the room smokin' my pipe an' all of a sudden, we heard chains rattlin' an' they were great big chains an' they hit the step an' went kerplunk! An' jest then an animal that looked like a mink, with eyes big as saucers, came into the room an' looked at me an' there was a little hole right by the floor board an' I don't know how that animal got in that hole but he went swish an' got in' Man, I was so scared I couldn't git off that chair an' I says, 'We ain't gonna stay here.' So the next day we finds a house an' moves an' I lost that whole month rent. I don't know what it was or whether anybody been kilt in that house, but it wasn't natural.
"I remembers another night when we was livin' back on Rampart Street. I had come home with a little bottle of whiskey an' I didn't want my wife to know I'd been drinkin' an' didn't want her to see the whiskey so I puts it in the next room on the mantel back of a picture. I gits in bed an' we goes to sleep an' after while I hears a sound like gulp - gulp - gulp, an' I says, 'Whoever's after my whiskey they ain't gonna drink it all on me' So I gits out of bed an' the cork was in the bottle but there was sho some of that whiskey gone so I jest finishes that bottle an' gits back in bed 'cause nobody I don't know ain't gonna drink my likker.
"We had a big clock that was sittin' right on the dresser an' no sooner did I git in bed, then that clock picks itself up an' goes Bam! an' falls an' breaks to pieces right at the foot of my bed. How my wife right here, she can tell you that, 'cause she heard that clock fall. I don't know who it was but it was somebody that got mad 'cause I wouldn't let them drink my whiskey.
"Another night me an' my wife was comin' from town an' jest as we git to the hospital, right in front of the building, we saw a cat an' we kept lookin' at that cat an' that cat wouldn't move so I says to my wife, 'I'm gonna make that cat move.' I was smokin' a segar an' I says, 'I gonna go right up an' put that segar in his eyes, then he'll run.' I goes right up an' that cat looked at me right in the eye and when I got near, he jest slid back an' he kept growin' and he grew an' grew an' by the time we left, he was "bigger'n I was. Me an' my wife, we didn't tarry, we ran.
"Then another time me an' my wife was walkin' along Claiborne Street an' we saw a little white rat that jest kept goin' backwards an' forwards across the street an' my wife says that she would like to have a little white rat an' I told her not to touch that rat 'cause any rat that kept doin' that wasn't natural. Well she picked that rat up an' soon as she got it in her hand, she fainted dead away on the sidewalk an' I had to have two men help me pick her up an' she didn't come to until she got home' An' she said when she picked that rat up, it kept gettin' heavier an' heavier an' it was cold as ice.
"You walks on Gravier Street an' you comes to them gas tanks at night, you gonna see a woman jest walkin' up an' down' not only me an' my wife has seen her but everybody that pass there. She jest walks solemn like an' she don't have nothin' to say to nobody' Sometimes she's dressed in black an' sometimes she ain't got no head. They say that she was kilt there an' that's why her spirit walks up an' down.
"Whenever you go to the woods, ain't you ever heard a switch crack an' you look back an' you don't hear it no more' They say that that is two spirits an' one of them says, 'There goes Granville Brooks,' an' the other one will say, 'That ain't him.' An' one' ll say, 'I'm gonna crack this switch an' make him look back,' an' that's why you hear it. I'm a great hunter an' I likes to get my gun on my shoulder an' go in them woods' I ain't never been in them woods once that I ain't heard a switch crack and had to look back.
"When I was young and had money I didn't spend it on gamblin' but I sho liked the ladies an' they got all my money' I had suits that cost more then I'm makin' in a month now an' I had me some good hats an' some good shoes an' the last pair of shoes I had made they was made in Thibodaux an' I paid $21 for them.
"I'm goin' to tell you somethin' that happened to me befo' I was married the second time. It was up the country. I was makin' plenty money an' I walked in this woman's house an' I intended spendin' the night, so I asked her if she was married an.' she said no. Well, I should have known better then that 'cause no woman that ain't married has a fine house like that' Well, I had me some Devil Island gin an' Bed Top rye an' I had had a couple drinks an' put it on the table an' settled myself down' That house had all that ol' time furniture in it. They had a big dresser right at the foot of the bed with one of these long mirrors' Then they had a chifferobe with another long mirror and the bed had one of them testers an' a mosquito bar' Well, after a while we gets ready to go to bed an' we had some more gin an' I puts my ol' thirty-eight thumb - cock Smith "Westerner on the table by the gin 'cause I thought there might be trouble. Well, we goes to sleep an' after a while I feels a hand on my shoulder an' "when I looks up there was a man standin' over me with one of those old cannon-ball pistols. An' the only thing he says is, 'Brother, would you mind lettin' a man sleep where he pays rent.'
"Lawd, I got so scared an' I was full of gin, I got out of bed an' I runs into the glass on that damn ol' dresser an' everywhere I sees a light I runs an' that's another damn mirror. That's the first time I ever seen a man cut his own self on glass' I got all caught up in the mosquito bar an' tore the tester down' That had to hold me so I could get reconciled' If he hadn't been a better man than me I would have tore that whole house down before I got out.
"Once I was courtin' in the country a girl name Coal Belle. They called her Sweetie for her short name. Well, one day I said I was goin' to take myself out an' go see Sweetie. We goes for a walk an' we gets to arguin' an' I call her a cow. She gets mad an' goes home. I was friends with her brothers an' after that I talked to 'em lot of times but they never said nothin' about as callin' Sweetie a cow, so I thinks that she didn't tell 'em anythin' about it an' that it's all over.
"Well, I waits about two weeks an' then one Sunday I dresses myself up in my pinch-back suit and two pointed Northern shoes an' a silk shirt an' one of them cravats' I had a blue one on an' I had a black one in my pocket so when I got tired of one cravat I could change to the other. An' I had my little hat pushed right on the side of my head. I borrowed my uncle's mare to make a good impression. I gets to the house an' everythin' was nice an' agreeable so I says, 'She must not have told the folks what I called her.' We sits on the gallery an' after a while I see 'em pullin' out the table an' puttin' the leaves in it an' gettin' ready to set it for dinner, so I says to myself, 'Here's where I gets me a good feed.' When dinner was ready they called us in an' that table sho had good food on it' I'll never forgit. They had turnip greens an' they sho was cooked, good corn meal dumplins', stewed chicken, meat, an' biscuits that high.
"Jes' as we gits ready to sit at the table. Sweetie turns to her father an' says, 'Pa, that's the one that called me a cow.' Then the fight begin. The pa and the boys jumped on me, an' I jumped over the table 'cause I didn't want to get my new suit ruined' By the time the fight finished I had upset the table an' there was no dinner that day an' my suit was full of grease. Soon as I could get out, I ran from the house, an' I had foot-logged it for about two miles before I remember my uncle's mare' I said I wasn't goin' back to that house to get it, so I goes home.
"when I gets in the house, my uncle says, 'Son, where's my nag at?' I didn't answer him, although I heard him call me, an' then he says agin, 'Where's my nag at?' So I tells him I left it at Sweetie's house an' he better go git it hisself. He asked me what was the matter an' I wouldn't tell him the truth. I just tol' him that me an' the boys had a fight, so he says, 'You better come with me.' we gets on the bosses and he takes his Winchester an' when we gets to the house, Sweetie's pa says, 'You can have yo' mare, but don't let that boy come in this house. He's jest' twenty-one and jes' made a young man and he knows how to call a woman a cow already.' If we hadn't left right away there would have been another fight.
That was a long time back' I don' know zactly how old I is, but I'm somewheres in my sixties, and I sho has had me a good time. But I done all the goin' round I want to do an' now I'm ready to settle down with my pipe."
- Hazel Breaux
