September 1939
Benjamin Johnson (Negro)
463 Tatnall Street, SW
Atlanta, Georgia
Ex-slave, Driver and Yardman
By Geneva Tonsill
I’S STILL TRAVELING ’CAUSE I GOT FAITH IN GOD
I found two old people sitting in a little dirty room filled with some odor that was so offensive that I could hardly remain in the room. It was filthy, but they seemed quite content in the midst of that filth.
They asked me in and to be seated. The old man got up to let me have his chair which he said was "comfortable". When I explained why I had come to see him and told of his housekeeper sending me there, he seemed quite pleased and his old wrinkled face beamed as he told his tale. He was so carried away in his description of the things that happened he would clap his hands and go on in a preaching tone until tears would come in his eyes. Then he’d pull out a dirty blue bandana and wipe his eyes. As I sat there hardly able to keep my seat because of the odor that filled the room, mice ran helter-skelter about the room and into the little back room and out again. On the stove, a little laundry heater, the wife had what she said was her breakfast cooking - okra and tomatoes, coffee and grits. While I sat there they served that meal. "Uncle Ben”, as he said he was called, decided he wanted same grapefruit juice, which had been given them in their surplus food order. He hobbled into the next room to open the can, which had been handed him by his wife who pulled a box from under the bed containing several articles of food. He found it difficult to open the can and I asked if I could do it for him, for I was eager to get back in that little dark room to see what was there. It was the kitchen and an old table, cabinet, and wood stove made up the furnishings. There were boxes, pans of dirty water, tub filled with clothes setting on the floor. Dishes were stacked up, dirty with, dust where they had been used and not washed. A pan of dirty, greasy water, sour from the warmth of the weather, stood on the stove which was cold and in this filthy water were more dishes. I hurriedly opened the can for "Uncle Ben” and went out for I didn't want him to feel that I was scorning him, but had I remained longer I would have been compelled to show it because my stomach was about to turn on me. After getting back into the room, I made an excuse to sit on the porch while they finished their breakfast. Even out there in the air I could still get the obnoxious odor from the house. The porch was entirely hidden from view of the street, except for the entrance, with vines. It really resembled some of the old shanties I'd seen pictured of living quarters of early years and the two old people were a typical old ante-bellum couple.
"When the war come on my master took me with him and carried me to the war in Danville, Va. My home was in Troupe County, ten miles from LaGrange, Georgia. Luke Johnson was my master. I know'd all of the people around there. I wasn't a soldier in the war, for they were fighting for us, but my master took me with him to wait on him.
"When they were fighting I had to stay at the tent, do all the personal things for my master, and watch him on the battle field. If he got hurt I was to go to him, even if they killed me in trying to bring him in.
"One day I was standing beside the tent and had my hand resting on the tent. There was fighting all around me, cannons and guns roaring everywhere, bang, boom, bang, bang, ZZZ ZZZ. Bless God, just like hell itself had opened up. I stood there with my mind on my master, praying for him to come back safe, although he and the rest were fighting to keep me under bondage. I loved him just the same. He was kind to me and I was praying for his safety. Boom, bang, bang, boom, roared this cannon and that gun and just as quick as a flash, before I could blink an eye, zip went a bullet right pass my face and truck my hand. Bless God, I fell down on my knees and you never saw a nigger pray as I prayed. They carried me in the tent. A man came and poured a little stuff on my hand. (He showed me the scar). Boom, bang, boom, the cannons belched fire and smoke, like it was a human being know'd where to strike its deadly blow. Boom, bang, boom, a soldier fell, the ball from a cannon had struck him in the neck, just above the shoulder and so terrific was the force of the ball, his head was cut from his shoulders and rolled every bit of ten or more yards from the body. I saw all of that and I wished I had stayed at home. Boom, boom, bang, bang, on went the guns into the night, seemingly never to end, When I got ready to leave home with my master to go to war, my ole mother told me and him, standing there in that cotton patch, that there was nothing to depend on but God and I depended on Him, too.
"One day as I stood there at the tent, watching and praying for my master, I saw a big white flag going up toward the skies, like a big white robed angel going to heaven. I was too startled at first to grasp what it meant or what it was but, as I got back my senses, I saw it was surrender, surrender, surrender. When the flag went up, surrender, surrender, surrender, Daniel, another slave there to wait on his master, asked, 'Brother Ben, what is that?’ I told him, 'We is free, we is free, they have surrendered, they have surrendered.' He said, 'For God's sake, do it say that, do it say that?' We were so full we couldn’t talk. Tears ran down his black cheeks and mine and we stood there looking up to heaven, thanking God.
"He couldn't read. He didn’t know what the flag said, White folks didn't allow us to learn to read and write. I was with the white boys because I had to wait on my white folks. I learned to read and write. White folks said it would run the niggers away if they learned reading and writing.
"I stood there after I come to myself and shouted, clapped my hands for joy and shouted and shouted, as if the Holy Spirit was coming down. White folks set their guns down and shouted, ’I’m glad of it, I'm glad of it!' And right there midst all that joy and shouting, men were digging graves and others were putting in the bodies, just piling three or four in one grave, like dogs, one on top of the other. There were other men cutting sticks and marking them so that they’d know who was in that grave. Chile, it was sad, sad!
"Them Yankees were running our white men through fields, wheat, corn, and barley, making them prisoners. Them Yankees put our masters in jails. They told us slaves, 'You all is free, free. You work for the people you have been living with if you want to or you go wherever you want to go. They must pay you wages if you stay with them. You are your own bosses now and what you work for is yours. Chile, that was what we had prayed for and God had heard our prayers.
"There was a lots of us slaves there in camp to wait on our masters. We joined hands, formed a ring and shouted and ray hand stopped hurting. I forgot I had been shot.
"I got home before my master 'cause he had to stay in the hospital until he was well. His leg had been shot off in the battle. When I got home the wimmin folks saw me come up, and another such hollering and shouting you never heard. I stood up on a bench and tole them, 'We is free, we is free.'
"Mis’ Betsy, my mistress, heard the noise and came to the door to find out who was out there. The cook tole her it was Ben. She asked, “Where is your master?' When I tole her he was not there, he hadn't come she was quite sad. She knew he was shot, though. She seemed to feel that I should have brought him and not left him in the hospital. She seemed to say you was to protect him. She know'd I loved him and would have treated him as a baby.
"Everyone was shouting and happy, even the white wimmin and girls were joining in for they were glad their fathers, sons, husbands and sweethearts were coming back, some of them. Some of them were sad for they know’d their loved ones would never return. Well, they were shaking my hand and some hugged me and I was afraid, for I was not used to all this 'tention, for they never let me get near them and I didn't want to, for I know'd my place.
"There were about 75 slaves on that plantation and when I came up, Sarah, the ole trusted slave blow'd a horn and they poured out of their little shanties like bees from a hive to find out what was wrong, for that horn never blow'd less it was calling the slaves for something 'portent. Little 'uns, big 'uns and all, some with children in their arms, some with rags on their heads, same barefooted and every way.
"When they got around me I tole them about we were free and when I got through they shouted and sang:
'The slavery chain done broke and gone,
Done broke and gone, done broke and gone,
The slavery chain done broke and gone,
Done broke and gone, done broke and gone.
I'm gwine to praise God till I die.'
"The wimmin went in the smoke house and got down meat. They cut hems and the best side meat. We'd never been 'lowed to eat anything but fat meat and we sho' et that day. They cooked biscuits and we had a feast. We’d never had anything but shorts. They never let us eat the flour they et. They cooked everything we hadn't been 'lowed to eat, for the white folks saved it for themselves. We stuffed our stomachs and sang:
'The slavery chain done broke and gone,
Done broke and gone, done broke and gone,
The slavery chain done broke and gone,
Done broke and gone, broke and gone.
I's gwine to praise God 'til I die.'
"Oh, we were eating ham. Lord God Almighty had unbuttoned the gates and let us out. He heard our calls.
"I sho'ly know'd how to pray when I left the war. Honey, when you needs something call upon God. I’s always done it and I's still traveling ’cause I got faith in God. He baid you may be sick or something the matter but if you call on him he will heal you. But if He wants you to come to Him, He will say to his angel, ’Go down yonder and bring John, give him anything he may want.’ They raised his head trying to keep him here, but the angel of God know’d it wasn't no need to do that for he was taking John away from here. No matter what you do or say, when God gets ready for you, you is gwine away from here. Chile, if you didn’t get ready here you can’t get ready up yonder. Everybody is traveling, I’se traveling too, I'se depending on the Lord. I got faith in him that he is gwine to let me travel a long ways. That is why I’se ninety-six years old. God has spared me here. A many one has come and gone, but I’se still here. I thank God too. My mother’s gone. She tole use to meet her in heaven and by the grace of God, I'm gwine to meet her there, too. My father's gone, my brother's gone. I'se still traveling, bless God. Honey, I'se still traveling.
"My mother was a good woman. She was a slave and didn't have much to say but she tole us to pray. She couldn't read but she would steal away and let me read the Bible to her, ’cause we weren’t 'lowed to read but I stayed round the white folks all the time and I learned. I was with the white children a lots but my mother said I was just smart anyway. I learned a lots of things that was taught the white children, I'd read to her. She always encouraged me to try to learn and be somebody, even if I was a slave and I did all I could to do what she wanted.
We had a hard time. I think of it now and I get so full. We waded in water, deep water, but we kept praying for the Lord to cut them chains.
"Chile, whem the slaves wasn't able to pick cotton or do as much work as was set aside for them they'd get lashings. If they said pick 100, 150, or 250 pounds, they expected that to be done, for they had estimated just how much work each one could and was able to do and that had to be done. I didn't do much picking for I had to drive my master round in his fine buggy. I have seen the overseer take girls in, one at the time and lash them. When they carry the girls in, a woman was there to whip them. They'd tie their dresses above their waists and give 15 or 20 lashes. I was the leader, for they thought I know’d mor’n the rest and they listened to me ’cause I stayed round the white folks most of the time. I got the boys together. I was lying down in the cotton patch. Lord Almighty gave me this knowledge.
"I said, 'Let us all get a big rock and let the girls pick cotton, put in the basket so much cotton and then put in the rock, finish filling the basket with the cotton. This was to make the cotton weigh more and keep the white folks from whipping the girls. We boys went to work. Chile, us slaves stood together then. The white folks never learned what we did. When the wimmin got scared and cried ’cause they'd get whipped 'cause they didn’t have the amount they were to pick for the day, we'd put a rock in. Then the baskets were taken to the scales. Lizzie know'd she didn't have her 150 pounds and had been crying 'cause she didn't. We had put a rock in Lizzie's cotton and hers was the first to be weighed. The weigher put hers on the scales and there she had hers and one pound over. Fetched Laura's up and put on the scales. Up went the scales. She had 102 pounds, two more than she was to pick. ’Oh,' said the overseer, 'we wont get to whip them tonight.’ We'd have to empty the baskets and always the one who emptied the basket know'd about the rock and he'd throw it away. We'd even get up early in the morning before day to throw them rocks away if we didn't have the chance that past evening. My mother know'd I thought it up and she would ask me how I thought it up. I'd tell her, 'Nothing but the Lord showed me what to do.'
"I'd think of how the man's head went off. He was there fighting to keep me under slavery. God Almighty intended that his fighting would not keep us.
"Chile, I could always see things. God Almighty fixed me so I could. No, chile, I didn't study no books to learn, that is a gift just handed down from my forefathers. You know evern before we was brought here from Africa by the white folks, and heathens as they say we was, there was that gift shown in many ways. I know you may read of it but, honey, in them days and it was so in slavery, the more the witch doctor could do, the better he was thought of and he was counted high up. I could do and see things too, even when I was very small. Stand up and let me look at you. Babe, she is a fine girl, ain't she? You can look at her and tell. She knows how to keep that tongue of hers. I could do a lots for you too if you’d believe in me and do what I tell you. And not talk. You see all those folks that come by here and spoke to me. They saw you in here and didn't come in. They know what I can do. They come by to let me do something for them but seeing you they just spoke and went on, but I know’d what they wanted. A lots of them come by to tell me, 'Uncle Ben, what you did for me come out just as you told me.'
"Would I mind telling you what it is I do for them? Uh, wait, let me look at you. Yes, you keep your tongue, I can see it. Oh, look, you are scared. I wont hurt you. I wont do nothing to you. I could help you though. I'd make life much easier for you if you'd let me fix you up. Anything you'd want would come to you. You could get anything you wanted. I am able to put husband and wife together. Lots of women see men they want and they come to me to fix them up and I do. They come back to tell me it came out just as they wanted. A lots of them come for me to fix them up to be lucky with the 'bug' and I do. They always come back to say they won. I could do it for you, too, but I can see you're scared of me. You don't believe what I say is true, I can see it. If you'd believe in me I sho'ly could do it for you and I can see you are scared, so unless you had faith in me I couldn't do much. You got to believe in me.
"Tell you just what I do? You've always wanted to know just what was done? Chile, I couldn't tell you that but if a person wants me to fix them for anything, they always comes by in the day to tell me and the next day they come back. Well, at night I fix up the stuff for them and have it ready for the next day. No, you don't understand, you don't believe in it. What do I do with the mixture? I'll tell you this but, mind you, you must keep your mouth and not talk about it. Oh, I know you wont tell. I know you will keep that little red thing in your mouth still.
I rub it on them and put some of it in each shoe. Chile, it goes wherever they go and do them good too. Do I charge? No, chile, I just let then give me what they want. Sometime they give me a quarter or fifteen cents. I don’t say no certain amount. No, chile, I can’t tell you more. God give me that power because I trusted in Him. If you believed in it, I’d do a lots for you, too. I see it. I can see plum through you. You're a good woman and works hard for a living. I could help you a lots too, bless God.
"When I come here I joined Friendship Baptist Church. Honey, where Friendship is now there was a little road and trees all around. I helped to put in the cornerstone. That was before the present pastor's time and he has been there over sixty years now.
"Daughter, when I come here to this place, you know where the old car shed on the Georgia road is, I helped to put up the wall over the old car shed. Where the Kimball House stands now was just a clump of trees. A creek went near by. There was swampy land, and the dreek ran up to Pryor Street and turned across Alabama Street. Them wasn’t no paved streets then, honey, I helped to fill in that creek. I remember on the spot where the Kimball House stands was a big spring with the best water, it was so cool. All along where the car shed was, women sold dinners and one could get all he could eat for 5¢. There was a marble yard near the Kimball House. People didn't have to buy much wood, for Atlanta was woods, woods, There Peachtree, Whitehall, and Broad Streets is today, there was nothing but woods and pig and cow paths. I used to go right out near the Kimball House and get wood to make fires for my family. So, honey, you can see how Atlanta has grow'd.
"Colored people had little shanties with stick and dirt chimneys. There Morris Brown College is now no colored people lived there. A man had a little store in that vicinity where the West Mitchell Street C.M.E. Church is now standing. All white folks lived there and very few of them. I thank God I have been spared to see all those old landmarks changed from swamps, woods and creeks to modern streets.
"I have seen the street cars that were carried along by mules and had a bell on the car. The man who drove the mules would ring a bell, ting-a-ling, ting-a-ling, down the street he'd go. The mules went very slow. I remember once I was riding the car and I was in a hurry to get where I was going and it seemed the mules were going too slow. I just got out of the car and ran. I kept up with the car and passed it. The street car shop was on Butler Street, where they kept the mules and cars. Now to think I have lived to see electric drawn cars. The Lord has blessed me.
"I worked for Mr. Forest Green, as yardman. I worked for him a long time. I then got a job driving for Dr. Stevens. No, chile, no car but a fine buggy and horse. I looked after the yard too. I worked for Mr. Rosenblack. Whew-ee! I've had some fine white folks, honey, and they were good white folks. I worked for another man, now what is his name? Babe, what was his name? You know, he would send me anything he thought I needed. What's his name, Babe? Oh, Babe, can't you remember it either? You know he would send me two tons of coal at the time. Oh, I hate to miss giving you his name, chile, because he was such a good white man. He is dead now.
"I married this wife, Emma, forty-six years ago. She was raised in Atlanta but was born in Marietta, Georgia seventy-four years ago, in January. She was a cook before she got too old to work and a good cook she was too.
"I sent my daughter, this was a child by my first marriage, to school. The first school she went to was Miss Packer's School which she held in Friendship Church. I paid 10¢ a week for her schooling. I never had any children by this wife. Honey, we have lived together all these years, trusting in God and that is why he keeps us. Young people is traveling too fast, they live too fast and they die fast too. Don't live to get old like me and Babe here. They just hurry themselves to their graves.
"Daughter, seems like I an telling you all the things that happened to me in slavery but I guess I have time to live and think in the past and that is the reason. I think of how slaves were auctioned off like cattle. The auctioneer would get up on a block, tell all of the things the slave could do, and he would tell it in the most glowing manner, so the bidder would offer a big price for him, or her. I can see the auctioneer how, standing there, 'Nell is a good nigger, a good cook, she is obedient, a good nurse and a good field hand. How much do you bid, $25, $50, $50, do I hear another . . . going, going, gone.’ I've Know'd them to take the slaves home after buying them and have them take off all their clothes to see if there was any defects.
"I've worked in the fields and when time come for dinner there was a horn blow'd or a bell rung for us to stop. Even the males were so used to the bell and horn that when they heard it they would stop dead still in the middle of the row, or wherever they was and wouldn't go another step. We slaves had a hard time but we trusted in God. We stood together. If one stole a hog, chickens, or anything, the others wouldn’t tell if for nothing. It would be a good thing if Negroes would stick together now. I don't believe in stealing and dishonest things though.
White people is good and they will help colored folks all they can if they is honest. God said, 'Together we stand end divided we fall.'
"White folks let us off on Friday and Saturday to get ready to go to church. Men put on their best shoes and red shirts and suits. The wimmin their best. We all tried to act like our masters and mistresses when we'd get out where they couldn't see us and Oh, how we’d strut. Every one went. We had baptism in the lakes and rivers. Them was happy times, for we felt big as the white folks. But, chile, we better not let the white folks know it though. The converts would come up out of the water shouting and clapping their hands, so full of the Holy Spirit.
"We had some good white people and my master was one of them. He was one of the the best white men that ever lived and there is many a one.
"At times the slaves would run away. I saw a man who run away and went on another man’s plantation by a creek and dug a hole, way back up in the bank, put planks in end he stayed there six years. His owner didn't know where he was. He and his wife stayed in that cave all those years. One of the children was born there. They would come out at night. They did all of their work at night, so they wouldn't be found. Some of the colored prople know’d they was there and would carry food and other things to them at night. After six years a man’s dog turned them up. A hound dog named Ruler. He went to the cave and scented and bayed, causing them to get suspicious. The dog dug and dug and finally the owner called in men and had them dig. Old man Bill Gorham, the meanest white man I ever saw, got picks and shovels and said, 'I bet I’ll get him out.’ He uncovered the cave and there was that family of four that had been in there six years. They didn't look like human beings when they were brought out.
"When I was young I went to see my girl. She was a fine, pretty girl and I loved her. Her owner came out and saw me there. ’Who is that nigger and what is he doing here?' He walked up and saw me, 'Why that’s ole Luke Johnson's nigger,' he said. He grabbed me by the collar and said he was going to whip me. Well, he didn't know I wasn't going to let him whip me before that girl. When he grabbed me by the collar, I caught him by the leg and raised it as high as I could. I wasn't going ro let him whip me. He fell and when he hit the ground, I ran as fast as I could.
"After we was free I got dissatisfied and decided to come to Atlanta. I was always the leader in my family and all depended on me. I walked to Atlanta from LaGrange, Georgia with my mother, father and two brothers. We walked it in a day and a half. We didn't have no money and just put bur feet in the road and come on here. We toted our little possessions on our heads. My father and brothers would carry it some and then I would take it. When we got to Atlanta, we met a white man, Captain Fuller. I asked him where we could stay. He showed me an old house down the road in the woods a piece. It was near where the Kimball House is now. He said, ’The door is down but you can stay in it. Set the door up at night so no one can bother you.' I went in. He told me to go to his house, and showed me where it was, to get some food. I carried our things in that house. There was a piece of broom in it and I swept the dirt out. I went out and cut some fire wood and made a fire. No one bothered us, for everyone was trying to get some place to stay, after they had been freed. For them Yankees didn’t have have nothing to give us after they'd freed us and although some of the masters give their slaves a little something to start on, there was so many more that didn’t do nothing but put them out and let us make it the best we could. I set up all night. Captain Fuller’s wife, when I told her he had sent me there, gave me plenty of food and told me to come on up there, that there was a little house out in the back yard we could live in. It was better than the one we was in.
"Father was kinder scared of white folks. He hadn’t been used to coming close in contact with them as I had and he was scared of them. He was scared to talk to them but I wasn't and asked for what I wanted. Mrs. Fuller told me to bring mother up there and, when she saw her, she said, ’Millie, you come and get anything you want.’ My mother told her she would wash and cook, or do anything else she could do about the house. Mrs. Fuller showed her where the wash place was and the tubs. She gave us meats and all kinds of food. She asked me if I was a member of the church and said God would provide for me. She was a kind woman and a Christian to.
"When Captain Fuller came back we had cleaned up the whole place. Everything was as clean as could be. They wouldn’t charge us anything for rent. We stayed there six months and then got a place to live in. Mr. and Mrs. Fuller gave us clothes and everything we needed. Yes, God told me to ask for what I wanted and I always did. They were some of the best white folks I've ever know’d and I've know'd some mighty fine ones.
"I worked as a plasterer and made good too. I was paid $2 a day. I did this work for a long time and after I began to grow old I did yard work and house cleaning for different white folks. I'm too old to work now. I do piddle about in the back yard. I have a little garden there.
"When the government passed the old age pension law I was the first one to get it, me and Babe here. Bless God, you don't know how much it helps. It has given both of us a sense of self respect that otherwise we wouldn't have had. I had always been able to pay my own bills and have a little money left for the little things we needed, and with the old age pension coming in each month, I still have that. We ore ole and unable to do much about the house and the government fixed it so we can have some one come in to clean and wash for us. She is sent from the Housekeeping place. She is very nice. She ain't been here though in a week and when I saw you coming in I thought you was another one sent us.
"We get surplus food once a month, and, God Almighty, I am happy. Chile, this was the best President we ever had, he is a Christian man. He believes in helping poor people. God got into his heart and told him to help us poor people and he is doing the most blessed thing for us. Lawd, I wish he could stay up there in that White House forever.
"Honey chile, I am happy here, praising God for his blessings to me and Babe. I'se just living in his blessed glory and, bless God, I'm praising His name.
