Story of
Loyd Wesley Lewis
315--34th St.,
Ensley, Alabama
HOEBIES, PETS AND CHILDREN
By Edward F. Harper
When my wife first suggested that we pay a visit to Loyd and Edna Lewis, I immediately began reciting an appropriate group of my cant excuses, which I have compiled and memorized for the sole purpose of winning a reprieve from social obligations when necessary. “And besides,” I added by way of clinching my argument, “I expect to spend the evening working on some material on the lives and habits of steel mill workers.”
“Well that’s just fine,” said my wife. “Loyd Lewis can help you. He works at the Pratt City plant of the Tennessee Company, doing some kind of work in the blacksmith division.”
“How long has he worked there?” I asked; and as she chattered I drew a fresh sheet of paper across my writing table and began making notes in my usual methodical manner:
Loyd Wesley Lewis, 315 34th Ave., Ensley
Employer: Tennessee Coal, Iron & RR. Co.
Blacksmith division, 8 years
Age: 27
Education: grade school, 2 years high school
Married Edna Burke (age 26) July 1935
No children
“Edna and I were school chums,” my wife went on;
“About the sweetest girl I have ever known; so even-tempered and sympathetic. I believe she would simply die if she thought that she had ever offended any one. This seems so strange when you consider that she never knew the loving devotion of parents. They died when she small, and her grandmother and uncle took her into their home. I’m sure they were kind to her. They certainly provided every means they could afford for her happiness. They lived only a short distance from my home, and Edna spent much of her spare time with me.
“It was at my house that she met Loyd Lewis among the gay crowd who used to visit with us there. They became engaged almost immediately, but when they married many of their friends predicted that they would never make a go of it, because their temperaments were so different.”
“Loyd was carefree and spendthrifty. He liked dancing and lively parties. His sort of life didn’t appeal to Edna in the least. Her grandmother’s religious discipline may have influenced her disposition; but Edna had some definite convictions of her own. Of course, she always accompanied Loyd when he participated in his friends’ gaieties, but only because she felt it her duty to be with him and restrain him if <text not clear> to drink too much; for, like his parents, Loyd had acquired the habit of drink very early,”
“Do you mean that both parents drank?”
“Yes, both; although his mother was not the addict that her husband was, I have often seen her shamefully intoxicated. Loyd’s parents, Robert and Lela Lewis, left a small farm in Elmore County and came to Birmingham in 1916. At that time they had two children, Loyd, who was six, and a girl, Julia, four years younger. Vainly shifting from one occupation to another for four years, Robert Lewis finally was given a job as helper at the Tennessee Company, where he had been employed in practically the same capacity ever since. He had bat little education himself, but provided consistently and ungrudgingly for the education of his children. They seldom lacked food or clothing, and very often he was known to cater to their whims to the extent of extravagance. They, however, received little discipline and less cultural training at home. The daughter, Julia, quickly acquired the slovenly habits and indifferent morals of her parents, and at the age of fifteen ran away from home to marry a bootlegger who owned a small farm near Warrior. This humiliated and practically aroused the hatred of her brother, Loyd, who from an early age resented his family’s manner of living.
“Loyd had been working at the steel plant for four years before he married, but he had saved nothing of his earnings; so it was through necessity, rather than choice, that he brought his young wife to live in the home of his parents. They bought new furniture on credit for their one room, and Edna decorated it with attractive wall pictures and draperies. It presented a marked contrast to the untidy condition of the remainder of the house occupied by Loyd’s parents.
“After two years of patience and persistence Edna managed to save enough out of her husband’s earnings to make the down payment on some new furniture, and they rented a small house in Ensley where they set up housekeeping.”
“That was about a year ago, wasn’t it?” I asked, checking over my notes.
“Yes”, said my wife; “and we have had several invitations to call and have dinner with them. Edna is such a fine cook, that I think she might be called an artist in that line.”
I made a note of this and underscored it. Then the suggestion caused me to look at my watch. “Too late for dinner,” I said; “still I think we should call on them anyway.”
The little bungalow which we approached an hour later is yellow and trimmed with burnt orange. It is back about twenty feet from an unpaved street, and the narrow yard is enclosed by a well-kept hedge. There is some shrubbery and the small porch boasts a few gay potted flowers.
Edna Lewis, an attractive brunette, invited us into a small, cozy living room, overcrowded by its modest but well- chosen appointments. Her husband, who had abandoned his dress shirt and shoes in conformity with the custom which hot weather imposes on the home habits of steel workers, laid down a magazine and rose to greet us. He is slightly taller than his wife, and his black hair was combed straight back from his high forehead. He possesses none of the physical characteristics that one is accustomed to associate with the blacksmithing trade. He was wearing grey tweed trousers, and his wife was dressed in a neat blue house frock with which she wore boudoir slippers.
“Goodness!” she exclaimed, “you sure caught us off guard.” She motioned us to a comfortable brown plush Chesterfield, and crossing the room, snapped off the cabinet radio which was blaring the music of a popular dance orchestra. “We were beginning to think that you were never coming to see us.”
Loyd sank back into his huge lounging chair and extended an open package of Paul Jones cigarettes.
“What are you reading?” I asked, casually.
He picked up the magazine and handed it to me. It was Good Housekeeping. “I read these now and then while waiting for the new issues of my favorites.” He pointed to a rack of magazines, among which I read the names; Thrilling Detective Mystery, Weird Tales. Startling Adventures, and other similar titles.
“Have much time to read?” I asked.
“Spend most of my spare time reading. Play bridge with the neighbors sometimes. We don’t go out much now. Edna’s got me pretty well tied down with furniture bills, house rent and grocery bills. Just can scrape up enough to see a movie now and then. We haven’t been to a dance in ages. While we were going to the dances I managed to keep a fairly fit figure; but look at me now. All this sitting around at home is ruining my waistline. Why, I bought six suits of clothes just before we want in debt and now I can hardly get into one of them. Maybe when the shop opens up full time again I’ll be able to work off some of my surplus weight.
“What hours do you work?”
“From seven to three-thirty, day shift. Have to get up about five; shave while Edna cooks breakfast; then eat while she packs my lunch pail. A buddy picks me up about six. That gives us time to make it to the shop at Pratt City and get changed to our work clothes.
“You work in the blacksmith division, don’t you? Did you begin as an apprentice?”
“No, I started out as helper. Helpers get a higher rate of pay than apprentices to begin with. Last year the company signed an educational agreement with the I.C.S. (International Correspondence Schools) and many of our helpers enrolled for apprenticeship training. I would have enrolled if they had offered this training when I began working there. An apprentice has a higher rating when he becomes a mechanic than the man who begins as helper. I started out as hammer boy. A hammer boy operates the throttle of the big steam hammer that is used to beat hot metal bars into shape for machining. Now I work with the drill press and the lathe; that is, I machine the jobs which the hammer turns out in the rough. Most of our jobs are repair work on the company’s locomotives. In heat times we have as many as twenty-five men in our division; but work’s on the drag at present. We are only working three days a week, but I think we will go on a four-day shift beginning next week.”
“What is the average salary for blacksmiths?” I ventured, casually.
“We get paid by the hour,” Loyd explained “and have various ratings. Mine is seventy-five cents an hour. We work an eight-hour shift.”
He paused and peered through the window beside him as we heard the tread of passing footsteps on the gravel street.
“Hello, Mandy!” called a girl’s voice from the street.
“Hello!” Loyd called back.
Edna, who in the meantime had been conversing with my wife, turned to me and explained: “All the folks ‘round here call him Mandy. He picked up that nickname when he started working at the plant. The fellows thought he was sort of ‘sissy’ at first. I guess it was because he always goes and comes from work dressed up in the latest fashion. I’ve never seen him in his work clothes, though I have to wash two or three changes of them every week.”
“They don’t think that about you now, do they Loyd?” asked my wife.
“I hope to croak the first cockeyed nut that sticks out his neck like he thinks so,” blurted Loyd, grimly.
“But the name has stuck, anyway,” said Edna.
It was hardly the time for my wife to mention it, but I can’t say that Loyd seemed to take any offense when she suggested that Edna show me some of the fancy needle work which her husband had amassed through years of painstaking devotion to his peculiar hobby. I say peculiar, because it is a rare thing to find a man of Loyd’s occupation who can appreciate this particular art; rarer still to find one who is skilled in it.
Among the specimens that Edna brought out of a large cedar chest were embroidered boudoir and buffet pieces, table covers and napkins, and a variety of silken boudoir pillows.
“When did you form this strange habit?” I asked.
“Oh, I don’t remember,” said Loyd; “just picked it up a long while ago.”
“I’ll tell you when it started,” Edna put in; “His mother told me all about it. He always hated the untidy habits of his family from the time he was old enough to notice them. He used to beg for pretty coverlets and pillows for his bed, and when his mother refused to buy them, some of the women in the neighborhood taught him and he began decorating his plain pillows and coverlets so that he might have the things he liked around him.”
“Edna, you have loads of needle work of your own, haven’t you?” asked my wife.
“Yes, but I’ve about quit doing it any more. Between us, we’ve got more than we’ll ever be able to use; and I’ve given hundreds of pieces away.”
“But you’ll be doing some of a different kind in a few more years, I suppose?”
Edna looked at my wife and laughed. “No, I suppose not. We’ve about given up hope. Anyway I don’t think Loyd wants any children.”
“I don’t want any?” exploded Loyd; “I don’t want how many more, why don’t you say? I practically raise all the neighbors’ children now. I wouldn’t have room for my own if I had any.”
I was beginning to think they were on the verge of a family quarrel when Edna laughingly explained that Loyd did not like the idea of having his house overrun by the neighborhood children.
“But it’s mostly my fault,” she continued. I’ve always played with the children, and when we moved down here away from Loyd’s family I got lonesome while he was at work, so I began inviting the children in for company. I played games with them and always gave them milkshakes and ice cream. Pretty soon I had as many as twenty-five or thirty children coming in almost daily. I didn’t realize that they would be such a big expense; and they never hurt anything.
“Oh, no,” snarled Loyd; “they never hurt anything. They just walk all over the furniture with their muddy feet; they turn over tables and floor lamps, raid the ice box and pillage every drawer on the place.”
“Why, Loyd!” said Edna; “You know it isn’t as bad as all that. And besides, you know that you are partly to blame for their coming down here.”
“Yes,” groaned Loyd; “I used to buy all the funny papers I could find and let some of them come in and read them. Soon every kid in Ensley knew it and crowded in here three deep. Why, you couldn’t see the floor for the papers, and you couldn’t see the papers for the kids” When one of them couldn’t find a chair or a space on the floor to sit on, he just climed up on the back of that Chesterfield and tried to perch on top of the floor lamp. That’s when I got mad. I wanted to take a whack at him with my belt, and I would have if he had broke that lamp. Lucky for him that I caught it just before it hit the floor. I ran them all home, and I haven’t brought any more funny papers home since.”
It was evident that Loyd was making an attempt to disguise his fondness for children. His chief difficulty seemed to be that he disliked having to pay the price of their companionship. He had failed to understand why he could not have the children and an orderly house at the same time.
“Did they come back again after being run home?” I asked.
“Oh, yes,” said Edna; “They came back next day. They come every day; but they always leave before Loyd gets home from work, or they sit around quietly while he is here. They start coming in about ten o’clock every morning. I always go back to bed when I get Loyd off to work, and they know that I don’t get up until ten. They always look in the ice box, and if they don’t find what they are looking for they say: ‘Aunt Maudie (that’s what they call me), ain’t you gonna make no ice cream today?’ And I say: ‘Yes, after awhile maybe we will make some.’ Then they just sit around or play till I get my work done; and I know that there isn’t any way to get rid of them until I have made the cream, so what else can I do?”
“You could run them home.” suggested Loyd.
“Yes,” said Edna; “and by Christmas you’d have them all tack again by fixing up a big Christmas tree and playing Santa Claus for them. Why, I bet you, last Christmas you spent a hundred dollars on presents and fruit and candy for those children.”
Loyd grinned sheepishly. “I don’t see how you get any work done with them hanging around all ‘the time.” he grumbled.
“Does it take much work to keep a compact little house like this?” asked my wife.
“It doesn’t seem so,” said Edna; “but it is so crowded that one can hardly use a mop without bumping the handle against the furniture.” She rose and started toward the door leading to the dining room, saying, “Come, let me show you the rest of our little home.”
All the rooms are of about the same dimensions as the living room, which appears to be about ten by twelve feet; and all the rooms except one are equally as crowded with such furniture as one finds in the usual modern home. There are two bed rooms. One is furnished with an ornate four-poster bedroom suite, with orange spread and draperies to match; the other with a plain iron bed covered with a blue spread.
“This,” commented Edna, “is our spare room. When we have overnight company we give them our room and we sleep here. At first we used this as a junk room, but we got tired of sleeping on the floor when we had company, so we bought this extra bed.”
The kitchen is immaculate. Small white curtains hang on the windows, and the ivory linoleum glistens in the light. The gas range is snow white porcelain, and there is a kitchen cabinet to match the color scheme. For lack of space the electric ice box had been placed in the dining room, which has modernistic furniture, and another linoleum of variegated pattern covers this floor also.
Loyd opened the door leading to the back porch and three beautiful Persian kittens emerged from the darkness and began purring about our ankles.
“The rest of our family,” said Edna. “We have to lock them out now and then to get a rest. They simply walk all over us when we leave them in. And they are shedding badly now; it keeps Loyd busy brushing his clothes and washing his hands.”
As we returned through the dining room, Edna paused and opened a cabinet, revealing rows of home-canned vegetables and fruits, jellies and spices. “Do you like homemade chow- chow?” she asked us. I acknowledged my fondness for it, and assured her that the whole display looked too tempting for a man of my appetite to gaze on too long. Then my wife introduced a question about recipes for fig preserves. Loyd and I perceived that this was our cue to return to the living room and leave the women to chatter of preserving and canning.
When we were about to depart, Edna brought a large paper bag from the kitchen and handed it to my wife. I could have guessed its contents, and was not surprised when, an hour later, may wife opened the bag and placed three jars of fruit among her own collection. To exchange samples of their canning achievements is a custom of long standing among women of the South.
