WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION
F. C. Harrington, Administrator
Florence S. Kerr, Assistant Administrator
Henry S. Alsberg, Director of the Federal Writers' Project
Date of First Writing	May 5, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Sarah Myers
Address	12 Holt Avenue
Place	Macon, Georgia
Occupation	Textile Worker
Race	White
Name of Writer	Annie A. Rose
Address	356 Cherry Street
Place	Macon, Georgia
Only a short distance from vineville, the main residential district of Macon, is a hilly strip of land bounded on the west side by the High School for boys and on the east by a network of railroad tracks. On part of this land is the large, red brick building known as the Willingham Cotton Mills. About three hundred people are employed in the mill and all make their homes in the small houses surrounding the mill.
The building which houses the mill is located at the foot of the hill conveniently near the small railroad station. On a level piece of ground between the mill and the village is a playground for the children of the workers. Sandboxes, slides, swings and a wading pool prove a great attraction for the children and on long summer afternoons and evenings the spot is filled with children up to ten or twelve years of age. The owners of the mill provide a trained director who is present to supervise the activities of the children.
The May Festival, the main social event of the year is held on the playground. The affåår starts at eleven o'clock of the day selected and is in full operation until eleven that night. Great preparations are made a month or so in advance; ice cream, soft drinks and candies are sold and the occasion is always a succes financially and socially. The proceeds this year are to used for the expenses of the delegates to a Sunday School convention to be held in another state.
The little Baptist Church is used for parties or gatherings of a similar nature. Several years ago there was talk of building a hall for such purposes but for some reasons is has been postponed.
Three paved streets lead from the playground up the hill. The houses on these streets constitutes the mill village. The houses are built very close to each other and are of the same style - simple, one-story cottages, most of them duplex in type, though a few are for one family each. Most of the houses have three rooms on each side but a few are larger by one room. Grey paint is used on all, the custom being to paint them every five years, to-day they present a neat, well-cared for appearance. Each house has a tiny yard in front. In nearly every instance the yards are filled with blooming flowers or shrubs and the porches are lined with pots and buckets of geraniums, begonias and other flowering plants. In the yards in the rear of the houses a number of the families have vegetable gardens and a few have chickens.
Sally Means lives in one of these three-room houses with her husband and three small daughters. As we approached her home, she rose from the swing on the porch where she was sitting, and invited us to have a seat there beside her. She is a rather tall, stout woman about thirty years of age. Her light red naturally wavy hair fell around her face and neck. Defective vision necessitates the use of eye glasses constantly. As she smiles or talks her wide full mouth discloses small uneven and uncared for teeth She was dressed in a cotton print in which red was the predominant color. A worn green sweater, run-over Patent leather pumps with heels without hose completed her costume.
"My husband is asleep in the front room, so I can't invite you into the house," she explained as we sat together in the narrow green swing. "He night-watches at the mill - goes on at eleven and is on till seven in the morning. He has to sleep in the day time and it's a job keeping the kids out so he can rest. He makes $11.65 a week, but they always take ninety cents out for the rent."
Mrs. Means went on to explain that water was included in the rent but the light bill is separate. She works from three P.M. to eleven and is paid at the rate of $2.64 per day. Since the Wages and Hour Bill was passed they have been allowed to work only forty-four hours each week. However, none of them have that much work, four days work a week being the average. Her wages are used to buy groceries, pay the nurse and washwoman, and purchase the needed apparel for the family. Her husband’s wages are used for insurance, payments on the furniture and the upkeep of the family car, a third or fourth hand Ford sedan.
"We just have to have a car," the woman explained. "Everybody has one; we couldn't ever go anywhere if we didn't have a car. I do all the driving, I take the kids to the movies when Shirley Temple or Jane Withers is on and then we all ride every Sunday afternoon. This car we have is just about paid for and I want us to get another one as soon as we can. I want my children to have everything that the other folks have. That’s the main reason I am working, just so we can have things liks other folks. I’ve just been working since the baby was about six months old. I like to work; I like it lots better than staying at home, slinging pots and pans and getting all worn out tending to the children. They get on my nerves. I've watched children whose mothers stay at home and children whose mothers go to the mill and the children are better when the mothers are working. The mothers get tired and cross and take it out on the children and that makes them act mean and cranky.
"Come here, Tippy, and speak to the lady," she called as two little girls came up the walk. "They're mighty dirty," she said and indeed we agreed with her. Dressed in overalls and sweaters, barefooted and with hair uncombed and faces grimy with dirt and sticky from "suckers", the sticks of which stuck out from their lips, they came shyly to the swing, the older one, aged four years saying in her childish lisp: "What's your name? I'm Tippy and this is Donna."
After a few minutes spent in becoming acquainted the two children went into the house, returning almost instantly with hands full of raisins. "I declare," said the mother, "look at 'em eating again. I just can't fill them kids up. They eat all the time. Jeanette, my oldest kid ain’t like these two, though. She don’t eat enough to keep a kitten alive. She’s in school now; she's in the first grade over at Winship. But she don't like it much. I reckon it's because she ain strong and well like the oldren kids at school. She nearly died about three years ago; had flu and then it went into pneumonia, she was in the hospital a month and then when she got well from that the doctor said she had a leaking heart. I have to be so careful with her all the time; she can't play and run and jump. The doctor wants her to take a nap when she comes from school but I can't make her do it. I’ve quit trying cause she always fusses and cries so much that it worse for her than doing without the nap."
Being asked to tell us something of her daily life she said: "It won't take me long to do that. One day is just about like another. I get up in time to fix a little breakfast for us and the kids - we don't care 'bout much breakfast - just eggs and toast and coffee. Yessum, the children love coffee just like me and their daddy; they don't seem to care 'bout milk. Then Ella (the cook) comes in and she cleans up the house and cooks the dinner. She sure likes to scrub and clean up; the water we use is free and I let her use all she wants. I don’t have nothing to do in the mornings - sometimes I sew for the kids, but I get my clothes ready-made. They're just as cheap, and I can't fit myself so good. I don't go anywhere much; husband sleeps in the morning and I just stay round the house. He wakes up about twelve or one and after dinner I go on to work. I like my work but we just have to keep on the job every minute. I'm a doffer; there are 108 bobbins to a side and eight sides to a doff. We all have to spool eight sides a night. When we get through with that our work is over for the night but we hardly ever get through ahead of time. The thread comes to us on great big comes, they're heavy, too, I guess they weigh about ten or twelve pounds. We stick those cones on spindles and the spindles are twirling around all the time and we run the yarn off on to spools, great big spools that look like spools for sewing thread. As we spool it off we have to watch the yarn every second and if it's got a thick place in it or anything is wrong with it we have to break the thread and fix it right. As a spool is filled it goes on into the twisting room and from there into the weaving room. I don't believe I ever would learn to weave - it sure looks hard to me. This mill just makes unbleached duck. They don’t do any dyeing or bleaching at all. I get plenty tired watching those spools and lifting those big cones but I know I'm lucky to have a job. There's plenty wanting to set on and can't. We've got four extras now - they're women who fill hen one of the workers is out-and that is more than we need. Whenever a woman gets pregnant and has to leave her work it's two or three years before she gets it back, if then. That's one reason I don't aim to have any more kids. We can't get along on what my husband makes, and if I had to quit I couldn't get my job back. He don't want any more either so I ain’t worrying about that."
A neat, old negro woman came slowly up the sidewalk. As she neared the house, Mrs. Means called out to her: "Hello, Aunt Sally, you needn't be coming round here. I don't aim to ever have to have you again." She laughed as the old negress replied: "I bet you will; I bet you'll be sending for me fo' long." And she went on up the street.
"That's Aunt Sally," my hostess explained. "She's the one I had when the last two kids was born. I wouldn't go to no hospital. I went the first time and that was enough for me. Aunt Sally took care of me just as fine as a doctor could. She just charges ten dollars, too; they charge fifteen at the hospital. Nearly all the women in the will village have her. She always come to visit you about once a month during the time before the baby is born. Then when your time comes, she comes on to the house and just takes charges of things and she stays right there until after the baby is born and everything is over. Then she comes every morning for a week, bathes the baby and you and sees that you are getting on all right. It’s lots cheaper than the hospital and it's better, too, to be right here at home. I never did have no trouble when my kids wore born t ad I didn’t stay in bed but three days. I felt just as well and strong as I ever had and it wasn't no use in my laying up there in bed just because I had had a baby. I hope I don’t never have to have her again, though.
"The mill has a doctor that we can go to free for little things, but if he has to come to the house he charges two dollars. He keeps lots of medicine in his office at the mill, too, and if that is what you need it is free, but if ho has to write a prescription, the prescription is free but you have to pay to have it filled at the drug store. The boss, Mr. Willingham is mighty good to all the people that work for him. He looks out for us and is just as good as can be. He’s sho got the money, too. I bet he's got money that he won’t never use, but he don’t lot it make a fool out of him. He likes us and sees that we are treated like other folks.
"Just to show you how nice he is," she continued, "a fire broke out last Sunday night in the warehouse. My husband was right on the job and he saw the fire and called everybody and they worked most all night, trying to save the cotton. Course some of it was burned but they saved lots and when the fire was over Mr. Willingham gave my husband five dollars and he gave the truck drivers fifty cents apiece. I don't know what he gave the heads. You see, my husband wasn't doing nothing but what he was paid to do, but he was on the job and saw the fire and called the folks and Mr. Willingham sure appreciated it and gave him the money to let him know it. He's a good man all right, and we're lucky to be working in his mill. Everybody over here don't feel that away about him, though. They fuss and complain but I don't listen to 'em grumble cause I know how good he is."
Unlike most mill workers Sally Means did not grow up in a mill village. She is an only child, her mother having died at the time of her birth. Her father soon married again and Sally was reared by her stepmother of whom she is very fond. Her father was shipping clerk for a local concern and she lived in Macon attending the public schools until she was eighteen. She then thought that she would like to go away to school so her father sent her to Carrolton where she boarded and graduated from the high school there. Asked why that town was selected she said she "didn't know, just thought it would be nice to go there." The next year she went to Young Harris College. "I was crazy to go there, too, "she said, "but one year was enough for me. It's a good school, but it's too lonesome. It's 22 miles from a railroad and there wasn't enough fun."
She next went to Florida to live with an aunt in Gainesville. While there she attended the University of Florida for two summers, studied art, education and science but did not graduate. On her return to Macon she met the man she married. "I don't know why I married him," she said, "but I'm sure glad I did. He was working in the mill and I just happened to meet him and started going with him. It wasn’t long before we were married. He’s lots older than I am; he’s fifty-four. He’s not a Macon man, he was born down in South Georgia and just happened to come to Macon and went to work in the mill. He was making more money then, used to make about twenty dollars a week but the work was too hard for him. It hurts some folks to work inside in the mill and he's that kind. Now me - I just get fat on it. When I started working I weighed 110 and now I weigh over 150. He’s lots better off night-watching, end since I can work, too, we get along allright. We haven't got any debts except the frigidaire and the dining room set. We've got another year to pay on the frigidaire and we'll finish the didning room furniture by September.
"We all have insurance policies and that takes about two dollars a week. We’ve got policies that are supposed to be paid up in twenty years on all the children and mine end his is straight life. We don’t have sick policies," she explained, "If you have them and get sick there’s always some way for the man to get out of paying you. So we don’t bother with that kind."
"No body does much for a good time around here," she continued. We mostly just work and eat and sleep. We’ve been having a revival in the church but I don’t get to go except on Sundays. I don't like the preacher much, anyhow. He's a German and I think he ought to be over there in Germany now. He says he’s been in America thirty years but I don't believe it cause he can’t hardly speak English at all. He says Hitler is just as good as Roosevelt. If he feels that way he ought to go back to Hitler. That’s one thing the matter with our country. There’s too many foreigners here. They all ought to go back to the country they came from and then there would be jobs a plenty for our own folks. I think this war we’re going to have will straighten things out, though. They say this one is going to worse than any other and we need it. There’s too many folks for the jobs."
Tippy came running out to her mother, saying, "Mama, daddy's waking up.” "Well, it must be about dinner time, then," she laughed, "cause he wakes up when he gets hungry. Won’t you have dinner with us? I don’t know what Ella has fixed up but we’ll be glad to have you." The invitation was given with evident <text not clear> and a regaled not being able to accept it.
SO WE CAN HAVE THINGS LIKE OTHER FOLKS -- Ga. -- Good.
General background sketch of cotton mill village -- Wife 30, husband 54 -- Both work in mill -- Combined average earnings $21.21 a week -- Installment buying -- Includes car and frigid-aire -- Three young children -- Last two used services of negro midwife because it was cheaper -- Company medical care does not include cost of medicines -- partial description of "doffing" -- Good account of employer paternalism -- wife attended college several years -- sidelight on pro-German propaganda -- Thinks war would solved the unemployment problem.
