TITLE:
FRED ALEXANDER.
Date of first writing	December 8, 1938.
Name of person interviewed	Mr. Fred Alexander (white)
Address	Whitmire, R.F.D. #2, S.C.
Occupation	Mechanic, who now works on a WPA Project in Union County.
Writer	Caldwell Sims, Union, S.C.
Reviser
"I was one of a very large family, nine adults of whom are still living, Due to the fact that my father was a tenant farmer and that he had so many children, we had it rough. Household duties consumed most of mother's time, which left little time for her to spend on our individual training and upbringing. We were bad boys.
"Country life in those days was filled with inconveniencies of every kind. We lived in an old house that was made out of hewn pine logs. There was an open passageway right straight through the middle of our house, that led to an open porch with the kitchen at the end of this porch. Here mother cooked and we ate there also. Mother went into the kitchen at five in the morning and often she spent the entire day there. Hog killin' time would find her in the kitchen long after dark. We boys enjoyed hog killins', we cooked and ate over an open fire, until we could eat no more.
"Pa tried to get all of his hogs butchered just before Christmas. When that job was over we had free time to run a-round. Then we fell into a great many more arguments, which led up to a lot of fighting. We were proud of the fact that we were born fighters. Pa never bothered us much unless we did not do our work. It was Ma who gave us most of our beatings for fighting. She blistered us too.
Our room was a shed room built across the open passage from Pa's room. In other words our room was connected to our parents' room by a door with the chimney dividing and a fireplace in both rooms. Pa hardly ever let us have a fire in our room. He said that we were so careless and scuffled so often, that he was afraid we would set the place on fire. When company came, our room was scrubbed, a fire was laid in the fireplace, and we boys were sent to the kitchen to sleep on pallets and a cot. I had to build the fire for the company when it was cold, so I did not like company very much. I was lazy and company made extra work for me.
"One Christmas an aunt and uncle and five children were coming to spend Christmas at cur house. When Ma told me this news, I decided secretly, that I would not sleep in that cold kitchen and have to get up and start fire in the stove for Ma to cook breakfast. Ma said, "Now boys I am layin' out your tasks to you now. I want you to keep your company manners all through Christmas and if I hear a word out'n you your Pa will take you out to the barn".
"Two days before Christmas the wind was blowing a cold rain up from the hollow down by the spring. The path from the spring was steep and about 75 or 100 yards long. In wet weather you could slide backwards down that path easier than you could slide on ice. Seemed to me that it took a sight of water for our own use, but when company was coming there was no and to Ma's demand for water from the spring. I was to keep water in the house and help Pa with the extra feedin'. Bill was goin' to see to the wood and Joe was goin' to help with the lighter tasks. Right here let me say this was before the day of automobiles and uncle was coming in a buggy.
"The day before Christmas Pa came to Union with Ma's list. Bill came with him. Joe and I stayed home. Soon after Pa left it began sleeting. So Joe and I set right out to do all of the outside work before everything was covered with ice. We piled wood high against the wall in the open passage. Then we filled the hay racks with hay. But Joe was in a bad humor and he bucked at everything that we started to do. I left my main job of getting water for the last thing. Then I told Ma to get all of the buckets and pans available clean so that we could fill them with water from the spring and have enough to do us through Christmas day. We made many trips to and from that spring. Each trip became harder and the path became slicker. We both fell several times letting the water spill over our feet and legs. Of course this was very uncomfortable, but I wanted to hurry as fast as we could under the difficulties and get through. Joe wanted to stop when he had enough water at the house to do that night.
"Ma had a small zinc tub which she had scrubbed for us to fill with water at this time. She told us to take it down to the spring and fill it up. Joe told her that he could not get up the slick muddy hill with that tub. After some argument she gave him a cuffin' and we started off down the hill with the tub. All the way to the spring he grumbled and growled about having such a hard time, as if we all did not have a hard time. I filled the tub three parts full, while Joe was complaining. He said, "If you put any more water in that damn tub you'll never get it up the hill". So I said, "Let's go with it then". He took it by the handle and started up the hill. We were nearly to the top of the hill when Joe suddenly dropped his side of the tub without any warning. I slipped and slid partly down the hill, that was now becoming icy. The water spilled all over me. It was so cold and my teeth began to chatter. Joe began laughing at me. I hurled a stick at him hitting him on his right shin. He let out a bellow and plunged at me. He grabbed me and slipped, falling on me all at the same time. He plugged me in my left eye. I got him around the neck and pulled from under him, giving him a kick. We fought until the blood began to run. We swore and spat at each other like wild cats! Ma heard us and came out to see what was he matter with us. But she could not make us stop fighting until she had broken a strong hickory and started frailing us with all of her strength. We let each other a loose. As she let up on her licks we boys began talking at once. Each one telling her that it was all the other one's fault. Finally I slapped Joe in the mouth to make him bush so that I could talk. I also cussed him. Ma pulled me over near a tree and began using that hickory of hers on me again. I saw Joe laughing at me again. The blood surged through my veins so that I forgot I was wet and cold. I heard Ma saying, "You should be ashamed of yourself for jumping on such a little boy". I felt so hurt at this, for although Joe was the youngest, he was just about as heavy as I was. I wanted Ma to whip Joe some more. She would not. I decided to leave home.
"We went back to the spring, refilled the tub and carried it safely to the house. Darkness was coming. Pa had come from Union. I heard Joe telling him how mean I had been. Ma called us into the house to wash up for supper. Joe was struttin around like a bantam rooster. While I was washin' up Joe came in and threw some cold water on my shoulders. I threw my shoe at him and hit him in the eye. He ran out of the door and I sprang against it and locked it. I dressed quickly and left the house.
"I thought that I would go to Union and be there on Christmas Eve! I had never been in town after dark in my life. Ma had a first cousin in Union who came to visit us every summer. She had a boy, Ben, just my age. He had often asked me to come and spend the night with him. But Pa would not let me go, saying that town was no place for young boys at night.
"All the time these thoughts were going through my mind, I was running and walking down the road to get out of hearing distance of home. It was very dark and cold. Wind in the trees made the limbs crack like dry bones. The sounds began to scare me. Union was 18 miles from cur house and that was a long ways off. I began to grow tired, so I slowed my gait. Soon I knew that I was nearly to Charlie Rochester's house. He lived only three miles from home. It seemed to me that I had gone at least ten miles, but it surely was the Rochesters' house where I could see light coming from the window.
"I decided that I would just go and spend the night with Charlie. The Rochesters did not know that we were expecting my aunt and uncle to come. They did not know that Joe and I had fussed and fought and that was far enough from home. When Ma and Pa and Joe found that I was not home they would be so worried and Ma and Joe will be sorry for the way they did me and they will hunt me.
So into the Rochester lane I turned feeling very cold, tired, hungry and scared. The Rochester lane was a winding lane through pine. That night those trees were icy. The lane was slick, as no one had been down it, apparently since the sleet had begun falling that morning. I slipped down many times. Strange noises seemed to haunt me every time I looked around. When I got nearly to the house I called Charlie. A man's voice said, "Who is there?" I knew that it was My. Rochester. So I said, "Mr. Rochester, where is Charlie?" He said, "Is that you Fred"? Charlie cane running by his Daddy to meet me. His Daddy wanted to know who was sick at home, or what the trouble was. I told them that I had just come over to spend the night. Mr. Rochester looked at me sorter curious and said, "It's funny for you to be a-leavin' home Christmas Eve night, ain't it Red?".
"They took me to the fire and I drew up close to it. Mrs. Rochester asked me why the folks had let me run off Christmas EVE. I turned so red that they all laughed and asked me about my face and hands being so skinned up. So I had to tell them about me and Joe fightin'. They were very sympathetic and that made me feel good. I ate some sapper while I warmed by the fire.
We boys slept like logs that night. The next morning the earth was covered with sleet and a little snow. The sun made your eyes hurt and the trees sparkled like diamonds. Before breakfast I helped Charlie with his work and we had a big time looking at their Christmas things till dinner time.
After dinner Charlie's Daddy told us to take one of his mules and ride over my way so that my folks would know where I was and that I was alright. So Charlie and I rode the mule down the slushy road that the sun had partly thawed. When we got in sight of our house I saw my uncle and Pa and my brothers in our front yard. When we got nearer they gave us a cherry greeting and Joe came out with two of my cousins who had come over for the day. In fact all of my kin from far and near seemed to be there and everybody looked so happy. While they were glad to see us, nobody seemed to have missed me, or even asked me where I had been all night.
"It ended up by Charlie's spending that night with me. All the visiting relatives left late and we boys all slept in the kitchen on straw and shuck mattresses. Next day the weather had moderated and ten of us boys in the neighborhood went rabbit hunting. We had a fine bevy of rabbit hounds and killed nineteen rabbits. Joe was so tired that we had to almost drag him that last mile home, but we had lots of fun. Of course when we got home he went off to bed and to sleep and got out of helping with the cleaning of those rabbits. But that is the way it was with us. We fought often and quickly got over it. I do not remember us ever mentioning that tub episode until after we were both grown. When an outsider tried to step in we did not even give him a fighting chance. Once in Whitmire a big bully jumped on brother Bill. Joe and I and two cousins all got that bully and took him to Duncan's creek and threw him in. That was in the winter too.
"Money was hard to get hold of when I was a boy. Pa being a farmer, did not have much money to give as. Most of his cotton went to his landlord for rent. What did not go for rent went to buy us a few of the bare necessities of life. Our clothes were mostly hand-me-downs from some relative or some older member of the immediate family. We did not have enough money left for oar school books. One set of books was used by the entire family. That among other things kept us from being the scholars that we might have been.
As for me, as soon as I could get my hand on a gun I began hunting and fishing. At an even earlier age I had gums to catch rabbits. For these gummed rabbits I got from 15 to 20 cents apiece for them. Then I would sell a string of fish for from 10 to 25 cents, according to the size of the string and to what my buyer would give for it. We ate a lot of game and fish at our own table.
"Whitmire our nearest town, was a poor market town. Nearly every family head there owned land and had a boy or someone who could hunt and fish and therefore keep his family very well supplied. There was no market for shipping such things to other towns. I believe mother and the girls were luckier selling their butter, eggs and chickens than we boys were with our game. There was of course a steadier market for butter, eggs and chickens.
During the watermelon and cantaloupe season we boys sold them anywhere from 10 to 50 cents apiece, according to just what we could get for them. This was also discouraging. So along about the time I was fifteen I became disgusted with everything at home and at school. We had a dull Christmas that year. Ma was sick and we had a hard time at home. It hardened me to see some of the fellows at school having it so easy, while we had it so hard. I became surly with them and irritable. This got me into a great many school fights. I belonged to a "gang" at school known as the "tough necks". The teachers and in fact the entire community got it in for us. So as I was the leader I stopped school. Of course this broke up the "gang."
"Along about the first of the year I went over to Wallace Wicker's saw mill one day. He had a saw mill in Santuc then and he gave me a job rollin' logs. I fell in and turned logs until got paid off the next two weeks. He gave me $2.00 a day and I stayed at the mill camp. When he gave me my money I went home and carried Ma and Pa a present and told them how much I was making and that I was staying in the saw mill camp. They seemed proud of me. Pa said, "Waal you know me and your Ma tried to give you a turn through school and you never took no likin' to it, so if its log rollin' you want instead, son, why you go to it Don't come back here no mo', you done got out on your own man now, so stay on it."
"Soon I was stronger and harder in my arm, leg and back muscles than ever. At the saw mill I still fought those that crossed me, usually winnin', but sometime gettin' beat. But I worked and I stayed healthy, and when I had money I went home and took Ma some. I stayed with Mr. Wicker until I was nearly eighteen years old. Then a Mr. Whitlock from North Carolina came into the community with a saw mill and set up not far from where I was raised down at Black Rock. I went to see him and he offered me a job at $3.00 a day, so I quit Mr. Wicker and went to work with Whitlock.
"Ev'y day at noon Mr. Whitlock's daughter brought his dinner in a pail. She was as slim as a willow reed and her hair was glossy like a crow's wing. Her eyes were full and wide and she could cut them at a feller' like lightnin'. While we all ate she would perch herself on a log in the sun and swing her bare legs in the sun and dig her toes in the soft woods earth. I would sit and watch her. "sometimes she would catch me and I would turn red and pull my hat brim down over my eyes. Then she would give me a sly glance. Just about this time her Pa would clear his throat and tell her to bring him a drink of water. There was a spring near the boiler, so I got to goin' to the spring with her. She would walk in front of me on the way to the spring. I could get a better view of her slim figure and of her well formed breasts as she bent over to dip up the water in her Pa's bucket. Something seemed to just pull us together.
"After I started goin' with her to the spring she got so lockin' like she know'ed more than I did and she would not look me straight in the eye. So I got where I never would let her see me lookin' at her.
"Mr. Whitlock got to lettin' me oil the engine and runnin' the saw a lot. I know'ed then that he liked me, or he never would let me fool around his engine. I wanted to become a "sawyer". I told Mattie Lee that when we went to the spring that noon. She looked at me and said, "Fred, why don't you come over to the house to night and talk to Pa about that?
"When I got there that night Mr. Whitlock had gone off. So me and Mattie Lee sat on the front porch in the moonlight and talked till her Ma called bedtime. In a year and six months we were married. We went to the Goshen Hill Township magistrate one Sad'day night and got married. We went on back to her Pa's for supper. Neither one of us could eat any of Mrs. Whitlock's flapjacks and she noticed it and when she ax'ed us why we was not eatin' as usual, Mattie Lee up and told her we was married.
"We went on off after supper, but I was back at work Monday mornin'. That night when I went up to Mr. Whitlock's I got Mattie and took her to a house I had done rented. From then on my of livin' changed and it has been changed ever since. Peered as if I could'n make enough to pay house rent and to keep us supplied with rations at saw millin! Bad weather or no sale for lumber kept the saw mill closed down so much that year. I am shamed to say it, but I had a good corn patch and I took my corn and got a North Carolinian to show me how to make 'gully run". That was jes' after prohibition come in this state. I knowed a lot of people and I sorter let it out easy like that I knowed where a feller' that was ailin' could git a little swig.
"Peered funny how many demands I got at 50 cents for a half gallon. Me and the North Carolina feller' was goin' good and we never thought a soul knowed where it come from till the law come and got our still one day. It was warm from a recent run. But we had gone when the law got there. I had gone on for over a year and never got caught. But that scared me and so I never went back no more. My wife never did know how I made so much money that year. She thought I was collectin' for a furniture man in Whitmire. A feller will do most anything to make money when he needs it for his wife and she need of treatment from a doctor too.
"I like the country right here at Black Rock where I was born. I have worked in cities and made more money in them than I can make in the country. But give me the country with its woods its pure air and its solitude. Right here seems more like home to me than any other community. Seems like I can rest better at night. It is only three miles from where I was born. We have three children now. The school over there by the Black Rock Bethesda (Baptist) Church is where I attended school and Sunday School and it is where my children go and where I want them to go and do better than I did. I have a married brother who lives a mile and a quarter across that hill over there. The Rochesters live where they have always lived and Charlie comes over often when he is not workin'.
"My house I rent from Enoree Forest Preservation for $12.00 a year. As you see, it is a good house and well kept up. I make $42.00 right now a month on the project and of course I have a hard time, but I would have a harder time if I lived in a city making even three times as much money. This house is on a knoll where you can see folks as they go along highway #176 from Union to Whitmire. These pines make it healthy and it is very cool in summer, much cooler than a hot city street, especially the part of a city that I would have to live in.
Mattie Lee has her cow and I have my hogs. She has chickens and we do not have to buy milk, butter, eggs or chickens. In season I always have a good garden. I plow my garden with one of Pa's mules and that does not cost me a thing. So the things that I get in the country free like the ones just mentioned cannot be measured in dollars and cents. If I was in town I would have a hell of a time buying as much milk and stuff as we use here. Why I just could not do it. Pa dug a livin for us, when we were shavers, out of the ground. I can do that too. But I am best at machine work. While I like the out of floors I can make more money at in-door jobs.
"You take iron for instance. I can make almost anything out of iron that can be made. I made those big door hinges on the club house at Foster Park. Yes, sir, I took the iron right down to Bob Bailey's blacksmith shop and made those hinges right there. While I like to work in an iron foundry, when I have finished I want to go home where I can look over red hills and through sighing pines. I like the quiet that only the country affords. I am glad that this house is far enough from the highway so that I cannot hear the noise of traffic at night. At the same time from my front porch I can see the smoke as it curls from my Pa's chimney. I can see the children when they go in school and the people when they enter the church on Sunday. I can sit on my porch and hear the hounds chasing a rabbit and at the same time plan a pattern in iron to work on the next day. Yes sir right here I have some things that city folks with money do not have. They are things that count a whole lot in life too.
If I do have a hard time making ends meet, country problems are not as hard to solve as city problems, I know, for I have lived in both places. Now children have to have a lot more than they used to have. The little ones are due three square meals a day, a course through high school, if they want it, and the proper clothes to go with all that. Of course they should go to Sunday School and the wife should get around some and have some church clothes. Women have to have clothes if they are going to be satisfied. When a feller' can't give his folks these things, well he ain't doin' very much. It is much easier to do all this in the country than it is in town.
"When "The Dainty Maid Silk Mill" opened in Union I was one of the first to get a job. I had saw milled and done other things for years. "The Dainty Maid Silk Mill" was on Main Street down by the Southern Railroad, where it crosses Main Street. I started working for $10.00 a week. I was regular for two years and got to making $15.00 a week the last year. Then at the end of that time Mr. Otto Swayze, chief mechanic began letting me help him with the machinery at night. Of course this gave me extra pay at the rate of from 50 to 75 cents an hour. In the day time I kept on running my two machines as I had been doing. Mr. Swayze taught me all that he could. Soon my pay amounted to around $24.00 every week. As I learned more about the machinery I worked on Sunday. Then I was putting in as much as ninety hours a week and when I did this much I made $31.00 a week.
We were getting along fine at home. I did not move to Union as a lot of country tenant farmers and renters did as soon as they got work in the mill. My family stayed right on in the country. I made the trip to and from work in a model "T". I still had my hogs, garden and a roast'n'ear patch, just like I had always done. My wife had her chickens and the cow and went on just like she had been doing. Neither of the children were in school then, but they had what they needed. It was along about this time that I began a little bark account. Mattie Lee and I were both proud of the fact that we had a little money in the bank, at last. It gave us such a good feeling of security that I had never before in my life had! Every two weeks I would take what was left from our expenses to deposit at the bank. The account grew. It is strange how fast one can grow when you add to it regular.
"Mr. Swayze was eager for me to work up to be a first class mechanic. He was the first feller' who ever told me that I had possibilities as a mechanic. That encouraged me. So after that I took to it like a 'duck takin' to water' as the old sayin' goes. The only thing that I dislike about mechanical work in the mill is the sunday work. I want Sunday for my own. I never have liked to work on Sunday.
"Time went on till lots of Union people began going to Spring City, Tenn. "Why we had a general migration of Union folks goin' to Spring City, Tenn. Some of them stayed up there and have never come back. They were building a new silk mill there. Mr. Swayze knew the man there who was the head mechanic. He wrote to the man about me and asked him to take me on. Soon the man wrote for me to come up there. I went and went right to work on trial. In just a short time he made me a mechanic in the new mill. That mill was called "The Southern Silk Mill".
When I got settled in my work I came on back here and took my family up there on the train. That was our first long train ride. It took twelve hours to get there from Spartanburg. My wife and child and I were all thrilled at the ride on the train and at the idea of us moving into a new town and a new house. No body else went at the time we did from Union, bat we knew some of the people who had gone from Union to Spring City before. Some of them came to the train to meet as and went with us to our new home. That made my wife feel good right from the start. Then some of our friends came from Union after that to work in the "Southern Silk Mill". We met them when they arrived.
"I was listed on the pay roll as a mechine operator. I made $28.00 a week and extra pay for overtime. I liked my work, but when I got home after work I did not like it. It was in town. I missed the country and its privacy. Mattie Lee liked it at first, but she soon grew tired of it. We had two children by that time. A baby made added expense to our family budget. If I remember dorrectly that baby cost as $15.00 a month in Spring City. When my family had been in Spring City almost a year, the wife and children came back to visit her parents and my parents in Union County. She stayed on down here until Christmas. I came home Christmas. Then I went back to Spring City the day after Christmas, for I had to work till New Year Day. After New Year Day they were going to take stock in the mill and it was to be closed three days I believe. Well the mill stayed closed a week and I was goolin' round there lonesome and spending my money and with nothing to do. I felt miserable. At the end of the week they said that the mill would not open for several more days. I was disgusted and pulled up and came home and have not been back since that time. But in a few days after I got back to Union they wrote me to come on to go to work as the mill had opened. But I did not go back. I should have gone tho (for ever since then I have not been able to get agead. In a year we were in a depression and all of my bank account dwindled away to nothing. I stayed around here until 1931 living on my folks and on my wife's folks, just picking up odd jobs at sawmills and making nothing to speak of. So that year 1931 me and my family put out in a "T" model for Washington, D. C. There I got a job as a mechanic and made good money for a few months. Then the place closed down. We then went to live with a brother of my wife's who lived in Washington then. I looked and looked for more work there. My brother-in-law is named Oscar Riggs. He got in that big Bonus parade. After we had been on Oscar for six weeks I decided that I would go home, so we put out in the old "T" for home.
"The next two years found me farming on the Deaver Place near Carlisle in Fish Dam Township. I made four bales of cotton the first year and three bales the second year. I had plenty of sorgum and about 50 bushels of corn both years I believe. The first year I cleared $25.00. The second year I came out in the hole and had to move off of the place. I got in with a nigger about this time and we made "gully Run". This time the law did not find us. But I could not get as much money for it then as I had before. There were too many "bootleggers". We sold for 50 and 75 cents a gallon plenty of times. Sales did not come often and me moved our still from place to place on the creek. To think of those years makes me shudder now. Everybody that I knew then was having it hard. Pa was having the hardest time that he had ever had in his life. Brother Bill got married then. He has had it hard ever since. He has a harder time all of the time than I do. He don't have a hand at different things like I do. A "turn" helps a man over many a tough spot. See my turn is machinery and electricity. I have an application in now down in Charleston at the Navy Yard for a place as mechanist in the ship yard.
"In 1933 I started workin' on the RFC when Mr. spencer Perrin was paymaster for Union County. We started workin on a side road down near Black Rock. My first job was water boy at 50 cents a day. Everybody on the job worked for 50 cents then, but they were so happy. You then we thought that the depression would be over in six weeks and that folks would be back in their private lines of employment. Folks stayed good natured on the RFC jobs. They had been idle for such a long whet of a time. You did not hear any grumbling then about having to walk to work two three or even five miles. Some of them walked that far too. They were so glad of the chance for a little work that they took it all good natured like.
When they started the investigators, Mrs. Teresa Cobb was my first investigator. She told me that the wage scale was goin' to change and that she was going to have me made a tool foreman. She said that she hoped to get me back into my line of work real soon. She went to see my wife and checked up on things in our house. She told my wife how to care for the children and what to cook for them and the like of that. We felt at home like the New Deal was sent from heaven. I am still thankful for the New Deal. I believe that president Roosevelt is the greatest president that we have ever had. If he had not saved the banks and opened up new ones and made them all secure we would have had a revolution before now!
"When the bosses started to ridin' folks to work they rained them. I went on a new project then. The letters had changed from RFC. I made $6.20 a week I think it was and worked four days. Our groceries came to about $9.00 a week. I was already behind with my grocery bills. But I had started payin' a little at the time here and there to keep the storekeeper from cuttin' me plumb off. Qur clothes were all ragged. Now and then I could make an off day at some sawmill that was runnin'. The government give the children and my wife some clothes and me some overalls. But our dollars could not go far enough. Even yet with me working off and on all this time my little money won't last till we even get what we could use.
Folks is gittin' awful discontented again. Out there where I work a feller' the other day wanted to be made a carpenter foreman. That feller' cannot drive a nail straight. So be is a grumblin' bout not being classified right. I know another feller' that don't even know a hack saw when he sees it, that wants to have charge of the tools. This goes to show that they have gotten enough from the New Deal to do them some good. "'When a sick man begins to grumble, why that is a good sign he is gettin' better, so I have always heard. Some of the folks on these projects knocks everything from their foreman up to the President. Nothing suits them and if it was not for WPA these very ones would be in the poor house.
"Everybody gets helped by the WPA whether they work on it or not. All the money that has turned in this country since 1933 came from the New Deal.
"Let me put some wood on my fire. It is cold to-day. (He drew one of the little girls up closer to the fire.) Well you see me here and you see my family. We have wood to burn plenty to eat with our chickens and garden and hogs. I pay my rent in advance, if I did not I would not be here. They tell me that in three years my rent in the Preservation will go down. My brother Bill, Charlie Rochester and I go to work together everyday when the project is going on. When it is not I see what I can find here to do. If I do not pick up a job I get me up a supply of wood and do things around here that a feller' has to do around the house all of the time. No I don't grumble. I am glad of my work and hope that I can keep it, at least 'till I see my way clear to something else. My $48.00 a month comes in handy. It goes a lot farther than the $42.00 did.
I'll go out with you. It is time for me to get in my night wood and feed up my hogs, while Mattie Lee sees about her cow, the chickens and then our supper.