Savannah unit
F. W. P.
Georgia
January 19, 1939
Mrs. Sara Wolfe (white)
Avondale,
East Savannah, Georgia
Widow
Mary Vining, Writer
THE STORY OF SELINA W-
"Well, I don't know exactly where to begin. I've had a hectic life it seems from the beginning - with all respects to my loving parents. But I've always had an optimistic nature, and I find it the best weapon when encountering defeat. Still, I always have enough ammunition left to begin the next battle.
"I was born of aristocratic parents on both sides. Their forefathers before the Civil War had been classed as wealthy land owners. They had many slaves and vast acres of land. My father was well educated and had had an easy life before the war. I have heard him say many times that he and his brothers all had a grown Negro boy to follow each one of them for protection and to serve them as they wished. My father's two sisters had maids to wait on them and an old colored mammy to cook and care for the home. 
"My father's first hardships began with the war. He was almost fatally wounded from the enemy's bullets. A bullet pierced his right lung, going through the muscle of his arm and on through his right hand. He lay in a ditch of running water for hours to keep from bleeding to death until he could be taken to the hospital for treatment. He was in the hospital for several months before he was mustered out and sent home just before the end of the war. He said he suffered terrible hunger during his war service and, of course, much fatigue on the battlefields. He suffered more when the war was over, he said, when he saw their faithful slaves freed and turned out on their own, in ignorance of the hardships they would encounter in the outside world of which they knew nothing. His father had been a kind master to his slaves and some wouldn't leave him. To those he gave acres and huts as a reward for their faithful services. Not long after, my grandmother died, maybe of a broken heart, because one of her sons lost his life in the war.
"Grandfather married again, I don't know what became of the land, but a brother of mine says he remembers our father telling them that each child received more than five hundred acres of land as their share of the estate, which they later sold for a small sum and each went their way after they were married.
"One of my earliest memories was seeing my father and brothers picking and loading watermelons on a wagon which they hauled away to be shipped to Augusta, Georgia. A few days later father received a wire for freight charges, and was also informed that the market was glutted. We were then living on a share crop and it seems that the money which they derived from the crop was their only dependence. In the fall of that year we moved to Rocky Ford, Georgia, where a glass factory was in operation. My four brothers secured employment there with faily good wages. Soon after we settled there, my mother died. I was six years old when mother died in 1891. My oldest sister was thirteen and my baby sister was two and a half years of age. I was the seventh child born to my parents. I can't believe they were proud of me, or at least I don't see how they could have been. I weighed less than two pounds at birth, and was more trouble and expense to them than any of the others. I was given up for dead at three weeks after birth, but an old mammy dipped me into hot water and cold water alternately and blew breath into my lungs, I guess after I survived that ordeal they didn't get excited about the paroxyms of spasms that tortured me until I was five years old.
"After mother's death my sister Flora shouldered the care of our family. My brothers persuaded father to give up his night work and watch over us, as my sister Flora was determined to attend school during the term and none of the family were willing to leave us smaller children in the care of a housekeeper. Several of our relatives tried to persuade my father to give the three smaller children to them to raise, but father said he would never separate us. He had been so carefully trained by Christian parents that I sometimes have thought he might have been too strict on some subjects, although he was the kindest father any family could have fallen heir to. I think the only fault my father had, or so I thought, was that he was too retiring in manner. I never heard him raise his voice in anger to anyone. He was methodical a s well as systematical in all his dealings, household expenses, playtime, etc. He taught us never to speak evil of anyone, or tell a lie. We were not allowed to visit much and at night we were all at home with him.
"The glass factory closed, and it was moved away to another town. My father refused the opportunity of going with the company, as our little town afforded many advantages, good schools and churches. There were many good Christian people there who willingly did many little kindnesses that meant so much to our lives. As a child, I wrote many lovely poems, or so I thought. My playmates praised them highly. I remember that the grownups thought they were very good too, but my lack of opportunity had me so handicapped that my talent in time amounted to no more than a hobby. Still, I have always tried to think otherwise. 
"My father soon found that there was no work available in the small town of Rocky Ford and his money was running low, so we moved to another farm out in Bulloch County near Pulaski, Georgia. My father and brothers share-cropped a farm for a Mr. P. That is where I first saw long-staple cotton growing. The land was so fertile the bushes were head high to my tall brothers. My two oldest brothers rented a farm not far from this place and after they got the work caught up on my father's farm they would go and tend the other crop. We had a happy life there together. My oldest sister would fill a great picnic basket which we loaded in the two-horse wagon and carried to my father and brothers at lunch time. We would spread the dinner on the ground at noon time, and there would be much laughter and fun.
"I remember that Mr. P's boy had a trained goat, and my only wish was to own a goat and wagon too. When I'd get tired waiting for the long day to end, my brothers would give me little tasks to do with the promise that if I'd be good and smart they would get me a goat after harvest time and train him for me so well that he would far out-do the P-boy's goat. I was so eager to have that fine rigged outfit that-1 asked almost daily how much longer off 'til harvest time. That goat was my day dream and nightly prayer, but it was never fulfilled. In the fall of that year my uncle in Florida wrote my father to sell out everything and go there to work as he and my four brothers could make a small fortune on the good wages down there. I remember the sale of our furniture very well, everything went but a few of the mattresses and a few prized relics. Instead of feeling sad at parting with our possessions, they were all hustling and bustling about in high glee, so anxious to go there they could reap a daily wage once more.
"We loaded our few things in a two-horse wagon, and all of us piled in there too, with plenty of eats to last the trip, which wasn't more than twenty or thirty miles. Every one was filled with glee, that is, except myself, for my dream of a goat died in my heart and I cried when I saw the P- boy's goat for the last time. My brothers tried to console me about leaving my little playmates; they never knew it was the goat that brought those tears.
"I've always found that too much happiness brings tears. If my brothers hadn't been big husky man they would have cried too at the end of that trip back to Rocky Ford, Georgia. We went to an old time neighbor's home to leave our horses and the few belongings with them to take care of for us until we could send for them. The Ogeechee River was on a rampage and my brothers rowed a boat across it to get over into Rocky Ford to wire my uncle that we would soon be on the way to Florida, also for him to wire us immediately when he could meet us. My brothers waited around for the reply, and when they received it they got an awful jolt. They were informed that the Phospate mines in Florida were closed as the rocks had run so low they were losing money daily. There we were, without a home, no jobs, and all our needed possessions gone. We surely had hit bottom. 
As soon as the waters receded and the roads became passable my father and brothers set out to get located again. Soon, we were on our way to another farm. This one was one mile out from Rocky Ford. The house w as an unpainted one, also there was no ceiling, just rough weather-boarding, it boasted of a small kitchen, a lean-to affair. The furnishings were very shabby compared to what we had been used to. I remember that someone gave me a silk plaid dress soon after we moved there 'and every time I'd see someone driving up to our house, I'd run in and put on that dress in a jiffy, never bothering to button it in the back. I remember my sister gave me several cracks about what she called "silliness". Little did she know that that dress and my dream goat were the two greatest things in my life. One I missed, and the other 1 prized more highly than I have a thousand dollars since.
"I can't recall clearly, but I think we left that place after harvest time. My father had raised a Jersey calf for Mr. P- our landlord, the mother of the calf having died at its birth. My brothers purchased bottles and nipples for the calf until it was large enough to eat food. At the end of a year the calf was almost grown, and when my father presented the bill of $25.00 to Mr. P- for the care and expense of the calf, Mr. P- refused to pay it, but did offer my father $5.00 which my father refused. He was hurt to think anyone would think he or his sons were classed as 'cheaters', as he termed it. Father was a very mild-mannered man, and so refused to accept anything for raising the calf.
"We soon moved to a little town known as Echo, Georgia. There was a large saw-mill there owned by M- and company.
"All my brothers got a job in the woods, hauling logs by mule team. My oldest brother got a job as fireman on one of the engines and soon he was made an engineer. Another brother knew lumber so well, he became woodsman, that is, foreman of the woods gang. This mill was working state convicts at the time, but there was plenty of work for outside help too.
"We lived near the little old rough boarded school house. My father rented the acres of ground around it and grew vegetables enough for our family. He sold vegetables to the mill people, watermelons too, he never could give up his watermelons.
'I don't remember how long we stayed there, but I know that I had. gone as far as I could in my studies. My brothers thought me a book wizard. They wanted me to finish in a high school with better advantages. The bookkeeper and mill superintendent wouldn't allow their children to attend the common school with the mill people's children. They had private tutors for their children. My father was so proud of us that he was insulted to think anyone on the mill grounds thought their children better than his. He said his four sons together made more money than both of these families put together. So my brothers decided to let us move back to Rocky Ford with our father and they continued on there coming home on the week-ends. i remember they each used to bring home water buckets full of eggs, twelve dozen to the bucket, that they bought for ten cents a dozens also, plenty of country cured hams etc., that they purchased for a much cheaper price than we could in our town.
"I could only go through the fifth and sixth grade in our school and my brothers wanted to send me to Scarboro, Georgia, to take up piano music with Miss M- as my guardian a nd teacher. She was a sister of Colonel. M- of Statesboro, Georgia. They couldn't talk my father into letting me go. He knew I would be in the best of care, but he still thought me delicate and was afraid I might somehow meet the wrong associates. Anyway, I was refused that privilege.
" Mr. C- and his wife were the loveliest couple in our town. He owned a mercantile and drug store and soda fountain. He begged my father to allow me me learn the soda fountain work, offering to pay me while training me. I was refused that chance. They offered to send me off to a high school and pay all my expenses but my father refused me that also. I was offered a good job in Statesboro in a big department store, I was to live with a fine family there, but I wasn't allowed to go. My father didn't believe in girls working, or being away from their parents, and my one wish was to get away and make my own way. My oldest brother married, and some time after my next oldest one married. My other brother went to Stark, Georgia, and worked, coming home the weekends as usual. My father married that year. I was sixteen years old. My stepmother was one of the grandest Christian women the world had. I thought- here is my chance. She was a pal to me before marrying my father. I had gone to her With all my perplexities and for her advice when I needed it. All she could do for me after she came into our home was to teach, me to sew. I didn't get to learn to make but a few things before I got married, at the age of seventeen.
"I married against my father's wishes. He said he only objected to my husband because he was an only child of an old couple. He said he had petted me too much and that I had been raised with care and kindness and perhaps my husband would always want to have his own way. I said that I would have mine too. This young man was my first love. I had adored him since we were twelve years old. He did not visit our home much before we married as he had been working in Stark, Georgia, as a convict guard for two or three years. The F- mill had closed long ago at Echo, Georgia.
"My in-laws were lovable old people and they had known me since early childhood, but they hadn't seen me since I was about twelve years old. Imagine their surprise when their son rushed in introducing me as his wife. I think it gave them quite a shock, as he was so young and unprepared to take charge of a household. They received me kindly and said, after it was done, all of us would just have to make the best of it.
"They had anticipated his becoming a lawyer or a minister or thought he would go into some kind of business. So with my persuasion they begged him to go off to school awhile and said I could stay on with them. His grandfather on his mother's side had been a successful and well known Baptist preacher. Two of his mother's brothers were then preaching, one in Macon, Georgia, and the other in a rural district not far from where we lived; so that is why his mother wanted him to become a Baptist minister. But persuasion did no good, he felt like he was a big married man and could shoulder his own responsibilities. He was only 18. We had no money and he had no job, so his father took him as a helper on his night firing job at the mill and gave him twenty-five dollars a month above all our expenses.
"I had thought many times if I ever did get my freedom I'd do as I pleased, and now that I was married I thought that was my way out. But I soon found out that I had jumped from the frying pan into the fire. As my father had feared and warned me, my young husband was contrary, jealous, and he set out at once trying to boss my every breath and turn, I was just as determined I wouldn't be bossed by him. So we started off badly. I don't see why his parents didn't throw us out on our necks.
" I remember our first quarrel. I wanted to go visit my stepmother's brother and family a few blocks from us. I had grown up with them at Rocky Ford. He said, 'No'. I then tried to reason with him sensibly. He flew into a rage and told me if I, went he would give me a, clicking when he woke up in the evening. Well then, my temper got the best of me, and I had my say, which wasn't very good for my mother-in-law to hear. She stuck her head in our room door and said, 'What's the matter with you children? Whose going to do what with whom?' I was so ashamed of myself that I told her we were only playing. She said so sweetly with a twinkle in her eyes, 'oh pardon me, I thought you two were quarreling.'
"After he went to sleep she and I went in the kitchen to do the breakfast dishes. She told me that I'd have to start with him right, a s he had been badly spoiled, to their sorrow. She told me how he went away from them to work and wouldn't heed their pleas about finishing his education, etc.? and she feared I was in for a hard life unless I learned to control him. She was a very delicate little person and almost too crippled with rheumatism to get about. She appreciated me helping with all the work and in no time she took my part when he got into those tantrums of his. My father-in-law almost worshipped me from the beginning, as he said they had always wanted and needed a daughter. They were just like a real father and mother to me.
" soon after our marriage my husband had a bad toothache, and for two or three days he wouldn't rest at all, so he asked me to go with him to the dentist about a mile out in the country from our little town Egypt, Georgia. Something warned me to refuse. I tried to beg off by saying that I couldn't go as I had. promised his mother to sweep the yards and, too, I didn't want to see him have his teeth extracted. He kept on pleading until she begged me to go with him. We had loaned our horse and buggy to a friend that day, and he had had to borrow his cousin's horse and buggy. Their horse wasn't very tame, he was only used to them handling him and us they told us that they would be uneasy until we got back. As we out of drove out of the lot gate something urged me to get out. I tried to beg off again and he told me if I wouldn't go with him that he would put the horse back in his stable. I knew how he was suffering and against my wishes I went. Before we had gotten half way, he struck a match to light a cigarette and it frightened the horse. He dashed out of the road and ran across a high log and fell on his back between two logs and got wedged. I was thrown out, dislocating my left knee and hip and collar bone.
"I lay in bed for a long time. When my baby son was born the next year I was using my crutches. When the baby was dressed and the doctor brought him to me, he said, 'This is not our baby, he belongs to God'. He was a beautiful baby and weighed almost 9 pounds. I didn't understand what the doctor meant. Being the first young baby I had ever touched I just took it for granted that was what doctors told all mothers, But when he was 4 weeks old he had a fainting spell and turned blue all over. My father and husband got up quickly and dressed. My mother and I were so excited we didn't know what to do. In a few minutes the color came back to him and when the doctor arrived the baby seemed all right. The doctor said he was surprised that he hadn't had the spell before. He had visited me every day since his birth and I had a very serious time at his birth and was yet unable to get out. Re told us the baby had heart trouble and we would in time lose him. What an excited and hurt family we were, as all of us adored him so. Re seemed to get along well after that spell and began gaining some.
"My husband was offered a good salary at Paschal, Georgia. He was to take charge of the boilers there at a sawmill. It almost killed our parents to part with the baby. They knew we were so young and I was so crippled that they feared the baby would be too much for me. I guess I was frightened about the outcome of it myself. I just knew the baby wouldn't live long as I had noticed so many times when I moved him quickly he would gasp for breath as if about to choke. I wouldn't tell my parents about it though for they were so anxious about him. But our doctor told them maybe if we took him the high climate would do him good. I didn't want to go and begged to stay on with my husband's people. But the hundred and twenty five dollars a month sounded like a fortune to him compared to the twenty five dollars a month he was getting then, and so, in the end, he had his way.
"We shipped our household goods ahead and in a few days we went, leaving our beloved old parents with broken hearts. I loved them so dearly, I am sure mine was broken too. We moved in with my brother on arrival. They were glad to have us with them as all the people there were strangers to them. They helped me in every way they could with the baby and my work. I did no cooking. We boarded with them as the baby took worse right after we got there.
" The Company had a wonderful doctor. He gave the baby the best medical care, but he told me that it would only be a matter of time and advised me to send for our parents. My father could not get off from his work but mother came and spent the last two weeks of the baby's life with us. I sat up most of the last two weeks with my baby on a pillow in my lap. I just couldn't think of giving him, up. The doctor finally gave me a hypodermic and I slept the whole night through before the baby died the next morning.
" I was very sick with larynx croup and high fever. The doctor said I was notable to go home with my husband to my baby's funeral. I couldn't even whisper, but I went. I don't remember getting there. I faintly remember seeing my baby's little white casket in the home; and when I regained consciousness, my baby had been buried two days.
We didn't go back to Paschal, Georgia. My brother shipped our things back to us. Father and mother found out that I was pregnant again and they wouldn't hear to us leaving them again. The next year a darling baby girl was born to us. Mother and father prayed that it would be a boy to replace the one we had lost. Father seemed somewhat disappointed, but mother hugged the baby to her heart and said, 'And to think we wanted a boy. God knew what we needed all the time'. The baby thrived daily, was alert and bright, and if ever a baby was worshipped by a family and all her kindred this young lady was, but it didn't spoil her. Our relatives came from Savannah to see her and showered gifts on her as well as on all our kindred.
"Two years and seven months later the stork brought a little man to add to our family. Re had no mole on his head at birth and as news travels fast in the country many people called on us. It seemed to be a very rare occurence. The baby's hair was black and short and he had a gray spot as large as a quarter on his right temple. He certainly was a curiosity. I just knew he would be blinded by the light at the window while people examined him to find a soft spot on top of his head. Our doctor said at the time that he was the second baby born as he was in history. I don't know. My husband just knew he would be a lawyer or doctor or maybe a scientist. I only hoped he would not be like his father-fussy, contrary and jealous; but I did hope he would be as willing a worker as his father and grandfather.
'I was using a walking cane yet. When the baby was one year old my dear father-in-law died. We were living on his farm out from Egypt about three miles, and when he got so sick he came to me to care for him. when he died it was like losing my own dear father. Bow we missed him! He had worked on in the village and kept us supplied with everything we needed as well keeping hired help on the place. We didn't know which way to turn then as he had been our provider. We couldn't stay on the farm, so we ; moved back with mother, and my husband worked as engineer at the mill.
"We found that the mill was closing soon and had to make a decision one way or another which way to go. We had the big farm and quite a sum of insurance money which father had left us. we didn't want to spend any of that. Mother needed it herself as she was so feeble and had to have medical care all the time. However, she had gotten so far without touching father's money. My husband didn't like farm life, but I begged him to try it awhile to please mother as she was old and lonely without father. She said if it hadn't been for her two grandchildren to love and amuse her she couldn't live. My husband was born on the old farm and mother loved it dearly, as she had spent most of her married life out there before they went to Echo and Egypt, Georgia. So we tried it the next year. We had been accustomed to having cash; well, it went hard with us. of course, we had plenty chickens, eggs, milk, and butter, also plenty of vegetables, syrup etc., but we were used to more than that. We found that if we continued to stay there we would soon have to use mother's money.
"I suggested we move to Savannah. It pleased mother, for she had two brothers and sisters living there, also other relatives. I wanted mother to be pleased, but of course I was thinking of the children too, wanting to give them all the advantages we should have had. I had told mother how I had been danied doing what I wanted to do and she knew too well how her son had denied her the things she had wished for him. she was anxious to help me get to Savannah, but every time I mentioned that I wanted my daughter to be trained in a business way so that she could make her own living, we had the usual row even at her young age. My husband had many things in his mind that he wanted his son to become, but he would not even think of his daughter ever having to work.
"We share-cropped, the farm out to an old friend of mothers. My husband came to Savannah two or three weeks a head of us and was doing extra duty as a street car motorman. He made good as an extra, we shipped our household goods down and I think it was the happiest day of my life when we arrived and went to his boarding house to live until our things reached us.
"We moved near the car barn so that my husband could be near his work. He soon had a regular run and we were doing nicely with the exception of mother. she kept very ailing, confined to her ted most of the time. She stayed about six months with us and Dr. L-, her brother, advised her to go back to the country. He thought it would do her good. I think his advice mostly was for her to take his baby son by his first wife back to the country. He was about twelve years old then I think. I had kept him since my girl was two months old. I didn't mean to part with him and mother wanted me to keep him too.
"Me and the doctor had a few heated arguments over the subject. He said his sister needed him to wait on her. Mother and I knew that he needed to go to school here. I couldn't part with him, it would have been like parting with my own as I had had him since he was six years old. I cut off his long curls and made his first pair of pants, I wanted him to have every advantage that my own would have. All his life with me, what 1 got for mine, I got him the same or as good. And talk about war, it certainly would have happened right there if his father had tried to separate him from me and send him back to the country. I had my way and he stayed.
"Mother went home, and wrote she was doing fine but she wanted our girl to go stay with her as she just couldn't live without one of her grandbabies. I let my girl go with enough clothes to last for several weeks. The child adored her grandmother and I knew outside of feebleness she would have the best of care, and I was willing to let her stay if it would help mother to be happy.
"My girl was very bright and smart. Mother took her to Sunday School for twelve Sundays, and taught her the golden texts on each little card and she memorized them by the pictures. On the fourth of July the church was to have its annual picnic. Mother had written me that the Superintendent was going to have her repeat all the texts by the pictures and wanted me to go and be with them. I made her the darlingest little outfit for the occasion and was very proud of her. I dressed the boy I had taken to raise, in a white sailor suit, and the baby also had a sailor suit that day. Everyone there admired them, especially my girl; she was a beautiful child.
The superintendent told the congregation the little girl had memorized all 12 of the cards by the pictures and he asked the pastor to take each one of them after she had repeated the golden text and read it to the congragation. She didn't make a single error. Mother was the happiest dear soul I've ever seen over that child. Of course, I was proud of her smart looks and. prided myself for the way I had dressed her.
"We went home and my husband was so glad to have us all together once more. Little A- hung onto her "Daddy" every minute, so afraid she would lose him.
" My husband liked the street car work so well I think he had decided it would be his life work, but fate plays funny tricks on us at times. One foggy morning as his car was passing a dairy on the Thunderbolt car line, a cow had strayed out on the tracks and he failed to see her. The car ran over her and liked to have wrecked the car. Well, he got his pink slip the next day and his spirits fell below par.
" He wasn't without work long though. He took an ice delivery job via a two horse wagon route. He made more money at that job than he had made in a long time. Many evenings he dumped as much as twelve dollars or more into my lap. Forgetting his weaker qualities, there never was a better husband or father to shower his earnings on his family. He wanted us to have everything. Re wouldn't take money off in his pockets, as he said too many people begged for it and his own needed it. He was so very stout though, and the ice delivery was hard on him. He stuck it out though until we had saved enough to open a little grocery store. This we did, out in West Savannah at the point of the Louisville Road and Bay Street Extension. We were warned that we had made a dangerous move though. 
"it seemed that on the space we rented, a house had burned to the ground, two women burning to death. The man escaped through the flaming window by jumping out and injuring himself. "Lincoln Park hadn't been open very long then and the Negroes out there were the toughest sort. They had just as soon pick a fuss with or shoot a white man as their own color. We weren't there but a short time before trouble began.
"In the fall of 1911 the first near tragedy happened. One evening about twilight, six or seven colored men stopped in front of our store door and grappled over a pistol, using vile language during the scuffle. My husband ordered them away, saying he wouldn't stand for such language before his family. His words fell on deaf ears. He got so angry, and afraid too, that the pistol might go off and perhaps kill one of us. He ran to the door and warned them that if they didn't get away he was going to shoot to kill.
"I closed the door and told him there were enough of them to make mince meat of him. He would be playing with death if he went out to them. My father and his brother from west "Texas were visiting us at the time and my husband couldn't stand to have them think he couldn't take care of a situation like this, so he jumped out among the Negroes. They clamped down on his hand and grabbed the gun, he couldn't let go of it. One man almost bit his thumb off. They seem to go savage and all the time yelling 'Kill him'. My husband knew they were going to kill, he was hollering for help. I ran across the street to our neighbors' house and took their double barrelled shot gun without even asking for it, as they were not at home. I held the barrel up and let go one shot into the air. They were so frightened they turned my husband loose leaving the pistol with him. Just imagine my father living to see his once two-pound baby girl grow to be an almost six-foot woman and saving a two hundred and seventy-five-pound man's life. That was rescue No. 1.
" The following day Sunday, we took the children and our visitors out sightseeing via trolley car. We reached home just before sundown and heard a Negro man in the road near our house cursing and raving like a maniac. The Negro after being reprimanded by my husband, threatened him and dared him to come out. Dear Bill, he could never take a dare. He grabbed the same shot gun and just as the Negro raised his gun, my husband let go his gun and hit the Negro in his side, He fell as if dead. His sympathetic comrades hauled him away in a wagon. Bill fearing the man was dead, expected the arrival of the County officers and his arrest. It was almost time for a train to our old home then so he got a few clothes together for himself and our three-year-old boy and caught the train out. Cur neighbor, a bachelor, warned us to get away from the place at once or we would go like the others who had lived in this neighborhood- in ashes.
"My father and uncle were very excited. I pretended to be brave. I knew Max would stand by me, he was a big boy now and my best pal when I needed him. We went upstairs, turning out all the lights. I got Anne to sleep. Joe, poor little dear, lay in darkness shaking like an aspen leaf all night I think. Max and I sat by the back window with our weapon ready for use should we need it. We didn't have to wait longer than midnight. We heard several men stumbling and falling over orates and boxes piled in back of the store. We couldn't see them as the roof of the kitchen and dining room obstructed the view. I didn't hesitate, I let go one barrel after the other towards them and such scrambling away I never heard.
Max and I kept our vigil til morning, not even talking to each other. We had our weapon ready for the next battle, but all was quiet and peaceful the rest of the night.
"Uncle and father were afraid to spend another night there so there early the next morning they prepared to leave on the 9 A.M. train going north. They took Anne with them. I phoned a transfer company to pack and ship my household goods as well as my store supplies and fixtures. While they were busy at this, Dr. N - paid us a pop call to tell Bill he wouldn't be arrested for shooting the Negro as he, the Negro, had just finished serving a 20-year sentence on a chain gang for murder, and that he also had a sister in the penitentiary for the same charge.
"My oldest brother was engineer for the Seaboard switch line and his run brought him right past our house every trip. So he got off from his work to see us safely off. Gee! I felt good to enter the city of safety. Max, brother, and I had an enjoyable day together, my first one in a long time. I was happy that mother would have her beloved grands with her too. Her health was failing daily, she needed us and how I wished that she could live on and on. when we made a safe home landing and all got together, there was a younger twinkle in mother's eyes than had been there in a long time.
"Mother, the children, and I were one big happy family. Bill took an engineer job with the new sawmill company at Egypt. His mid-station was in Haleyondale and he stayed there nights and spent the week-ends with us. Mother died the following July. We were all broken up without her. She had been raised on the farm and her advice had been invaluable to us in conducting the farm. I felt forlorn, left with my two children, my foster son, and Mother's spoiled son on my hands to fight it out all alone. How I missed her: But I have one grand thing to remember all my life. She told me before she died that God had sent me into her life to bless her last years, and she wanted to say truthfully that she loved me as dearly as her son, for I understood and gave her the care and kindness that she wouldn't have had without me. I cherish those words forever as so many mothers with an only child don't see the loyal side of a good daughter-in-law.
"Bill moved us to Haloyondale and I had sworn that I wouldn't go. My wishes were to come back to Savannah with the children. But Bill said he was fed up on Savannah as it held ill luck for him, and that there was nothing he could think of at that time to make a living. He was making a good salary at his job and I didn't want to persuade him or antagonize him so soon after our sorrow. I felt it wouldn't last long anyway, I was always hopeful he would settle down on one job. But my hopes were always dashed, for in a few months we went to Bogaloosa, Louisana, to live, spending what few dollars mother left us for the trip, hotel expenses etc.
"Bogaloosa was a real city, to be classed as a sawmill town. The population was more than ten thousand and the lumber mill was the largest one in the world. It operated every hour of the twenty-four, stopping only five minutes at a time to change crews. The company hotel was modern and had more than a hundred rooms. They served grand meals. We had to put up there for ten days.
"Bill got work the next day after our arrival as main line logging engineer. I was getting nervous over the bills that were piling up as our cash had run so low. But, when we at last found a furnished house and I asked the clerk for our bill, I shivered all up and down my spine while I waited for him to get it. I knew I couldn't reach it. He handed it to me and I almost dropped from sheer joy, all five of us for the ten days was only fifty dollars. I told him there must be some mistake as some of the guests had told me the charges were extortionate. The clerk smiled and said. It's a gift from the manager to you.' He said, 'Any woman that had raised such well behaved and lovable children as you have deserves some credit, and this is the payoff.' This made me very happy.
"We were lucky in getting three furnished rooms in a nice apartment house near the school. I was really delighted. I entered all three of them stout-heartedly with new inspiration. Bill was making such good overtime on his job I planned to save the money in a few months that we had used up in getting out here.
"I did all my own work, even though suffering tortures of the damned from my injuries. On payday after paying the bills I'd bank what I could, holding back a few dollars secretly to have a song published. When I had the thirty five dollars it took to get a musical composition published I sent it to Mr. H - in Chicago, Illinois. When he sent it to me I took it to the Theater Studio and the pianist gladly played it for me, predicting that it would make a big hit. I was on my way to success now, I was to get two hundred and fifty free copies to sell in my town and with the proceeds pay my part of the publishing. When I kept gaining cash I would have a story book published, then Bill would be disputed in his face for he had told me so many times I was wasting more time and paper than I'd ever get back.
"I had sent a photograph with my poem that had cost me ten dollars to say nothing of the cost of dressing for it. I waited and waited to get a reply from my letters. After so long, I began to get alarmed and wrote the Mayor of Chicago to investigate the delay. He wrote me that Mr. H - had been sent to the penitentiary for twenty years for defrauding the public by mail. My dreams and thirty five dollars had gone to the devil. I was glad that I hadn't divulged that secret to Bill, for it saved me of a three weeks fuss at least... as well as his chickens coming home to roost.
"I was very glad that the children were doing so well in school. Anne studied so many books now at the age of nine, that my landlady often teased her that she must undoubtedly be studying law. She had gone for ahead of Max in her studies.
"Poor Max could never get the sound of a word. I laughed until I cried many times trying to teach the sound, I'd repeat over and over distinctly a word and he'd come out with another word, missing it a mile. He never did learn to spell correctly, but he could memorize history, something I never did.
"Anyway, I was happy to have free days to apply my time to my studies. A friend of mine had won a lawsuit in Georgia because I handled the correspondence with the claim agent and she donated freely to me, With this I bought a course in story writing and moving picture scenarios from the Plamer Institute in California. I had passed 5th in examinations. They gave me much encouragement after criticising my lessons. I held high hopes of becoming a successful writer.
"But as always, something happened. On the night of December the 19th, my spirits fell lower than ever. Bill came home with the news he had lost his job. We had moved to ourselves, using our cash to furnish a three-story house, renting out apartments. we therefore got our rent free. There we were with all that furniture on our hands, and couldn't sell it; so we left it to one of our best tenants. We had just enough money for railroad fare home. We left that night.
"Business was terrible all over the country then. Thousands of men had been laid off in Louisana. I was mad and upset and afraid. Bill had lost his good job so foolishly. All the engineers disliked the train crew foremen, one Mr. K-.
"It seems Mr. K. had given him the wrong train orders No. 19 by mistake. These trains pulled logs over the N.O. & Great Northern main line passenger Railroad to Bogaloosa. An awful accident like to have occurred. Bill's train met a passenger train heading towards each other on a tressel, but each engineer had seen the other in time to slow up a few feet from each other on the tressel. Bill was already so excited that when he went in the office to sign off and make the report Mr. K. - about the error he, Mr. K. hopped on Bill with some vile language what a Southerner doesn't stand for end it wound up with Bill going outside and throwing a brick at Mr. K. through the window pane and came near striking the man on his head. I couldn't fuss with Bill, as I didn't blame him much, but that didn't put any money in our pockets to strike out for another home.
"In an Alabama town Sill got off to some Florida town to get work as he had heard of a big saw mill there. The children and I went on to Rocky Ford to visit with my sister until I heard from Bill.
"In a few days he walked in smiling. He had such a happy look on his face, I just knew that he had good news to tell me.
And, what do you think? He had stopped over at Egypt, Georgia, and sold our farm of three hundred acres, two nice dwelling houses, outbuildings etc., also heavily pine timbered lands for one thousand dollars cash. The timber was worth much more than that amount to say nothing of the re-boxing of turpentine trees. We only had two farm horses left. I had prized that farm home ten times more than its value and hoped to keep it on through our lives, and now it was gone for a song. My father-in-law had left his deeds to his heirs and legal heirs of his body, which meant my two children also. I consulted a lawyer about getting it back but he said it would probably end in a lawsuit with loss to Bill but in time if my children wished to, they could reclaim it, as they were too young now etc etc.
"Bill had always had his way in the past; I meant to have mine now. We came to Savannah on February 14th, 1914. we bought two lots here in Avondale on monthly instalment. We built a three room unceiled house, using the largest room as a store. We then put in a three hundred dollar stock of groceries.
"We were the first white settlers out here, later five more families joined us. Two families, only, lived then in Avon Park the next subdivision adjoining us. Their trade and the dairymen down below Sollee Station were all the white trade we had to depend on. But Bill had chosen this section because of the large old Negro village back of us, which had been settled many years then. Of course, there were prospects of getting their trade. Their peace had never been invaded before, and they resented the white people settling near them to destroy their freedom. East Savannah Station right in front of us on the Thunderbolt car line was where they rode the trolley car to and from the city. Acting and talking as they pleased with no interference, they became contrary from the start and caused many disturbances. Instead of Bill trying to understand their attitude and being patient with them until he could win them over, he set out at once to conquer them via axe handles, two by four's etc. The younger set of tough Negroes all seemed akin, and if one got hit the whole crowd was ready for war, to be as ugly as they could. They'd come by our house at night, cursing, singing and swearing, making all the noise they could to disturb our rest and to aggravate Bill. I warned will that he was only one against many. But, as a rising comes to a head, so did the braggarts.
"one big bully well dressed, with gold front teeth, and a cigar in his mouth, entered our store cursing violently along with some bad language to get a row with Bill. Bill ordered him out of the store, with such talk before his family. The Negro told Bill that his family was as good as his etc., also, that he would curse where and whenever he pleased. He finally went on the outside cursing and daring Bill to go out and that he would kill him. Bill, fired with that insane impulsive temper of his, followed the man around to the side of the store. We had no weapon in our home, I looked out the window and saw the man with a brick in one hand and a pistol in the other backing away telling Bill he would get him sooner or later, but he had just as soon do it now as any time. A neighbor's son had left his new baseball bat at our house, and I grabbed it and folded my dress over it and ran in front of Bill slipping the bat in his hand and I said, 'Kill him Bill'. The Negro thought it was a pistol and he dashed to run. As he did so Bill sailed the bat at him striking him full force in the back of the head. The Negro fell as if dead. Bill pulled him face upwards and crawled on him, giving him an unmerciful beating, took his pistol and came back in the kitchen to wash the blood off his hands. I was back of the counter finishing some book work I had started. I heard a tumult of voices nearby begging someone to go back home. 'If you go in there, they'll kill you. ' I didn't call Bill as I feared for his life. The brother of the man whom Bill had beat so badly, looking very much like a big gorilla, stood in the store door demanding of me to tell where my husband was. 'Do you want to get killed? ' I asked him. 'Yes'm, I'm ready to die now' he replied. I told him 'Just stand where your are and I'll carry out your wishes.' I stooped below the counter and the Negroes on the outside grabbed the Negro away, beating him with sticks, fists, and whatever they could find. That ended the bad boys. (Rescue No. 2)
"I did all my work, helped with the store; kept the children in school did carpenter work:, put up fences, took in sewing, I even half soled shoes. I did everything in my power to keep going uphill. But Bill, Max, and Joe contracted malaria, and had chills and fever every other day. Business fell off, as the war had conscripted all the young men that hadn't volunteered. We had ceiled the rooms, but that was all the improvement we had made on the property. The lot dues were in arrears; we had plenty to eat left, but soom that would run low.
"We moved to the city. My sick patients got no better with all the doctor and druggists prescriptions. A little old lady told me to give them Oxidine; that one bottle each would cure them. That did the work. At that time, I had two boarders. Max was telegraph messenger now and that was all the income I had to depend on.
"Bill secured employment as pipe fitter's helper at the Sugar Refinery, and it wasn't long before he got the position of electric and stationary engineer's job. We moved to the Sugar Refinery.
"Max was made foreman at the Pulp and Paper Mill. His brother who was night foreman boarded with me. All of them gave me eight dollars a week each as they were making good wages. Max bought Anne a second hand piano and she and Joe went to the city school on Oglethrope and Drayton streets. Anne took music twice a week. She learned rapidly. In a short time she could play very well. Joe was doing fine in his studies. He was only nine years old then.
'I did all of my housework. Washing, cooking, scrubbing, and soon had paid the back dues on the lots in Avondale. I was needing an operation badly and was trying to save for it, but Bill had a falling out with his boss and that job went.
We had to move somewhere, as my house in Avondale was leased out. we moved to another place in the city. Bill picked up part-time jobs. Max became messenger boy again for the western Union; things were looking dreary now.
"A friend of ours from Wild Cat Camp NO. 2, in Florida, was here conscripting labor to the camp. Bill met him and brought him home. He was foreman of the camp and he offered Bill a logging train and pictured rosy promises of the place and good wages. Bill was never hard to persuade to take a train. He was in the dumps now anyway, and he was thrilled over the prospect of it. I wanted to stay here with the children, and let Bill send out expenses. It wound up as usual. The foreman gave me fifty dollars for the trip down there, saying Bill could pay it back to the company on installment. So off they went that night leaving Max and I the trouble of packing and shipping. School had ended and the children were all aflutter to join their Daddy and live in the wildwoods. They looked forward to this grand vacation, as well as to play with the foremans children.
"We made the trip and reached Watertown about night. We stopped at the East Coast Lumber Company's hotel. There were no children except mine there, and the boarders told me that it was a shame to take them out to that camp, and they predicted my stay there would be short-lived. They didn't know that I had been accustomed to living any place for a short time. Bill's train pulled in early the next morning; he hurried over for us. I never saw him so glad to see us before; I didn't understand why until afterwards.
"His log train carried a passenger car, an old box car with rough seats attached to the walls. The floor was littered with hay, and provisions for the camp store. I was never so shookup in my life as I was on that thirty-mile trip. I ached from head to foot, as I had just survived a bad case of influenza. There was an epidemic of it all over the States then, and too, I needed an operation so badly I wasn't able to stand such rough traveling. It was night, of course, when we reached the village of Wild Cat Camp. Upon viewing the location the next morning 1 knew the place had been given the right name. If one had been compelled to stay there long they would have been as wild as wildcats We had three rooms at the big mill. They were built at the mill and hauled out and dumped along the spur tracks. These rooms were each separate. Imagine that home, rough, unceiled, and unpainted. Two for bedrooms and one for the kitchen and dining room. We didn't even have pump water. Had to tote it from a water pump at the water tanks about two blocks, a bucket at the time. Some families much larger than ours lived in fewer rooms. As we were the foreman's old friends, and neighbors, we were favored. God pity the rest:
"We had a two by four schoolhouse, but the State wouldn't furnish a teacher for less than twelve pupils. So the foreman added his son of twelve and I my two children to make the required number. My children kicked up a ruckus about this as they had just left the city school and saw no vacation coming. The poor little natives used such words as 'hit' for' it; 'haint' for ' isn't'; and 'gwineter' for going to. Our kids got a big kick out of the teacher trying to break them from that habit, but she never did.
"We had no church. We couldn't use the schoolhouse as it wasn't large enough for the teacher and pupils. There was no amusement whatever. My children had nice clothes but nowhere to wear them. I stuck mine away for the moths. I boarded the teacher, did all my work, and took in sewing, as the Negro log choppers made good money and there were no ready-made clothes to be bought at the place, and the women were glad to pay any price for their sewing.
"The commissary kept a fine line of silks, satins and cotton dress material. I sewed regular. Made more money some days than Bill did at his job. I never had an idle moment. I didn't want one, I couldn't have used it anyhow. There was nothing to see as far as one could look but vast acres of dry grassy lands. Some pine trees that were too young to cut down, and thousands of old logs and stumps littering the ground. we had sent home for our horse end on Sundays we would hitch him to a wagon and all pile in for a ride, but as far as the roads went the view was the same. It was really an honest to God Wild eat country. The kids did have amusement setting out traps for wild varmints. 'coons and opossum were so plentiful they ran along the railroad tracks and wild kittens were easy to catch. About the only thing of interest was that we were surrounded by a fifty-mile-square cow ranch. Bill bought in as many as 80 carloads of cows sometimes, and the hot cow scent could be smelled for a mile, I think. Imagine sidetracking them alongside our houses all night, and the cows bellowing and pawing, waiting to be hauled to the chute to be unleaded. The kids enjoyed seeing the cowboys rounding them up for the ranch.
"Dysentery was raging. One little twelve year old boy died with it. The company furnished a doctor, but after his morning office hours, if he had to be called, someone would have to drive twelve miles for him.
"I pled with Bill to get us away from that dreadful place before it took some of us. If I ever got excited about a thing Bill thought I was crazy or foolish. Max had a good job, and he fell very ill with the disease. In a few days Sill took down with it. Poor Max suffered more than anyone I had ever seen. The disease caused inflamatory rheumatism to settle in his elbows and ankles, and as the swelling increased the pain was so severe that he screamed like a maniac. Bill, I knew would die right there on his bed. If I ever wanted to run away, it was then. I had rather have died than seen my two lovely healthy plump children get that malady. I stayed up day and night and nursed them, boiled the water they drank and kept them out at play all day. At night they slept over at the foreman's house until my dangerously ill patients were out of danger. The foreman ordered the doctor to stay at my house and to give the children a preventative. I was beginning to contract the disease myself. Had it not been for the doctor being in my home, I guess I'd have died later without anyone to nurse me, as there was no one available.
"Bill and Max finally crawled out of bed looking very weak and thin. Max and I put in to leave. Bill said we would be okay now and there was no work in Georgia. But if we insisted on it he guessed it was the best thing to do. He was so glad to get away from there he almost outran us to that beloved box car that was sidetracked for passengers.
"The only advantage I made, with all my hard work there, was that I bought a membership ticket to the Writer's League in California. I also sent a song off during the war that was good. I bought plenty new clothes, and outfitted the children, Max and all, with nice winter clothes, even bought my sister an outfit too. But I guess the Writer's League thought I had died for they never heard from me again. Just that much money wasted unless I could get full time to study my Palmer Course and send them sound stories to sell for me.
"Bill was as happy as we were when we hit the sidewalks on West Broad Street at the Union Station. The first person we met was an old friend. He was an officer of the city police force. We jibed him a bit about being a big cop. He told Bill there were openings on the force and told him also how to get an application filled out. So the kiddies and I went on to Rocky Ford to visit with my sister until Bill landed something. And being me, I burst right in on her three children in bed with measles. On the next train I sent mine to my brother's home about fifty miles from Rooky Ford.
"I had a letter in a few days from Bill. He had had no trouble in getting on the police force. He asked me to go back to Wild Cat and have our things crated and shipped to Savannah. I was all tired out helping nurse the sick at my sister's, but there was nothing for me to do but go. I stopped by my brother's house to see his family and my kiddies,. I came on to Savannah, going on to see Bill, but he had gone on night duty and just had time next morning to say "hello" before I left for the town of Wildcat.
"That was the coldest December I ever remember here. And it wasn't a week off 'til Xmas. I had to be back with the kiddies by Xmas Eve night anyway. I felt very bad on that trip. When I reached Wild Cat and went into that place it reminded me of a morgue. NO wood to build a fire, and I like to have frozen stiff. Luckily I had saved all the crates that I had shipped my things there in or I never could have shipped them back without making heavy lumber ones. The foreman came to my rescue and had some colored men to orate everything and had them load it on the train. He bought our fine young horse and gave me a hundred and twenty five dollars for him. He was worth double that much but it was either take it or leave the horse there until we could send for him and Lord knows when that ever would have happened, as Bill was getting only ninety dollars a month.
"I made the trip back to Jacksonville, and I thought I would pass out in the hotel that night. I had fever and kernels had formed about on the back of my head. Didn't feel much better next morning when my train pulled out for Savannah. I went where Bill was staying with our friends and spent the night. The next morning I could hardly move my arms and legs. I found they were badly swollen and pimples had broken out all over me. I had the measles!
"I sent toys for the children, and while waiting for our furniture I got able to be around again. The lease on our house had run out and we moved back to Avondale. One bad luck followed after the other. I had two major operations the next year. Dr. C. - was assigned to the ward in St. Joseph Hospital. So many of the doctor's had been sent to government camps, he had to take over the ward for another month. That's what saved my life. He had about finished operating on me but the hypodermic clashed with the ether and I was dead for five minutes. He knew I had no contagion and he blew breath in my lungs with his breath. It was about five minutes he said before I had a heart beat. He sent me back to the ward he thought to die. I screamed one breath after the other. I know the other patients wished I could die and give them some peace.
"After going through all that, in eleven months I had to undergo another operation, worse and more dangerous than the first. I had to have money and nurses. So there went the first mortgage on our little home. We had been so glad that we had paid for the lots and the little home was ours.
"When Max was seventeen, he wanted to join the Navy. Bill objected because, he said, just when he was getting old enough to be of some use to us in a financial way, he wanted to run off. We hadn't adopted him legally and Bill couldn't sign the papers anyway. I was determined that if Max wanted to go he should. My only chance to help him was to take him to his father Dr. L. - which I did. So soon Max was in the Navy. His sisters and brothers grumbled among themselves that had Max been my own son I wouldn't have been so willing to push him off from home so young -- little they understood how I had been denied doing many things that would have moved the stumbling blocks from my pathway in life. I had know so long what it meant to have an anxious heart in a cage, and willing hands in shackles.
"Max was sent to Chicago Lake School to study aeroplane mechanical work; when he finished building his second motor he was sent to Panama Canal Zone as pilot mechanic.
"After Anne finished her business course, she was taken in a lawyer's office in the city. Joe was still going to school. When Anne was eighteen years old she married, moving to New York soon afterward. Her health got very bad after about ten years in New York; she had divorced her husband in the meantime. She came back South to help care for me, as I had lost my husband with an attack of acute appendicitis.
"Joe trained to be a prizefighter while in New York, but finally gave it up. He works on a ocean-going ship now, and is in Australia. Anne and I haven't seen him for five years, but he writes us that he is coming home soon.
"Anne works as stenographer at a local paper concern, she is taking care of me, we have so much to pay out though that we just barely do get by without actually having the wolf to come in the door. I have an eight-room house in Avondale, which I live in, renting one room out to an elderly lady. The other house, of five rooms is also rented out. But both of the houses are heavily mortgaged and there's fire insurance and taxes to pay, so I still can't see my way clear on the first of the month. Seems like I will never see my way clear again. I'm still trying to write, but seems there are so very many things to 'tend to that I don't find much time. There is always a crowd of young people around the house, especially when Anne is at home, and I can't find a quiet place to write.
"I've won prizes over the radio for three poems, have two juvenile stories completed and over one hundred poems to be published in book form when the lucky break comes. I'm waiting optimistically for fortune to rap on my door, but when I hear a rap...I'm afraid not to open it, for fear its opportunity - and afraid to open it as it may be a collector calling for past due accounts.
"My daughter is thirty three years old, and my son is thirty. I have two dear granddaughters by my son's first marriage. They live here in the city. Both attend school, one is thirteen years of age and the other eleven. They always spend the week-ends with me. It makes me very happy to have them with me, they are such sweet, bright children.
"Well, when I started this story, I had no idea there would be so much of it but still I haven't told it all. I guess I could fill a large book with all of it. But anyway, I'm still looking for the end of the rainbow. I still have faith that everything will come out right. My health isn't very good. I suffered a stroke about eight years ago, but I have the use of my arms and legs, in fact I recovered so rapidly from the stroke that, it wasn't long before I was up and around doing the work I had always done.
"Max is a Navy officer now, and will soon be ready to retire. He is married now and living in Coco Solo, Canal Zone.
"I'm looking forward to my son's homecoming, and hoping he will stay at home with me, and quit the sea. Then I'd have my little family together again."
