C. F. Gerber (white)
Sheffield, Ala.,
R.R. # 1.
Charles M. Donigan
Colbert County
C. J. GERRER, FABOCER
Charles Frederick Gerber lives with his wife and two daughters on what is known as the Leighton Road five and three quarter miles due north of Leighton, Alabama. His house is about sixty feet from the highway on the left hand side. This road is graveled from Leighton north to the Tennessee River. Mr. Gerber lives about two miles south of the river and about one-fourth mile south of the business section of Ford City. The rural route does not pass in front of his house so he has a box on the road going west to Sheffield, Alabama. All of these points are in Colbert County. Alabama.
Mr. Gerber rents from cash eighty acres of fairly good land with house, barn, chicken house and other outhouses. A good creek flows through please and he uses a well for water. The house was dillapidated when he first rented it about three years age, and he has rapaired it as far as he was able, painting it inside and out and repaparing the walls. The roof is old but does not leak. The old house has two rooms in front with two shed rooms to the rear and an attie room upstairs. A ponch is across the front, and doors open from each of the front rooms on to it. One of the front rooms has a large wood-burning fireplaee. A heater is installed in the other front room. One of the rear rooms is used as kitchan and the other as a bedroom. There is heat in this room except through a door into the kitchen. One of the front rooms is used as a living room and is nicely furnished with piane, couch, table, chairs and bookcase. The other is the dining room. There is also a bed and wardrobe in this room.
A TVA electric line passes along the read in front of Mr. Gerber's house, but the house is not wired. He uses a mantle coal oil lamp and ordinary lamps.
Charles Frederick Gerber was born in Barton County, Kansas, 7/30/1889 and moved with his parents to Colbert County. Alabama within one-fourth mile of where he now lives, in 1898. His wife, Mary Halone Jones Gerber, was born in Lauderdale County, Alabama, 9/4/1893.
The eldest daughter is Jessie Lee Gerber, whose birthday is November 26. She would not allow her father to tell the date of her birth, but she was born in Colbert County. Alabama, about twenty-three years age. She was graduated from Colbert County High School in 1936 and then completed a correspondence business course. The younger daughter is May Helon, whose birthday is April 4. She also objected to giving year of birth but she is about twenty-one. May Helon completed the eleventh grade in Colbert County High School, but did not finish because she got a job and contributed a part of her earnings so Jessie could graduate. They are both pretty, industrious, refined and highly respected girls. Mr. Gerber's father, grandfather and great grandfather were natives of Baden, Germany. He said that his father was one of a family of five boys and girls, that he lived in Baden, Germany, in a house and barn built together and that he had heard his father say he worked an ox and a horse together.
Mr. Gerber said that a schoolmate of his father came over to this country and settled in Ohio and wrote his father who then came over himself. One other member of his father's family, a brother, also came over to this country. Mr. Gerber's father's name was George Frederick Gerber, born in Baden, Germany 12-26-1853. He died in Colbert County, about 1936 or 1937. Mrs. Mary Hester Gerber's father was a farmer in Baden, with a family of four girls and two boys. Mr. Hester Came to this country on account of the California gold discovery and crossed the country to California in 1849. He then went back to Germany and brought all his family over to settle in Kansas where he homesteaded, building at first a sod house. George Frederick Gerber who moved to Kansas from Ohie had known the Hester family in Germany, and they were married after they reached Kansas.
Mr.<text not clear> said "My father took a German language newspaper and saw an advertisement about fine farming country in Alabama and warm climate, and since there had been serveral crop failures in Kansas, he decided to go to Alabama and look the country ever. After he convinced himself that this was good country, he sold out and moved to Colbert County, in 1898, and bought 310 acres of land 12 miles east of Sheffield and one mile south of Tennessee River on the River Read.
Mrs. Gerber's paternal grandfather brought his family of three boys and several girls from South Carolina, and homesteaded in Landerdale County, near Waterloo, Alabama, in the 1820's. His own maternal grandfather, Ephrain Rood, was a school teacher who came from North Carolina and settled in Lauderdale County, where he married the widow Whitsett in 1857.
Mr. Gerber believes in large families. He said "A family that includes seven or eight children is better off financially. I believe an extra large family is better than a small one. I think it is a sin to limit children.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Garber are proud of their two fine girls and of each other.
He showed a pride in his ancestry, for he spoke of his mother's father being a "forty-niner' and of his father's grandfather fighting against Napoleon.
He attended school fourteen years which he said was pretty good in his day, but both he and his wife would like to have their daughters college educated if they could afford it. They say a college education would be an economic advantage. They say, however, that the public school system in Colbert in efficient.
He said that his chief ambition is to own a home. He does not now own a car. He used to own one had had to give it up during the depression.
The present income of the family is greater in dollars but will not buy, as much as his income would when he first started out in life for himself. He says their actual needs to ho covered by income are "living expenses of myself and family", and he added that his increase covers that.
He is apparently a thrifty non who expends his income with judgment and apportions it wisely in his living.
Mr. Gerber said "I think that in order to live adequately a family should have an income of $2,500.00 a year."
He expressed pride in the fact that he is a farmer. He is also a first-class mechanic, and was in the garage and automobile repair business for a while in Leighton, Alabama. He moved just before the depression with his family, to South Bond, Indiana, and held a factory job. His wife also worked while there, but after a year or two they decided to return to Alabama and begin farming again.
In regard to land ownership, he said "I don't believe land should be owned in too large tracts. I think ownership should be well distributed.'
In speaking of different types of life and different environments he said "I have tried both farm and city life and each has its advantage. In town I made good money and when the day's work was done. I had nothing to worry about. But when you got out of a job, I don't know what them. When you are sick you are up against it. Expenses still go on. In the country on the farm, if something happens to keep you from working for a day or tee, everything goes on pretty much as usual; crops continue to grow. Besides in the country it is healthier; there is better air, water, fresher food. Education for children in the country, now that buses pass the door, about equals that of city children. If living in town my children might be able to get jobs, but I might not, because of age, while in the country on a farm I have a job as long so I can work regardless of age. Also children have jobs as a farm; all the work they can do."
Speaking of polities, Mr. Gerber said, "I always vote in all primaries and all general elections. I cast ay ballot for the man I think best for the office. I use my own judgment and am not influenced by others; but I always vote for the man I think is the best Democratic Candidate and I always vote the Democratic ticket. I think the trend of political thought is from a conservative to a liberal policy."
About religion ho said" Considered as a whole, religion has a beneficial influence on morals." I approve of all clean forms of sports, such as football, baseball, tennis, golf, etc. I think dancing in the homo is all right but do not approve of dancing in night clubs or public places." It is all right to go automobile riding, provided no excesses are indulged in. Playing cards and similar games are all right if no gambling is involved. Attending picture shows and the theater except on Sunday, is all right and probably has some educational value. I contribute all I am able in money and farm produce to my church. I would feel very grateful if I was in need and worthy, for any aid extended to me by my church. Both my family and myself are regular members."
Mr. Gerber and his family attend the Mt. Pleasant U. S. A. Presbyterian Church which is less than a half mile from shore they live.
Some time ago I was talking with him about a government loan he is trying to obtain to that he may buy a farm; and he said he was afraid purchase of the farm he now rents and for which he has applied, would not be approved on Account of the coat. I then suggested another farm several miles away. His answer was "I would not want to get that far away from my church."
Mr. Gerber said that he had spent in all about $200.00 for doctors and medicines with no hospital expense.
He said "The health of myself and family has always been good, due partially to good medical care and to good home doctoring and nursing. Work has helped to keep us all healthy. I have never made a study of balanced diet but I believe in it. My wife, as far as possible, plans her meals with a balanced diet in view. Our income is sufficient, together with produce we raise and can; and with milk, butter, eggs, meat, etc., for a completely balanced diet."
The Gerber home of four rooms is always kept clean and in first class order. All members of his family are very neat and clean of person. The home is and comfortably, furnished and the kitchen has a good woodburning range, safe, shelves, table and utensils.
Beds are all comfortable and with good mattresses and covers and the dining room table always has perfectly clean linen or a cotton damask cloth spread. I did not see the attic room, but was told it is fully equipped. There is no bathroom in the house, the family using a tab for bathing.
They take an interest in everything they have, buying new pieces of furniture as they can afford, end Mr. Gerber keeps it all in good repair.
In regard to ay farming operations, he said "I raise cotton, com, hay, garden truck, hogs, calves, and chickens. I break all my tillable land in the late fall and winter, and break up my cotton land again about April first, then I double cut it with a disk harrow, then go over it with a section harrow; then between the middle of April and the first of June I plant my cotton, which in 1938 was eighteen acres, with a two-row plantar, applying fertilizer with the same operation. I cultivate with a spring tooth cultivator when cotton gets up about three or four inches, which is usually around the middle of Kay. I fellow the first cultivation immediately with first chopping; then I wit about a week and cultivate again. Then I wait for about two weeks, usually until the tenth of June, and chop again. I follow this chopping immediately with a cultivation, then in about ten days cultivate again and July first run over the middles. This lays the cotton by. Then about September first we start picking cotton. Two or three pickings are necessary to get all the cotton. My family do most of the chopping and picking. I have to hire some of it, but not much.
"In planting my corn, which in 1938 was twenty acres, I break up again about five acres around March twentieth, then section harrow it and plant it with two-row planter. Between May first and fifteenth I break up the other fifteen acres for com, section harrow it and plant with a two-row planter. I cultivate my corn when it gets about four inches high, and is about ten days or two weeks I cultivate again. When corn gets from knee to waist high I thin out and hoe and follow with another cultivation which lays it by. I side-dress it just before the last cultivation with nitrate of soda, one hundred pounds to the acre. In November I gather corn and put it in the crib."
'My hay is mostly meadow hay, about four acres, which I cut when ready and as soon as cured I haul it to the barn. I get usually two cuttings.
"I have one-half acre in garden and raise cabbage, carrots, onions, tomatoes, beans, peas, turnips, spinach, beets, cucumbers, mustard, lettuce, radishes, egg plants, squash, okra, sweet pepper, and hot pepper. In addition to a garden, I raise in separate patches, sweet and Irish potatoes, serghum for syrup, wat ermelons, cantaloupes, popcorn and pompkins.
"I use and own the following steck and tools:
3 mules 1 nowing machine
3 cows 1 cultivator
1 calf 1 2-row planter
15 hogs and pige 2 1-row planters
25 chickens 2 plows
1 wagon 1 tractor (out of commission)
1 hay rake 1 feed mill
1 lot misc tools 1 harrow
"After laying by, my wife and daughters do most of their canning while I make my hay. As for assisements we don't have so much time left. However, we go fishing, go to picnics, go visiting, go to parties, and church entertainments.
"I usually settle with my landlord, Mr.S. N. Sheram, in cash about November first. I rent in all about go acres. As soon as I can get a government lean already applied for, I expect to buy my own place.
"We always rise in summer time about 4 A.H., eat breakfast, and get to the field, about five o'clock. We knock off for lunch about 11:30 and return to the field about one o'clock, finish up about thirty minutes before sundown, then we do the evening chores, eat supper and retire as soon as possible unless something happens to prevent. In the winter we don't get up so early.
"Among our asusements are hunting, picnicking, going to parties, picture shows and school entertainments, going to town, visiting neighbors, and relatives in the next county. Of coures my daughters do their share of courting. The courting couples use our living room for this purpose, then go to church together, go riding, go to town, to picture shows and visiting. I spend most of my spare time at home with my family, hat go to town occasionally and also to the neighborhood stores.
1/16/39
S.J.
