April 8, 1939.
Caleb Carter (white),
Sweeten Creek Road,
Asheville, N.C.
Mushroom grower.
Douglas Carter, writer.
MUSHROOM GROWER
Original Names	Changed Names
Caleb Carter	Carson Sevier
Asheville	Montvale
Bingham Military	School Balsam Military School
A. & M.	(unchanged)
Y.M.C.A.	(unchanged)
Georgia		(unchanged)
St. Petersburg, Fla.	Harrison, Fla.
Virginia	(unchanged)
Hampton Roads	(unchanged)
France	(unchanged)
720673 (Army identification)	760273
Bridgewater	Hightower
Florida	(unchanged)
Philadelphia	(unchanged)
Pennsylvania	(unchanged)
Vanderbilt Hotel	George Hotel
South Carolina	(unchanged)
Washington, D.C.	(unchanged)
MUSHROOM GROWER
"I started this business with one postage stamp, which I borrowed. That is literally the truth. I didn't have a cent when the idea came to me, and I had to borrow a stamp in order to mail the letter answering the ad. I'd seen that same advertisement hundreds of times, I guess, but this particular time I decided to answer it. I had been trying to make a living in real estate, but at that time there were more agents here than customers and prospective customers put together, it seemed, and I wasn't making a dime. I was living with my father, though, and had no wife or children, so I wasn't suffering, but I naturally wanted to get into something that would yield an income.”
Carson Sevier likes to talk about his successful mushroom-growing enterprise. He was born in Montvale in 1893, of English-French stock, mostly English, but one of his French ancestors played a very prominent part in the Revolutionary War. Other ancestors were officers in the Confederate Army, but Carson does not take much interest in genealogy, and never boasts of his ancestry. He leaves such matters to his father, who can talk by the hour on the subject. Carson is blond, about medium height, 145 pounds or so, and slightly stooped.
He has developed a mode of dress which, permits him to work freely about his farm and mushroom plant without running the risk of damaging expensive clothes, while enabling him to appear in town without changing, and without embarrassment. His place is only a few miles from the center of town, and he frequently must make quick trips back and forth. His father and brother are lawyers, "but I have done just about everything,” he says.
”I went to a private school at first, then to Balsam Military School. In each case I was a day student, because the schools were close by," he explained. "I played football at Balsam, but I was pretty light, and I didn't even try it in college. When I finished Balsam I went to Tech to study electrical engineering. After a year, though, I went to A. & M., and switched to civil engineering, but I never did graduate.
"For several years before going off to college, I worked during my spare time and vacations from school; at the Y.M.C.A. most of the time - I was a sort of clerk and handy man. After leaving college I went to Georgia, and worked in the naval-stores industry. From there I went to Harrison, Fla., and got a good job with the traction company. I was there when the United States entered the World War, and I enlisted in the National Guard. Because of my military training, I was made a sergeant. I got desperately sick, though, and spent weeks in the hospital. They thought I was going to die, and I didn’t much care, but somehow I recovered. Later, when the officers training camps were established, I applied for a place in the coast artillery, and was sent to a training camp in Virginia. When I finished the course, I was commissioned second lieutenant, and was stationed at various placed in Virginia. When the war ended I was aboard ship in Hampton Roads, headed for France. We had been ordered to sail on the 9th or 10th, but at the last minute we were held up, and of course the war ended on the 11th, so the ship returned to port, and we disembarked. I was discharged soon after, I still remember my identification number: 760273.
"After the war I worked for a time as a civil engineer on the construction of the dam at Hightower, but I couldn’t get Florida out of my mind. One of my best friends was down there, too, so I returned to Harrison and got my old job back. When the real estate boom started, I got in on the ground floor, so to speak, and I me de money so fast that a mere job seemed nothing, so I quit, and devoted all my time to real estate.
"Those were hectic days, all right. At one time I had $250,000 worth of property, on the basis of the boom prices prevailing then, and I thought I was a rich man. None of it was fully paid for, though, and I sold it as fast as I could, and bought more, at higher prices. It was a wild time, and the collapse found me loaded with mortgaged property that nobody wanted to buy. I tried to save a filling station out of the crash, and I managed to hold on to it for a while, but eventually I lost that, too. I operated it myself while I had it, and made a fair living for a time, but business dropped off, and I lost everything.
"I met my first wife in Florida, but we were married in Philadelphia, where her people lived. We had a fine home in Harrison, but I sold it and lost the money in other real estate. My wife never was particularly strong or robust, and she died in a hospital in 1926. I wound up all of my affairs in Florida in 1928, and came back here to live with my father - broke. Things were pretty dull here at that time, and I couldn’t make a living at anything, it seemed. The real estate boom here followed the one in Florida, and the aftermath was just about as bad. I opened a real estate office, but I never did do any good, so I answered the advertisement: 'Grow mushroom - make big money,’ or something like that. It was nearly nine years ago, and I’m still growing mushrooms. I haven’t made ’big money’ yet, but I’ve been making a good living, and I’m getting things in shape so that I can soon make a little something more than a living.
"It was tough at first, but I stuck with it. My first mushroom beds were in the basement of my father’s house, and were built of second-hand limber that I hauled myself. I did all of the work at first, but now I have four employees - more on occasion. I still do as much of the work as I can, though. Sometimes I’m busy from seven in the morning until after midnight.
"Before I bought this place, my plant had expanded to five growing rooms, three in the basement, and two in the garage. I only have three rooms now, but each one has the capacity of all five of the others put together. This plant is just as modern as anyone could build. I went to the center of the mushroom industry in Pennsylvania, studied their methods, inspected all the plants I could, and learned the way to build an up-to-date place."
A bell was heard ringing somewhere in the building. "I couldn’t get along without a telephone," he explained, "but it was expensive to put in. I had to buy and set the poles myself, and furnish the wire to connect with the trunk line on the highway. Somebody upstairs will answer it."
In a few moments a Negro girl called out, "Mr. Carson, the George Hotel wants six pounds o’ mushroom, quick. They wants big ’uns."
"You’ll have to excuse me for a few minutes," said Carson, turning to me. "I don’t have that many large ones picked, and those folks must be in a big hurry. They are good customers of mine, and an order like that usually means that they are getting up a big dinner for someone rather unexpectedly.
The framing is mostly 4" x 4" timber, and on each side there is tongue-and-groove gypsum wallboard, fireproof. The space between is filled with spun-glass insulating material that looks like fluffy cotton. "It was expensive construction," Carson explains, "but it will save me money in the long run. The rooms must be kept at about 55º while the mushroom are growing, and even with all that insulation I have to supply heat during the winter, and run the cooling equipment during the summer. When a room is being prepared for planting, I have to raise the temperature to about 140º, and keep it there for several days. If I didn't have good Insulation, the cost of heating and cooling would be sky-high, to say nothing of the difficulty."
Heat is supplied by a hot-air furnace, and the ducts are so arranged that there is an even circulation of air throughout the room being heated. The circulation is facilitated by a large blower, which can also be used to furnish ventilation under pressure whenever necessary. The furnace is equipped with a stoker and automatic controls, and requires very little attention. A drop in temperature of 2° will bring the furnace into action, and when the room reaches 57° the heat will be automatically cut off. The cooling machinery is likewise automatic, but only one of the rooms is equipped for artificial cooling. "I arrange my planting schedule so that the room with the coolers will be in production during the hottest months. The only other mushroom-growing plant I know of in the South is not equipped for cooling, and therefore can't produce during hot weather. They have to get their fresh mushrooms from me then," said Carson.
The growing rooms, situated side by side, are about 15 feet high, 20 feet wide, and 40 feet long, and each room has about 3,000 square feet of growing space. The beds about 80 inches wide, are arranged in tiers, six beds to the tier. The three lower levels are serviced from the front of the building while the hillside at the rear gives access to the upper three. The furnace room is at one end of the building.
A four-room home is atop the mushroom plant. Carson married again about five years ago - his wife being a childhood playmate and a daughter of the doctor who brought him into the world. She helps with the mushrooms, and is on the payroll as a regular employee. Her principal work is preparing the fresh mushrooms for the market, but she usually helps with the canning, too. They have a scientifically designed cannery in their home, and about half the output of the plant is canned. The floor of the house is laid directly on the roof of the main part of the building, and the whole, probably unique, is not unlike a ship: the roof of the plant representing the main deck, and the house forming the superstructure. They have all modern conveniences, including electricity and running water. The water system was put in by Carson himself, and has as its basis a bold spring near the plant. The water is supplied to the house by an automatic electric pump. Water for the mushroom beds is pumped from the creek.
"I wouldn’t take anything for that spring," says Carson. "I had the water analyzed, and it’s purer than the city water. The flow is more than enough for my needs, too. The creek is practically the same water - it flows from a protected watershed, and never gets muddy."
Carson has some ducks and chickens, and expects to get a cow and horse. His bottom land is very fertile, but he has not yet attempted to cultivate more than one or two small fields.
"We’ve been too busy getting our building finished," he says in explanation. "I just haven’t had time to think about farming yet. That’ll come along in good time. Next year you will probably see the whole valley under cultivation.
"I started growing mushrooms here long before the building was complete. The plant has been producing for more than a year, but we have just finished the house. You see, I completed the growing rooms one at a time, and each room was planted as soon as it was ready. When the mushrooms started coming, we had to move out here, although the house had just been started. It wasn’t practical to live in town and care for a crop out here. Mushrooms require constant attention, and we have to be close at hand. It was worse than living in a barn at first, but we had to devote practically all of our time and energy to the mushrooms and the completion of the plant before we could think of comfort for ourselves. We lived for quite a while in two rooms that had only been roughed in, so to speak, but when the plant was complete we got to work finishing the house."
The telephone interrupted our conversation again, and this time Carson answered it:
"Hello . . . Yes, this is Carson Sevier . . . Yes, ma’am, I sell compost by the sack and by the cubic yard ... A sack would be 50¢, delivered. . . No, ma’am, not today, because I don’t have a load going to town today. I couldn’t afford to send the truck that far on a special trip for just one sack. I have a load going tomorrow, though, and your sack can be delivered early in the afternoon . . . Yes, ma’am I certainly will . . . Not later than tomorrow afternoon - and thank you very much."
"Some people," he said to me, "would ask you to drive 10 miles to deliver a bag of peanuts! I'll send the truck to town on a special trip to deliver half a yard or more, but certainly not for a 50¢ sack. I sell quite a bit of compost for fertilizer, and it brings me in a nice little sum."
Now, about those mushrooms: just how does one go about growing a mushroom?" I asked.
"First, the compost must be very carefully prepared. That's the basis of the whole thing. The material is stacked up and cured for weeks. At regular intervals the stacks must be turned - that is, the outside must be put inside - so the result will be uniform. The curing is judged largely by the temperatures generated. When the compost is ready, it is placed in the beds, about five inches deep. In the meantime, the boards that form the beds have been scrubbed with a wire brush, and the whole room thoroughly cleaned and fumigated. I use potassium cyanide as a disinfectant - the same stuff used in the lethal gas chamber at the penitentiary. For a while I used sulphur, but I found that potassium cyanide is better, although more dangerous. Whenever I use it I seal the room up tight, but just to be on the safe side we spend a night or so in town - until I’m ready to air the room out. It wouldn’t take but a few whiffs of that stuff to kill you!
"When the beds are filled, the room is heated, as I said before. The curing and heating processes kill all of the elements that might support the growth of a poisonous mushroom - ’toadstool' - and I have never had a bad one come up. It has been proved that the poisonous varieties cannot grow in a properly prepared bed - it’s impossible. Anyhow, I know all the different kinds, and could spot a poisonous one instantly.
"At the proper time, the temperature of the room is lowered, and the spawn planted. We don’t plant seed, as most people think. The spawn is carefully cultivated by experts, and is shipped in glass bottles about the size of a quart milk bottle. It’s necessary to break the glass in order to remove the spawn, which is a brown, fibrous mass, like dried grass tightly compressed. It is broken into pieces about the size of the end of my thumb, and the pieces are planted on five-inch squares, about two inches deep. In time, tiny white threads spread out from the spawn in all directions, and a mushroom might spring out of any part of any thread. Mycelium is the technical name for this mass of cobwebby filament.
"After the planting, the beds are covered with about an inch of soil that has been carefully selected and prepared - casing dirt, we call it. I have sent my truck six or seven miles away, to a mountaintop, for the proper soil for this purpose, but I get good soil closer in, now. In about six weeks the mushrooms begin to appear, and they continue growing for about four months, if I’m lucky. They mature quickly, and must be picked at just the right time. I do most of the picking myself, and it must be done just right, too: the entire root must be removed, because if any part of it is left in the bed, it will rot and spoil the surrounding area. A whole bed could be ruined that way in a short time. The hole is filled up with casing dirt.
"During all this time, the temperature of the room must be kept as near 55° as possible, as I explained, and the beds must be constantly watered. At regular intervals it is necessary to use insect power to kill the mushroom flies, tiny little creatures that don’t seem to feed on anything but mushrooms. They could destroy a whole crop if they were not controlled. I have tried various methods, but find the powder best.
"Oh, it takes plenty of time and hard work to grow mushrooms! The advertisement would have you believe that it’s easy, but I know better. Incidentally, I soon discovered that the people who put the advertisement in the magazine get $4.50 for the same amount of spawn that is available in Pennsylvania for 50¢, and the Pennsylvania spawn is superior! Several other people in town wanted to grow mushrooms after I made a success of it, and I told them in detail how to go about it. I even furnished them with compost and spawn, and offered to buy all their surplus mushrooms, but the work was too hard, or they didn’t apply themselves, or something; anyhow, not one of those who tried was successful.
"When the growing period is over, the room must be cleaned out, and then prepared for another planting. The material from the beds is very good fertilizer, and I sell lots of it for flowers, vegetable gardens, and lawns. I have had samples analyzed, and the material is better fertilizer when I get through with it than the original compost."
"What is your principal market for mushrooms?"
"I sell wholesale here to grocery stores, hotels, cafes, and so on, and I ship a good many. Being closer to the southern markets than the Pennsylvania growers, I can supply these markets with fresher mushrooms. I ship extensively to South Carolina, Florida, and Georgia, and sometimes as far north as Washington, D. C. A large retail grocery chain operates a fleet of trucks from a warehouse several miles away, and each truck distributes my mushrooms over a wide area. The trucks leave the warehouse about midnight three times a week, and I have to drive over there during the evening with the aggregate orders. They naturally want the mushrooms as fresh as possible, so I don’t start getting up their orders until late, and it is frequently after 11 o'clock before I leave for the warehouse. Their largest orders always come on Sunday, so my wife and I have to spend every Sunday evening filling and delivering the orders. Sometimes we are barely able to reach the warehouse by midnight, when the orders are unexpectedly large. Once they had to hold the trucks for nearly an hour, waiting for me to get there with the mushrooms, and the truck drivers glared at me like they wanted to mob me, when I finally arrived. They had been fully loaded and ready to go, all that time, except for the mushrooms, and the delay must have made them furious! I have a few retail customers in town, but not many. At first, though, I sold my entire crop at retail: I would simply load up my car, go from house to house, and keep going until I sold out. You will find that in the north markets the price of fresh mushrooms fluctuates widely, but I have always maintained the same price all year.
"All those that are not sold fresh are canned, and you will see my cans in just about every grocery store in town. I have the latest canning equipment, and I put up all the popular sizes. One large cafeteria chain uses my product exclusively. The canned mushrooms are shipped just as extensively as the fresh ones; perhaps more so."
"Is your place paid for?"
"No, it isn’t. I have a lot of money invested in it, and my equity is considerable, but I had to put a loan on the place in order to finish the building. I don’t expect to lose it, though, as I did the Florida property I spoke about. That was pure speculation, while this is a sound investment.
I expect to grow mushrooms here the rest of my life."
<text not clear>
