July 13, 1939
Mike Kofinas
189 West Trade Street
Charlotte, N. C.
Salesman
D. W. Crawford, writer
Mary R. Northrop, reviser
IT COME OUT O. K
No Names changed
"No, this is not my place, I sell fruit for my brother. I sell here since Armistice Day. When was it, 1919, maybe? Yes, I come from Greek islands. Southern coast."
Mike is short and stubby. His teeth are as blue-white as his close-cropped hair and the shaggy brows that lie around his deep blue eyes like fuzzy white caterpillars.
Mike is strictly business while on duty and gives perfect service. He talks freely in Greek with his countrymen but seldom makes acquaintances among Americans. His English accent is inimitably bad, too bad to reproduce. His gift of pantomime perhaps has made it unnecessary for him to learn the language.
"I first remember playing in water," he said," on the shore of an island on coast of Southern Greece. We lived on many islands. My father was a man of the sea. Children lived in the water--sailing toy boats, swimming, fishing, playing in the sand. I can't tell when I went to work. Worked on my father's boats. He do all kinds of shipping, hauling goods from other islands, the mainland, and maybe from distant ports, I don't know. He drowned at sea when I was young.
"I was a sailor and worked for shippers, I was stout and always had good job. Before I was full grown I was captain small sailing ship. Owner was sponge fishing. We went on long trips about the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas, any place we could find sponge. Boats sometimes got wrecked in storm, sailors most always got ashore, but had to help build another vessel. Sailor had to be workman, same as seaman.
"I come to Charlotte on account I had relatives here. I got here in 1904. Stayed ten days. Nothing doing. Went to Kansas City, got a job building railroads. It was road from there to Cripple Greek, Colorado. Big mining. Later went on to Denver. I worked at laying ties and rails. Hard work, good pay. While I was working on railroad I told only lie I ever told.
"I'd been there few weeks when boss had row with foreman--told him he didn't know nothing. Fired him. Asked me if I ever been foreman. I say yes. I hadn't, but I knew anybody who could lay keel and rib and rig boat like I had, could lay railroad. We worked all kinds on that railroad--Irishmen, Poles, Italians, Swedes, and Greeks. All tough, worked hard, drunk lot of liquor. Had a little trouble--fist fights. Not amount to much. Irishmen and Greeks best workers. Both drunk lot of whiskey. Greeks never got drunk but Irishmen always got drunk. Fought on pay-day. Work, yes. Worked hard.
Sometimes twelve, fifteen hours a day. Sometimes when washouts come, work all night. Worked for that road four years and then went with the Salt Lake and Rio Grande. Worked there ten more years. Got telegram from brother here to come. He had work for me. Been here ever since.
"I have three brothers in this country. One owns this business, one is a painter in Pittsburgh, one is shipping clerk at the Southern Fruit Company here in Charlotte. Got niece working in the dime store here. Red Cross send her here from Greece when she is thirteen years old. I take her in the fruitstand when the sales tax first come, she gets good experience counting up pennies. See? I show her all time, and when new dime store opens, she gets job first day. Twenty-three work there first. Pretty soon some go. Then some more go. My niece stay on. She make them fine clerk.
"Yes, I'm married, got two kids; the wife and kids, they never come here. I go back to Greece once in while--five or six times, maybe. I go again next spring. I am sixty-four years old. Maybe I die there, who knows? One time on the boat I have appendencities. They don't operate. Wait till we get to port of Athens. I come out all right. One time here I was operated for kidneys. It come out O.K., too. I have pneumonia, in Mercy Hospital seven weeks. Six doctors say I die; one say no. The one is right. I still here.
"No the wife don' t like this country. She never come here, she don' t know; but she say she don't. I no argue with women. I fuss with men on railroad, but not with women. I'm all right."
