July 1, 1939
Miss Nell Pentecost,
County Courthouse,
Carrollton, Ga.
County Relief Director.
Miss Bessie Bonner.
THE RELIEF LADY
Seated in a big chair in the corner of the office, I had time to note the furnishings of the office and the appearance of the director while she interviewed a prospective CCC enrollee. A hat rack with a small brown hat swinging from its topmost hook stood to the right of the entrance door; a map of the state was tacked on the left wall, and below it was a big calendar showing the Sundays and holidays in red figures; and a spotlessly clean lavatory could be seen through the open door in the left side wall. In the center of the room was a large flat desk, covered with a dark green blotter; the correspondence was neatly arranged and beside it was a growing plant with shining dark leaves. A small flat table placed against the left wall held an extra wire basket filled with correspondence ready for the files; state bulletins and volumes of state laws were set in orderly rows against the wall at the back of the table, free of dust and the usual office confusion. Most of the wall space opposite the door was taken up by a double window, along the ledge of which were small growing plants; and on the radiator just below the window was a little aquarium, in which tiny gold-fish raced over and under the miniature castle and artificial ferns.
The only other furnishings were the three heavy office chairs. On one of these sat the Relief Lady, a rather plump young woman in her thirties, dressed in a neat dark silk sports dress. Her dark hair was brushed straight back from her forehead and tightly rolled at the back of her head; a plain gold wrist watch and one ring were her only ornaments.
Her interview with the CCC prospect over, she turned and apologized for the delay, giving an opportunity to see how she really looked. It was a pleasant enough face with clear dark eyes, more serious than the lips which had a decided up curve; her healthy tan was dotted with a few scattered freckles, kissed, in by the sun and wind which she faces, hatless, for hours every day; and her low voice had that vibrant quality that carried laughter, sympathy, or positiveness in its tones, according to the mood of the Relief Lady.
"No, I did not plan this as my life work. After I left college, Father's health, which had been failing for some time, made it impossible for him to attend to business. I had been with him so much, in the store and on the farms, that I knew a great deal about his affairs and it was the most natural thing in the world for me to take things over; especially after Brother John died so suddenly. Then Mary and the children came to live with us, and after a few years Father died... Then came those years when everything went shaky.
"This job came to me rather unexpectedly. Miss Johnson, of the state office, called one day and asked me if I'd like to be appointed as county relief administrator. I had been giving a music lesson, and with much embarrassment I had to admit, before my pupil, that I did not know what she meant. She explained briefly, frankly admitting that she was a little hazy on some points as the work was still in embryonic state. I was anxious for any kind of work, but I did not know what I was letting myself in for. She gave me an application blank and asked me to fill it in; and when reading it over, She reminded me that I had failed to give any information about my Red Cross experience. 'But I was only director of a local chapter,' I told her. 'Well, give that information, and also mention your work with the Census.' She evidently knew of experiences that I had forgotten. No, I did not own a car. Yes, I could drive. Yes, if necessary, I could get a car ..... 'But, Miss Johnson, how long will this job last?' I could see myself getting a ear and the payments falling due after the job had petered out. She laughed. 'I wish I knew,' she said. 'It might be for a few weeks, or months, or for years.'
"Later a local committee called on me; and, as I was still trying to find out what would be expected of me, one of them (and I do believe he honestly thought that he was stating a fact) said: 'Why, Miss Ann, I know that you can do all that is required. As I understand it, there will be a board or committee that will do all the work and the administrator will just sit in the office and do nothing more than draw a big salary.' At that, I told him I thought I could qualify. He often comes to my office now, but he long ago received the information direct from me that the BOARD does not do the work and that I have more to do that just 'draw a salary.'
"Would you like to make the rounds with me today? My work will take me near the Old McIntosh Reserve and we will drive over there for a fish dinner. Ruth is very much interested, and I am, too, in having the state take steps to develop that place. It is possible that she will go with us." A brief telephone conversation disclosed that Ruth had an unbreakable luncheon engagement, so we slipped down the back stairway in an effort to miss the people who would see "Miss Ann" and rush to pour their troubles into her ear.
Parked close to the concrete curb in the rear driveway, the new Plymouth presented a sorry appearance with the back bumper's nose knocked to an upturned tilt and the right fender smashed in.
"A truck came too close to the bumper, and an amateur driver sideswiped and wrecked the fender of my car. I shall be able, I think, to get the insurance people to make the repairs; but it does seem that I am destined never to have a car that is free of scars."
Just as the gears slipped into reverse and the oar was sliding out of the driveway, some one yelled "Miss Ann", and a woman came running across the courthouse lawn, calling:
"Are you going to Cedar Valley? I've missed the bus and will have to wait. Thought you might be going that way. No? .... Well, I want to see you about Muzetter, anyhow. Can't you find work for her in some mill? She sure wants to get work. She is fifteen."
"No, Muzetta is too young for employment in the mills. The child labor law prevents that; and we are not going to Cedar Valley until late this afternoon."
In the offing were waiting, anxious faces and there was a rush toward the moving car.
"It is not my day to be in the office but the public has never been made to realize that there are certain days for office work, and if they get a glimpse of me before I get out of this drive I have a hard time to get away."
Once out on the highway, the stiff breeze that swept through the fast-moving car tempered the heat of the mid-summer day; but the heat was stifling when a car passed or we followed in the wake of one when we were on unpaved roads.
"I could not have carried on without the splendid co-operation of the state and county authorities," she continued. "They have helped me to execute any plan I have advised. They have left me to make decisions, too. I doubt -- in fact, I know -- my decisions are not always wise. I am conscious of many failures. Making a decision is not always simple, however."
Suddenly the brakes went on, at the top of a hill, and we rolled back a few yards to stop before the square little house just passed.
"I'll have to go in here," and with one quick movement she slipped from under the wheel and out into the sandy yard, high heels making little round holes in the ground as she walked quickly to the house and into the open doorway. Low voices greeted her and the hum of conversation came indistinctly from the shadowy room.
The rock foundations of the little house were undermined by the heavy rains and erosion through many years, and it teetered slightly to one side as if trying to find a more solid resting place.
In the yard three enormous cape jasmine bushes were covered with waxy blossoms and the heavy fragrance hung in the hot air; a black game pullet chased a butterfly to the stone step at the doorway; and in a tiny window, far to the side of the house, a black kitten sat in the glaring sun calmly washing its face. Overhead, patches of blue sky showed through the white clouds; and out across the wide cultivated fields bald knolls of red or gray clay occasionally dotted the green acres, the contrasting colors blending into mosaic patterns. From the one small tree, in the corner of the yard, came the lilting notes of a mockingbird's song.
The car door opened and closed softly, and small brown hands were again on the wheel. "Isn't she beautiful?" came the low question as the car was backed noiselessly out to the road and was ready to coast downhill.. Framed in the dark doorway, her slight figure half leaning against the lintel, a young woman stood and smiled "goodbye." The almost spiritual loveliness of her face made the involuntary question unnecessary.
"Yes, it is tuberculosis. Months ago a man came to see me and asked me to come out here. He said, 'Miss Ann, I've came here to tell you something, you may think it is none of my business; and, maybe, it's none of your business; and you may not be interested. I just had to come and tell you about it, and ask you to try and do something about it. There's a family cut my way that needs help. They are in a bad way - all of them down sick. It's the Smiths. They'd die before they'd take help - I mean relief. But I thought you might manage to drop around and see... You'll know what to do, and you'll be able to handle 'em. I can't.'
"It promised to be difficult but I told him I'd go right out there. On the way, I tried to figure out the best approach and I decided that it would be best to just drop in casually and tell them that I knew they had lots of sickness and that I was wondering if they would like for me to send a nurse out to see them. The nurse from the state health department happened to be in the county at that time. Well, I didn't get it over as smoothly as I thought I had it worked out. I could see backbones stiffening and eyes flashing with resentment. I rattled om: 'I thought this nurse could come out to see you and, perhaps, suggest something to make your father more comfortable. This is just a suggestion. I know the nurse is here - and I was passing, and - and, well I thought you might be interested.' Miss Lucy looked straight at me and asked:
'Miss Ann, is this relief you are offering?'
"I told her it certainly was not (was I on a spot!) and that this nurse happened to be here from the state health department end I thought she could help them in some way...'and - I was passing--'
"Well, somehow, it worked. One thing that distressed the nurse was the fact that the young son, a fine boy, was sleeping with his father who was in the last stages of tuberculosis. She tried to arrange to get a cot so that he could sleep alone, but the father said that he got very cold during the night and his son kept him warm.
"Both the father and the mother died within the year. We have succeeded in winning the rest of the family over and X-ray pictures have been made of them. The boy is free from infection.... But Miss Lucy - I am trying to get her in at Alto. I stopped to remind her to come to see the doctor Monday. It may not be possible to save her, but we are trying. I am sending the boy to CCC. He is thrilled over going, and I am thrilled that he is going. He is so splendid. The other member of the family, an old aunt, is dying with cancer.
"Sometimes, I have a problem like this. Old families that generations ago had plenty of money often resent all offers of help, and they have an almost insurmountable antipathy to federal aid.
"Very different are they from the majority of eases, who think that the world owes them a living and that the government should be tapped as often as possible. This morning, for instance, I have had to see an old man who claims that he has not received his pension cheek. By writing to the state office I have had a photostatic copy of the cancelled check returned to me. The signatures of some of our best citizens are on this check, witnessing the old man's mark (He cannot write), and it was cashed here in town two days after it was mailed to him. Well, I do not know if he is really honest in claiming that he had not received it, or if he thinks that he can get another check. Most of these people are so ignorant - and, then, too, however religious or honest they are in everything else, they have no scruples when it comes to beating the government. In their way of reasoning, it does not constitute a crime; therefore, it does not rest heavily on their consciences. I refused this morning to let the old man make an affidavit. Federal investigation would more than likely establish the fact that he himself cashed this check. That would mean imprisonment for the old fellow. Mr. Jones, one of the witnesses to the old man's signature, says that he could not swear that it was the old man who asked him to witness it - so many things of this kind are just routine in his office - but he is reasonably sure that it was he. 'Miss Ann', he said, 'I would give him another check, out of my own funds, rather than see him go to jail.' The others feel the same way about it. The question is: Did he get this money? Is he trying to cheat? Or is he mentally incapacitated? That may be one way out. And if I have to have a guardian appointed for him, he'll tear his hair. Anyway, I shall not let him make an affidavit.
"That reminds me of another case of dishonesty. I had absolute faith in the woman - a church worker, respected in the community, and very ambitious for her fatherless young sons. She had appealed to me and I had recommended the older boy for the CCC before she moved into another county, also in my territory. Through another field worker, she entered the younger boy. She stated that he was the only one in the family making application for CCC enrollment and gave his age as several years older than he is. The field worker passed the application on to me with her OK as to eligibility, etc. I had to be present at Beaumont when applicants were to be given physical examinations and passed by the army officers, so I let the application go in without my OK, knowing that it would be brought to my notice. The names of these two boys came near the top of the list, showing that they registered from different counties and named the same person, their mother, to receive the allotment. Lieutenant Brown came to me with this information and I knew immediately that the mother had tried to slip one over on us. We called the two boys in from the waiting line and questioned them. They declared they were not related. However, the boy that I had recommended just hung his head when he saw that we knew the truth. The army officer was inclined to refuse both applications. I knew the mother really needed the help, and the boy certainly needed the training and discipline of the CCC, so we kept the older boy and sent the younger one home. Another boy came to me, after registration was over, and wanted to know what caused the delay in registering Robert and John. I asked if he knew the boys and he said they were cousins of his and that they were brothers, which I had known all the time.
"These attempts to cheat the government are not confined to the illiterate class. A few weeks ago a dear little old lady came into my office and applied for old age assistance. She gave the name of her only relative, a daughter in Austin. I sent the usual letter to the daughter. No reply came. I sent a follow-up letter asking for a reply. Both letters were in return envelopes and, after waiting a reasonable length of time, I asked the state office to investigate. It seems that the old lady had a tidy little sum of money which the daughter has invested in a business which seems to be paying some dividends. The need for OAA is questionable. Subsequent calls from the old lady usually resulted in nice little visits which left me under the impression that she was not losing any sleep over the delayed pension. Then, one day a short time ago, she came back with a young woman. The young woman was wall dressed and carefully groomed, but noticeably afflicted with a superiority complex. Before I had time to say a word, she sailed into me:
'What's the meaning of this delay in giving my mother her pension? You are just another one of those high-salaried-do-nothings that sits behind a mahogany desk and lets the public sweat.' ......and on and on. She shot broadsides into me until I was boiling but unable to get in a word unless she could be gagged to silence. Finally, she had to stop for breath and I managed to ask politely:
'What is your name?'
'I have no name; that is, I have none to give to you.'
'In that case, you have no business with me,' and I managed to get to the door end push it gently against her. She was outside before she realized it and I snapped on the latch while she was still shouting accusations and threats. The old lady gave me a pat on the arm as she slipped out, and whispered; 'I'll see you again, honey.' I hope not. "I have a little twinge of conscience every time I think of the people in this next house. The family was on relief and I noticed that one of the women was comparatively young, and she looked to be quite strong. I suggested that they might feel better if she had work to do. Her reputation was not the best, and, while the need was evident, I could see no reason why she should not work. I asked her if she would not prefer to receive help through wages rather than to accept straight relief. She said she would love to work and that she was strong and healthy, etc. Wall, I had her assigned to work. She did not report. I then notified her to come to see me. She did not come. Just about that time my mother had grown worse and had to be taken to the hospital for an operation. Anxiety over her condition, pressing work in the office and field, and other things crowded the matter of the young woman out of my mind for awhile. Then her mother, a pitiful old woman, came timidly into my office one day. Sitting on the edge of a chair, she kept folding her handkerchief into tiny pleats and nervously straightening them out again. She had brought me a bunch of late fall flowers and, while I was putting them in water, I kept talking to her - trying not to notice how like a scared little rabbit she looked, and that she might jump and run if I raised my voice. After a little while she was more composed and, leaning toward me, she asked;
'Miss Ann, how's your Ma?'
'She is better, thank you. We have been very anxious and worried over her condition.'
'Miss Ann, is it.. is it so that she has cancer?... That's what they say, you know.'
"I told her that it was true and that she had had a very serious operation and was now in the hospital. Dabbing her streaming eyes with the pleated handkerchief, which she had rolled into a tight little wad, she told me, pausing now and then to stifle a sob in her throat:
'Miss Ann, I feel like I can tell you now... since your Ma has one. My daughter, my Mary, has cancer... She ain't able to work... We was just ashamed to tell you.'
"It is only too true. The young woman whom I tried to make go to work has only a short time to live. I have a heart twinge when I think of this... and other times when I have failed to understand. Strange, how these people are sensitive about certain diseases - like cancer or tuberculosis. I probably never would have known the truth about this case if my own mother's operation for cancer had not become known to them. Somehow, they figured that it was no disgrace after they knew about mother."
Turning off the main highway, we were again on narrow roads that criss-crossed through low bottom lands; red flags warned of "construction ahead". A tractor had to pull to one side so that the Plymouth could pass. To the left there was a marker on a granite boulder, over the site where General McIntosh was murdered; to the right was an old house where his cabin had stood.
"This spot until recently was enclosed in a pig pen. Some public- spirited women insisted that the place be cleared and the marker placed here. We'll stop on our way out and examine it."
Winding around through, a maze of new roads, we found one that led straight to "Jim's Place," on the banks of the Chattahoochee, under age- old trees. The shady coolness was an oasis after miles of riding under a hot sky. The long, narrow building had numerous windows, and there was one spacious room with a wide open fireplace and a smooth floor for dancing feet. The walls were covered with pictures - painted on some coarse cotton material and signed by the local boy artist, one H. Lattimer. The pictures, of various sizes, were all of waterfalls or water scenes. The blue of the sky and the blue of the water, the brown rocks, and the green in the waving palms ware exactly the same in every picture. H. Lattimer took no chances by experimenting with his three prime colors. A pantry and a kitchen were at one end of the building, next the river; and at the other end was an open porch, breeze-swept and cool, furnished with benches and rough board tables. Here the meals were served.
Jim met us with a wide grin spreading over his homely face.
"How about some fresh water fish for our dinner, Mr. Burns?"
"Yes, Ma'am! My wife has gone for the day but I can fix a fish dinner for you. Will have to serve the convicts first - they are working on our roads. I'll call you as soon as I am ready for you. Just rest out there by the river - or any place.... Wait! Miss Ann, do you want ice tea?... Well, now I just can't make tea. Good! If you will make it, I'll have the water boiling when I call you."
Lilies end ferns grew riotously over the gray rocks on the sloping hillside, and a few trees were scattered in the spaces beyond. The red water purled softly along the clay banks and through the bordering reeds, the waves dipping in and out, like curtsying bows of gallants in some old southern dance. Farther downstream they broke over the low shoals and the eddying current whipped them into yellow foam.
"We are exactly opposite the spot from where Chilly McIntosh swam across the river on the night that General McIntosh was murdered, just below the shoals there."
Here the Relief Lady gave evidence of her Scottish ancestry as she continued: "I feel resentful when I come here, a little sentimental, perhaps, and indignant that the state, and the nation, too, for that matter, has not made any effort to preserve this place - the hone of the patriot who so loved it that he reserved it when ceding the lands of his people to the state. The first of his family, coming from the heather-blown moors of his native land, brought with him almost a colony of sturdy Scotch pioneers to help build a civilization in the wilderness of a new country; and six delegates bearing his family name were at the First Continental Congress... It seems that the river alone is to sing the eternal requiem of this forgotten son of a new land. The place does have possibilities and I'd love to see some effort made to preserve it before it is too late."
Jim came to the door and called that the fish were ready and - since he had failed to find any lemons - would Miss Ann care if he substituted coffee for the iced tea? Out on the open porch the lunch was served - fish fried to a golden brown, hush-puppies, French fried potatoes, pickles, and hot coffee! A finicky guest would not enjoy the primitive service; and having to use, collectively, a bath towel in place of the doilies which Jim just could not find might be just too horrible! Jim assured us that the bath towel was clean, as was also the cooking. (We used this same towel when we washed our hands after lunch!) Jim's guests that day had seen so much of life's sordid side, so great a lack of comfort, that fastidiousness was not allowed to spoil the enjoyment and appreciation of the delicious meal that he had prepared.
While we ate, Jim entertained us with the local gossip and the story of the hired man finding an Indian pipe in a near-by field and trying to break it with a piece of iron. He showed us the pipe, which seemed to be cut from solid stone and polished.
He refused the money that we offered him for the dinner.
"Charge you, Miss Ann? I should say not! Just come again, and bring your friends."
Argument proved useless. There was work to do, so once again we started, reluctantly leaving the shaded coolness. Just then Jim remembered something and came tearing out:
"Just a minute, Miss Ann. About that preacher, Mr. Gibbs. He asked me to speak to you and see if I could get you to hurry it up - - "
"His application has been received and will be attended to as soon as I can get to it. I take them in the order they are received."
"He thought, being as he is a preacher-- -- --"
"Preacher or farmer, black or white, I take them just as they come - and he'll just have to wait."
"Well, I just premised that if I saw you -- -- But do you know he wanted me to tell you that, since he is a preacher, the community might appreciate it if you could double the allotment?.. No, I didn't like that. Yea, you're right. Goodbye, Miss Ann."
We plowed into the newly sodded road and out again to the paved highway for a few miles before we turned into another narrow community road where it seemed that there were just a few inches between the outer edge of the tires and the deep ditches on each side. The Relief Lady sped along as if on a paved boulevard.
"This road is one of the 'unpardonable sins' that Corra Harris described, in a letter to a friend, as isolating her house 'In the Valley' whenever it rained. I was trying to find this family and stopped at the rather decent farmhouse we have just passed to ask the way through this wilderness. The woman called her husband and told him to get in the car and go with me, as she was afraid for me to go over the road alone. I am not nervous and I never drive slowly, but after a few hundred yards of this road I noticed that the man was holding uneasily on to the door, so I asked:
'Mr. Brown, would you like to taka the wheel and drive until we reach a better road?'
'Good God, NO, Miss Ann! You just go right ahead... and try to keep out of that d -- -- -- -- d ditch!'
"The mother in this family, where we are going now, died last week. She seemed to be dying when I arrived there and I went to her husband and told him that a doctor should be called as his wife seemed in a serious condition.
'She's all right,' he said. 'She's had spells like this afore and always got all right.'
"I insisted on having a doctor, but the woman was dead when he came... There's a baby. Some old woman hurried out to find mullein and wild cherry root for tea when it was only a few hours old. She said it had 'yaller janders'. I suggested that it first be given soma milk. If it had been the child of wealthy parents who could have placed it in an incubator, provided nurses and hospital care, it would surely have died. It's just one of those things that makes me wonder. The father is a moron, and the children, with few exceptions, are not normal. The boy is unusually bright and I am trying to get him in CCC; a few months in camp and he would be able to do more for his family than all the relief workers in the state. It seems to be the only constructive measure I can recommend. The baby, which I do believe will live, will have to be placed out. With such a background, it will be difficult."
A quick turn to the left and across the rough plank bridge that spanned the little creek, and we were at the little three-room house, hemmed in with grass and weeds, the hot sun pouring down upon it. Hanging from the porch rafters were articles of freshly ironed clothing - a pink print dress, gray cotton trousers, a blue shirt, and some dingy knit underwear. In the one little patch of shade, on the corner of the porch, a geranium was growing in a tin can. Inside, the house was bare and unlovely, but not "cluttered" as such homes usually are. The baby lay motionless on the bed, the older girl fanning the flies away from the tiny bit of humanity.
"Hit's a boy," she said. "Wish it'd been a girl - Well, I'd love to raise a little girl. But he don't cry. He's good." She spread the coarse white sheet over the little form.
"Miss Ann," and there was the ghost of a twinkle in the girl's brown eyes, "I had to make shore 'twas you. 'Cause Pa told me if a 'dressed-up' woman coma here, fur me to grab the kids and light out for the swamp. Pa says we ain't a goin' to be parted." Evidently some rumor has reached them that an effort is being made to find a home for some of them.
The girl could not tell us where to find her brother. She thought he had gone to see his girl friend, Muzetter. Yes, she would remember to tell him to see Miss Ann on Wednesday. Over the rickety bridge again and out into the "unpardonable sin" which was called a road, unable to forget the misery, the hopelessness of the clinging children left in the hot little house behind us.
"And this is why I can't sleep at night!" exclaimed the Belief Lady, as if she had suddenly made a discovery.
"Now, to find Muzetta! I have an idea that she is the fifteen- year-old girl who wanted to find work in a mill. If so, it is on the other side of Cedar Valley. I do not dare trust those children to tell the brother that I must see him Wednesday."
More miles over uncertain roads, and then the old house in a clay-washed yard, the paint gone with the rains of many passing years. A few straggling rose bushes, a cape jasmine, -and over the corner of the house a crape myrtle spread its soft pink bloom over the roof like a feathered crown. It was Muzetta's house, and the brother was there.
-----------------
"I promised to take a little boy for a ride when I came this way. I saw his father yesterday and told him that I would see him today. They will be expecting me. The boy is just back from Warm Springs and I am anxious to see him. You see, my special hobby is 'crippled children' even if my work with them is limited. This child is a bright, happy little fellow, as is usual with afflicted children. It was a hard matter to get the consent of the family, or even persuade the boy to go to warm Springs after we had worked hard to gain admittance for him. I was desperate, promised him everything he asked, if he would only go... I even told him that he would see the President, and that the President would talk to him about Washington. I crossed my fingers when I promised, maybe preyed a little that it would come true, but positively assured him that it would happen. Well, it did. President Roosevelt came down for Thanksgiving, just after the little fellow first went down there, and it all came true just like a fairy story. The boy believes anything I say now, but I am careful not to make any promises. He was all drawn and helplessly crippled. The father and mother wanted him to be well, of course, but any suggestion of sending him away from them met with opposition. They were afraid. Perhaps, he would not be treated well. Maybe, he would get homesick; and, maybe, they would hurt him! well, I painted Warm Springs in such glowing colors that it would take a big imagination to make heaven more attractive, and succeeded in sending him there (To Warm Springs, not Heaven!). Since the first trip, he is always anxious to go back when the time comes for him to go for treatment. He has been three times now. He has improved in every way - even speaks more correctly, due to association with the patients and nurses at the foundation."
Assembled in the shade of a big apple tree the entire family was waiting when the car came to a stop in the kitchen dooryard. "This is a different class," was the first thought after I noted the appearance of the family group, dressed in clean cotton clothing, their intelligent faces shining with happiness and appreciation at the attention shown to the little cripple. He was carefully placed in the car and made as comfortable with cushions as his braces would permit. A paper bag filled with damson plums for Miss Ann was anchored where it would not bounce about and crush the ripe fruit.
In order not to hurt the little patient, the brakes went on frequently and no attempt at speeding was made until the smooth pavement of the highway was reached and there was no danger of jolts and jars. Interrupted only when the Relief Lady had to stop to make a call or some inquiry in connection with her work, the boy's description of the foundation, his doctors, his nurses, life at home, etc., kept us entertained. His cheerful optimism was a tonic to wavering faith. No word of criticism, no groan of complaint; all was praise or happy expectation. He spoke slowly, carefully choosing his words and trying to avoid colloquialisms. When asked if he was comfortable, he always said he was, although the twisted little body, braced in steel, sometimes slumped into positions that must have been painful.
When he was lifted tenderly to his wheel chair again, something was missing from the car, something more than just the little figure on the cushioned seat, something that lingered - like a benediction.
"That child makes me ashamed." But the comment did not come until after a long silence and after we had sped over miles and miles of paved highway.
"No, I have never been afraid. Once a drunk Negro sideswiped my oar and kept going. Mother was with me and it frightened her, but I was too angry to be afraid. Another time when I had gotten off the main highway in making a detour, I lost my way. It was getting late, dark in fact, when we came to a house. One of the girls from the office was with me, but usually I am alone. The house was all dark, and still. You know, these country people go to bed with the chickens. I went to the door and knocked. I had to find out where we were, and I had a flat tire, too. At long last a woman came and opened the door. She was an evil-minded vixen. She froze me with a look when she saw me standing there alone, but I managed to tell her that I had stopped to get some help with my ear. 'Then, too,' I said, 'I'd like to find out just where I am -- --'
'I should think you would, you hussy! Any woman out by herself this time of night - an' you don't even know where you are - can git along without help. No, there ain't nobody here as can help you.'
A little way across the field I saw a cabin and had turned to go there and ask any Negro who might live there to give me some help, but just then the woman's husband came dragging down the hall, barefooted, with a lighted lamp in one hand and hooking his suspenders with the other.
'Well, if hit hain't the relief woman', he exclaimed as soon as he saw me. Speak of quick changes! Mrs. Bullfrog was a novice in the art of making quick changes compared to that woman. Her expression changed so suddenly that I had an idea that I had dreamed she called me a hussy. She'd have baked biscuit and fried chicken at that hour of the night if I had hinted at being hungry! Her husband fixed the tire for me and told me how to get back to the highway. As we rolled out of earshot, Blanche, the girl with me, hissed in my ear: 'If that woman ever needs help and calls on you and you dare to listen ... I'll, I'll wring your neck, Miss Ann!'
"Well, patience is something we can live without - for a time, at least. I often lose patience, and don't think it's anything serious. But, sometimes, my faith gets a jolt. That's different. Over there in the jailhouse are two little girls - one twelve and the other only six years old. The mother and the twelve-year-old girl have been found guilty of operating a house of ill fame. I rebelled at sending the girl to the reformatory. She seemed so young. One of the officers told me that she was hopeless. I would not believe it and went over to the jail to see her... How could a young face ever become so hard, so evil, so brazen? I know now that the reformatory is the only place for her. But the little girl, the six-year-old one... I could not bear to see her behind bars, so the sheriff's wife has given her a room and will take care of her until I can find a place for her.
"Religion? Church? Well, frankly, some of our hardest problems are those cases where the church societies have scrambled their good intentions. There's always some one who is not willing to hide good deeds behind a bushel, is inclined to talk too much, or to boast of the Samaritan act. It just does not work. However, I did take some mean satisfaction over the dilemma of the minister who was at home with us at the time a family came calling on me late one night. They came from an adjoining county, pitiful objects - and what a story they told! The minister heard it all and said to me later: 'Miss Ann, I am horrified! I did not think it possible for such conditions to exist. Where on earth did those people come from?' 'Why, Mr. Crane, they live just back of your church ! ' I knew what I was talking about, too.
"No, I do not find many books in the places where these people live and very little reading matter of any kind. Oh, once I did find books! I had a call to go to a place across the river from where we were today at noon, some distance over and back from all ordinary roads well, you might call it the 'backside of nowhere' it was so nearly inaccessible. The cabin door was closed but I could see the old Negro woman coming toward me across the ploughed field. I went to meet her. I could talk as we walked and save time. When we reached the cabin, however, she insisted that I rest for a little while. I noticed pamphlets from the 'Literary Guild' and from the 'Book-of-the-Month club' lying on the little table. Just to make conversation, I asked her if she could read.
'Oh, yes', she said, 'I b'longs to all dam clubs.'
"I was astonished when she showed me some of her 'nice books' which she kept packed away.
'Do you read all these books, Aunt Mandy?'
'Yes, Ma'am! I reads 'em all.'
"I don't think so. There were books on religion, poetry, and some oriental treatise -- on voodooism, maybe; a handsomely bound set which she said she was going to will to 'de chillun'. The only way I can account for the possession of all those books is that Aunt Mandy can read and write a little and has answered ads. offering books on approval, or for sale with same down payment. Possibly she has made some payment on some of them, and, having gone over those roads a few times, I can understand that no collector has ever been able to find her. It is a strange hobby for an illiterate old Negro woman, this collecting of books; but, regardless of methods, she has collected some lovely ones -- I even envy her a handsomely bound copy of the works of Shakespeare."
The lights were turned on in the streets of the little town when the Plymouth slid into the rear drive. Courthouse offices were closed and the shadows had deepened until the pink althea at the entrance only made a dark blur against the white wall of the building. The Relief Lady snapped on a light as she entered, and the ringing tap-tap of her high heels echoed down through the empty corridors as she made a final visit to her office to check up and see that the week's work was finished. Soon the lights were switched off and the heavy outer door swung shut behind her as she came down the steps.
"I had to telephone a grocery for the Clarke family, and make sure that it would be delivered tonight. Fortunately, the grocery stores do not close until late cm Saturday."