Tbor City Tampa, Florida 2315 12th Avenue Adelpha Follato (Cuban) Stetson Kennedy 
ENRIQUE AFD AHAIIDA 
Amanda's house is several "blocks east of the Hav-A-Tampa cigar factory, on a narrow dirt alley lined with unpainted 
frame shacks. A group of children playing marbles in the sand includes blondes, dark Latins, and Negroes. They 
scatter like a flock of chickens when they see the car approaching. 
As soon as the car stops they gather around it, climb upon front and rear bumpers and the running boards. Dark, stout, 
and smiling, Amanda shouts to the children and comes out to greet us. She hugs my wife Edith, and shakes my hand. 
"I been wanting to meet your husband a long time," she tells Edith. 
We enter the front room and sit in three rickety straight chairs. The only other furnishings are a table, a new 
automatic-tuning radio, and two calendars. Several children stand in the doorway, staring, and a small boy bobs his 
blonde head in and out of another door leading to a bedroom. 
"Them's all my kids," Amanda says, "and they sure look like tramps. There is no use for me to wash them in the 
afternoon when the come home from school because by night they have got all dirty again. I just leave them alone till 
night and wash them good before they go to bed. 
1220 

2. 
"They "been playing marbles with those colored kids next door. Those colored kids are nice children; their mother, she 
is a good woman from Georgia. I rather have my hoys play with them than with a lot of other kids in this 
neighborhood. 
"Did you notice the people sitting on the porch of the second house down from here? They are not such good people. 
He is all right, but his wife Is not so good. Una Libert iny. She has three men giving her money—she calls them 'old 
"buzzard1 unless they bring her money. 
"Besides these four kids here I got two raore girls living with my cousin in Key West. She can take better care of them 
there; she ainft got no kids of her own. That blonde-headed rascal that keeps poking his head around the door is named 
Jose^\ he's five years old, and the other boy, Perico, is eight. Maria is nine, and Rosa—she's my oldest—is thirteen.M 
Rosa says, "How do you do?" She has brown hair, a delicately pretty face, and intelligent brown eyes. She does not 
have on any rou^e or lip -stick, and her cheap house-dress is torn in many places. 
"You know what?" asks Amanda. "Rosa, 13 years old, is getting ready to get married. I wish I knew how to knock 
that idea out of her head." 
"The sooner I get married and get away from here, the better," smiles Rosa. 
"He's an Italian," says Amanda, "and I don't want no Italian son-in-law in the family." 
"Well, you might as well get used to it," says Rosa. "I love Nicky and I'm going to marry him no matter what anybody 
says. He's a very nice 
Italian. He has a mustache, dark hair, and he's tall." 
1221 

3- 
"He's got blue eyes," adds Amanda. 
"He has not!" declares Rosa. "His eyes are very li^ht brown. I ought to know—I've been close to hiia.'" 
"I don't see why you can't marry a Cuban or an American—anything but an Italian," says Amanda. 
"I do like Americans," admits Bosa. "Sure.' But I can't do nothing about it. The only way to get Americans is to be 
high-toned and lire in Hyde Park and I can't do that. I don't want any damn wild crackers from out in the woods, 
either. They're wild people. You can grow potatoes in their ears and scrape their heels. 
"Nicky is a beautician in New York and he came down here to visit his family for the holidays. He has stayed so long 
he has lost his job, and now he wants to go back to New York and get a job in a restaurant. He wants to go back and 
get a job and then come marry me, but I want him to marry me first and take me with him when he goes. I always 
wanted to live in New York." 
"She's only known him for three weeks," says Amanda, "and says she is going to marry him. Well, marriage is like a 
lottery: you don't know whether you win or lose till it's all over. 
"I was married when I was 13 years old, just like Eosa. That's how I know she's too young to think about getting 
married. She ought to be in school." 
"That's right," asserts Edith. 
"You think I want to start back to school now?" demands Hosa. "And go back to the seventh grade where my kid 
brother is now? Hell no! 
VZ'ZZ 

I wouldn't start hack now for nothing! " 
"Eosa sure was smart in school, too," says Amanda. "She made all A's from top to bottom, and even skipped a grade. 
She quit school he-cause she had fainting spells and the doctor said she had a weak heart. But now she goes to dances 
and everything and doesn't ever faint no more so I think she must he all right and ought to go back to school. 
"I used to have fainting spells like Eosa before I was married, but since I been married I aint had any at all. Me, dark 
like I am, would get white as a sheet when X fainted. Z don't know what that is—I never went to a doctor for it." 
"I've got a job in a sewing room," says Eosa. "Not the WPA; a Jew-store sewing room. I made $2.20 last week, but 
you know I am only an apprentice learning my trade; I will make more money soon. There is a supervisor there 
watching us all the time to see that we don't rest. Sometimes when he is in some other part of the shop we stop a 
minute, but when we see him coming we have to start working quick or he docks part of our pay. The only way I can 
get any rest is to go to the lavatory. We aren't allowed to stay there but a few minutes." 
Little Joscrt) suddenly dashes into the room with a rubber ball and flings himself on Amanda's lap. He is pursued by a 
small, thin, bow-legged girl who tearfully accuses him, in Spanish, of stealing her ball. Amanda forcefully takes the 
ball, and returns it to the girl. Jose*' wails strangely. 
"Jose's deaf and dumb," Amanda explains. "He stole that girl's ball and now he wants to go take it away from her 
again. He's some tough roughneck. He fights anybody; he don't care how big they are." 
1223 

5. 
"I rather he dead, than deaf and dumb like that," solemnly declares Maria. 
Perico walks cautiously across the room, and turns on the radio. "I hope it isn't church music,w he says. 
"Here comes my husband, Enrique, now," exclaims Amanda, "he's been to the store." Enrique seems to be about Ho 
years old; he has a rather handsome face, and appears to be quite active and virile. 
"I don't spoil my children," continues Amanda. "When I go to visit somebody my children come along and sit down 
and behave themselves and don't run around hollering. They don't always ask for bread when I go visiting, either, like 
a lot of kids do. 
"Jose eats candy all day. It's bad for his teeth and I ought not give it to him but he cries if I don't. He111 take all the 
pennies you will give him, but he won't take no nickels or dimes or nothing like that. * guess maybe he never spent 
nothing but pennies in his whole life; he must think pennies is the only thing you can buy stuff with. 
"He sure hates to take a bath. Sometimes when he knows he's going to have to take a bath he gets on the toilet and sits 
there for hours, just to keep from having to take a bath. You try to take him off the toilet and he hollers and hollers. 
The only way you can make him take a bath is to get a belt and make out like you are going to whip him. Then he will 
get in the tub." 
"My kids know when I take off my belt I mean business," says Bnrique, speaking for the first time. "They know I treat 
them good and buy them things and don't buy myself nothing. I buy my wife a dress and the kids 
$2 suits for Christmas and me no buy nothing." 
1224 

6. 
"Jose sure is stubborn, " Amanda goes on, "and what a temper he's got! When he wants something and can't make you 
understand what it is, he sure makes a fuss. I want to send him to school as soon as I can. He has a good head on him. 
He can learn to write and will get along fine, I think. I took him to the doctors here and they said he was horn that way 
and there wasn't nothing they could do. 
"Jose goes to shows and likes them very much. You should see the motions he goes through when he comes home and 
tries to tell me what he saw. He imitates automobiles, airplanes, horses, everything. You should see him imitate 
Enrique shaving and brushing his teeth.¦ 
Jose is sitting on the cement steps, exploding caps with a small tack hammer. He watches the caps very carefully so he 
can see the smoke and tell when they explode. He explodes the last cap, looks around for approval, and puts the head 
of the hammer in his mouth and chews on it. 
"He is always chewing on some kind of iron," Amanda complains, "always chewing on his belt buckle or something 
like that. Look how he's got his belt fastened up now—with a match-stick. He chews off his belt buckles faster than I 
can sew them on. 
"You'll have to forgive our humble house," says Amanda apologetically. "I only pay S3 a week for it, but it is near 
Enrique's job. Did you know they're planning to tear down a lot of these old 'shotgun' shacks T —You know, these old 
houses are called one- or two-barrelled shotgun shacks, according to how many apartments they have. I heard they are 
going to build big new apartments for Negroes, and make them all move into one section and not be scattered all over 
like they are now. I don't know as all of them will want to move, but I guess the city will condemn 
their property if they don't. 
1225 

7. 
"Enrique made all this furniture out of boxes and things; he made those benches and that table and that cabinet and 
icebox. He made the ice box out of tin; it keeps ice good, too. Enrique is good like that; he saves us a lot of money. He 
makes wicks out of old carpet for the oil stove, and he makes vinegar and wine with raisins. 
"You know, I would like to have nice furniture, but I donft like to go in debt. I don't believe in buying furniture unless 
you can pay for it. The only thing we owe money on is that radio; it cost $39-50 and it sure is a good one. It gets all 
the Cuban stations. 
"Some people go ahead and buy pretty things and go in debt when they can't afford it and maybe the company takes it 
away from them and then they lose all that money. There's nothing I hate worse than to have collector men coming to 
my house all the time bothering the life out of me and keeping me broke. I rather buy good healthy food for my kids 
and a few little clothes for them to go to school; it don't make so much difference about the furniture. I think it's best 
to save and keep a little money ahead in case there is sickness or anything like that. It don't look like we are able to get 
much ahead, though. 
"When Enrique is working steady he likes to buy better food; you know, he likes to see the children get happy. But I 
say we better eat the same food, but not extra—so we can maybe save for when his job stops. 
"When I was married my mother hadn't never told me nothing about life or nothing like that. I was as innocent as the 
day I was born. When she used to want to talk about those things she would look at me and I would have to leave the 
room. I didn't know nothing about how not to have babies—no wonder I had so many. I'm 28 now and got six kids 
and I 
1226 

s. 
don't want no more. There ain't no use in having kids unless you can give them some of the things they need. The more 
kids you have the less there is to give them. 
"I always had to have a chape rone everywhere. My date had to come to the house mostly and sit in the living room 
with the family and carry on conversation. Ve couldn't even get up and go back to the kitchen for a drink of water 
together; I always had to go get the water toy myself. My date had to leave at nine-thirty, and I wasn't allowed to walk 
to the door with him; X had to say goodbye still sitting down." 
"Cuban customs are crazy anyway," says Rosa. "I'm glad I was born in America." 
"I was born in Key Vest," replies Amanda. "I'm an American just as much as you are. I may come from Cuban 
descent, but I'm 100 percent American just the same." 
"Real American people consider you a Cuban," retorts Rosa. 
"Vhat do I care what they consider me so long as I am an American?" asks Amanda. "Heck yeah, I'm an American— 
alnt I on the VPAT 
"The relief station here gives away lots of good things. They give me nice clothes for the children; and they give us 
can meat, and flour, and lots of things. It's real good stuff, too, and helps out plenty. I heard that Roosevelt was going 
to start giving away lots more things like that, and start selling things very cheap to poor people on relief. It sure will 
be wonderful if he does. 
"Do you like grapefruit juice? I'm going to give you some cans of it I got at the relief station. It carries one pint in each 
can. Grapefruit juice makes very good drinks with rum. I get cans of it all the 
1227 

time—last time they give me five cans. I fixed some of it nice in glasses with ice and sugar for the kids, hut they donft 
like it and won't drink it. They like the fruit, hut they won't drink the juice. 
"Food is pretty cheap in Yhor City—I get milk for 10^ a quart—hut even so, lots of people do not have enough money 
to "buy to eat. I have seen people go to the meat market and ask for free scraps for dogs, and then cook the scraps and 
make soup to drink. 
"Enrique used to have a little 'buckeye' cigar factory of his own. He had 12 men working for him at one time, hut you 
know he didn't have enough capital to keep going. He had to buy all his material for cash and sell for credit, so he 
needed more capital than he had. He is a good "business man and was doing good with it for awhile. 
"My one ambition is for my kids to finish school and maybe even go to college. That's the main reason I wish Enrique 
could get started with his own buckeye again—so maybe he could make enough money to send the boys to college. If 
I had the means I sure would help him get started in his own factory again. 
"He did try to borrow money but the hanks wouldn't lend him any because he didn't have enough security, and he 
didn't know nobody else who could lend him any. He wants so hard to start a buckeye of his own again; that's all he's 
living for, the day he can start again. Look: he picked out this label from a catalogue. He's saving all these labels in 
case he starts up again. I think it was the prettiest one; nobody can use this label hut him because he bought the rights 
to it. It looks like he will never be able to get started again, hut while there is life there 
is hope, they say." 
: . 1228 

"Looka all these cigars "behind this door," says Enrique. "I keep them hid here for a friend of mine who has a little 
"buckeye factory. Eight now, the first of the year, the customs checks up on all cigars and collects for revenue stamps 
on them. Diaz—he's my friend—he keep these cigar here so he won't have to pay no revenue. That's about the only 
way he is able to make any money, cigars sell so cheap now. 
"Diaz has gone over to St. Petersburg to sell some boxes of cigars to the tourist, without no stamps on them. 
Sometimes he gets low with money, so he makes up extra good cigars and sells them to tourists like that; he sells them 
dearer, hut they is hotter cigars. By not paying revenue on them he makes money pretty good. But that's dangerous, all 
right; you know, he might walk up to an officer or something. 
wHe used to he the "biggest "bootlegger in Tbor City during the prohibition. He had $60,000 in the hank at one time, 
and now he no have nothing. The police took it all in fines and "bribes to get him out of jail. Diaz used to he plenty 
tough. But he's getting more old and soft now; he says so long as he has to eat and a little money to spend he is going 
to enjoy himself while he is alive. 
"In the factory I work in now, I make 30^ an nour hut it's not regular work all the time. The days what we are working 
we make about $2.30; that's not so bad as a lot of people makes. The smallest amount they pay in the factories now is 
$10 a week and you have to work very fast on account of the wage hour law making wages high and unless you can 
work fast and good the company will fire you. 
"There aint no young people—very young—working in the factories. The Government won't allow it. A few years ago 
they found two boys working 
1229 

11. 
who were 17 years old, and they made the "boys quit the factory and go hack to school. They wouldn't have "been 
hired in the first place if they hadn't lied about their age. 
"There is quite a few crackers working in the factories now; most of them came from Georgia." 
"You know what's the matter with them cracker people?" interrupts Amanda. "They live so far out the running water 
aint got there yet." 
"We used to make $55 a week," Enrique continues, "hut now don't nobody make much more than about $18. I guess 
it's mostly because the machines can make cigars so cheap; you can buy the best kind of cigar now, 2 for 5#. And aint 
nobody smoking cigars like they used to; young people all smoking cigarettes. Cigars is going out of style. 
"In the days when we made $55 & week we didn't have no unions. Maybe that's why we got so much pay—when we 
used to strike we always won, but since the unions organized we aint won a strike. We used to go on strike and 
everybody stick together good; you know. Key West and Cuba would send help, sometimes five percent of our wages, 
to take care of our families while we on strike. Of course, the people in Key West is all on relief now. 
"This APofL union is no benefit to us. Before we can strike now we have to get permission from the Florida union 
officers, and they have to get permission from the national union officers, and they won't let us strike. If we go ahead 
and strike anyway without permission we all lose our jobs at the factories and there is plenty workers to take our 
places. 
"Roosevelt, he is the one make the—what you call it—um—Lewis. 
CIO, that's right. Roosevelt don't make it, but he make it grow good, 
1230 

12. 
you know. He say CIO is all right. He prove he like the CIO the way he put good men on the Labor Board and the 
Supreme Court. 
"There is a closed shop in all the cigar factories in Tampa. You see, the factory owners they like the AFofL union and 
they make the closed shop so nobody who is not in AFofL union can get a job. 
"Of course most of the men, they like the CIO, but there is nothing they can do about it. Because if they break up the 
AFofL union and have the strike, the factory owners, sheriff, police, judges and everybody like that is for the APofL 
union. Besides, there is plenty of men who would work the factories and break the strike. 
"I guess you saw in the papers about the national officer of the APofL cigarmakers' union coming to Tampa and 
suspending the guiding committee elected by the local unions. The committee was trying to get the men to make the 
CIO union. They had a long fuss in the courts with the national officer. The unions elected another guiding 
committee—it was funny, the new committee wanted the CIO just as much as the suspended men did. At last the 
national officer agreed to let the suspended men come back in the union if they would promise not to be officers for a 
year. 
"One time the Ku Klux Klan paraded through Ybor City to break up a strike. Everybody just got their shot guns and 
came out and sat on the porch with their guns and watched the parade. It sure was a quiet parade, and it didn't last very 
long. Man, it was a good thing the Klan didn't start no trouble or there sure would have been revolution or something 
over herei The Klan don't want no talk of communism going on. Neither do the factory owners, sheriff, police, or 
judges. They all work together 
1231 

13. 
just like that. 
NI read in the papers about the Elan parading over in Lakeland, trying to stop the citrus workers1 strike. But it din't do 
no good. The citrus union wrote a letter to the longshoremens' union, and the longshoremen stopped handling the 
fruit—which was being packed by scab laborers—and they also got the seamens1 union to stop shipping it. A-nd in 
New York, somebody was picketing the fruit stands in the market. That was real cooperation. 
"Of course they was very lucky to not have no dishonest judge in Lakeland; the judge would not give the companies an 
unjunction to stop the picketing of the packing plants. 
"Citrus is a perishable food, and unless it is handled quickly it rots and the owners lose money. With cigars it is very 
different. All the factories have thousands of cigars stored up, and in case there is a strike, they have plenty cigars to 
last a long time. That is why the companies win the strikes, because the cigars will keep a long time. The companies 
have enough money to hold out for years, while the workers do not even have to eat for their families. If the workers 
just had enough to eat maybe they could win the strikes more better. 
"The wage-hour law is funny. The government make that law so things would be more better for workers; so they 
would get more money and not have to work so long. But it is not working like that. More than 2,(XX) mens have 
done lost their jobs from the cigar factories in Tampa because of that law. The factory owners say they no can make 
any profit if they pay the workers so much money, so they fire the workers and put that work on machines. Of course, 
the factory owners can afford to pay more 
. 1232 

wages, hut they say they can't, and that's all there is to it. They want to keep all the profit for themselves. 
"That law is playing hell with the little buckeye factories, too. Buckeye owners can't pay their workers no more than 
75^ or $1 a day, so unless they get exempt from that law I guess they have to go out of business. 
"The national officer of the cigarmakers' union—the one who suspended our officers for trying to start the CIO—is 
trying to get the cigar industry exempt from the wage hour law. He says that is the only way those mens what have 
been fired can get their jobs back. But the way I think it, the Government ought to make the company take back those 
mens and keep up with the law, or else why did they pass a law like that in the first place. 
"All these new kind of insurance the Government has made the companies start for the workers is all right. There was 
a man in our factory got hurt with a saw not long ago, and he was in bed one week and that insurance pay him just the 
same as if he was at work. Man, that's all right; we never had nothing like that before. 
"In the G-asparilla parade in I93O the Hav-A-Tampa float had a beautiful Cuban girl on it—she was beautiful—and 
they had her, almost naked, painted all over with gold paint. Eight after the parade she got sick and she was sick for 
two days and died. The doctor said the paint had poisoned her. Of course her family didn't get paid anything. 
"In the National Maritime Union sit-down strike on the S.S. CUBA, while it was in Tampa all the men went on strike 
but one—he was a Key West man. They all sit down on the ship. We heard they was on strike, you know, so we went 
down to the dock to see what was haoTDening and how 
1233 

15. 
they getting along. They had picket lines all around the dock. Some of the men asked us to bring them a copy of the 
paper and some cigarettes and we did. When we got hack it was raining like hell and the picket lines were standing out 
in the rain. Then the policemen drove up with two Dig open trucks, and they went on the ship with their "blackjacks 
and guns and arrested everybody and put them in the trucks. 
"They put all them men in them trucks and they was packed in just like cattle. They drove to the jail standing up in the 
trucks in the rain and singing all the way. They sing all kinda songs and say they aint gonna "be in jail long. 
"All our cigar unions took up a collection and also went to a loan company and borrowed money to pay the fines for 
the strikers so they could get out of jail. We sent cigars and cigarettes to the jail for them and the restaurants in Ybor 
City sent good food free. All the food and cigarettes was searched good before they would give it to the men in jail. 
For a long time after the men got out of jail we cigar union men paid 10^ a week to pay back the loan company for the 
fine money. But now the national office of the NMU is paying us all back. 
"This morning everybody is supposed to start to register for the social security. I am going down to register this 
morning at the Labor Temple if you want to come with me. M 
Perico suddenly becomes attentive. "Let me go with you," he says to me, "and then when you leave daddy you won't 
have to ride back all by yourself." 
"Smart kid, huh?" says Enrique, and chases Perico out of the house. 
1234 

16. 
So Enrique and I drive to the Labor Temple alone. 
"I am not sure about how this social security works yet," he says, "but I think it is this way: if you do not go to 
work—I mean if the factory is not open—then the factory and the Government have the social insurance together 
which they pay you for about three or four months. They only pay you a certain percent of your average salary; I don't 
know how much, but it sure sounds good, all right. You can't get anything, though, unless you register. Everybody is 
registering." 
The Labor Temple is surrounded by a noisy crowd of men, women, children, and dogs; the activity reminds me of 
typical scenes at voting polls. Enrique leaves me and take his place in the line of people waiting to register. Although 
all conversation is in Spanish, I hear frequent interjections in English, such as, "OK," and "That's nice." 
I decide to enter the building, and as I walk through the entrance I am immediately approached by a Cuban man who 
asks: 
"You Americano? You sign the petition to lift the embargo on Spain?" He has a card table erected near the doorway, 
and approaches everyone who enters. 
I tell him that I am a member of the Jacksonville branch of the Medical Bureau and Forth American Committee to Aid 
Spanish Democracy, and he re spends enthus iast i cally. 
He calls to a stocky Cuban man who is drinking a Coca-Cola at the drink stand. 
"This is Mr. Ginesta," he says. "He is the Tampa chairman of the Spanish Aid Committee." 
"I am pleased to meet you," says Ginesta. "I hope you will be here 
1235 

17. 
for the meeting when we sponsor two young ladles who are touring the country in a 'wounded ambulance. ' One of the 
young ladies drove the ambulance for Loyalist Spain, and the other was a nurse. The Tampa Ministerial Alliance is 
going to co-sponsor the meeting with us; it will be the first time in this country that a ministerial alliance has done 
that. And for the first time we will get the Americans in Tampa to our meetings. 
"Ginesta just returned from Washington a few weeks ago, N explains the other man. "In a few days he is going back to 
Washington again to attend as a delegate to the Congress for Peace and Democracy." 
"Tea, I learn plenty in Washington, ¦ Sinesta says. "I went with a delegation to ask Congressmen to lift the embargo 
on Spain. Man, we got a good friend in Claude Pepper; Pepper, he is a good guy. There wee another Congressman 
who told to us: 'You are from Florida and not my constituents, but in your request you represent the majority of the 
American people, and so do I.' That sure make us feel good. 
"There was another Congressman who said: •Tes, I will vote to lift the embargo on Spain this time. —But listen, I 
want you to understand that it is not I who have changed my views since I voted against lifting the embargo last year. 
It is the situation that has changed.1 You see, he didn't want us to say that we were right and he was wrong, or that he 
had swung around to our point of view. Munich, the Lima Conference, and President Roosevelt's speeches sure are 
waking a lot of people up. 
Tou should have seen us when we went into Senator George's office, from Georgia; we almost got thrown out. I don't 
guess there has been a Spaniard in Georgia since DeSoto marched through. 
"I learned a lot in Washington, all right. I watched those guys 
1236 

18. 
work and I know there are very few real liberals. Most of them are uneducated and crooked politicians controlled by 
the big interests.R 
A young man who has been standing behind Ginesta, listening to the conversation, steps up and whispers cautiously to 
him: "You must be more quieter and not talk too much because the woman selling drinks at the cold drink stand is a 
Ku Klux Klan so you better be careful." 
"I was just talking about the Spanish Aid committee," replies Ginesta, "but the Elan don't like it so I guess I might as 
well be careful.—Do you know Pershing, who is field representative for the Spanish committee? Well, he spoke here 
in the Labor Temple not long ago. He is very good, all right. At the meeting he read a note he had received at the hotel 
that said: 'Tampa is an unhealthy place for liberals.' After he read the note he said: 'Whoever wrote that note should 
be sent one saying not to come over here because Tbor City is an unhealthy place for fascists.' Everybody laugh; they 
sure like Pershings." 
Enrique approaches, having duly registered, and nods to Ginesta and the others. "Give my regards to our friends in 
Jacksonville," says Ginesta as I tell him goodbye. When we leave, I see over the front entrance a large poster labelled: 
SOLIDARITY WITH THE VICTIMS OF WORLD FASCISM: 
"Those were very intelligent mens you were talking to," Enrique says. "They are leaders in the unions, the newspapers, 
the Spanish Aid Committee, and all like that. You know, all the unions make I don't know how many h~\ -thousand 
cigars and cigarettes to send to Spain—we stayed in the factories and work overtime to make those things for Spain. 
"The Spanish Aid committee has two mens to stand by the factory door everytlme we get Day; one of the men takes a 
collection to help Spain, and 
1237 

19. 
the other man writes the receipts for whatever you give. It is almost like "buying bolita, the way they work it—you can 
"buy a 5^ piece or as much more as you want. Giving receipts that way nobody can never say any of the money is 
missing. And they print in the paper the record of how much every man give. " 
Although it is only two o'clock in the afternoon when we return to the house, Amanda, is already considering what she 
should cook for the evening meal, which is eaten at four o'clock. She explains that it is Cuban custom to eat at four, 
because that allows time to clean up the kitchen before night; and also, when they retire early* the food is thoroughly 
digested before they go to sleep. 
"What would you all like to eat for supper?" she asks. "We want to fix something you like. I don't know much about 
cooking American dinners. 
"We don't want American food," says Edith. "I'm sick and tired of eating American food; it hasn't got any taste to it. 
That's one reason why I came to Tampa: so I could eat some good Cuban food." 
"I know a man who sells crabs," says Enrique. "If I can just find him while he is drunk—he stays drunk most of the 
time—I can get three dozen crabs for 50£. Crabs makes very good enchilado." 
"My husband likes enchilado, frijoles negrfr(black beans), garbanzos (Spanish^beans), arros con polio (rice with 
chicken); he likes all Cuban things, plenty hot," Edith says. 
"I know," Enrique says, "I make the empanada. You know, the shrimp all crushed up and cook with hot sauce and then 
fry inside little long rolls of dough. The dough cooks crisp and you bite into the good hot shrimp. I think maybe you 
like that all right." 
1238 

20. 
He hurries off to the store to "buy the necessary ingredients. When he returns, he goes to the kitchen and "begins 
preparing the meal, while Amanda sits in the front room and listens to the radio. WI sure got me a good cook for a 
husband," she says. "Enrique cooks lots more "better than I do, and he likes to, so I'm glad to let him do it. You know, 
most all Cuban men is good cooks.11 
I sit in the kitchen window and watch Enrique. The entire house is permeated with the odor of the sauce which he 
prepares ty frying finely chopped onion, garlic, green and red peppers in tomato paste and olive oil. When the shrimp 
are boiled, he pulls them into shreds with his fingers. The sauce is strained to remove the onion, garlic, and peppers, 
and then mixed with the shrimp. Dough is made of flour, "baking powder, and water, and portions of shrimp are 
encased in it. The empanadas are then fried in very hot lard, and come out crisp and golden "brown. 
He has made a large pot of rice, which he strains and then steams with the addition of a tablespoon of lard. He 
prepares a salad of sliced tomatoes, cucumbers, and lettuce, and pours over it a dressing of salt, pepper, olive oil and 
vinegar. He pours four large glasses of home-made raisin wine, and smaller glasses for the children. 
Someone shouts "Hello" from the front porch, enters, and walks on down the hall. "This is Miss Caridad Martinez," 
says Amanda. "She is a very good friend to us who wanted to meet you." 
Caridad is about 19 years old; her complexion is very light, her eyes large and dark, and her hair naturally waved. She 
remains a few minutes, laughing and joking in Spanish. When she leaves, she says in English, "I'm very glad to have 
met you." 
1239 

21. 
After she has gone Amanda says, "Poor Carldad—she's got TB. Three of her sisters died with it in the last three years. 
Now Caridad is going to die with it, the last one, and her mother just looks at her all the time and cries. It hurts her 
mother to know that Caridad is going to die, too, like all the others. Her mother fusses at her all the time hut it is only 
because she is so worried about her dying. They are a very nice family and the girls were beautiful." 
When the cooking is over and the meal placed on the table, there is a sudden burst of very rapid and excited Spanish 
which I am unable to understand. Perlco dashes out of the front door. I ask what has happened, but receive no answer. 
In a few minutes Perico returns, and there is more rapid talking in Spanish. The dinner is getting cold. 
At last Amanda says, "Well, I guess you might as well know; we been trying to borrow some knives from the 
neighbors but none of them has got any either. I guess we will have to use the big knife and pass it around the table. 
I'm so ashamed not to have no knives, butwwe don't never use any. M 
We all gather about the small table. "Just help yourself to everything," invites Amanda. Perico tears the end off of a 
hot loaf of Cuban bread. His hands are extremely dirty. 
"Perico.1 ¦ shouts Amanda. "Get up from here and wash your hands.1 You know better than to sit down to eat with 
your hands like that." 
I am suddenly startled by a loud "Mooo..." from directly under the kitchen window. Everyone laughs loudly. 
"What's a cow doing so close?" I ask. 
"That was no cow," says Enrique, "That was a^cagrabsuLle- -a horse— 
1240 

22. 
poop-pooping!w 
They all laugh louder than ever. "Sure it was a cow," says Estrella, "Enrique ought to he ashamed telling jokes like that 
at the dinner table. The neighbor's keep their cow in a shed right under the window." 
"That remind me of a good joke," says Enrique. "One time there was an old man who had a horse named 'Bertha,' and 
his daughter was named 'Bertha' too. There was a young man who wanted to borrow the horse one day, so he asked 
the old man if he could borrow Bertha for a little while. The old man grabbed his gun and say, 'Eell no, what you think 
this is— you think I let you try out my daughter?'" 
The response to this joke almost upsets the table. 
"I notice you don't laugh so much like the Latin people," Amanda, says to me. "I guess you feel good and just don't 
laugh so much. I think that is all right. But I just can't help laughing. You should hear me in thepicture show; 
sometime when I see something real funny I laugh so much I have to go outside to stop from laughing so much." 
"Would you like to go for a ride?" asks Edith, after the table has been cleared. 
"Yes, sure, anything you all want to do," replies Amanda. "You go put on your suit, Enrique; we are going for a ride 
and I like to see you dressed up in your suit." 
After a few minutes Enrique appears in a neatly pressed brown suit. 
"He won that suit at a lottery for $1," says Amanda. "The man told him if he wanted to buy an extra pair of pants to 
match, it would cost him $6. I told him to go ahead and get the extra pants because that way the suit would be good for 
twice as long as if he only had one pair of 
1241 

23. 
pants. I bought him that crepe shirt he's wearing, for Christmas. It cost $2." 
Amanda is rolling her hair on a clothes-pin. "I fix hair pretty good, huh?" she asks. "You know I don't get to go to the 
beauty parlor but about once a year. They don't do it so good as I do sometimes; I taught some of the girls in the 
beauty parlor how to fix hair more better." 
In due time we are ready to leave. "Let's drive over to Tampa tonight," suggests Edith. "We saw all there is to see of 
Tbor City last night." 
In Tampa, we drive slowly so Edith and Amanda can look in the shop windows. Each window evokes some such 
comment, in Spanish, as: "Que lindol" (How pretty) "Quebonito!" (How beautiful) "Divinoi" (Divine) "No me gusta!" 
(I don't like it). 
"That's the jail Shoemaker was taken out of," says Enrique. "Right in the middle of town. They took him out and sat 
him down in a bucket of hot tar, castrated him, beat him, and did all kinds of things to him. I have heard people argue 
about whether the Klan, or the police, or both, did it. All I know is that they took him right out of jail. 
"I been in that jail. One night when I was walking home along the bridge I saw a lady climb over the rail and get ready 
to jump in and commit suicide, so I grabbed her around the waist and held on and she yelled and raised all kinds of 
hell. The police came, and I guess they thought we was fighting; anyway, they took us both to jail and told us we 
could tell it to the judge. I stayed in that jail seven days before Amanda could borrow &10 to pay my fine to get me 
out." 
We drive over a bridge into a residential section of large homes and well-kept lawns. 
1242 

m: 
"This is Davis Island,n says Amanda. "This where all the millionaires and rich people live. It's very pretty in the 
daytime but you can't see much now. That's the...no, that's not it." 
"Amanda, you don't know nothing about this part of town," says Enrique. 
"I've only rode over here on the Davis Island once or twice," Amanda, admits. "I tell you what you ought to go see: 
the museum in the Tampa Bay Hotel. They have lots of things in there very old, thousands of years old. I like it in 
there. I only been there one time but that time I stayed three hours looking at all those things. It sure is interesting. I 
hope you go there before you leave; you would like it." 
On the way home we stop at a barbecue stand. When we reach the house, Rosa is sitting on the railing of the front 
porch, looking up into the sky. 
"Well, I guess you don't have to worry no more about having an Italian for a son-in-law," she tells Amanda dejectedly. 
"Nicky and I had a fight and he went away mad. I guess it's a good thing. We didn't get along so good anyway." 
"I'm glad you find out now before you married him," comments Amanda. 
We are given the front sleeping room. 
The next morning we are awakened by Rosa who calls, "Tour coffee is ready." 
"Huh," says Edith, "That's not Cuban custom—Cuban custom everybody eats when they feel like." 
We are served coffee and hot bread, and prepare to depart for Jacksonville. Enrique and Amanda present us with a 
package of sandwiches to take with us for lunch, several cans of the surplus commodity grapefruit juice, and a pound 
of black beans. 
1243 

25. 
"We wish we could give you something more better to take with you," Amanda says, "but Enrique hasn't worked any 
in the last few weeks and we are short on cash. " 
As we start out the front door, the children in the bedroom shout: "Goodbye-Goodbye-come-again.'" 
"Goodbye,11 we call. "And Eosa, ¦ I say, "don't get married before I get back to Tampa, and I • 11 bring you a nice 
American for a husband." 
"All right," she says, "I'll wait." 
"I want to come visit you in Jacksonville sometime," Amanda, says, "but I don't know when I'll ever be able to leave 
these kids. I aint got nobody to look after them while I'm gone. I never been nowhere except Key West, Miami, and 
Tampa, and I always wanted to see Jacksonville before I die...Well, hurry up and beat it. And don't say 'goodbye.'3 
Say, "haata la vista—until we meet again. • " 
One week after our return to Jacksonville, we receive a penciled postcard from Amanda. It concludes: "Rosa married 
Kicky and they are living with his family in West Tampa." 
1244 

