A SHRIMP FISHERMAN
“How long I been on the river? Well, I guess my ma carried me out here, ‘cause I remember comin’ on the river soon as I was old enough to talk. I always liked it an’ I'd be miserable if I had to live away from it. I was born on Josephine and Rousseau Street an’ that’s right on the river, an’ new I lives on Annunciation, an’ that ain't far from the river on’ it ain't far from where I was born. I ain't moved much, have I?
"If you wait here a minute I'll bring the boat around, an’ if you'll walk down these steps, an’ hoist yourself into the boat, I'll show you how I catch swimps. If you ain't scared, I'll be glad to take you. The river is she’ plenty rough today, but you don't have to afraid of this beat, it ain't gonna turn over. The only thing is that you might get a little wet, but that can't be helped. I'd like to take you cat-fishin', but it's too rough to try an’ go over to the lines today an’ you wouldn't catch anything.
"You like your swimps cooked, an’ served nice, I guess, but not me. I just takes them out of the water, an’ peels then an’ eats them like they are. Raw? Sure, that's the best way to eat these kind of swimps.
‘Swimps ain't runnin' so good now, the river's too high an’ the weather's too rainy an’ windy, but next month they'll be runnin' good, an’ then you can make easy six or seven dollars a day. They ain't no trouble to catch am’ they sell for six or seven cents a pound. I don't go through the streets sellin', I just sells them right off the wharf. You'd be surprised how many people comes right to the wharf to get swimps. You never get caught with too many. The trouble is, you ain't got enough to sell.
"We each has our place under the wharf to catch swimps an’ nobody goes an’ tries to get the other man's swimps. We don't pay nothin' for our places an’ nobody bothers us.
"You come out early in the mornin', about five o'clock, an’ set your willows down, an’ leave them for awhile an’ come back in the evenin’ an’ pull ‘em up again. You see, we tie these big willow branches, with all these twigs, on these pilings, an’ you just lift ‘em up, an’ put the not under them. Just like this.
"We use the same willows all the time. They don't have to be green. Swinps run right on the top of the water. We'd never get any swimps if we had to sink them to the bottom, ‘cause you is in 40 feet of water right now. Look! there's only two swimps on these branches. Most of the time in good weather, an’ when they runnin', they is eight or ten at one time. An’ these swimps are too small to feel with, they even too small to use for bait.
‘You see those pilings right straight across the river there? Well, that's where I tie my cat-fish line. You string the wire clear across the river. You tie it to a piling on this side, an’ then you tie it over on the other side of the river. The river ain't wide here, it's just about four and a half or five blocks. It takes five dollars worth of wire to string it across the river. An’ about every few feet or so, it may be 6 feet or less, you put your line with a hook on it, an’ then you put your bait on it. You can use swimps, or fish heads, or hearts, just anything you can get at the market. An’ you just sink those lines an’ leave 'em. An’ as you go across the river, you bait your lines, an’ as you come back, you get your fish. You can ketch the fish gain’ across the river, too, but I don't know how it is that you always ketch more comin’ back. I don't know if the fish are gonna run as good this year as they did last year, but last summer she’ was good. We made 35 or 40 dollars a week on fish.
“When they open the look at Harvey, crabs some in an’ that's bad ‘cause they bury themselves on the bottom an’ with these here legs on the side, what you calle ‘em, yes, the feelers and the claws, they pick your bait off your line. You can't katch crabs in the river, ‘cause they bury themselves. You only get red fish down in the salt water, down by the month of the river.
‘Some people catch swimps in a box. They get a wooden box, say a milk box that milk comes in. They put a screen on the side, an’ then they make a little hole in the screen, an’ then they put cornmeal in there, an’ they sink that box. The swimps can get in that hole, but they can't get out. You only ketch large swimp that-a-way. We don't feel with the boxes out here, we gets all we want with the willow branches. Some people put regular croaker sacks with little holes in ‘em, an’ bait them with cornmeal, an’ then let the swimps some in ‘em.
‘My pa swimps down by Felicity Street. He lives with my sister on Felicity am’ Tohoupitoulas. He used to be a longshoreman, but he drinks so much that he can't hardly do nothin'. I wanted him to come stay with me, but he gives too much trouble. He's always drunk an’ makin' noise, an’ fightin'. She’ he goes to jail, but we get him out. See, I got a brother-in-law on the police force. Well, he gets him out.
"Pa's been drinkin' all his life, an’ he she’ give mamma plenty trouble. He made good money on the river, but we never got none of it, he just drank it up. I remember once when I was just growin' up, he was on a spree an’ he got the D.T.'s an’ we had to call the police. I called to take him out to that place back of the prison where they treat drunks an’ crazy people. The police came to get him, but he was in the yard with an ax in his hand an’ they was scared of him. I was afraid he was gonna hurt my ma, so I went into the yard an’ took the ax away from him. Sho’ I was scared, an' I don't know to this day how I got that ax from him. Well, he went out there an’ we didn't see him for about 2 weeks. An’ when we went out there, he wanted to come out, but I wasn't gonna sign the papers to get him out that quick. We left him there for 2 months, but he begged to come out. He was lookin' fine so we brought him back home an’ he acted good for about a year after that an’ didn't give us no trouble. But then he went back on it an’ he ain't been off since.
“My sister sho’ is good. I don't see why she don't put him somewhere, but she don't bother with him. When he starts givin' trouble, she just calls the wagon an’ sends him off.
‘I works at night at the incinerator, back there around Washington Avenue. Well, I ain't been there long enough to tell about things happenin' there. Some people say they find a lot of things in the garbage, but I ain't found anything worth while yet. You see, when those trucks come in, they just dump it and burn it up. There was a man down in the French Quarters, he had put $15 in one of these tin cigarette boxes, an’ he threw away the case. He came back to the place to try an’ get it, but that money was all burnt up.
“It ain't like before when you could go an’ pick at it. We just dump it an’ it's gone. I ain't heard of ‘en findin' any bodies like that there. There's a lot of dead animals people stick in the garbage. They ain't supposed to do it though.
"I only been there since the 5th of March. I had been on a best, an’ I had trouble with the skipper. He was a Greek an’ he says I was an agitator. You see, when you on the boat an’ they ask you to do work that ain't your own, you get paid extra for it. Well, whenever they asked me, I'd do it but I'd sign up to collect the extra pay. The other men hadn't been doin' that. They just had been gain’ ahead an’ doin' the work an’ not gettin' any money for it. Well, the skipper said I was ruinin' the good men. I told him, ‘To hell with you, it's those men that are ruinin' me.’ I could have taken it up to the office ‘cause I belong to the Maritime Union, but I didn't bother. He didn't like me an’ I didn't like him. So I quit the boats.
"I went to my Ward Leader ‘cause he had told me he would give me a job when I wanted it. I went there in the mornin', an’ he told me to meet at the City Hall about 10 o'clock, an’ that night I went to work at the incinerator. You see, they get out there what they call the extra board an’ that's jobs they keep open for people they promise jobs to.
"I fires out there an’ then I collects garbage down in the business section an’ the French part of town. That's the only places they collects at night. You couldn't get the men to collect twice a day in the residential district. No, it ain't hard work to collect garbage. It's covered an’ you got three men on a wagon an’ they can help you with the big cans. I goes to work about six or seven o'clock at night, an’ I works until maybe four o'clock in the mornin’. Sometimes when there's a lot of heavy work, like after a parade, where there’s a lot of trash in the streets, I may work until about seven o'clock in the morning. I gets $4 a night, an’ I don't work on Sunday. When the last train comes in on Saturday night, they just puts it in the fire an’ closes the door an’ lets it burn out by itself.
“I could of gotten a day job if I had wanted, but workin’ in the day you can't come out swimpin' at night. There's some of ‘em that keeps on swimpin' an’ fishin' in the winter, but it gets pretty cold.
"I tell you the truth, I don't think I could live away from the water. I'm tellin' you, as soon as I open my eyes in the mornin', I can't stay home. I just gotta come out here. That's true what they say, once on the water, always on the water. I'm goin' back at the end of the year. I always try to head for home in summer, so that I can fish an’ swimp an’ take a good wim. Lord, I've swan across that river as many times as I got hairs on my head, am’ you see I ain't bald. Look down there, you see that's some fellers swimmin!. No, it ain't too early to swim, but sometimes it's cold. I been in water so cold that my skin turned blue from the cold, an’ I got cramps in my arms an’ legs, but after a few minutes, I got warmed up an’ I come out.
‘Yes, I'm married. I'm married 9 years. We run off to get married. We went over the river an’ was tied by the judge an’ we had a little reception that night, but that's all. We had our marriage blessed by the priest afterwards. We just went over to the judge, ‘cause we decided one night to get married an’ thought it would be quicker. But I guess you can get married just as quick by the priest.
"My wife's named Althea. She's 34 an’ I'm 33; she's just a few months older than me. No, she never worked. Both of us got French names, but we don't speak no French. My grandpa was from France, an’ would be French, an’ my grandma was from Germany. I don't know why they came over here. I don't remember what my grandma's name was. I remember once when I was makin’ a trip to Germany, my aunt had given me my grandma’s name an’ the little town where she was born, a little town outside of Hamburg. So I went to the police an’ give them my grandma's name an’ the name of the town an’ they said they would take a little time to look it up. So when I went back there a few months later I went to the police but they said they had never heard of the town. The first time I heard my grandma's name was when my aunt wrote it down an’ I forgot it since. That is my pa's ma. My grandfather on my pa’s side worked for the city. He used to sharpen the tools for the guttersnipes. You know what that is. When they had these big gutters, the men that cleaned then out were called guttersnipes. He didn't have to leave the house, he had his little shop an’ he sharpened the tools right there. He used to live on Felicity near Annunciation. You can see the place now, it's a big red brick house, but they got niggers livin' in it now.
“My ma's dead. She died February 25, 1926. I don't know what she had. The doctor said that if the baby lived, she would die but the baby died an’ she lived for a little while, but she died anyway. She was bleedin' an’ bleedin' all the time an’ they put the radium up her, but it didn't do no good, they couldn't stop her bleedin'. She was about 40 when she died.
“She had a big funeral. They had 18 automobiles an’ we waked her for 3 nights. We didn't have the wake at home, we waked her back at Leitz Undertakin' Parlor. It's sho’ true, the only thing they do at wakes is drink. My pa had a good time ‘cause he had all the free licker he wanted. No, you don’t give the drinks, you make them bring their own ‘cause it's too expensive. She was buried from St. Michael’s church. She sho’ was a good woman. She went to church all the time. My ma had 12 children; there's 5 dead.
"You remember a little while ago when they had the piece in the paper about this young boy that fell off the garbage wagon an’ the wagon rolled over his head on’ crushed it an’ he died? I done forgot his name. Well, I was one of his pallbearers. I'm tellin’ you they sho’ drank at that wake. They was buyin' whiskey by the quart. I didn't drink none ‘cause I was pallbearer an’ had to respect him. An’ when you carryin' that corpse you gotta be careful. I heard ‘em say times they dropped that corpse because they was drunk.
“No, I don't have no children. My wife, she can't have none but I'm raising my little sister. She's 15 years old an’ she goes over to the public school. She'll finish next year. I don't know where she's gonna go after that. She's gonna go back to school though. I tell you, I like young people around the house. I don't like no house without young ones, that's why I took my sister to raise. It gives my wife something to do an’ it's company for her ‘cause I'm away at night. She's crazy about my little sister.
"Me, I went to St. Michael's school, but I quit in seventh grade to come out on the river. My brother Eddie's married an’ got eight children. He was a longshoreman, but he lost out in this last strike 'cause he went CIO. All the white workers went CIO an’ the niggers went AF of L an’ the AF of L won. Befo’ on the river, they used to put on half an’ half. When they put on six niggers, they had to put six whites: new they put 66 niggers to one white. I don't know why they do it ‘cause they pay ‘em all the sane wages, 90¢ an hour an’ time an’ a half for overtime. I think they put the niggers on because they can buy their votes quicker than they can the whites. You see, the last strike, they put it up to the Union. There was AF of L, the CIO, and the old Stevedore an’ Benevolent Association, an’ an independent one in favor of open shop. Well, there was 5700 niggers to 1200 to 1500 whites on the river on’ all the niggers went AF of L so all the others lost out. Well, since Eddie's lost out he’s been swimpin' an’ fishin'. He’s got eight kids to feed an’ he's gotta do something.
“I got another brother that’s got three children an’ he used to work for the big shots drivin' them around like a chauffeur. He lost out some way an’ now he's back on the river.
“I used to do longshore work, too. I made good money ‘cause I was ready to work anytime. I remember once I worked from a Sunday mornin' till Wednesday night without stoppin'. No, I didn't have no sleep, it didn't bother me. I worked two winches at a time an’ I come off on Wednesday night with a hundred and forty-two dollars. A winch is a thing that you load the boat with. It's got two lovers on’ it's got steam an’ then that picks up the freight an’ puts it in the hold. It can pick up six or seven tons at a time. That was loadin' an’ unloadin' canned fruit --- pineapple, apricots, an’ things like that for the West coast.
"Sleep don't bother me. I gets four, five hours a night, that's enough. You see, I'll go home this evenin' an’ I'll sleep about two hours befo’ I go to work. Shucks, noivous, I ain’t never been noivous or sick in my life. I gotta drink four or five cups of coffee before I go to sleep. I drinks half a gallon of coffee befo' I come out on the river in the mornin'. I sleeps upstairs by myself. You see, we got a house with three rooms downstairs an’ a room upstairs in the back. It's early in the mornin' when I come home from work an’ I'm hot; if I got in bed with the ol' lady an’ we hot on’ her hot, I'd burn up. So I goes upstairs where it's cool an' airy. The ol’ lady wakes me up early in the mornin’, though.
‘No, she don't seem to mind bein' alone an’ not goin’ out at night. We been married 9 years an’ she ain't said nothin' about it yet. I only took the ol’ lady to the show twice since we been married an’ then I didn't take her, I just met her downtown. One time I met her by that station down by Saenger an’ took her there, on’ one time I took her to Loew’s State. She can go with my little sister in the daytime if she wants.
"Sometimes when I'm off we goes down to Lucien's. That's a nice place on Almonaster an’ St. Claude. We got some friends that has an automobile an’ they takes us. We go down there an’ dance an’ drink beer. That ‘beer ain't got no kick to it. Good Gawd, you can just guzzle that beer from nine o'clock at night ‘til two o'clock in the mornin’ an' you don't feel nothin'. They don't charge you nothin' to come in, they just charge you for your drinks, an’ they cheap.
"I go to barrooms an’ take a drink with the fellers an’ things like that, but I don't get drunk in no barrooms, 'cause I seen too many none make fools of themselves in a barroom. So when I want to get an edge on, I buys myself a quarter of a keg of beer en’ drinks it an’ when I gets drunk, I goes to sleep. The ol’ lady, she don't like beer, she likes whiskey. What they say about longshoremen an’ men on the river spendin' their money on women an’ licker is true. Soon as they get paid they go right to these barrooms an’ cash their check an’ get drunk an’ they ain't got nothin' when they get home. They make good money, too, an’ their poor wife on’ children suffer. You see Miss Bilbo, you know her - yeah, that's the one on Tchoupitoulas Street. Well, she makes all the money she wants from those people. They been there for years. Me, I don't do that. When I get my check, I gives it to the ol' lady an’ I lets her cash it an’ sometimes I takes three dollars out of it an’ sometimes I don't take nothin'. I just gets her to give me the money when I needs it.
"Well, the Irish Channel ain't like it used to be. Everything changes after awhile. Befo' a nigger couldn't pass in the Channel 'cause they'd she’ run ‘em an’ they'd sho’ beat 'em. They just figger the Channel wasn't for the niggers. There was no niggers livin’ there an’ they didn't have no business there so there was no cause for them to come. They used to go after the strange whites, too, but they didn't bother them much. Boy, I been in those gangs.
‘Sho’, I make my own boats. We all make our boats. It took me two days to make this one an’ I made it out of side boards. It all depends upon what kind of boat you wanta make how long it takes. I got two boats, but the other one is kinda old. This one is good an’ heavy an’ you don't have to worry, it ain't gonna leak. I been all over the river in it. Sometimes I go about 3 miles down below those oaks in St. Bernard Parish. It's just about 25 men that run down there, that's all.
"Yeah, I've seen a lot of bodies come up in this river an’ they is an awful sight. Once you go down, you always come up. You come up when your gall bust. A little while ago there was a nigger right down here on Jackson Avenue. He was gain’ swimmin' an’ somebody pushed him in an’ be was drowned. Nobody ever found out who pushed him or why. We found him right around hare a few days after. He was all swelled up an’ his eyes was gone an’ everything an’ he sho’ looked terrible.
"I don't have no automobile. Sometimes I think I want one an’ sometimes I think I don't. Of course, you can get pleasure out of it but when you got to get it on time you got to pay so much more for it. An’ whenever I talk about it to the ol' lady, she says, ‘Well, we'll have the cash to buy it some day.’ I guess she's saltin' the money away an’ know what she's talkin' about.
"I wouldn't own a home for nothin' 'cause when you own it, you got to buy it an’ then you got to pay to live in it. You can't live in no house for nothin'. So I figger I'd rather pay rent an’ let somebody else worry about it. Whenever something's gotta be fixed, they gotta tend to it - not me. I got a nice place with four rooms: one upstairs, three downstairs, a nice yard, gas, an’ electricity, an’ I only pay $15 rent. We was livin' in another house, but it was a little too cramped an’ that's one thing I don't like to be, too crowded up. I like a place to walk around in when I come back from my last trip, my ol' lady had moved in an’ it's just as good a place as you could find. I got ducks an’ chickens, too. I had a duck settin' on about 40 eggs an’ only 6 hatched, an’ I had paid $13 for that drake, too, but he was no good ‘cause the eggs was no good. So I just bought another drake an’ I leave him off kinda to himself now. I got hens settin' on a lotta eggs, too. We had a drake for dinner Sunday, but I don't like that kinda meat much, it's too dark; I like chicken better. No, we don't sell these kinda things, we just raise them for ourselves.
"People always ask why we get tattooed. I don't know why, but it ain't no superstition with sailors that I know of. I got my first tattoo befo' I started on the boat. See this one up here! That's supposed to be an Egyptian girl. That name, Lulu Johnson, that's a girl that I was supposed to marry. Funny thing, she couldn't have no children, either. I was gain’ with her a long time an’ you know how when you start goin' steady an’ kinda know you goin’ to marry ‘em, then you talk about all these things. That's how I come to find out she can't have no children. See, she an’ her brother used to fight a lot. I don't know why they fought. Maybe he was jealous of her, but one day he threw her on the floor an’ he stomped on her stomach with his feet an’ that was why she couldn't have no children. You know, that's a shame for any man to do a woman like that.
"At that time I was workin' for the Delta Line an’ one Saturday I hit town with $400 an’ my mind set on gettin' married. So I phoned her up an’ her mother answered the phone an’ I thought it was her. Well, you blow how you talk to your girl an’ her mother bawled me out an’ told me not to come around, the girl was married. She married a captain on one of these river boats. Lawd, I sho’ felt bad ‘cause she was a nice girl. You know, she laid up in the hospital for 4 months an’ was operated on an’ had a little girl. She is the most beautifullest little girl you ever seen. She got her husband to get me a job with Lykes Brothers.
“Well, lemme get back to this tattooin' you ask me about. I had these done in New Orleans. There used to be a place where the Magazine car used to turn at Canal an’ Decatur. No, these don't mean nothin'.“ (On the upper right forearm there are two hearts with an arrow and on the under right forearm there are two more hearts under which is written "True Hearts.’ On the right shoulder is a bunch of roses with "Mother" underneath.) "Sometimes I think I want some more done but I ain't had it done again yet. Some people has their whole bodies tattooed but me, I don't like that, I like to be able to see the design. An’ when you get your whole body tattooed, you can't see the design. No, the women don't judge you by your tattoo, they don't even notice it. All they're interested in is gettin' your money.
"I been all over the world. We were 57 days on the water goin' to China an’ we only saw land one day. Oh, you got a lot to do on the boat. You never go to bed early. After your work's done, you sit down an’ you play cards an’ shoot craps; an’ you tell stories an’ swap yarns. You does all your own washin', all your socks an’ underclothes, too. They feed you kinda good. I got $72.50 a month.
"When that ship hits port an’ the fellers that are off, they're ready to go. You see, some places like Liverpool an’ all, where they have locks to go through, well, the boat has to wait for it to fill up. An’ these that are off, they can get their pay an’ go ashore. Well, as soon as that beat hits, they're gone ‘cause there is a bus or streetcar to take them to town. An’ by the time the rest ties up an’ gets off, they've had all they wanted an’ spent their money an’ are comin’ back.
"I been to China, lotta trips to Germany, an’ a lotta times to England, France, Liverpool, Brazil, an’ lotta other places. But to me the two places where you can have the best time is in Rotterdam an’ Liverpool.
“They don't have no district in Liverpool. You just go to the bar an’ meet your girl an’ they gotta room an’ they take you there. The English people sho’ are nice to us. If they stay with their family, the mother an’ father go out to the show an’ they put the children to bad an’ they leave you alone in the parlor with the girl. Some of the English women are cold an’ haughty that way the people say they is, but I didn't find ‘em cold.
"I remember once when I was in Galveston, I went to a shop an’ I bought some of these fancy pants an’ stockings, an’ a slip an’ things for a girl in Liverpool. An’ when I gave ‘em to her, you know what she had the nerve to say? ‘That's the kind of drawers the men wear in America!’ The English women wear them drawers that are kinda full an’ come down over the knees. I think they're made of wool. ‘Course they gotta wear ‘em over there ‘cause it's cold. Well, I don't care whether she wore them or not, I just left ‘em with her. When I went to France, I bought some perfume that was $25 an ounce. I don't know the name of it, but I swear I never smelt anything like it in my life. I brought that to my girl in Galveston.
"You buy all kinda crazy things. One time I got the idea of buyin' a goat - that was down in Brazil. An’ I had the idea I wanted to raise that goat, too, an’ I brought it all the way here with me an’ when I got down at the river, they said I had to throw him over. They don't allow no foreign animals to come in. There was a man down there to catch the goat. You know the men that hang around to ketch the things you throw over. I sho’ was sorry to lose that goat ‘cause I had my heart set on raisin’ him.
"When I hit Germany, there was a man that had a snow white canary boid an’ another one that was orange color. I wanted to buy that white boid an’ he wouldn't sell it ‘cause he had won prizes with it in a show. Well, we left an’ went to Hamburg port an’ all the time I kept thinkin' how I wanted that boid so when we came back to Bremen, several weeks later, I finally talked him into sellin' me those boids. I took care of ‘em an’ when I got to the Quarnatine Station, they tol' me I couldn't take ‘em off the ship. So I just left than on the ship ‘cause one of the men said he would take care of ‘em for me until we went out again. Do you know I had those boids for a trip an’ a half. I didn't know nothin' about feedin' them; I just fed them anything I could lay my hands on, an’ one time I fed ‘em toast an’ the next mornin' they was layin' dead.
‘Well, in China or England or France or Germany or any place you go, you go to a picture show or some place like that an’ you meet a nice girl an’ you talk to her an’ she invites you to her house, an’ you start goin' with her an’ when you go back to that port, you call her up if you liked her the first trip. It's just like in America. It's the same thing - it ain't no different.
‘Now, China - they got a district an’ they got a good one, too. These Chinese women sho’ are pretty an’ they sho’ are clean - they're the cleanest women I ever had. They burn that sweet smellin' stuff in the house, an’ oh, it makes the house smell beautiful - it makes you think you're in a church. Now, when I smell it in church, I think of those Chinese women. They use all kinda perfumes an’ powders an’ things. They charge you 12 yen for a night - that’s $6 in American money. Boy, do they treat you nice! In the mornin’ you feel like you come out of a pressin' shop. They take all your clothes - your pants, shirts, shoes, an’ socks - just leave you with your drawers on. The next mornin' they bring you back your clothes, the shirt an’ socks all washed an’ suit pressed an’ your shoes shined. There a few people in China that speak English, but that don't make any difference, you can always get along.
“You know, I'm gonna tell you. You know why I went to China? I had heard that the Chinese women were made crosswise an’ I wanted to find out for myself. I went down there an’ I had many a Chinese women an’ I never found any like that. They're just like Americans. They ain't no different in bed from anybody else. An’ they don't use all those kinda things ‘people say they use.
"You don't save no money on them boats. My kid brother was on the boat for awhile on’ he got in a crap game one night an’ he lost all his money an’ he borrowed $5 an’ he came out winning $200. I was out 42 weeks one time an’ I came off with only $100 an’ that ain't nothin' for being out that long. Some of ‘em spend their money beto’ they get it. My kid brother got married 2 months ago an’ me an’ the ol’ lady stood for them. Yeah, he was married by the priest. He don't know that it's all about yet, but wait 'til he finds out.”
