DAVE FRANKLYN &FAMILY
<Text Not Clear>
1. Date of First writing: January 14, 1939.
2. Name of person or family interviewed: Rufus McNeil and Family (White)
3. Address: R. F. D. I.
4. Place: Boomer, N. C.
5. Occupation: Small farmer and WPA Worker. <Text Not Clear>
6. Name of writer: James Larkin Pearson.
7. Name of reviser:
<Text Not Clear>
apparently these people are small landowners bet not enough is told about the fundamentals, of their' economic condition.
THE STORY OF DAVE FRANKLIN AND FAMILY
A two-room "boxed-up" cabin squatted forlornly in the middle of a red-gullied field. Near one corner of the house, in a dump-heap of old shoes and tin cans, one sickly peach tree struggled in vain to look alive. Except for that, not a shade- tree, not a shrub of any kind, to break the monotony of barrenness. Three small boys (the youngest one not much more than a baby) were playing with a puppy in the yard. At my approach they scampered around the corner of the house toward the back where a toil-worn woman of uncertain age was bending over a wash-tub.
"Maw, they's a man a-comin'," I heard them chorus in a stage whisper as I followed them around the corner.
"Good morning," I greeted when in speaking distance of the woman. "You are Mrs. Franklin, I suppose."
"Yes, mister, er jist call me Lindy. I'm Lindy Franklin' an ever'body around here knows me. My ole man's name is Dave Franklin. Maybe you've hearn tell o' him. But Dave ain't at home today--he's off a-workin'."
"And you seem to be pretty busy, too, Mrs. Franklin--or may I call you Lindy?"
"Law yes, mister," answered Lindy as she wiped her soapy hands on her apron, "I am allers busy. These-here young-uns gits so miserbul dirty hit takes a orful sight o'washin'." She waved one boney hand with a gesture of despair.
"How many children have you, Lindy?"
"Jist these-here three boys, an' Lord knows that's a-plenty for sich pore folks as we air. Me an' Dave has ter scratch mighty hard ter keep 'em sump'm ter eat an' a few rags on ther backs."
The two larger boys were standing off a little distance to one side and looking at me out of the corner of their eyes. The little fellow was hiding behind his mother and occasionally peeping around, with a sort of frightened expression in his eyes.
"That biggest one over thar is Siddie," resumed Lindy proudly. "Siddie has bin a-goin' ter school, an' the way he learns is a plum sight. He's purty smart, Siddie is. I tell Dave we gotta make a preacher out o' Siddie. They's bin a turbul lot o' preachers in the Franklin fam'ly, but they's allers room for one more.
Now Eddie thar, he's powerful smart, too. He's a-goin' ter be a lawyer, an' maybe a guvner er sump'm. They's bin a heap o' lawyers in the Franklin fam'ly, too, but Eddie he's a-goin ter beat the whole kit an' bilin ov 'em. The baby here--his name's Bertie--we can't tell yit what he's a-goin' ter be, but I Jist bet ye he'll be sump'm big. Hit's a strange thing about my boys, them bein' so oncommon smart that-a-way, an' I hain't got no idee whar they got ther smartness, 'les hit was from me. Ther daddy hain't no Solomon, ever'body knows that, even if he is a Franklin. Me an' Dave ain't got no eddicashun, but we calculates on sendin' our boys ter college an' lettin' 'em larn ever'thing in the world."
She stopped to get her breath and to put some more chunks of wood under her wash-pot. I took advantage of the pause and asked:
"Where did you say your husband is working, Lindy?"
"Oh, Dave--he's a-workin' down by yander at the saw-mill, off-bearin' or sump'm Turbul dangerous work hit is, an' I'm oneasy over minit ov the time. But we got our little crap sorter worked out, an' Dave he 'lowed he could make a few dollars at the saw-mill this week. The young-uns has got ter have some shoes an' over-halls an' things. An' I diskivered this mornin' that the last scrimshun o' meat was out, an' they ain't but two more messes o' coffee. The ole cow's nearly dry, too--goin' ter be fresh in August, though, an' if we can live through till then we'll make it. Lord-a-mercy, I don't know what we pore folks was put here for nohow; but I allers says I ain't a-goin' ter die as long as I can git a breath. Maybe we'll all be rich some time when these-here boys o' mine gits up grown an' famous like they's a-goin' ter be. But I gotta git this-here washin' finished afore dinner. Wuz they annything speshul you wanted, mister?"
"No, thanks, "I replied, "nothing special. I was just passing and thought I would stop and speak to you. Good-bye, Mrs. Franklin. Goodbye, boys."
That was eighteen years ago. Yesterday I passed that way again. Where the boxed-up cabin had stood was a modest but very nice framed and weatherboarded house with wide comfortable looking porches, one of them screened in, a convenient kitchen and dining room, and a perfectly new looking green roof on it. The house looked as if it has recently been made over <Text Not Clear> I knocked at the door. The same Lindy appeared, looking older and more stoop-shouldered, but with the same resolute expression and manner.
"Looks like somebody has been making improvements around here since my last visit," I remarked.
"Yes, yes--oh, yes--the house looks a little better. Have a seat here on the porch, "And she offered me a chair.
Clearly it was not a rich home yet, but it was a vast improvement over what it had been. About this time a well-built young girl of about sixteen came out of the house onto the porch.
"This-here's Roxie," explained Mrs. Franklin by way of introduction. "She ain't rightly our own gal, but we raised her. She come erlong sorter atter the boys begun ter git up a little, an' hit's bin purty nice ter have a gal in the fam'ly."
"And where are those big boys? Have they all done as well as you expected?"
"Well, I can't say as they have--that is, none ov 'em 'ceptin' Bertie. The tuther two got married an' went off to therselves. Siddie he lives here on part of the place, but him an' his old woomer jest looks out fer therselves. Eddie, the one what was gwine ter be a lawyer, he's married too an' settled down to work in a tan-yard. We don't git no help out'n him. Eddie has still get the makin's ov a lawyer, though, an' I sorter 'spect he'll turn out ter be one yet sometime. Eddie drinks some, an' gits put in the can once in awhile. But he's purty good, Eddie is, an' he's worked himself up to a purty good job."
"Well, what about Bertie?" I asked.
"Oh, Bertie, he's in college out yonder at that Berear place in Kaintucky. He's bin thar this makes four years, an' this is the last year he has ter go. Then he'll know jist erbout ever thing they is, I reckin, an' hit's right plum amazin' ter me how a boy's head kin hold so much larnin' like they puts in 'em out thar."
"And so Bertie sure enough did go to college! Good for him! But how did he do it?"
"Oh, he done it mostly by his-self," said his mother proudly. "Worked his way through, as they calls it. Me an' Dave helped him a little off an' on, but not much. We wuzent able to help him much. As I said, he done it mostly his-self. An' that ain't all Bertie done nuther. Afore he started ter college he done worked his way through the high school, too, an' got finished quicker'n annybody else. Hit mostly takes four years to larn all they is in high school, but Bertie he larnt it all in three years, an' ever' time he got the prize for bein' the best all-round boy in the school. One summer he wuz picked as the leader ov a young people's summer camp in the mountins. Hit looked like they couldent run nothin' without Bertie, not even the newspapers. When Bertie wuz in high school he got ter writin' pieces for the newspapers an' has bin at it ever since. The papers ackshully pays him for his pieces, an' he makes a right smart o' money that-a-way, an' hit helps a plum sight about payin' his school expenses. W y, bless my soul an' body, a whole slew ov Bertie's pieces what he writ up has bin printed in them thar big city papers what comes out ever' day. Part ov his work at the college is what he calls publicity or sump'm--writin' up all the news what happens around thar an' sendin' bit off ter the papers. Bertie has purty good health an' is orful active on his feet, so he takes a big part in them thar play--games an' runnin' matches what they have at the college. An' they's sump'm else he's a-doin? this year. I don't know just the fine points about it, but it seems lak the college gits out a big fine book ever' year, with lots o' pictures an' all that, an' purty kivers on it. College Annual or sump'm they calls it. An' this year Bertie has bin chose ter git up that book. He sez hit's a monstrus amount o' work an' a purty high honor to git up that book, but they must a-thought Bertie could do it better'n any o' the rest, an' I jist bet ye a purty he can, too." Lindy, bent and labor-worn and ignorant about books herself, did not try to conceal the pride she took in the achievements of her boy.
"And who has been doing all this building and improving around here?" I asked. "It looks like a different place entirely."
"Maybe you won't believe it, mister, but Bertie's the cause o' this too"--casting her eyes around over the new house. "Atter he got ter be a college student an' livin' in all them fine houses out thur, he got ter wantin' this old place ter look better. So when he wuz at home last summer he studied him up a plan ter make some money, an' that boy worked nearly day an' night all the time he was at home. He made erbout two hundred dollars out'n his summer job. Then he bought lumber an' hired a carpenter an' fixed up the house. 'Course he couldn't spend all his money on the house--he had ter take some ov it back ter school with him. Thar wuz some more ter pay on the lumber, an' me an' Dave has bin a- payin' on it along--a few dollars each month. But we air glad to have the house, an' hit never would a-bin if it hadn't bin for Bertie."
At that moment a battered and muddy roadster rambled up and stopped at the end of the path in front of the house.
"Ther's Dave a-comin' now," Lindy said casually. "He's bin a-workin' on the WPA--mostly road work. He's bin at it for three or four years. He mostly works jist part time and has some time ter work at home. They bin workin' on the road today--away over yonder next ter the Breshy Mountain. Siddie--he's my oldest boy--he works on the WPA too. He's got a cyar, an' his daddy rides to work with him."
Dave crawled out of the car, and Siddie drove on to his own home a little farther down the road. Dave was tired and dusty and moved rather stiffly as he came up the walk. Dave is a rather silent man, with a timid and uncertain look about him, much as a meek and faithful work animal might have.
Lindy had been sitting on the edge of the porch with her feet on the top stepwhile talking to me. She got up and brushed off her dress. "I reckon Dave will be purty hungry," she said, "I got ter git in an' put supper on the table. You come back agin when you git a chanct. Maybe Bertie'll be home then."
"I certainly will," I said as I started down the steps. Dave nodded and spoke in a subdued voice when I met him. His manner was apathetic, bespeaking a life that was without vision--planless, futile.
Lindy called to me from the porch. I turned.
"Bertie left with me a bunch of the things he has writ. They's a whole passel o' clippin's from papers. You want ter see 'em?"
"Gladly," I told her. Dave stopped on the porch and looked back with a sort of uncomprehending interest while his wife came forward and handed me a handful of clippings. One look at the by--line, and I turned abruptly to Lindy Franklins:
"You don't meant to tell me that your boy Bertie is the Bert Franklin who is known far and wide to newspaper readers?"
"You," she answered, pleased and smiling. "That's my Bertie."