Socio-Ethnic
Greeks in America
Susan Clark
November 14, 1939.
Mabel b. Francis Editor
Miami, Florida
MR. and MRS. NICK ANTHONY
728 N.W. 21st, Terrace.
Miami, Florida.
I interviewed Mr. and Mrs. Nick Anthony, in their home at 728 N.W. 21st, Terrace. The beaten weather frame cottage was small and simply furnished but clean. The furniture was a mixture of wicker and mahogany pieces and the living room rug was worn. A piano stood in one corner of the room and one picture of a dancing girl in <text not clear> was on the living room wall. Large photographs of three grown children were on top the piano. There was no telephone or radio, but there was an electric refrigerator.
When I arrived, Mr. and Mrs. Anthony were sitting on a bench in the back yard and greeted me in a friendly manner, inviting me into the house. The front perch was dusty and as I offered to stop on the perch for our interview, they both asked me to go in to the house. Mr. Anthony is a large man weighing perhaps 200 pounds and were a white shirt with dark trousers. Mrs. Anthony is tall angular and was no doubt quite attractive <text not clear> as a girl. She has been in ill health for several years, the result of too frequent child <text not clear>, she said. She were a neat black and white print dress and her hair was fluffed up becomingly, but her face looked drawn and despite the ten of her skin.
I was referred to this family by Mrs. Karaimis, whom I interviewed recently and by Nick Anthony, their son, whom I had met at the karaimis home. Nick said he thought his parents had had such a hard time that perhaps their story would be of interest.
Mr. Anthony and his wife were residing in Srantsa, in what was formerly Greece, but is now part of Turkey, before 1914. Between 1906 and 1914 Mr. Anthony was employed on a steamship plying between Hamburg and New York City, as porter and baggageman. When he landed in New York in 1914, he decided that because Greeks were being subjected to such hardships by the Turks, he would come to America to live. During the invasion of Greece by the Turks, Mr. Anthony said the citizens were not allowed to keep their homes, their pigs or their goats, only the clothes on their backs. They "just left as quick as they could go."
Greeks who stayed there died from starvation, and they died in tents, not houses, explained the Anthonys, "Nothing hard here, like that," said Mr. Anthony.
"In this country everything is good, everything fine. I like it good. Free country, free God."
When he decided to come to this country to live, he returned to Srantsa with the idea of finding himself a wife. When I remarked that Mrs. Anthony was probably his sweetheart over there, he replied: "She not know me good. My father say she good girl, have good people, make me good wife. I know her one week, then we got married."
They agreed that in their homeland, the parents usually arrange the marriages. This was quite in contrast to their oldest son, born and reared in this country, who recently married an American widow with two children. This marriage, in Miami, was not approved by the parents but they are resigned to it now, and Mr. Anthony remarked that "they get along good, now."
Mr. Anthony was 37 years old on his arrival in the United States in 1914, and Mrs. Anthony was 23. They immediately went to New Meadows, Idaho, a very small town of a few hundred persons, where Mr. Anthony worked for a railroad company as baggageman and porter.
They stayed there about a year and one son. Jimmie was born in 1915. There was no church in the town to baptize the baby when it was 40 days old and Mr. Anthony asked his employer for a ticket to go to some place where the baby could be baptized. He was given a round trip pass for himself, the baby and the mother, to Portland, Oregon. That first year in this country was very difficult, Mr. and Mrs. Anthony agreed.
"I cry all the time. I want my mama every day. I cry. All time while my baby coming. I cry. "Mrs. Anthony said. As a result, when the baby was born, it cried too. She explained. "I feed my baby. I like my baby, and papa good to me, but I got homesick, want my mama, all the time."
The doctor in New Meadows told the Anthonys that they had better leave that part of the country, it was too hard for Mrs. Anthony. They left in July, 1915, and settled in Freemont, Ohio. There Mr. Anthony got a job as steel and iron worker in a factory. And there another son, Charlie, was born. In one year, they left Freemont for Canton, Ohio, where a better job had him offered Mr. Anthony in the Canton Carbon works. "I work like mule in Canton," said Mr. Anthony. "I no kick. We have 'nether baboo in Canton. Nicky, he born there, and Julia, she born there too."
Because of the short intervals between the babies, Mrs. Anthony is health began to fail and when Nicky was born, they said a woman to come in and take care of him. Their physician recommended that the family move to a warmer climate for Mrs. Anthony's health they moved to Miami in 1922. Here, Mr. Anthony established a shoe shine business on what is now E.Flagler street. "I saved much money in Canton. When I come here I lose it in that shoe shine business. Not enough people walking around Miami then," he smiled. "No make money."
He decided to try another business, in Miami's colored section. He and a partner, since returned to Greece, joined a restaurant, pool room and "hot dog business. "Those colored fellas, ate 'om up and I fix 'om all night. We work 24 hours every day. We make lots of money. I save my money and I buy house in Miami for 6,500. That was in 1924. I put money in Biscayne Bank. I lose 5.000 in Biscayne Bank." He recalls. At his mention of their lose Mrs. Anthony looked worried and said, "maybe they give us a little that money now?"
In 1925 he thought he had sold his house for 15.000 but the sale was never consummated because of the deflation of real estate values. Later, he sold that house and another house, for $2,200. All he owns now is the little frame cottage they live in, probably worth $1,500.
Both parents of Mr. and Mrs. Anthony died in the old country. They receive letters from cousins in Greece now. Mrs. Anthony explained "They ask, we come to visit them, like others come to their homes in Greece from America. We have no money now. We stay here. I never see my mama again. When I come here, now I don't care to go there."
The children were sent to both Greek and American schools here in Miami. The daughter, Julia, is half owner of a smart beauty shop around the corner from her parents' home and was recently married to a young American born in Greek named Anagnostis. The daughter is a beautiful young woman and has the appearance of being a charming American girl. Nick, 21 years old the only son remaining at home, looks more like a native Greek: he is very considerate of his parents, is musically inclined, and plays the violin, mandolin and piano, all by ear.
Both English and Greek are spoken in the home and the parents enjoy reading the New York Herald, a Greek newspaper.
Neither the son nor Mr. Anthony drink or smoke. Mr. Anthony laughed when we talked of wines and liquors.
"I like beer and wine some time, but I got drunk only once. "The admitted. At this Nick, laughed and said "if I caught my dad in a pool room or drinking I'd bring him right home." Anthony said "such foolishment."
When I asked if they used English in the home very much, Mrs. Anthony said that "when I like to speak high up, I speak English all time." I gathered that when she associated with her church or club women and liked to appear as cultured and as educated as any of them, she used English.
During the past year Mrs. Anthony health has been poor and he has been calling regularly on a physician. He has advised her to have an operation but she is very much worried about it. She said that the doctor said "I no need medicine - I have operation I be all better. Too many babies too close." The woman who called on her during my visit in the home, seemed to be quite concerned about her and asked Nick what the doctor had told him about his mother that day.
Nick replied that the doctor said she could have the operation Friday and the visitor said she would be back the next day. I gathered that perhaps the case was a clinical one, although during our visit the woman visitor joked with them and they called her their friend. She told of having been to the doctor's on one occasion, with Mrs. Anthony and when the doctor finished with the examination and Mrs. Anthony asked much it cost , he replied: "Two or three dollars." Mrs. Anthony had three dollars in her hand, but when the doctor worded it that way, she quickly put one of the dollars back in her purse. The guest laughingly explained, "she did not need me to help her at the doctor's. She understood about money."
Mr. Anthony seemed very solicitous of his wife's health, and when she said "maybe I die in the operation," he encouraged her, as we did. She seemed weak and discouraged.
During the conversation, Mr. Anthony brought out a beautifully crocheted bedspread Mrs. Anthony had made. It was carefully wrapped in dark colored cloth.
"I make it for Julia," said Mrs. Anthony, "but she got no room for it now, in her small place." Nick proudly added "see, mom made each piece, and then put them all together."
During our visit, Mrs. Anthony served a very delicious rich cookie called kouraviathis. It was very rich and was served with a glass of water and a paper napkin. Mrs. Anthony could not give me the exact proportions of ingredients, but urged me "to bring a pound of butter and some sugar and she would make some for me some day." She said they only continued butter, sugar and a little flour and that when baked with nuts, are even more delicious. She also urged me to take a part of a leaf of broad she had just baked. She called it whole wheat bread, but it was really more like a delicate rye bread. It was light tan and was baked in a round leaf. It was very good and stayed fresh for two days. She said she use white and brown flour and yeast and Wesson oil in it, but she could not give definite directions or amounts.
When Mrs. Anthony was feeling better, she noted as secretary <text not clear> of the Greek Parent Teacher Association in the Greek School in Miami. She is a member of the Phellopthos Society, a Greek Woman's Club.
The family uses a makeshift Cadola, or prayer light. Mrs. Anthony showed me how she uses a heavy water glass for this, filling it about half full of water, then pouring a quarter inch of olive oil on the water. She then took a piece of cotton, breaking it from a cotton blossom that grow in her yard, twisted a small bit of it into a think wick shape and then wound it onto a hairpin which she had bent to rest on the glass. This is lighted at night and placed before a little wooden painted picture of the Christ. It burns all night and when the family says prayers at night they are said before the light and crucifix. The small battered looking picture plaque of the Christ that Mrs. Anthony showed me was brought by them from Greece.
Mr. Anthony told me of his wife's shopping ability of which he seemed very proud. They needed a suitcase some years ago and when they went to buy one the price quoted them was $15.00. Mrs. Anthony said she could not pay that much, but she wanted a good leather bag and told the Jew clerk what she wanted.
"I know material….my mama and me know material.." Mrs. Anthony told me. Then when the clerk told her the bag was solid leather she said, "no, that is not all leather. I know cloth and material.." The man explained that he had paid 15 for the bag and could not sell it for less but as Mrs. Anthony walked out of the store he called her back and offered it to her for $12, then $10 and finally he came down to $5.00. Then she bought it. "He not foolish me," Mrs. Anthony said.
The Greeks observe Christmas, Easter and August 15th, with a service called the <text not clear>. This is not a regular communion service, but comprises a service hold just before those special days and before a marriage.
Confession to a priest is made, and when one repents his sins and prays for aid in mending his says, he is forgiven and then given plain broad soaked in a wine during this occasion.
The Anthonys observe the Greek manner of naming children for Saints, and also observe the Saints days for which the children are named. For example: their son Jimmie, or James, means St. Demetrius in the Greek tongue. October 26th, was St. Demetrius Day on their church calendar and it was therefore "Name Day" in the Anthony home. Intimate friends and relatives called as Jimmie's home that day wished him good luck and happiness. Jimmie is the son who recently married the young American-born widow with two children. During the past summer, Mr. Anthony had a very large carbuncle which he had removed. It was quite an operation apparently, "They fill me up with dope so much I seek two weeks after operation." he said. "I was like drunk with dope." That is the only illness he has had he said. Mrs. Anthony told of the doctor's having asked her if her children were will, on a recent visit to his office and how she explained to him that they were all in good health. "Nicky, he strong, he make fight, never sick." She told the physician. Nick told me that he had done a little fighting until it was time for him to be a professional, then he stopped.
The Anthony family could recall only one real superstition that worries them. When a picture falls with no one touching it or apparently causing it to fall, that it is a bad omen. And if a holy picture of any type should fall for no apparent reason, it surely means bad luck, they explained.
