July 26, 1939
Mrs. M.A.Matheson, Invalid.
Newton, N.C.
Ethel Deal, Writer.
Dudley W.Crawford, Reviser.
Original Names	Changed names
Mrs. M.A.Matheson	Mrs. Moore
Mark Matheson	Moses Moore
Henderson County	Hart County
Jean	Jane
Statesville	Statesboro
Ironburg	Ironton
Cleveland	Harrison
“How are you, Mrs. Moore? I'm glad to see you up and about."
“I'M poorly; don't feel so good this hot weather. The doctor put two shots in my arm yesterday, I always feel bad the next day after. There Moses, turn that iron off 'fore it gits too hot. No, I'm in no hurry to iron, 'cause I need to rest awhile."
This conversation took place at the home of Mr. and Mrs. Moore. Mrs. Moore has been an invalid for years, suffering with pellagra. Her house was neat and clean although the floor was bare of rugs. Outside the window was a pretty flower garden, and in a little pen I could see three white rabbits hopping about.
"You know", she said, "I'm so glad to have company. I don't go anywhere and I get lonesome".
“Do you and your husband live alone?" I asked.
"Law, yes, but we got eleven children, two dead and nine living. They’re all married but one. She's off keeping house for her sister. I would like to have her home. This town is a bad place to get work in though, thout you got experience. Course, I don't mind telling you about my early life. Does me good to talk about old times. Everything is so changed from what it used to be. Now, when I was a girl, things was a lot different. I can't see as they're for the better though.
"I was born in Hart County. My father was pretty well-to-do and provided well for his family. He was a strict religious man. Our home was about three miles from the Blue Ridge Mountains. If I live till the fifth of September I'll be sixty-six years old. I went to school three miles from my house to a big long school house, which was also used as a church. I never got no further than the fourth reader before I was sixteen years old. You couldn't learn much in three months out of the year. Arithmetic, was what I liked best. Sanford was the name of it. I liked the Blue Back Speller too. If I do say it Moses here can't beat me on Arithmetic and spelling. He's been to college.
"About once every two months we got to visit our Granny. This was a treat for us kids. Granny lived tuther side of the Blue Ridge. If it was summer, we walked it. Yes, we was satisfied living like that, 'Course we was, we didn't know nothing else. We had no horses, only oxen. I've drove a team of oxen a many time. I was raised in the corn field and worked hard in my life. Children now don't know nothing about work.
"They was twelve of us younguns, and we all worked. Birth control, as they call it now, didn't bother people where we lived. Everybody had a big family. A baby was a blessing; the more babies there was, the more blessings there was. Then there was the quiltings and log rollings. My! what a dinner and supper we had at those gatherings. In the big open fire place, a big iron pot of chickens was boiling, six or eight of them. The pot pie was made from raised dough. We don't have chicken pie like that now, too much trouble. People just go to the store, buys egg noodles and other canned stuff. That warn't all we had though.
“I can still smell the big platter of hog jowl in the center of the table; baked brown and peppered, checked off on top with a knife like a checker board. The chicken pot pie was brought in, spare ribs cooked with kraut, turns, cakes, pies, gingerbread. The men always eat first. After the men went back to work the women and children had their fill. The quiltings and log rollings lasted all day. The big time was night; the musicians brought in the banjos and fiddles and began to tune up for a dance. They played, 'Turkey in the straw, Seeing Nellie Home,' all the old songs. How them women and men could dance! Us girls at home was allowed to look on, but never joined in; father didn't think it was right.
“Yes, we had plenty to eat and wear. Twas better than eating out of paper bags. Our well house was chuck full of good things for winter. I never saw a glass jar till after I was married. We raised beans, taters, corn, cabbage, onions. Tobacco was the money crop. We always laid up a barrel of pickled beans. We made a barrel or two of kraut; put up a couple a barrels cucumbers, shelled beans, dried peas, green beans strung, with a needle on strings and hung from the rafters to dry. These were called snaps and were good when cooked with hog jowl. Fruit was plentiful; this was dried in a dry kiln. We gathered wild grapes, cooked them in lasses and put them up in a big stone jar. Cheese was made from clabber milk.
"Early in the fall we killed a sheep; mutton was good eating, if you knowed how to fix it. It took about three killings of sheep, three big hogs and a beef to supply meat during the winter for our crowd.
"My mammy made my fathers best suits, after weaving the cloth on a hand loom. The goods was dyed in the indigo pot, the dyes were mixed at home. Father was a deacon in the Church. I was awful proud of him, dressed up in his Sunday best. He wore a biled shirt and jeans suit. My best dress was worsted for Sunday.
"I never had a beau till I was sixteen. Jim Walker walked home with me from church one Sunday. My brothers walked behind us. Girls was looked after them days. Jim come in for dinner after an invite from my father. We went in the front parlor. The family set with us after dinner.
"Children born out of wedlock was few in the hills. Effen a young man did fool a girl up, he was disgraced for life. The girl must take her ay, after confessing before the church, and go to meeting. The man usually left.
"Doctors weren't to be had anytime, day or night. When a baby came a midwife was called. Girls them days didn't talk and know things like they do now. I'd never asked my mammy anything about having babies like my daughter, who is eighteen, asks me; I guess she'd had a stroke. Things like that was spoken in whispers. My Jane, now, she comes in flops down in a chair, crosses her legs and don't think about it. Her whole knee cap shows, she thinks no more about her legs than her face. Our dresses covered our feet, and legs weren't to be thought about, much less seen.
"At the age of nineteen years, I met and married Moses Moore. Moses was a poor man, no more education than I had then. After marriage, we left the mountains and went to the eastern part of the state. Mr. Moore studied at night and worked in the daylight. He wanted to teach school. Later, we went to Ironton, Tennessee. He taught there one year, and commenced preparing for the ministry. He was ambitious wanted to be a Methodist preacher. After he was ready to preach we moved back to Cheek County; five years he preached there and taught school. We've lived in Statesboro and Harrison. He’s taught school forty years in all. Twenty years ago, my health broke down. We come to Bakerton and stayed. My husband preached at the North Bakerton Methodist Church, several years after we come here.
"Times is so hard here. Moses ain't had a lick of work in five weeks. He works for W.P.A. My boy wanted to go to the army so as to git advantages he couldn't git in a cotton mill. He’s going to study for something special. I'm so afraid we'll lose our home, if Moses don't git work, the building loan is behind now. My garden is dried up on account of the dry weather, can't expect much from that. We’ve never owned a car, can't afford one. I'd ruther have my feet on the ground any day, gas to buy, I don't think poor folks can afford them.
"Now, if Moses can just get work at a dollar a day we can manage; no childred to school or nothing like that. We done the best we could for the children, not as good as we would have liked to do.
"I do wish that you didn't have to go," Mrs. Moore said, as I began to get my things together.
“I'm sorry too. I've enjoyed it. Thank you for the story. I'll come again and get Mr. Moore's story of his earlier life. I'm interested in how he educated himself to be a preacher and school teacher."
"Do, come again when he can stay at home and tell you. I can't recollect all them things like he can. Don't you think my pot of floweres are pretty"?
"That wash tub full of red geraniums is as pretty as a picture," I said.
"I care for them myself. Seems like flowers help a lot, to pass away the time. Goodby, be sure and come and take dinner with me some day."
