<text not clear>
Date of first writing:	January 12, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	Courtney Murphy (White)
Address:	Snow Hill, N. C
Occupation:	Farmer (laborer)
Name of writer:	Christine Taylor
Revisers:	W. J. Sadler Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 5,000
Rmifolks crten's to <text not clear>
Lessie Ogden was doing her week's washing In her yard several children were playing, but they seemed to be overcome with excitement at the approach of an automobile. With their hands and feet all over the car, it was a surprise to learn that they had ever seen an automobile before But this didn't go on long, for soon Lessie appeared from the back of her little three-room house which had no windows and with cracks large enough for a cat to crawl through.
She was wearing a dirty brown-checked skirt, a ragged red sweater with grease spots on it, an old pair of brown cotton stockings, a ragged pair of shoes which bobbed up and down as she walked, and a red toboggan.
"Will, you come here and git this wood the children done drug out from the wood pile," she yelled after she had almost fallen over a piece of wood. "Spase'n' I had fell an' broke my arm or leg an' had another doctor's bill."
She arrived at the car and commanded the children to get off.
"Law, I'm mighty dirty to be a-comin' out here before a stranger," she said, "but if you ain't got but two dresses to your name you can't look nohow. An' that's my case. I got one 'sides this here one an' I jes' hung it out. I was tryin' to git a little washin' done so as to have the children somethin' clean to wear to school Monday."
There were some dingy-looking clothes hanging on the line and some in the pot boiling.
"We don't have no special time to eat 'round here an' hardly ever gits over one or two meals a day," Lessie explained. "When the children go to school I don't have no time to cook no breakfast fur 'em, an' I never think 'bout cookin' till atter they gits home, which is 'bout four-thirty. Sometimes I gives 'em a little meat an' biscuit. Hit shore does help fur the children to git somethin' good at the schoolhouse fur dinner."
The children were still standing near the car, restlessly whispering among themselves. The youngest of them put her arms around her mother's dress and whispered something in her ear as she bent over to listen.
"Hush," Lessie said, "you ought to be 'shamed of yourself."
"Ma, I heard what she said," one of the boys said, grinning from ear to ear. "She said tell the lady to give her a nickel." Lessie seemed to be embarrassed.
There were some oranges in the back of the automobile which the children seemed anxious to get, and it seemed that they might take the place of the nickel.
The two boys grabbed the bag, but Lessie took it from them and gave it to the girls, saying, "Let the littlest ones git some fust."
Seeing a man come into the yard, Lessie said her husband had arrived. He merely nodded his head as he passed. He had dark hair and expressionless brown eyes, and his beard looked as if he hadn't had a shave for a week. He was a little stooped and walked as if he didn't have much strength. He was about six feet tall, weighed about 135 pounds, and was wearing an overall suit and a cap that was somewhat soiled and worn.
"Gus," Lessie called, "you take the rest of these oranges an' this cake in the house an' take the children with you so I kin talk to the lady."
Her eyes filling with tears, she continued: "You know, to think of what I have had an' the way I have to live now, hit shore do hurt me. Yes sir, hit shore do. I jes' want you to see a picture of me when I was young. I reckon there's plenty of hard times to tell if that's what you want to know. I guess we could go in the house, but I reckon my fire has gone out an' everything is in such a mess. I can't keep no house in that old house. I reckon hit will he quieter here since the children is up near the house.
"Plenty folks down there in Snow Hill knows all 'bout me 'cause I was raised there," Lessie said after she had sat down on the front seat. "You could ask almost anybody down there 'bout me an' they could tell you somethin'. You know, ray grandpa, Tom Moore, was called one of the richest men in the county. He used to lend everybody money an' always said when people told him he ought not to lend so much, 'Maybe if they don't pay me back they'll pay my children or grandchildren.' He used to live up there in Snow Hill up at this end of the town. He was a good man.
"My daddy was Bat Hendricks an' my mama was Aileen Sykes. They was both raised near Snow Hill. I don't remember much 'bout my daddy 'cause he died when I was young, then Mama married my gran'pa. He asked me what I was goin' to call him an' I said, 'Gran'pa, of course, 'cause that's what I've always called you, an' I can't think of you as anything else.'
"When I was growin' up we was good livers. I went to school over to Snow Hill till I was fifteen. Then me and Gus, we got married. I hadn't never been with nobody else, but he loved me an' me him, so we got married. We've been married twenty-two years, an' we been livin' right here in this same house fur twenty of them years. We moved to Walstonburg a little over two years ago, but we had to move back 'cause the children kep' a-breakin' the window lights out.
"Yes sir, I been right here on 'Old Man Tom's' place fur nigh twenty years. Old Man Tom is Gus' daddy. He lives up on the road jes' a little ways in that white house with them big oak trees in the yard. We don't pay no rent an' we kin git all the wood we want. Old Man Tom has got some tenant houses on his farm an' got lights in 'em but they is all rented out. He keeps a-sayin' he's goin' to build us a house, but I doubt if he will ever do hit 'cause, like I done said, we been here twenty years an' he hain't done hit yit. We don't even have our own water. He's tried three or four times to put a well here but there's so much quicksand here you can't. I don't know what we'd do if our neighbors wouldn't let us git water from their house.
"You know, sometimes this ground is so soggy I can't hardly git in an' out of the yard if hit rains much, an' we ain't got no garden house."
Gus, who had gone to Old Man Tom's for a saw came back down the highway carrying the long saw on his shoulder.
"Gus said this mornin' that he was goin' to make a sawhorse an' learn the boys how to saw," Lessie said. "You know, I think they orta learn 'cause you don't know when you'll need hit. Look, I told you so."
Gus took a good-sized limb that had two prongs and stuck it in the ground. He laid a log across it, holding one end of it himself, while the two boys sawed. Every time the piece was about sawed off the little girl would run up and grab it to keep it from falling. When they had sawed that log another was put on, and one of the little girls held that while Gus split the sawed log.
"When Gus kin git work to do he kin make a day of hit an' git fifty cents. In crop time he don't make but fifty cents a day, an' he hain't even workin' now. They tell me hirelin's hain't go in' to git but thirty-five or forty cents a day another year. One time 'bout three years ago they give Gus one of them WPA jobs. I wish he could'a kep' hit, but you see, we lives ten miles from Snow Hill. Gus didn't have no way of gittin' over there 'cept walkin' an' I tell you he jes' couldn't stand that, an' they was a-diggin' ditches at that time. Hit was in the winter when he was a-workin', an' he had to git up at four o'clock, 'way 'fore day. I don't know how much he was gittin'; 'twon't much though, but it was better than doin' nothin' in the wintertime when there was no work to do at Old Man Tom's.
"Look at Will, he's done been in them oranges agin."
Will was tossing one up in the air as if it were a ball. Down it fell in the black, polluted dirt. He took his hand, brushed off what he could, and ate it as if he enjoyed it.
Lowering the car window, Lessie yelled, "Gus, go in there and put them oranges where the children can't reach 'em; hain't no use to eat 'em all up at one time." Hazel had already eaten three.
The fresh air was welcome, for the greasy odor from Lessie's clothes had filled the car.
"I shore am glad hit has turnt warmer, 'cause I like to have froze last week durin' them real cold nights," Lessie remarked. "I'm goin' to ask them if they won't give me some of them scraps down there in Snow Hill so I kin piece me up some quilts. I hain't got half enough cover. You reckon they'd give me some? Lawsy, I wonder what some of them folks in Snow Hill thinks of me goin' down there to git things. I kin make up some right pretty patterns.
"You know, one time I was in Snow Hill to see Mollie Simms, she's some of my folks, an' she asked me if I didn't want to start one of them chain quilts. She said that in the end I might git enough to make me a new quilt an' hit wouldn't cost me nothin', 'cept makin' an' sendin' 'em to friends. She give me a pattern I was to go by an' told me to work my name in black on the middle one an' be shore to make hit outa white cloth. Well, I done like she told me but I never got but seven squares. I finally made enough squares to put with 'em to make me a quilt. Course they didn't have no name in the middle of 'em an' won't quite as pretty, but I places the ones with names on 'em all 'bout on the quilt, an' in the center of the ones I made I didn't put any white.
"Looka here, none of this I been a-tellin' you hain't to git none of my folks away from me, is hit?"
"That biggest boy's name is Bruce," said Lessie in response to a question. "He's my second boy, one of them boys what some of them folks in Snow Hill come out here an' got me an' Gus to sign up 'bout six years ago to send him to the Caswell Training School in Kinston. I'm so glad to have him home fur good. He kin help poor Will do a whole lot. Hit's been too much on Will to have to tote so much water.
"The other boy is dead that went there. Lord, hit makes my blood boil ever' time I think of how they treated me when my boy was there in that hospital dyin' with the pneumonia. They sent word fur me to come if I wanted to see him alive again; that was at three o'clock. I got there by four o'clock an' at six o'clock he was dead. You orta seed him; he had big black spots all over his body an' didn't have no clothes on him, an' they even wanted to keep his body over there to bury hit. Well, I didn't think Old Man Tom would do hit, but, you know, he sent over there an' got his body an' had him put up there in his fambly buryin' ground. He even paid all the expenses of the burial. Hit cost nigh to $100. And then he up and got Bruce out fur us. I shore am glad to have us all together. Hit's been nearly two years now since he died."
Bruce and the little girl, Hazel, have the same blank appearance as their father, and their speech and movements are quiet. Will appeared to be more like Lessie, very loud. Suzanne was the queerest looking one in the group. She is ten years old and not a bit taller than Hazel. Her hair is fine and about an inch long and stands wild-like.
"You know, when I first sent that youngun on the school truck to Snow Hill the children beat on her so much an' Will, he tried to take up fur her that there was always a fuss," continued Lessie. "She was so little Mr. Lanier, the county superintendent, he come out here an' said he knowed she couldn't be six an' told me to keep her home. I knowed how old the youngun was. Lord, hit shore did hurt 'cause seem like she was to me the smartest youngun I had, an' there I couldn't send her. The next year I sent her agin, an' this time they sent me word she couldn't go 'cause they was filled up an' the teachers had more than they could manage. That was two years I kep' her out of school, an' still she didn't grow none. I made up my mind she was a-goin' the next year when we was livin' up at Walstonburg, so I sent her, an', do you know, that youngun got on the honor roll. Don't want nobody to tell me she can't learn.
"She like to of died this spring, though. I declare she like to have had everything. She first was tuck with the pneumonia, then she had the measles, an' atter that she had two abscesses on her lungs. They drawed out ever so much pus, then they had to take her tonsils out. That youngun had to even have three blood transfusions; she jes' lay there like she was dead. When Gus went over there to that Kinston hospital an' brought her home I didn't think she was goin' to ever git over her sickness. They told me they didn't think she'd be able to go back to school any more. But, I'm a-tellin' you she goes to Snow Hill to school now. She's in Miss Pruitt's room an's makin' the honor roll agin, so don't tell me she can't learn. I know the rest of 'em is like Gus; don't want to go to school an' don't care, but that Suzanne is shore 'nuf smart.
"Hazel jes' started this year; she's in Miss O'Berry's room. She hain't been much 'cause she cries an' cries ever' time I put her on the truck. The truck stops in front of our door, an' I shore hate it 'cause she don't want to go. The teacher hain't never slapped her. Suzanne cries ever' time she misses the truck.
"Will is still bringin' home the wustest reports like he's been a-doin' now-goin'-on eight years, an' he's in Mrs. Lanier's room. I believe hit's the fourth B. I know he hain't never stayed in school like he orta 'cause I've heard he was awful hard-headed at school. Gus, he never would go to school. He can't even write his name."
The children had picked up some almanacs that had been thrown in the yard by the mail carrier.
"We don't have no money to spend fur papers," declared Lessie. "We're glad to have somethin' to eat. I didn't have nothin' fur Christmas 'cept a dozen oranges an' some butter I got from the Welfare. I up an' asked Old Man Tom fur some money to buy somethin', so he give me $2. I wanted the children to have a little enjoyment. I bought a pound of nuts an' half of them was no good. I also got a little candy an' a doll a-piece fur Hazel an' Suzanne. Lord, things shore does cost. They wants seventy-five cents fur a little piece of meat no bigger'n your hand.
"You know, when my last baby was borned I had the flues. I had a granny to stay with me awhile, but I could only pay her fur four days. Usually I could git up in four days, but that time I had to stay in bed two weeks; an' Gus had to wait on me atter she left. My poor little baby jes' cried all the time, an' I knowed my milk won't doin' him no good. Hit did look like he was goin' to die spite of anything I knowed to do, so Gus got Mr. Akers to take us to Eureka to the doctor over there. He put my baby on Carnation milk. You know, when he weighed the baby the little thing didn't weigh as much as hit did when hit was borned. I asked him how much he would charge if hit was too sick to take to him an' he had to come out here to see him, an' he said $5. I hain't been back to him since. None of his old medicine didn't seem to do him any good nohow 'cause he kep' a-gittin' wusser an' wusser.
"One day he had the wustest spasm I ever seed a baby have. He jes' kep' a-drawin' an' I couldn't do nothin' 'cept cry, an' we didn't have no money to send fur the doctor. Finally, when 'twas over with he got right limp an' I thought shore he was dead. Somethin' had to be done fur my baby, so I called on the Welfare. They sent Dr. Pegram out here, an' he put him on cow's milk. He said that other milk was so rich hit was eatin' up his insides. Seems like the little thing did pick up a whole lot, an' ever' day when I'd wash his little arms I'd say to myself, 'He's gonna come yit.' I tell you, he won't nothin' but skin an' bones. Got down to four pounds, an' got so weak he couldn't even move his head.
"I don't know who sent her, but one day the county nurse come out here. I shore was 'shamed of the way she found things 'cause the flies, they were awful. Finally somebody give me some cheesecloth an' I sewed hit together an' tied hit 'round the crib. I was testin' the baby's milk by stickin' the nipple of the bottle in ny mouth an' drinkin' a little to see if 'twas sour. She looked at me an' said, 'Why, if I were you I wouldn't do that, 'cause grown people have so many germs.' She told me to boil all the bottles an' keep 'em covered up. Lord knows I was doin' the best I could 'cause I had to set up all night most ever' night. She wanted to know where I was gittin' my milk, an' I told her I was gittin' hit from Gus' daddy, an' they kep' hit in their frigidator. Shore was a lotta trouble, but I was willin' to do hit fur my baby.
"I told that nurse that I shore loved all the children I had, but shore didn't want no more. I told her that last midwife that stayed with me told me I was goin' to have thirteen more. Lord knows, I hope I ain't goin' to have that many. A big family is nice, an' I loves everyone of mine, but when you is pore like us you don't need so many.
"You know, me an' Gus is kin an.' I don't think kinfolks orta git married 'cause they tell me that will have effect on your children, an' I shore do believe hit. I told her them oldest boys of mine couldn't git along at school so they come some men out here an' got me to sign a paper fur them to go to Caswell Training School.
"The nurse ask me if I didn't want to go to the hospital an' be operated on so I wouldn't have no more children. I told her I shore did, 'cause my health was a-gittin' wuss ever' day, 'specially since I had this last one. I ask her how was I goin' without any clothes an' nobody to keep my baby. She said they'd provide clothes an' put the baby in the special baby ward, that the baby really orta be in a hospital, anyhow. I promised her I'd go.
"One day atter that she brought gowns, two new dresses, an' a pair of shoes fur me, an' a supply of baby clothes from the Welfare. Besides that, she brought some clothes fur the children. She told me to be ready next mornin' when she stopped by an' she would take me to the hospital in Kinston. I didn't have no stockin's an' a coat to wear, so I went up to Gus' sister's an' borrowed them from her' I left my two girls with his sister, an' Will stayed at home with his daddy.
"Next mornin' when she stopped by I had every tiling ready. I got in on the back seat with my baby. When we got to Snow Hill, Miss Simms rode with us to Kinston.
"This was the first time I had ever been to the hospital, an' I didn't know how it'd be. But when we got there everybody was so nice to me, an' everything was so pretty I was glad I'd come. The nurse an' Miss Simms said they'd stay till the operation was over an' I was gittin' on all right, so I felt better.
"I was put in a room with three other ladies. One was from near Snow Hill an' I had heard of her people, so I soon got acquainted with her. The ladies had some flowers in the room an' seemed to be gittin' on so well.
"Before long they come in a nurse an' she stuck a needle in my arm an' put me on a long white table an' rolled me into another room. They was so much in there to see, an' they put me to sleep so quick I don't remember so much till I woke up an' was back in my room with the three ladies. The doctors said I was 'bout the best patient they had, that I went to sleep so easy.
"Atter I'd been there 'bout three days they brought my baby fur me to see, an' atter that they brought him ever' day. He looked like he had gained a pound or two. People there ms so nice to me.
"The nurse an' Miss Simms come to see me ever' other day. Gus, he come over twice, an' one time he brung all the children. He couldn't come 'cept when he could git a ride 'cause we live twenty-six miles from Kinston. They kep' me there 'bout two weeks, 'cause they knowed I didn't have nobody to look atter me. They wanted me to leave the baby there. One time I started to, but I jes' couldn't part with hit. One reason I decided to bring the baby home was that Mary an' her husband come to live with us. Mary's my cousin.
"I shore was glad to git back home even though things was so nice over there. I see that nurse go flyin' by here nearly ever' day. Sometimes she sees me an' throws up her hand, but if I needed her I'd git out there an' wave her down.
"When Mary come to live in the house with us I had to put all my beds in one room, so she could have the other. Mary had a stove in the kitchen, 'cause I didn't have one worth nothin', so we used the same one. She was good to me, but her an' that husband of hers lived 'bout like cats an' dogs. He beat her so many times she threatened to leave him, an' he wouldn't provide fur her an' she was 'spectin' any time. I have to hand it to Mary, she was smart. That summer she was here she canned ever so many quarts of vegetables, while I didn't have none. I was sick an' couldn't tend to my garden, so we didn't have none left to can. She was a great help to me, but I was sorta glad when she left 'cause we was so crowded. I've heard lately she left her husband an' was back home with her mama.
"Lawsy me, if we didn't vote old Man Tom would have a duck" she responded to another question. "'Course we are Democrats. He usually takes us up to Snow Hill at votin' times. Sometimes I says I won't vote like he says, but I always end up by doin' hit.
"You know, church would scare me to death. I used to go to church an' Sunday school when I lived in Snow Hill. Lord, how I wish they would build a church nearby. The nearest one to us is six or seven miles up at Lindale. I shore do wish my children could go. Gus or me neither one belongs to the church.
"You know, when they has little ball games up to the station they always goes even if hit's on Sunday. I don't keer 'bout such things. I'd rather be a-walkin' up an' down the road. I don't know what the people is comin' to. Hit hain't the world wrong; hit's the people.
"Law, look at them pigs. I don't see what people turns 'em out fur. If I had any I'd shore keep 'em shut up. I'd be scared they'd git run over like that one did near here t'other day."
There is not a windowpane in the house, only shutters swinging on hinges. The shutters were sagging, and one of the front windows was partially covered with a sack. A block of wood had been placed before the door to be used as a doorstep.
Gus went in the back door and put some wood on the fire. In front of the fire was a three-legged skillet which still held the water Lessie had used to bathe the children.
Lessie brought out two chairs, both of which had been re-bottomed with calf hides. There was another one in the room which had been re-bottomed with innertube strips.
The picture which she prized so highly was hanging on the wall and was the only one in the room.
"There's the picture I was tellin' you 'bout," she said, pointing to it. "I wouldn't take nothin' fur that picture; 'twas tuck before I was married. I shore don't look like that now. I'm gittin' right fat since I was operated on three years ago this spring."
There was a bureau and a washstand in the room, each with a mirror. The mirrors, however, were so badly scarred and covered with flyspecks that it was impossible to recognize yourself in them. The room also had two iron beds, and underneath these were boxes in which Lessie kept their clothes. The room, as were the other two, was ceiled with wide rough boards which didn't fit very closely together.
There was a bed and a cradle in the other room. It was Bruce's room. There was a small platform which connected the two rooms and the kitchen. A shelf had been added to this, on which they keep the drinking water, and a gourd hung just above it.
The kitchen was the third room. There was no overhead ceiling in there, and Lessie had placed broomstraw across the rafters. There was a table and some chairs in the kitchen, but the dishes and other utensils were lacking in quantity. The few in there were scattered about over the room.
"I won't never forgit 'bout three years ago when a lady come here an' showed me how to make a whole lotta tilings," said Lessie as she paused a moment. "I shore did enjoy her visits. She brought a lot of Sunday school papers an' magazines one time an' read stories to the children. She made me a white bureau scarf an' a washstand cover an' showed me how to make paper flowers. One day she brought some tin cans an' we covered 'em with some cloth she brought. We tuck seven cans an' made two stools, one fur Hazel an' one fur Suzanne, but I couldn't keep 'em lookin' nice 'cause the flies was so bad. You know, she set right down here in my house an' hemmed up a dress fur Hazel an' Suzanne. They was some dresses I got at the Welfare, an' they was down to their ankles.
"While she was a-comin' out here my children started up with them sores they been a-havin' ever since. She told me to grease the places with sulphur an' lard. I done hit an' hit shore cured 'em up.
"You comin' back out here any more? I shore hope you do, 'cause we don't hardly ever have nobody to come to see us."
