Date of first writing:	January 20, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	Dr. W. W. Whittington (White)
Address:	Snow Hill, N. C.
Occupation:		Physician
Name of writer:	Christine Taylor
Revisers:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 3,200
A COUNTY PHYSICIAN
Ben Collier, a man seventy years of age, of small stature and weighing only about 135 pounds, was smoking a cigarette.
"Good evening," he spoke politely, "won't you be seated? If you'll wait just a moment until I can get Mrs. Collier to get me some coffee I will talk with you. I'll bet I don't drink coffee like anybody else you know. I drink mine cold, with no cream or sugar.
"Speaking about my life," he went on, "I've certainly had variety. I reckon I've done about everything except having been put in the penitentiary.
"My great-great-grandfather came over from Wales with Lord Calvert. Calvert was a Catholic, but my forefathers were Protestants. They were well-educated. My great-grandfather was educated at the University of Glasgow, in Scotland. He lived almost all of his life in the western part of the state but all of his children except John, who located up there also, scattered in the South.
"My father, at the age of thirty-five, married Margaret Arnold, a descendant of the French Huguenots. There were fourteen of us children. My father was just a plain ordinary country doctor of that time.
"He and my mother together had 300 acres of farm land, and I knew what it was to work. Why, I worked from dawn Monday morning till sunset Saturday. I didn't have Saturday afternoon off like most people do now. I cut wood, split rails, and dug ditches. I worked like the very devil. Convicts don't know anything about work.
"I went to the regular three-months school, and all my teachers, with the exception of two, were men. Every one of them was a good teacher. One was the best in Math, Latin, and Greek I ever saw and he hadn't been to school a day in his life.
"When I was seventeen years old my father took me to another town to continue my education. When I got there I found I had accumulated so much knowledge that I entered college with no further preparation. I could survey as good as anyone. Of course, my father and some of my brothers were doctors, but that wasn't the reason I decided to become a doctor. When the horse threw me and stepped on my wrist my father and oldest brother set it. They didn't do a good job, and for that reason I can't turn the one that was broken as far as I can the other. After that, I made up my mind to become a doctor, the best one that I could.
"After I finished my studies down here in 1892, I went to Baltimore where I worked in the college, and city hospital, for my board. My tuition was free because I was a doctor's son. At night I taught a class in history and another in philology. Do you know what that is? Philology is the study of how words are made. I also taught a quiz class.
"One day our professor of surgery gave us a lecture on syphilis. About the time he finished, an undergraduate from Baltimore Medical entered and told us we were all invited to hear a doctor from North Carolina lecture on syphilis. So the next day we went to hear him speak. His lecture was so directly opposite from the one the day before that I decided doctors were foolish. Before he finished, an undergraduate came in and invited us over to his college to hear their man speak on syphilis, so we went. His lecture was so entirely different in description and ideas from either of the other two that I thought: Well, I'm not going to get into any rut; I'm going to do my own thinking from now on. I left that college the next year and entered a medical college in Kentucky. There I got that diploma you see on the wall.
"In 1894, they had the last great epidemic of yellow fever. Foolish-like I volunteered to go. They said it would count the same towards a degree if I went there as it would if I stayed. The very next day I was sent out to a little town to nurse three or four cases of yellow fever. I nursed them for a week then I got sick at my stomach and had to go to bed. When I waked up I was back in a hospital in Kentucky, recovering from a severe case of yellow fever. I don't know even how I got there.
"I found out at the end of the school session that I was an honor graduate and that I would receive the honor medal. I was extremely proud and I still have it today. If I hadn't received that medal, I would have received several others, but no one receiving it can receive another. I had specialized in something few people knew anything about--bacteriology. I was right in on it when the bug was found that causes tuberculosis.
"On my last day at school I made a contract with a man in Kentucky. I think if I had stayed on with him I might have been somebody. My mother and father were now both old and feeble, and, as I was the only child who was not married, they wrote me and asked me to come home. So I threw up my contract, went home and became a horseback doctor in the mountains of North Carolina. I still have three of the old saddlebags I used.
"In 1898, a call was sent out to all yellow fever immunes, asking them to either join or contract with the United States Army for service in the Spanish-American War, so I became a contract doctor. I went to camp, and after a few days' training I became a member of the headquarters brigade.
"After returning to this country and having had three months' service with the Indians in the West, I was transferred for service with the British.
"Now, let me tell you a few of my experiences, for I've really had some of every kind--some very strange ones, at that. I've had to perform almost every kind of operation, although I'm no surgeon. I once went to see a little boy and found a big bulge over his heart. I got his father's consent to let me cut in there, and I found a needle that had worked through. I've taken people's hands off and also performed mastoid operations.
"I've also had some peculiar situations to occur in childbirth. A preacher came up to me one day and asked me to go over to see a girl who had been taken seriously ill while working in the field. I first refused to go, but, after he offered to put up $5, I decided that I had better. When I got there we took her to the shade of an oak, and right there under that tree a baby was born. I later learned that the very preacher that came after me was the father of that child. But the most striking coincidence that I have ever had occur during my practice occurred to three sisters in the same night. I received a call to visit all three of them. The first one had twins; the second one, triplets; and the third one, one, in other words, six children were born to three sisters in the same night."
With a smile on his face, the doctor continued: "I always thought my first childhood sweetheart was about the prettiest girl around, but I saw her sometime ago and darned if she isn't about the ugliest woman I've ever seen. I was extremely afraid of girls when I was young; I didn't have but one girl friend before I finished school. She had yellow hair, brown eyes, and the prettiest skin I ever saw. My heart like to have jumped out of my breast when I first saw her. She wrote me a letter one day and asked me to come to see her at the earliest possible time. I set out early the next morning to go the distance of thirty miles. I spent the night there and the next day we sat on the side of the road to talk.
"She said she would live in a house made of brush if I'd marry her, but I told her she would have to wait till I finished school. Then we had a fuss. I hadn't been gone so much as an hour before she had wired her other sweetheart to come to see her. He came the next day and they were married.
"Afterwards, I fell in love with another girl, and we planned to get married. I didn't have any money but had a lot owing to me. Most of it was owed by three men who were classed as millionaires. But they said they couldn't pay me any; they were broke. They all said that they had credit and that I could buy what I wished.
"My first wife and I had two children. The oldest is a music and voice teacher in a Virginia college and the other is a high school teacher. Both are college graduates.
"After a time, my wife's health failed and we were forced to move to a lower, level place. She developed arthritis; her fingers knotted and her hips hurt her so she could hardly walk. I reckon you wonder why I happened to land in this place.
"When my first wife and I started housekeeping we didn't have but one chair and a box for a table. She always sat on the chair, and I sat on the box. I made us a table out of mahogany; that would be worth about $100 if I had it now, but I sold it when we moved because it was so unhandy. When we started housekeeping I collected twenty-eight hams, three sides, two shoulders, and wheat from those who couldn't pay money. Every time I had two bushels of wheat that I didn't need I'd take them to town and trade them for a chair. My first year's income was about $400 plus all the food and things I collected.
"My wife died and I took her body back to the mountains for burial. Then I married again. We had four girls. They've all had a college education and are all married except one.
"This wife died in a few years, and then I married again. She's been bossing me like I was a stepchild ever since. You can see that she has made a lovely mother for three sets of children. We have had two sons--one in college and one in high school.
"My first ambition was to own my own home. When I bought that home it had neither lights nor water. The first thing I did was to put in both water and lights. I was the second man in the county to have electric lights. Then I bought a car because the other doctors had them.
"At one time this country was very prosperous, and I even got $16,000 to $18,000 ahead. Seemed like money couldn't stay with anybody, though. It seemed to burn them. Instead of throwing my money away, like so many did, I put most of mine into this house. It has twenty-three rooms, including three baths. There were three stories. We practically live in the basement, but it's just like a regular store because most of it is above the ground. We have just made three apartments in the house."
The house has a metal roof, a large porch, and many windows, and it is very conveniently arranged.
"You see that wardrobe over there against the wall?" he asked. "I made that soon after my first heart attack. I copied the pattern out of a catalogue. We already had the wood and I borrowed an electric sand paperer so it didn't cost much. That sword over there on the wall belonged to a British Admiral.
"My son made that checkerboard table and telephone stand. It's a kind of hobby with him as it is with me. Carving used to be my greatest hobby, but I don't carve much now except my fingernails and toenails. I have a three- piece coffee set that was given me by my aunt when I got married. In this old-fashioned set you drink your coffee out of the larger saucer, sitting your cup in the smaller saucer.
"You know, in all the number of times that I have been married I have never tried to influence my wives' vote nor their religion. I'm a Baptist now, and my present wife is an Episcopalian. She can remain that as long as she desires.
"Up where I came from there were only two denominations when I was a boy--Baptist and Methodist. I guess that is the real reason why I am a Baptist.
"As a child, I always hated work and always had a desire to be rich, but by the time I was grown I was glad I was born among the working people instead of being a rich sitter. I've always been proud of my work but I've been ashamed of the things I didn't know. There has never been any outside influence in my life that I remember. The basis of my satisfaction with my life is that I have always tried to do my best. I'd rather have a life of my kind, an outdoor life, than any other kind. I wouldn't be tied up in a mill office all day for anything. The time when I made a lot of money I tried to develop an office. It lasted three years and some days I made as much as $35 a day, but I was actually glad when the depression came along and broke it up.
"You know, to me a human being is the most interesting thing I know of. My greatest delights have come when I found out something new about him.
"I have had to study medicine two different times completely. The first time I studied what they called Empirical Medicine. I learned what to do but not why. I learned to give calomel, salts, and pills by using a powder or liquid and mixing it with a little flour and water. Later I used capsules.
"By the time I had learned Empirical Medicine, I had to learn Scientific Medicine. You know, the science of medicine has increased more in the last twenty- five years than it had in 5,000. The way I first learned medicine was practically like the old Egyptians used to use.
"See this burn on my hand? That's an X-ray burn. I got that on the first X-ray I ever used. By the way, my brother and I owned the first X-ray in the western part of the state. I have the first X-ray picture ever made in the state. My oldest brother died from X-ray burns.
"When I first came down here to practice medicine the nearest hospital was 400 miles away, and that one wasn't much. It was just a big rooming house turned into a hospital.
"I have also lived through three modes of travel: horseback, buggy, and automobile. At first people rode horseback. My father did all his practice on horseback, but when I started practicing there were twelve buggies in the county. When I got my first car there were only two in the county.
"Since I had that first heart attack I haven't done as much practice as formerly, but I am the county physician at present.
"There is no excuse for children not going to school nowadays. Some of them say they just can't go because they haven't got any clothes to wear to school. I know most of them can get at least overalls for their boys and some dresses from the Welfare, for the girls. It has always been my opinion that he who intends to specialize should not be allowed to until he has at least an academic education.
"I've seen men riding camels on the desert, elephants plowing, and many strange and beautiful sights, but about the prettiest I've ever seen was the Taj Mahal in India. I didn't get any closer than 600 yards because they protect it so.
"You know, if I had my typewriter that I loaned my son, I believe I would write a book entitled, 'The Life of a Country Doctor.!"
<text not clear>
