CASINGHEAD GASOLINE PLANT
"Boy, what are you doing in this tool house?"
"Waiting for the four o'clock whistle, that's what I'm doing."
"Up to your old trick, I see. Well, it's good to know you haven't changed a damn bit. The same old Buster."
"Who in the hell . . . . Well, I'll he -- Dan!"
"After eight long years."
"By God, you're the last person I expected to see come through that door. Where've you been keeping yourself? Whatcha been doing? Just this morning us boys was talking about you, wondering what happened to you. You working?"
"Yep. That's why I'm here. Got a job you would like. You'd "be plenty good at it. Buster. It's tough on me, though. Not in my nature. I've got to be nosey. Got to interview oil workers and get them to tell all about themselves in their own way."
"You're getting paid to be nosey?"
"That's right."
"How do you get a job like that. Man alive, I could make lots of money. Retire in a week. I'd sure enough buy a grapefruit farm in the Rio Grande Valley. You been at this nosey job ever since you got laid-off eight years ago?"
"Nope. Been nosey only a few months. Most of the time I've been bumming around the country looking for work."
"Have you sold any more stories to the magazines?"
"Nary a story."
"Been East to see your mother?"
"Saw her about a year ago."
"Did you see that big shot in New York who sent you out here to learn the oil business, and then had you run-off because you was our labor representative?"
"Wait a minute! I'm the one to get nosey, not you. I'm getting paid to ask questions."
"Can't a man get nosey on his own?"
"Sure. But let me get nosey first. Now tell me your life story, but don't lie."
"Will it be printed in a book?"
"Yep."
"Boy!"
"The God's truth. Buster."
"The God's truth so help me."
"If I forget I was born and such, Dan, just jump me up, because you ought to know my life story by heart. I know I ain't been backward in telling off on myself, especially after a couple of snifters. . . . .
"Dan, remember how we used to get drunk when we was staying in the bunk house? Man alive, we used to put them on in those good old boom days. Remember the time . . . .
"All right, we'll talk about my life first. Then me and you will go home, grab a bite to eat, and then go to town and really put one on, just like old times.
"Ma had me in Keota twenty-nine years ago. Let me see, that would make it - 29 from 39 - 1910. Ma was 1/8 Cherokee, and owned some land till she married my old man. That makes me 1/16 Indian, 1/2 Irish, and the rest, unknown. Probably wildcat.
"My old man didn't favor work none, so he decided to go in business. He sold ma's land and opened up a drug store in Stigler, the county seat. Haskell County. Stigler is 12 miles west of Keota. The old man made a fair living, and we were respectable people. You know what I mean, we didn't do hard labor and get all dirty and sweaty. We let other folks do the work, and we took the gravy.
"I went to high school in Stigler. Played a little football and baseball and failed all my courses. After school and during the summer, I skeeted sodas at the drug store. When the old man wasn't around, I'd treat the girls, and after work hours, the girls would treat me. It was a fine set-up. So fine that it made me decide to leave Stigler in a hurry. I had put in two years at high school and had two more to go. But I figured even if I got as much out of the last two years as I got out of the first two, I still wouldn't of learned a damn thing. Anyhow, I was having woman trouble, Five of the girls wanted to marry me, and marry me right off. In this day and age a man can't marry five women and get away with it. Knowing that, I took out.
"Hell no! That's no lie. I didn't say I knocked the girls up. By God, I had a whole drug store to keep me out of trouble. The girls thought they were in love with me or something. I don't know. They pestered the hell out of me. So I took out. Always wanted to travel, anyhow. The only good size town I had ever been in was Fort Smith, Arkansas. Went over there several times to play ball. I wanted to see other big towns, especially Oklahoma City. Wanted to see what a capital of a state looked like.
"I got a ride to Poteau with some boys I knew, and at Poteau I grabbed myself a freight. The Rock Island goes right through Poteau to Oklahoma City. My plan was to horse around Oklahoma City till I seen all I wanted to see, then take a freight to the Rio Grande Valley. When I got to the Valley, I was going to skeet sodas till I made a nice stake, then I was going to "buy a grapefruit farm. I've always been partial to grapefruit. Could eat them all the time. Wish I had one right now.
"But when I got on the freight, my mind was changed for me. The whole freight was alive with men going to the oil boom at Seminole, A man could make more in a month in the oil fields, than he could make in six months skeeting sodas in the Valley, That's what the men told me. They said I would be a fool to pass up a chance of picking up some easy money in Seminole.
"Seminole is only about 150 miles from Poteau, and I had to go through it to get to Oklahoma City anyhow, so I decided I Just as well look the town over.
"That was in the summer of 1927, Twelve years ago. And except for a couple of trips to Tulsa and Oklahoma City, and several jaunts back to Stigler on vacations, I ain't left Seminole since.
"Seminole was mad with life when I come in on the freight. I haven't seen so much activity in one small place in all my life. It looked like one big mud-hole full of shacks, tents, trucks, cars, oil field equipment, mules, and folks. Everybody was in a hurry, and most everybody was mad as hell because the mud slowed them up. Some men were so mad, they were fighting each other over nothing. And because they couldn't get no work done, the men went to drinking, gambling, and whoring. It seemed like the whole town was drunk. There was no law in Seminole, and folks did anything they was big enough to do.
"I ain't kidding when I say Seminole had me scared, I was scared plumb stiff. I wouldn't of left the freight, if I hadn't of buddied up with some boys.
"But it wasn't hard to find a job. The men on the freight had been right when they said a man could get a job right off in Seminole, and get paid good money. The oil companies were begging for men, fighting each other to get them. But them men on the freight sure slipped up when they said it was easy money.
"Easy money – hell!
"My first job was with the Sinclair, digging ditch and laying pipe. We went to work early and quit late. We averaged putting in 14 hours a day. It damn near killed me. I wasn't use to competing with mules. I'll admit, I couldn't take it. After a week, I quit. Got my time and stalked right off the job. And I wasn't the only one, three days was the average any man worked on that pipelaying job. They had to quit to rest up so they could put in a few more days of work.
"But I didn't go back to pipelaying because I never did get rested up. Working in a drug store had made me soft. Sure I'd played some football and baseball. That had toughened me up some. But the only way a man could last on a pipeline was to go in training for a month ahead of time, just like them heavyweight boxers. Then he'd last only a week at the most. It was inhuman.
"By the time I'd paid for my room and board for that week, I was flat broke. Everything was sky-high. You couldn't get a meal for under fifty cents. It cost a man about $2 a day for food alone, and room rent was higher than food. Being flat broke, I either had to leave town or go back to work.
"I decided to go back to work. But not pipelining!
"I went to skeeting sodas and waiting on counter in a drug store, something I knew how to work at without killing myself. It was easy to get work in a store. The stores didn't pay big wages like the oil companies, and most the men who flocked to Seminole wanted big money. The storekeepers had to go out of town, hire help, bring the help to Seminole, and give them a place to flop. Even then the storekeepers lost most of their help, because the boys would soon go for the big money in oil.
"My plan was to work in the drug store till I could get an easier just with an oil company. Get on as a regular roustabout and make a flat $130 a month, with a room in the bunkhouse thrown in. With a job like that, I could get a good stake. Then I'd take out for the Valley.
"Now if I wanted to nose into everybody's private life in town, I couldn't of picked myself a better job. Of course, I knew that from past experience. But I didn't get nosey. Didn't have to. Folks tell everybody who works in a drug store all about theirselves. They tell things they wouldn't even tell their own folks, especially their wives or husbands. I got to know the love-life and sickness of most everybody in Seminole.
"In those boom days there was no difference between folks. We lived alike, ate about the same things, played the same girls, drank the same kind of rot-gut corn whiskey, and had the same diseases. And we all talked familiar and friendly, as folks ought to do.
"I got to know lots of girls, and knowing all these girls was the reason I got on steady with the Carter Oil Company.
"Wild Tom Cross was the chief engineer here at the Carter Grisso Gasoline Plant, Wild Tom wasn't busted back to head mechanic till Baldy came from the East. That was after you got laid-off, Dan. It was in the spring of 1932. Anyhow, Wild Tom had to have his women. And that's how come Wild Tom got so friendly with me. I had something on damn near every girl and woman in town. So they were all friendly to me. I had more girls on my hands than I could take care of. They kept me dead on my feet, especially middle-aged women, whose husbands worked nights. But I won't go into that. If Ruby read about those girls and me, she'd thrown a ring-tail fit. Ruby is the wife.
"Well, Wild Tom got friendly as hell and would hang around the drug store in the evening talking to me, waiting for a girl to come and see me. When a girl came in, Wild Tom butted right in on our talk, asking me to make him acquainted with the girl. Five minutes later, he was asking the girl to go car riding with him. Then he'd take her out, pour the whiskey to her, dance her and rub her into a lather, and then take her to a hotel room and prowl her drawers.
"It didn't take me long to get tired of playing the pimp for Wild Tom. And I was fed up with skeeting sodas for $12 a week. As I said before, the prices were sky-high during the boom. And I might as well say here, that even today prices are higher in Seminole than any other town in the state. The business people don't know the boom is over. I couldn't live on $12 a week, leastwise make a stake. And though I knew the work would all but kill me, I decided to hit Wild Tom up for a job. Maybe I could get a snap.
"So when Wild Tom came in the drug store to get me to get him another girl, I did some requesting myself. I asked him for a job. Tom said, 'You mean it?' And I said, 'You're damn tooting I mean it.' Tom then wanted to know why I hadn't asked him for a job before, that it would of been mine for the asking. He told me to come to work in the morning. He would put me to roustabouting.
"And that's how come I'm 'in oil' as the big shots say.
"I started working here at this casinghead gasoline plant in January 1928. I'd been out to the plant once before with a fellow who wanted to get a job with the construction gang that just about had the plant built. It was a sight to see. Everybody was in a big hurry, and working like hell. There were over 300 men on the job; pipe fitters, engine setters, pipeliners, boiler makers, electricians, meter men, welders, carpenters, painters, mule skinners, truck drivers, and a whole slough of common laborers. Never before had I seen so many different kind of workers all working on the same job. No one man can take credit for building this plant. It took lots of strong backs and lots of smart heads.
"It was after the plant was built that I started working in the yard gang. And I'd been working in the gang about five months when you come on the job, Dan. But seeing I've got to tell my own life story, I'll talk just as if you're dumb as hell about a gasoline plant. And even if I said you was dumb as hell, I wouldn't he lying.
"A yard gang at a casinghead gasoline plant does all the repairing and changing of fixtures to be done. Before the depression the company was always introducing new kind of equipment. Experimenting. And if they didn't like the new contraption, the yard gang would have to yank it out and put the old fitting back in, or put in a new-fangled contraption. Today the company makes few changes. They want to wear out the old equipment before spending a cent for new stuff. They're getting close as hell with their money.
"The yard gang also digs ditch, lay a little pipe, goose weeds around the stock tanks, paint the buildings and fittings and company houses, clean coolers and boilers - hell, we do something of everything there is to do around a gasoline plant that don't take no special skill and training.
"I worked in the yard gang for a year, and then went to oiling in the Main Engine Room for Four-Trey. Four-Trey is still engineering, and just as grouchy as ever. We'll go and see him after the whistle blows. He's got the evening tour this month, works from four till eight. You won't have no trouble getting a life story out of Four-Trey, Dan, if he's in the mind to talk. And he's always in the mind to talk about himself. He don't give a damn about nobody else though.
"When I oiled for Four-Trey, I got along with the grouchy old bastard all right. When you first hear him tell about himself, it's funny as hell and you can't keep from laughing. But when you hear the same story every day of the year, it gets old, plenty old. It's enough to make a man throw a ring-tail fit, listening to him. But I listened and laughed like hell each and every time. And that's how come I got along with him.
"Hell, I ain't suppose to tell about Four-Trey.
"I oiled until the big lay-off came in the fall of 1931. And that big layoff got me. The company sent me down the road.
"Oh, oh, here comes Outfit. You knew him, Dan, when he was operating Gas Lift #108. He's now pushing the gang here at the plant. He's a pretty good old boy, but like everybody else who's worked around gasoline plants any length of time, he throws ring-tail fits. I'll finish my life story later."
"Buster, what in God's name you doing up here in the tool house? Why ain't you at work. If I turn my back, you're gone."
"You remember Dan, Outfit. He used to work for the Carter."
"H'ya, Dan. Glad to see you. Buster, go out and help Alvie unload the truck."
"Howdy, Outfit. How's everything with you?"
"Not worth a damn. Buster, Alvie's waiting on you. He's out by the junk yard. Now get going. It's damn near four already."
"Why don't you write up Outfit, Dan? He can give you a good life story. Have him tell you about #108 blowing up. That's a real story."
"Buster!
"I left five minutes ago. Come out to the truck, Dan, when you're through with Outfit. We're going to town together tonight and really put on one. We'll get running, stumbling, blind drunk. Just like old times."
"Tell me about Gas Lift #108 blowing up, Outfit."
"It was the god-awfullest experience I've ever had in the oil field. And, mister, I've had experineces."
"You don't mind telling about it, do you, Outfit?"
"You're damn right I don't. Everybody ought to know about these oil field accidents. God knows, there's been plenty of them. Many a good man has been crippled and disrigured for life. Look at me. Some of my fingers gone, my ears half gone, my nose half gone, and damn near my whole body scarred up. I'm more of a burnt-out cinder than a man. You're damn right people ought to know about these accidents, especially young oil-field workers. Too damn many men have been killed outright in these fields. Knowing about these accidents might help to keep some of the boys above ground a little longer."
"You knew Mitch. He was oiling for me when I was operating #108. A fine boy. He couldn't of been over twenty. But he wasn't hair-brained like most youngsters, he knew how to do his work, and he done it. "one of this sitting around beefing, or walking around half asleep. Most youngsters spend all their off hours drinking and dancing and playing up to the gals. They never sleep, except on the job. Mitch wasn't like that, he played up to the gals, and got drunk every once in awhile. A clean, healthy-looking boy like Mitch just can't keep the gala off him. Mitch looked like he could do the gala lots of good. But he also took care of himself. A fine boy.
"The night of the explosion, I rode down to #108 with Mitch. My car had its rear end tore out, so Mitch come by the house and picked me up. Mitch had a Cnevvy coupe, a fancy blue job with yellow wire wheels. We was on morning tour, so we got to #108 about a quarter to twelve. We always relieved the otner operator and oiler about fifteen minutes early. That gave them a chance to tell us how things were running before they went off tour at midnight.
"When Mitch and me was coming up the road, we could hear the engines at the lift trembling on their cement foundations. The whole lift was shaking. The corrugated tin roof and sides were setting up a god-awful racket. Even the earth seemed to be trembling like we was having an earthquake. The exhausts were barking like mad.
"Mitch turned to me and said: 'The boys must be kicking off a well. Hope they get her kicked-off before midnight.'
"Case you don't know, I better tell you what kicking-off a well means. You understand the idea of the gas lift. In a well there's a big casing, and inside the casing there is a smaller pipe called the tubing. Under high-pressure, dry gas is either forced down the well through the tubing or the casing. Most the time it's the tubing, the smaller pipe. When this gas gets to the bottom of the well it mixes with the oil. And when the bottom of the well - it's like a little cave - gets more gas than it can hold, the gas starts looking for a way out. Ana the easiest way out is up through the tubing or casing, depending on which one you're shooting the dry gas into. If the dry gas is shot down the tubing, the mixture of oil and gas comes up through the casing. And when the pressure at the bottom of the well gets so great that the oil and gas comes roaring up the tubing, we say the well has been kicked-off.
"When you're kicking off a well, an operator and oiler is kept pretty busy. Some wells are stubborn, and you have to put 800 pounds pressure or more on the line to get the well to kick-off. This high pressure plays hell with the Bessemer engines. They get shaking like a dog spewing razor blades. The four-inch input lines that run from the Bessemers to the well also take a beating. Sometimes they rare-up out of the ground. Kicking-off some wells makes a man shakey himself. And that's way Mitch said he hoped the boys we was relieving would have the well kicked-off.
"When we drove up to #108, Slim, the operator, and Leroy, his oiler, came out to the turn-stile to meet us. Every gas lift has a cable fence all around it, about 150 feet from the engine room. No one is suppose to come inside this fence, except on business. And there's positively no smoking allowed inside the fence. Operators and oilers ain't even supposed to carry matches on their persons. The lift is usually full of gas, and a flash from a match, or a spark caused by metal hitting metal, would do lots of damage. If we wanted to smoke, we'd get outside the fence. Inside the fence, we chawed tobacco.
"Slim and Leroy came out to meet us. And while we were standing there smoking, Slim told us how things was running. They was kicking-off Harjo #3, a tough baby. They already had better than 500 pounds on the line.
"I asked Slim if he had the scrubbers by-passed, and he asked Leroy the same question. Scrubbers are tanks used to separate the condensed gasoline from the dry gas. And they ain't built to stand too great a pressure. In kicking off a well, the scrubbers are by-passed, cut off the line. Leroy allowed how he had by-passed the scrubbers. When Mitch said 'all of them', Leroy said 'yep' again, but he had a not-sure look on his face. Mitch said he'd check them to make sure, and went toward the lift.
"It happened them.
"No sooner had Mitch got into the engine room when there was a big explosion. It knocked Slim, Leroy, and me clean off our feet. It jarred the hell out of me. When I come to my senses, I rushed to the engine room to see if Mitch was all right. As I reached the door, the whole lift busted into a roaring flame. I sure enough did go out of my head. All I can remember was running like mad, running away from the heat. I didn't care where I was going, I just wanted to get away from the heat which was burning me like hell, burning me blind and crazy. But I didn't seem to be able to get away. The burning heat kept right up with me. I didn't come to my senses again till days later. Then I was in a hospital, miles from #108.
"I ain't never seen Mitch since the time I seen him going into the lift to check the scrubber tanks which were on the other side of the building. Slim and Leroy tell the story that while they was beating and rolling me clean of fire, Mitch came walking out of the flames. Just walking peaceful-like, as if he was taking a stroll. They said he was a pillow of fire. He walked toward his car, but never got there. He folded up by the turn-stile. Slim rushed over to him and covered him with dirt. Mitch was all fire, and Slim couldn't lay a hand on him. So he covered him with dirt. Them that ought to know allow that the only thing that wasn't burnt on Mitch was a little square of leather from his belt, the part right under the metal buckle.
"Mitch was dead even when Slim was covering him with dirt.
"We don't know, and never will know, whether the scrubbers were by-passed or not. The company claimed they wasn't by-passed and fired both Slim and Leroy. But the company better not fire or lay me off. I'll go to court. This half-nose, these half-ears, and these missing fingers will be the only witnesses I'll need to win my case.
"That explosion at #108 was the god-awfullest experience I've ever had in the oil fields. And, mister, I've had some god-awful experiences."
"Over here, Dan. No need Alvie popping-off, because I've already told you all there is to tell about him."
"What did Buster tell you, Dan?"
"I told Dan all about your old lady being sweet on Wild Tom. How she pesters Wild Tom all the time. That Wild Tom's old lady has to stone her away from the house. And how it don't faze her none, because she just can't keep herself away from Wild Tom."
"Buster, your big mouth is going to get you in trouble one of these days."
"Tell your own story, Alvie. Buster's lying again. He hasn't told me a damn thing about you."
"Alvie is touchy about trifling wives. He's jealous as hell of his old lady."
"You carry everything too goddam far."
"If my wife was trifling on me and she was getting fun out of it, I wouldn't mind. What makes my wife happy, makes me happy. That's shows you how much I love her. Of course, my wife would never trifle on me. A woman don't crave a gnat when she's already got an elephant."
"Bear's ass!"
"Let's have your life story, Alvie."
"I've been working in the oil fields for 15 years. I rode into Cromwell with the first load of pipe, and left Cromwell for Seminole two years later with the last load of whores. And I've been here ever since, driving a truck for the Carter. Twelve years of it.
"I come from Arkansas and don't mind saying so. From over in the eastern part of the state. Clay County. I was born on a farm not far from Piggott. And I stayed there just long enough to grow up so I could get away. I still had fuzz on my face when I went to Detroit to work in an auto plant. Us boys from the South were welcomed in Detroit. They even sent word for us to come up there and work. I didn't know till years later they was using us ignorant boys from the South to keep wages down in the North. Because we was used to little or no money, we didn't bellyache about the wages we was getting in Detroit. It seemed like a lot of money to us, till we went to buy things, and then it didn't seem so much.
"The money wasn't the only reason I went to Detroit. I always did like to work around machinery. But working in an auto plant wasn't like I thought it was going to be like. You just do one thing over and over, and that ain't a damn hit interesting. It ain't like putting a whole engine together and seeing whether it'll run. And if it don't run, trying to figure out for yourself why it don't run, and what in the hell you've done wrong. It's indoor work too. There's no hunting yourself a shade tree to work under. And there ain't none of the boys hanging around, kidding you along and giving you a hand when you need help. It's drudgery. It ain't living.
"I didn't last long in Detroit. It made me sick working indoors all the time, and doing the same old thing over and over again. It sure made me jittery. I've "been as nervous as a whore in church ever since.
"From Detroit I went to Florida. There was a real estate boom going on and I didn't have no trouble getting a job. I worked for a plumbing contractor, and made good money. Good money! But I couldn't hold on to it. The merchants, bootleggers, and whores got it all. I didn't work very long in Florida. So damn many people come looking for work, jobs got scarce and wages were lowered.
"Men and my buddy, a fellow I roomed with, left Florida for the Oklahoma oil fields. We planned on making some quick money. My buddy wanted to buy a racing car. He said we could clean up lots of dough. But when we stopped off in New Orleans to look the town over and get drunk, my buddy got sweet on a gal and wouldn't go no further. So I left him laying up with the gal, and come on here to Oklahoma.
"I landed in Cromwell when the boom was at its wildest. There was lots of work, and I got a job right off working for the Sinclair in a ditch gang. We worked from early morning to late night, and didn't get no time-and-a-half for overtime. Us day laborers got a straight fifty-cents an hour. My first full month's check come to $180. That'll give you some idea how much work I put out. Working by the day don't help you none, if you want to get service with an oil company. You don't stand for no promotion or a better job if you're on by the day. You've got to be a roustabout and get paid by the month. When things are booming, a day laborer can make more money than a roustabout. But when construction work is going on, a field is building up, lots of good paying jobs are made, and it's the roustabouts who get the promotions.
"Now I'm going to tell you how come I was put on steady roustabouting. I ain't ashamed to tell it, but it makes me mad as hell for some other bastard to tell it, or kid me about it.
"I hadn't been in Cromwell a week when I got sweet on a gal and upped and married her between drinks. Saturday night I had gone to the dance hall to look the gals over. That's what I said, look them over! I was too tired to do even one of them gals any good. I was that tired. It being Saturday night, I had a few drinks under my belt. I wasn't doing no tall drinking because I had to be on the job early the next morning. Yep, we worked Sundays, holidays - all the time. But those few drinks had me bleary-eyed. When a man works hard and is tired, it don't take much whiskey to get him going. It wasn't long before I didn't feel tired no more. I felt like dancing. So I started in dancing.
"I danced with five or six gals before I got around to dancing with Ida May. She's the one I upped and married. Ida May was a fine dancer. She sure knew how to fit herself into a man. You felt like you was riding her, instead of just dancing with her. That gal could put life in an old man with her dancing. She could even raise the dead.
"I spent the night with Ida May, but she wouldn't do nothing till I promised to marry her. Said she had never done nothing like that before in her life. I didn't exactly believe her, but I figured she hadn't been at it long. Ida May was only sixteen. When we got the marriage license, she told the clerk she was nineteen. She was only sixteen though.
"Well, we got married and went to keeping house. Got ourselves a little two-room shack. And we was mighty happy. But it damn near killed me trying to do right by my ditch digging job and by Ida May. I found out one thing: a man ain't the Man he thinks he is - not by a damn sight!
"I had been married only a short time when I was put on steady as a roustabout. It was what I wanted, and it made me feel proud. The boys in the gang said they was glad I got on steady, but they had a funny look in their eyes. A kind of look that said I was down in the foreman's vineyard helping to pick his grapes. I went around and explained to the boys that I didn't favor Bill Chapman no more than they did. The boys just laughed and said they wasn't accusing me of nothing. But I didn't believe them till the truth come out.
"Ida May was laying up with Bill Chapman. That's the plain truth, and I ain't ashamed to tell it. That's the reason I got on steady as a roustabout. The boys in the gang knew about Ida May's trifling on me, but they didn't say nothing because they didn't want to get messed up in a man-and-wife fight. I don't blame them for that. I stepped in a man-and-wife fight once, and I carry the scars to this day. Both of them ganged up and beat the hell out of me.
"If Ida May hadn't of started turning from me of a night, I would, never of got suspicious. One night, kidding more or less, I told Ida May she was acting like a trifling woman. That's all I said to start a££ with, but it was enough for a starter. Ida May turned on me like a hell-cat. She howled that it was a goddam lie, and she demanded to know who was blabbing on her. Still kidding I says, 'Ain't you and Bill Chapman been kind of friendly here of late.' Bill Chapman had the name of playing up to his workers' wives. Ida May leaped out of bed, and howling like a mad gave me a piece of her mind.
"Innocent-like, I had spoke the truth.
"You can guess how pop-eyed astonished I was when Ida May didn't deny trifling with Bill Chapman.
"!You dumb son of a bitch,' she howled, 'you think you're so smart and such a damn good man, that Bill picked you out of hundred others to put on steady roustabouting? If it hadn't been for me, you'd still be a day laborer. And that's where you belong, you dumb son of a bitch!'
"She really poured it on me. There wasn't a name she didn't call me. If I hadn't popped her on the jaw and knocked her out cold, she'd of talked all night.
"The next morning I went up to the office and beat the hell out of Bill Chapman. Flattened his nose like a pancake. Then I drew my time, got drunk, and left Cromwell and came here to Seminole.
"I ain't seen Ida May since. Yep, I got a divorce.
"And that accounts for why the boys kid me about trifling wives. I'm married again to a woman younger than myself. And I'm working for a man who is worst than Bill Chapman for playing up to his workers' wives. I've been driving a truck for twelve years, and if I ever get promoted to a better job, I'm going to kill both my wife and Wild Tom Cross."
"There goes the whistle, Got to put my truck up."
"How you know your old lady ain't trifling on you right now, Alvie?"
"I know she ain't. Just know she ain't."
"I wouldn't be too damn sure of it."
"I know are how to keep a woman from trifling."
"You do? By God, let me in on it, Alvie."
"Keep them barefoot and pregnant!"
"Wheel"
"Some on, Buster. Let's look the plant over."
..................... What is submitted is only the beginning. We have still to hear from the crumb boss, the engineer, the chemist, the stillman, two office boys, Wild Tom Cross, and the rest of Buster's story. We will also learn how a casinghead gasoline plant is run. We will visit Buster's home for supper, and end up 'histing' beer with the boys at the Club Bar.
It is hope that the reader will know boom days and present conditions in the oil fields of Oklahoma after reading these interviews.
<text not clear>
