POCKETS IN AMERICA
COOSAW ISLAND, S. C.
Coosaw Island, in Beaufort County, South Carolina, is literally a dark comer, inhabited solely by the peculiarly black Gullah Negro. No automobile, telephone or bathtub has ever been on the Island, which has no bridge or causeway and can be reached only by means of a rowboat across the tiny tidal creek which separates it from Sams' Point and Ladies Island.
Coosaw's population is made up of some thirty or forty families, all occupying shacks of varying degrees of dilapidation, set on small farms of ten, twenty, or thirty acres, which have been inherited by one generation, from another since their slave ancestors became freedmen and land owners after the Civil War. The Negroes cultivate their farms haphazardly, planting little patches of cotton, com, potatoes, and peas, which are rarely sufficient to last then through a season. They earn cash for taxes, clothing, occasional house repairs, burial society dues and church contributions by seasonal work at nearby shrimp and oyster factories and on the large truck farms of neighboring islands.
When crops are all gathered, hogs and other "critters" are turned loose to fend for themselves. It is a two-in-one system. The animals find their own livelihood in rooting up potatoes and the like, and the cultivation of fields next season is thereby made considerably easier. A hog, for instance, can root up a surprisingly large area of land pursuing a buried tidbit. Unfortunately, however, his pursuit leads him back and forth across the main thoroughfare, for there are few fences on the island. The middle of the sandy road is apparently his favorite spot for digging himself a nice cool hole in which to rest after Ms arduous labors. Since the only means of transportation on Coosaw is my ox and cart over these deep holes, most inhabitants prefer the original style of locomotion - on foot.
Life here is leisurely and unhurried. No duties are so pressing that one may not take time off to hunt and fish, to chat on a neighbor's porch, or to stretch out on the grass beneath the shade of a tree for a noontime nap. The sick, if too ill to be brought into Beaufort to a physician, are treated by native "root doctors" or with home remedies, of which there are many. Birth and death are but natural events and are managed without benefit of outside assistance.
The islanders boast a school house, recently built, where their children now learn to read and write, and two churches. Religion plays a predominant part in the lives of these secluded black 'people and there is strong rivalry between the two congregations. One is known as the "society" church, the other as the church of the "common people".
From the latter body has arisen the leading citizen of the island, the pastor of the church which he largely built by his own efforts. Joseph Holmes by name, he is familiarly called "the Reverend". Before he began to preach, the old darky worked on a boat and saved his money, which he used largely in financing the "common people's" church building. Week days he is a plain industrious farmer, but on preaching days and when he goes to Beaufort he is an elegant figure in a heterogeneous collection of clothing donated from time to time by his white friends, of which the crowning glory is a swallowtailed coat. No article of his apparel fits. The Reverend Joseph is the acknowledged leader of his flock in morals, religion, and grammar, and digressions on the part of his people in any of the three are equally painful to him. He is not only the prophet but the law. With the title of mayor of Coosaw Island, he settles most disputes which arise. When the dispensing of justice gets too complicated for him, he sometimes brings his problems to "big court" in Beaufort, but mostly ho handles things in his own way.
When government relief was first dispensed in the section, the Reverend Joseph headed a large delegation of his people and came to Beaufort to ask help because, as he explained, "everyone else was getting it". As each applicant was questioned, he or she was constantly admonished or encouraged, according to individual requirements, by the reverend. "Speak up and don't act lak you is facing a doctor bill,' he would spur the timid. Or, "Nigger, ain't you know dat a lie? Goberment ain't goan stand for no lying in dis business!" he would tongue-lash those who showed a tendency to depart from the truth. Finally, the interviewer requested that he not interrupt further, whereupon he drew himself up in offended dignity and said: "Madam, maybe you don't know? who I am. I am the dedicator of Coosaw Island!"
The Reverend Joseph hit upon an excellent word to describe his position. To call him "king" would be too small, "president" too ineffectual. "Emperor" was probably not in his vocabulary, but obviously he had hoard of dictators.
Hence his neatly coined title for himself - "dedicator".
Coosaw Island takes its name from the Coosaw Indians, who roamed this section. Though no white person has lived there for many years, in ante-bellum years it was the plantation of captain John Bull and was known as Bull Island. During the uprising of Yamasee Indians in 1715, while captain Bull was absent from home, Indians attacked the island and carried away Mrs. Bull. Her husband never found any trace of her, except one of her slippers which he picked up in the woods. In 1734 he gave to St. Helena's Episcopal church in Beaufort, in memory of his wife, a silver communion service, which is still used on special occasions.