In an otherwise identical version the following comments appear on the top of page 12663: "Good-WTC," and "OLD PERSON ON RELIEF."
January 12, 1939
Uncle Charlie Lewis,
Dresden Road, 5 miles
from Paris, Tennessee
Writerl, Nellie Gray Toler
Revised by Jennette Edwards
and Aswell.
A MIGHTY COMEDOWN
"It wasn't trifleness with me. Nobody can say Charlie Lewis is trifling. NO, hard luck just hit me all in one blow. Once I had three good farms and a good home and a mighty good wife. She was the best woman that ever lived in this world. But hard luck just hit me all in a blow. It took everthing I had in the world. It's a pity and a burning shame for a gentleman to be right down in the line with the common poor. Yes, a pity and a shame! Charlie Lewis, blue blood running in every vein of his body, trotting in this door to get his sack filled by the Relief."
Uncle Charlie Lewis put the tow sack bulging at the bottom with groceries on the floor. He topped the sack with his oversize, worn-out felt hat and scouted around the relief warehouse for something to sit on while he talked. He dragged an empty wooden box from behind a stack of cannedgoods. Turning it bottom side up, he perched on top. Heripped open the brass buttons of the gray Confederate jacketwhich, in better days, he'd worn to reunions.
Chewing meditatively on the long ends of his gray mustache, he said, "It's mighty hard on old folks to come downin the world. Mighty hard. I'm going on eighty-four now and haven't a thing left in the world I can call my own but rheumatism. Not a thing. And the doctors could take that if they wanted it, and welcome. They won't take it. Charlie Lewis has got mighty little these days. There was a time when he walked down the street as straight as an arrow. New suit of clothes, rich, well-to-do. They'd been glad to help out any misery he had then, those doctors. I had moneyto pay them then. Not now. No, Lord. I've had my share and more of hard luck. Charlie Lewis, blue blood running in every vein of his body, just on common charity.
'Hard luck just hit me all in a blow. Sarah took down with a dire disease. And then the money began to go. What's a man to do with a good wife sick? Let her die without turning a hand? So I spent every dime I could get finger on trying to keep her in this world with me. Every last dime. Doctors bills, nurses, hospitals, everything I heard of in the wide world to ease her. Ah, but to no avail. To no avail at all. Lord, but I've had more than my share of hard luck. My dear wife dead. Three children dead. Andthe one that lived to be grown is no comfort to his ownfather. I forget he's in the world. He's got no timeforhis poor old father who gave him every comfort in the world. But Lord bless Ed for having a car! That's a quick way toget a mean woman out of your sight. Just take her off. I mean that woman who nursed my sick wife.
"There wasn't a thing in the world for me to do when Sarah died but let her stay on. She'd kept house for the two of us, for an old sick woman and a worn-out old man. My rheumatism had me where I couldn't move. I had to have somebody to do for me. well, I was a gentleman. With blue blood running in your veins, you just can't keep from knowing the thing to do. So I married her, married that nurse. I married her to keep me company and to keep her good name. But she had a soul of the deepest dye. Lord, it's a misery to live with a bad woman. Worse misery when you've had a good woman fifty years. Well, I made the mistake of my lifetime letting that low hussy take my name. She had no character at all. A friend came and told me just what she was. She was bad with just anybody and everybody that came along. Just the worst bad, and it made no difference who. Any man at all would do for her. And me cooped up in that dark room in bed, not able to do a thing!
"I just dragged myself right out of that bed. Got my pants on over my nightshirt. I went out of that back door to Ed's without waiting to get my shoes tied. I told him,'Son, hitch up that car. You've been talking about how fast you can drive that car. Come and take that woman off. I don't care where you take her. Just take her far, so far she can never find her way back.'
"So Ed did it. Lord, I wished I'd heard about what she was sooner. She got a disease in myblood there's no cure for. No cure in this world. That what makes me feel funny in the head and gets me dizzying so I can't work. I just fall over if I don't get a place to sit quick. Just fall over. Charlie Lewis dropping in the road or anywhere it happens to hit me.
"What a terrible price a mean woman can cost a man! It took seven hundred and seventy-five dollars to get rid of her. I sold the best part of the last little farm I had in the world to get that divorce and settle her. I dropped my insurance. Then lightning struck the feed barn. The house burned, burned to the very ground. And not a penny of insurance on a thing. Well, I had a niece that took me in. She let me live under her roof. But she died before I was settled good and there I was again. Penniless and alone in the world. And Lord, it's a cruel world.
"Here I am, Charlie Lewis, living in an old outhouse that's not good enough for niggers. Roof leaking, foundation rotting, nothing fit for hogs on the outside, nothing in the inside fit for a gentleman. Old broken down bed springs. Lord, no springs for these old bones. No cover to keep him warm except filthy old ragged quilts. Charlie Lewis sleeping in his union suit to keep from freezing to death. Not a whole dish to eat from--just broken plates and chipped cups. Charlie Lewis, blue blood running in every vein in his body, drinking water from a lard bucket. His organs hurting him so he can't get the water out of the well unless Horace is there to do it for him. Horace is a good nigger. Don't know how I'd do without him.
"No, it wasn't trifleness with me. Hard luck just hit me in a blow. And after it hit me, as long as I was able, I worked. If I couldn't get a dollar I took fifty cents. If I couldn't get fifty cents, I'd be glad for a quarter. I did anything and everything. And I'm not going to tell a living soul what I did do. It's a shame and a pity for a man with blue blood running through every vein in his body to have to do as I did. Then my health went back on me. It just gave out on me. There was nothing left for Charlie Lewis. He was cast off by his kin, by his own flesh and blood. Not a dime in the world. Nothing left but the arms of common charity.
"My relief application went right through. But, Lord, they ought to give me more. Fifteen dollars a month's mighty little when your medicine bill goes over twenty. Then I have to pay that nigger Horace Diggs fifty cents a day to stay there and wait on me. When I die, I don't want to die alone. Sweet Jesus, don't let me die alone! Horace is past seventy-one, but he near eats up every bite of food in my house when I'm in bed and not watching after it. But I don't grudge him a bite. He's a strong nigger. He can lift me in and out of bed like I was a leaf. He can tend to me like a nurse. Oh, it's shameful the way a poor old man like me loses control. He's like a baby, no more control than a suckling baby. The baby's climbing toward life but the poor old man's going down hill the opposite way. He loses control of first one thing and then the other. Shameful, shameful! You know a wet union suit will give a man pneumounia if it don't freeze him to death. A gentleman ought to always have a nigger to do for him. Always.
"A gentleman ought to have a few things in the world to let himdie easy. And I haven't. Not a thing. I just don't know what I'm going to do. I just don't. Folks think fifteen dollars a month is a fortune for a man. I have to hire my wood cut and everything. And I can't pay when I hire. And I need doctors and medicine and more food than they give me here. If it was twenty-five a month maybe I could do better. But it's fifteen. I just don't know what I'm going to do.
"Lord, Lord, it's mighty hard, that's all. Charlie Lewis, blue blood running in every vein in his body, in the worst shape of any man in the world."
He buttoned his coat and slowly hefted the towsack of groceries. He limped toward the door, still talking andshaking his head.
"Lord, I'm worrying in my head every hour of the day and night. Suffering every minute in my body. My legs are stove up and stiff. My organs are sosore I can't move without misery. And bad blood just chokes up my heart till can't breathe. And I know those sores on my legs are cancer just coming out from the bone. I know it! And I can't do a thing in the world about it. That fifteen dollars a month's not enough. It's mighty hard, that's all."