A SELF-MADE MAN
Written By:
Mrs. Leola Bradley
Research Worker
Georgia Writers' Project
Athens -
Edited By:
Rudene Hix
Typist
Georgia Writers' Project
Athens -
WPA Area - 6
September 29, 1939
 
September 13, 1939
L.L. Jordan (White)
15½ West Trade Street
Charlotte, North Carolina
Painter
Bradley
A SELF-MADE MAN
Walking through the campus of the Agricultural College, which is a part of the University of Georgia system, I read this sign in large black letters -
P.W.A.
Federal Emergency
Administration of Public Works
Dining Hall - Athens, Georgia
This was obviously going to be a building of gigantic proportions, modern in every way to fit the needs for which it is intended. As I looked beyond that structure I saw a group of houses, six in all, nearing completion. They looked to be modern beautiful residences but I could not understand their being built in Just that locality.
Being interested and seeing a workman near by I asked, "What are those buildings to be used for?"
'Why, Miss, deys de Home Management Buildings, to be used by the Home Ec Department. Ain't dey purty?"
"They certainly are," I said, "and I would like to see them."
"Well, Miss, I ain't working ober dere but I speck dey would be proud ter let yer look em ober."
I walked down the road which had been beaten out by trucks, automobiles, and other vehicles. No permanent road as yet had been built. The grounds around these buildings had evidently never been in use. They were very rough and full of holes, but I noticed the grading machines were at work, going back and forth filling in here and dragging down there in order to level them up.
A man was standing on the outside of one of the structures with several men around him. I supposed he was the foreman and was giving instructions to the workers, who from their dress appeared to be painters. I paused until he finished, for I wished to get permission to see the interior of the buildings. Just then he turned and saw me.
"Goodevin, lady," he said. Returning his salutation,
I introduced myself.
"Judson is my name," he said, "Luther Judson, and I'm pleased ter meet you."
"I have been admiring these buildings from a distance and I'm wondering if I would be allowed to go through them."
"Sure, sure! Just wait a minute and I'll show you around."
After a few minutes more of giving orders he joined me again. "Lots of people come out every day to look over the work and we are allus glad to have em if they don't get in the way or into wet paint." I promised him to be very careful so we began our inspection.
"I'm glad te came terday", he said, "for after today the sandin man is comin ter begin on the floors and nobody can't come in after that".
"I'm head er the paint Job", he continued, "and I'm workin P.W.A. help, en, lady, I tell yer, it is a worrisome business, makin out all them Government papers and reports and things is sompin. I ain't never had ter do it before. It gits on my nerves. Then, too, they are fussy a lot. Not all of them, of course. I reely have some fine fellers workin under me. I'm with the Northeastern Construction Co. of Charlotte, North Calina, and my home is there too".
Mr. Judson was a man of fine physique, rather tall but well proportioned. Although he was only in his early fifties, his fast greying hair was getting very thin on the top of his head. His florid complexion was offset by deep blue eyes that bespoke a kind and genial disposition. He wore overalls and a cap much bespattered with paint. As he conversed with me he continuously wiped away the beaded perspiration from his face. While his manner was very obliging, he would impress one as being a hard worker, kind-hearted but exacting where his work is concerned.
"I ain't much to look at today," he said, "Ef I had knowed yer wuz comin I would er fixed up a little. I don't allers have to wear my painter's clothes, but today I got so aggervated with some of these workers I just offed my clothes, got inter my overalls, grabbed my brush, and went ter work. These P.W.A. workers are not any too much up on their jobs and I haf to watch em. We'er spected to git this job done in two more weeks and its sorter got on my nerves".
Going through the buildings room by room he explained as beat he could the uses of each one. "I'm reel proud of this paint job. I recken ye ken tell I'm not much of an educated man but I do feel like I know my paint."
I commented on the beauty of one particular color. "Yes", he replied, "I spent a whole half'er day mixing paint to git that color". Stopping abruptly in his talk, he said, "Miss, whuts your work? is it with the University? I told him of my work and asked if he would let me write his life history. "Why, lady, I'll just be only too happy if it'll do ye any good. I've done everything from plowing and railroading to paintin. 'Course I been paintin a long time now and I guess I'll allus paint until my time comes,"
Fearing that he was too busy to continue the interview, I suggested another time. "No, I've got just as much time now as I'll ever have, if yer don't mind being disturbed ever now and then." I told him I didn't, so he began.
"I was born in Mechlenbery Count, North Calina, just four miles from Charlotte, Of course then that was in the country, but now the town has moved and spreaded out in that direction. I wuz borned a po boy and wuz raised a po boy but I had fine parents. My mother wuz one of the finest women God ever let live- My wife is next. There wuz seven of us chillun in the family-four boys and three girls. I think big families are the happiest. 'Course now it seems ter take more to raise chillun now days than it used tar, and I think the pitifulest thing in the world is ter bring a lot of chillun in the world when you can't raise em and give em a chance. And while I believe big families are happiest I don't think more chillun orter be born than a man ken take keer of.
"My childhood wuz happy, but it didn't take much to make me happy. Us boys had to help with work around home while we were little. Then when we were big enough we helped on the farm. Why I've plowed many a furrer. We had to mind our parents too. My!My! they wuz strick on us and if we ever got in ter any devilment we shore caught it.
"Now, I ain't no educated man as yer ken tell. I'm a self-made man, but lady, I'm proud of my record. Course I went ter school some in my younger days tut not much. I went to four different schools but altogether I don't recken I went higher than the fourth grade. Now I'm just gonna tell yer the truth I speck my schoolin in all didn't cover over eighteen months. I just wouldn't go, didn't keer fer it. My mother would send me and I would play hookey. My! me! many's the time my father would nearly tear the seat out er my pants fer runnin away from school. No, my learnin came from experience. The best education I got wuz when I wuz railroadin. A man can learn a heap gittin out in de world and just mixin with people. Tell the truth I ain't so strong fer so much college education. I just bet the most of people out of jobs right now are college people.
"Then so many of our criminals now are college graduates. I had a funny experience once, when I was workin on a job in Griffen, Georgia, I had to go out ter the Federal pen in Atlanta ter see a man on some bizness. I wuz stopped at the gates by a guard but when I stated my bizness he let me in. On the grounds wuz a man dressed in snow-white. I axed who he wuz, and the guard told me he wuz a college man with several degrees and had been there for sixteen years. Sent up fer robbin a big bank. And he said there wuz lots more just like that there. No, I don't believe in too much education. I put my children through the ninth grade. Then they got out on their own and they are all married and doing fine. I just wusn't able to give em any more than that. A man with a trade like mine, fer Instance, ken allus git er job.
"Me and my wife Married when we wuz young. She wuz seventeen and I wuz nineteen. That wuz too young but we wuz dead in love. We had a nice family - had four boys and one girl. We had'er lot of trouble mixed in with the good. We lost one of our boys when he wuz twenty-six. That wuz a blow ter us. He had the flu and then it went in ter T.B. I've allus made good money but it's took so much fer doctor bills. He wuz sick two years. Then my wife's health ain't so good. Doctors, hospitals and operations ken sure get your money.
"Say, while I'm tellin you about my chillun, I want ter show yer a pictur of the purtiest man in the world if there is such a thing."
I told him I would like to see it. So, looking in his coat pocket, he handed me the photograph.
"That's my son, the one that died. He wuz a good boy and I promised him on his death bed I would meet him in Heaven. I specks ter do that, too. My wife, shes a religious woman and I try ter live right."
At this time one of the workmen stepped up and said, "Boss, giv'me a cigarette". Mr. Judson handed him a pack, "Yer know, I buy three ter four packs ever day. I don't smoke nigh all of em. I just gives em away. I just know I got the bigges heart in de world. I guess I'd give a body my head off they wust ter ax me fer it. I can't refuse nobody nothin.
"This ain't de first time I've ever painted in Georgia. I painted on one of dem Government houses in Atlanta. J.A. Jones Construction Co. of Charlotte had the contract for the building part den he subcontracts the paintin ter Rogers Paint Co. Yes, I'm proud of my work, too. It ain't so bad on yer health as office work. I keep well fer I try ter eat right.
That's the main thing is eatin balanced diet.
"We own our home. I had it built just to our notion and I done the paint job myself. Just wish yer could see it. We're proud of it. Course I'm away lots - in fact nearly all the time.
"My wife's mother lives with us. My wife's coming here while I'm on this job and I sure want yer to meet er. I married the purtiest girl in all North Calina".
I assured him I would be delighted.
Just then the afternoon mail was brought in and he asked to be excused while he read it. "Well", he said, as he finished, "here's some more papers ter be filled out. I declare all this red tape about this government business sure gets my goat and somehow I ain't up to it as well as I would like to be. This P.W.A. and W.P.A. sure gives lots of work to people that need it though. That's one thing our President has done that has sure helped the country.
"Now I don't take a lot of stock in politics, but President Roosevelt, he's my 'Buddy'. He's fer the poor folks. Some say he want go in fer another term but just watch whut I tell ye. Course he says we ain't gonna git in this war and he means it now, but sometimes a feller can't help hisself. But as I wuz sayin, if we git in the war President Roosevelt will be President right on an I'm fer him. Oh, of course, I votes, but outside er that I don't fool wid politics much.
"Yes, we're both members of de church, Baptist, My wife wuz a Methodist when we fust married, and somehow I believe she felt sorter funny bein out er my church. So one day she came ter me and says 'Honey, I'm gonna join your church'. 'What about yer baptism', says I. 'Well', she says, 'I've decided I ain't right clean and I believe I'll git down under the water and git a good dose'. So she did. We go ter church and Sunday School ever Sunday I'm at home.
"Goin back ter my younger days, things wuz sho different then. Our biggest pastime wuz goin to preachin and we didn't have a automobile to pull up in front er our door ter ride in. No, mam, we either rode behind the mules or walked. Chillun are sho spoiled yer day. All this riding round, smokin, drinkin, and pettin wuz sompin we never heard of. Course now I ain't been no angel since I growed up. I drink some, don't never git drunk. My biggest fault is playin poker. I used ter be a expert poker player but I've 'bout quit all that now.
"When I'm at home I don't want nothin bettern just to go in at night, git comfortable, turn on the radio, and just enjoy home."
I noticed as he was talking he kept glancing down at a paper in his hand. "Lady, if yer will parden me just a minute", he said, "this is one of them imports I has ter fill out. Let me see who ken I git ter help me."
"Mr. Judson", I said, if I can help you in any way, I'll be so glad to do so".
"Well, that sure is kind and it want take yer more'n five minutes."
We seated ourselves at a table and spread the papers out, which proved to be the work-sheet and payroll. I wrote as he dictated.
"Number 1 - twenty-four hours - he's been laid off.
"Number 2 - he gits four eight-hour days en one four-hour day". So on, until it was completed, signed, and put in envelope ready to mail.
"This is what gits these fellers they money, so if you'll excuse me a minute I'll send this right down to the Post Office. I've had lots of funny experiences in my life. I'm gonna tell yer one. I don't often tell it and yer ken write it down if yer wants ter. I'm proud er it. When me and my wife had just two kids, Charlie and little Nell, we lived in a two-room apartment right across the hall from a friend of our'n. They had two kids, too. One night we all went ter town. My wife, she walked with Mrs. Davis and I walked on ahead totin little Nell in my arms. On the corner wuz a man I never seen before. He wuz drinking but I didn't know hit then.
He walks up to me and says", 'Say, Mister, is that yo baby you totin or is it mine?' "Well, I saw red. I handed my wife the baby. Then I picked up a Coca-Cola bottle and lambed him right side er the head. He died three days later. Course I went to jail but got out on bond. Hit came ter trail but I wuz turned loose. That's one time I lost my temper that I ain't been sorry fer".
Not wanting to keep a busy man from his work any longer I suggested that I had better be going. So after finishing our inspection of the buildings I thanked him and said, "Goodbye".