Mrs. George L. Peschau
Maurice B. Haskett
MRS. PETE PATELLOS
The apartment of Mrs. Pete Patellosis modern, the living room being furnished with an overstuffed suite, the bedroom being furnished with a modern bedroom suite, and the kitchen being furnished with an electric refrigerator, stove, and other modern appliances.
Mrs. Patellos is fifty-six years of age and lives here with her husband and Mr. and Mrs. Nickolas Patellos. She was Fotenie Tebissere before her marriage, and she was born in Philipopolis, Bulgaria, in 1883. Her father was the operator of a cafe in the best part of town. He died when Fotenie was only five years old, leaving his wife almost penniless and with four little girls. This resulted in Fotenie getting very little education. But her mother sold the cafe and bought a house where she operated a boarding house and also took in sewing. And under their mother's direction the four girls became expert seamstresses.
Then one by one the four girls began to marry. Fotenie, then twenty-one, met Arthur Kazakides who was living in America but had come to Bulgaria to visit. He was forty-seven. Before his five-months' visit was over he and Fotenie were engaged. Then he returned to America, but after nine months he returned to Bulgaria for Fotenie. Their wedding took place in the Greek Orthodox Church with four bridesmaids and four groomsmen attending.
For six months Arthur and his bride remained in Bulgaria, then they both decided to come to America. Landing in New York, Fotenie says that she was terrified by the hugeness of everything and felt smothered by the large crowds. They settled in Jersey City, but Fotenie knew no English and she became lonesome and homesick. After three months they again returned to Bulgaria. This time Arthur sold his interest in his cafe there. In Bulgaria their only child, Marvika, was born.
Thecouple remained in Bulgaria for three years. In the meantime, a friend of Arthur's in Wilmington had interested him in coming there. Arthur arrived there in the spring of 1910 and opened a small confectionery. His wife and baby followed him in August of the same year.
Fotenie said that she was determined to like America this time, and from the first she did like Wilmington. It was a small town with open spaces and more like the town in which she had been accustomed to living.
Arthur prospered in his business, but his health failed him before long. He died from asphyxiation in 1916. He left his widow with $12 in cash and an equity in a. small house.
Fotenie was made of the same material that helped to carry her mother over the hurdles of misfortune. She immediately went to work in a tailor's shop and worked there for three years when she had to stop because of bad eyesight. With the small amount of cash that she had saved she opened a dry goods business of her own. She also took in sewing. But she soon realized that her little business was a failure. She had made some unwise purchases of materials and found that shecould not sell them for anything near as much asshe had paid for them.
She had to do something else then, and she soon found employment in Pete Patellos' Confectionery. She was a clerk and kitchen helper. Not long after this Pete's cousin, Nickolas Patellos, arrived from Greece, and he went to work there. Within a short time he had fallen in love with Marvika, Fotenie's daughter. The marriage followed soon, and Fotenie went to live with her son-in-law.
Fotenie found romance also. Pete had been a bachelor for years, but the bravery, courage, and gentle disposition of Fotenie had won him. It was not long before they were married. The two couples moved together, and the two men own and operate jointly the People's Grocery Store, one of the city's largest grocery establishments.

