Mr. Fred Trammell
279 Yonah Ave.
January 4, 1939
C.L. Fowler
Just A Traveling, Rambling Man That Settled Down In Athens Town. After finishing the evening meal I went to the home of my next door neighbor. He and his wife were sitting in their cozy living room. He was smoking a cigar and she was working, as usual. He never forgets that cigar (mis I said he always puts a cigar in his mouth before he puts his breeches on, and she's always working when you find her at home. She works in town during the day and there's so much she wants to do when she gets home, sewing cooking, canning, cleaning, etc. Mr. Trammell is also very industrious and does many things to help at home when he is there. He spends a good-bit of time with his musical instruments and practicing. He sells pianos and collects for Flanigan & Flanigan, who have had offices here, but are now located at Winder, Georgia.
They are a very pleasant couple and everyone enjoys visiting this home. Mr. Trammell wanted to know where the Chinese Checker board was when I walked in. They enjoy the games as much as we do. I handed him a cigar and told him that he had to talk this time -- we would not have time to play checkers and I didn't bring the board. In a short while he began talking, which is one of his greatest hobbies. Wish that I could remember all the interesting stories that I have heard him tell, then it wouldn't be necessary to get these interviews to write my story.
"I bet I can tell you something different from anything you've heard. My father and two of his brothers married three of the sisters. Mother's name was Virginia. She graduated at the Alabama State College and Grandpa Stillwell gave her a $1800 Mathershack piano. Sister Ella has the piano now in Charlotte N. C., didn't you see it ? It's nearly a hundred years old and the ivory keys and yellow as gold. They all lived at Fredonia, Alabama, bought adjoining plantations and had lots of slaves, which were freed after the war. One of my mother's brothers who was a Lieutenant in the Confederate War, on the southern side, was killed at New Orleans. A sister Sallie, married John Christian and they moved out west to Gilmer, Texas.
After the war, another of my uncles took his Negroes, thirty of them, and eight yoke of oxen and went west to Danger Field, Texas, captured the Mexicans and settled that place.
There were twenty of the grandchildren and for twenty years there wasn't a death in the family -- but when they commenced dying, they died like pigs with the cholera.
We had lots of cattle. There was a deaf and dumb negro boy 6 years older than I was, that helped with the work. We turned the cattle out every day. Every family had one cow that would wear a bell and this was called the bell cow. One day me and the negro boy turned the cattle out and we were killing lizzards. The negro got mad and knocked me in the head with a rock and I thought he was going to kill me and I didn't know, and don't until this day, what about. Dad settled with me and did the same for the negro and brought the cattle home.
Uncle Putty had a pretty watermelon patch and in the middle of the patch was a grape vine. We were thumping watermelons, trying to find a ripe one, when I heard a gun go off and you should have seen me run. The negro couldn't hear and uncle came out where he was, laughing about me running. He gave the negro a load of watermelons.
When the sugar cane was cut and syrup made there were two barrels put away to go to sugar, This is how our brown sugar was made.
I had always wanted to go west so I decided to visit my uncle in Danger Field, Texas and also an aunt and uncle at Gilmer. Texas. While I was there we went on a fish fry to the river. You could not buy bathing suits then at stores, so each girl made a suit for one boy. I jumped in the river from one rock and was going to surin a cross to another on the other side, not realizing the danger I was in as it had rained, the river was up and very swift. Did not go to the rock I had intended to but was carried on down the river by the swift current. The boys yelled for me to hold on to some willows near by and I did until they could get a rope and help me get out.
"When I left Gilmer, I bought a ticket to Sulphur Springs- - going to see Mr. & Mrs. J. W. Cranford. Mrs Cranford was my mother's niece. Mr. Cranford was a noted Criminal lawyer and later a senator and congressman. On the way to Sulphur Springs the train was wrecked. That's when my fingers were mashed and broken, that caused them to be as you 'see them now. I'll never forget that ride on the Kansas, St. Louis and Missouri railroad. The first thing I knew was the next morning after the wreck, my hand was hanging up at the head of the bed with a pan of castor oil over it and another under it, with oil dripping over my hand. I was in the finest furnished home I had ever been in, with two Catholic nuns. One of them saw I was awake and came over and said, ' Son, how are you feeling,'. They were some of the best people I have ever been with. They ask me where I had been and where I was going. One of them wrote cousin John a card. He wasn't at home but his wife received the card and came on the train to where I was. The next day he was there and offered to pay these ladies for their trouble but they would not accept a penny. He told them not to let anyone talk to me. Said that he would pay my expenses when I was able to leave. They had a law suit but I didn't get anything from the accident. I, then went back to Freedonia, as every thing was so wild and gloomy in the west.
After being in the west I was dissatisfied and wanted to go back again. Dad said if I wouldn't go he would give me a mule and sixty acres of land. They would board me but I would have to pay the negro $3 a month and $3 for his board. It was in July when I came back home, hired this negro, Henry Grady and we cleared up twenty acres of land, heavy timber. We had two or three log rollings. Dad bought me a good mule and we worked from daylight 'til dark. It was a rule to give all the negroes the 4th Saturday evening in each month off. Then you could hear them hollow. They worked rain or shine only this evening and they looked forward to this as we would a vacation. I rang the bell at 3 and 12 o'clock each day. There were six or eight bells we could hear from home. Some were about four miles away.
That year I made eight bales of cotton and over 200 bushels of corn. Five bales only brought $100, cotton seed 10¢ per bushel and corn 35¢. When that crop was gathered and disposed of I told Dad that would be my last year to farm and it was. I told him that I was going west and when I crossed the Mississippi I wasn't going to stop in eastern Texas. When all my expenses were paid I had barely enough to carry me west, so I ran a gin that fall for Sol Ward, the wealthiest man in the community. He had a gin and mill on Big creek. The mill was three stories high and then wasn't near as high as the bridge across the creek -- liked about twenty feet. At this bridge is where me and Miss Carrie Griffin saw what seemed would be a terrible accident. Ben Tillman had the finest horse and buggy in the county. A young lady was with him in the buggy, when they started across the bridge, the horse was frightened and backed off the bridge. The trees and bushes caught the buggy and no doubt saved their lives. The horse was hurt pretty bad but they were not hurt.
The mill was on one side of the creek and the gin on the other. I run the gin that season from daylight 'til dark. It cut all cotton for an area of twenty miles of that place. The mill ground corn for an area of thirty miles of that place. Have known people to have to stay two days to get grinding done or unload and come back. I have known them to grind all night. Frank Hagood ran the mill. He always called me Ma-Shack-and-A-Bed-Ne-Go.
This pond was one hundred and twenty-five yards wide, 2 miles long and ten, fifteen to twenty feet deep at different places. Once at a picnic there I was with a young lady out in a boat. It was the first time I had ever rowed a boat. There were lots of ducks, so I had carried my twenty-two rifle. I saw several green headed ducks, my oars were forgotton as I reached for my rifle. The oars were gone and someone told me to paddle with my hands. We had a time getting to shore and that completed the boat ride which did not end as pleasant as it began.
Ward's Mill was famous for picnics. For fifty-one years the first Saturday in May they had these gatherings. They would come forty miles to these picnics and to dances. I have took loads of feed, from home many times to feed stock of persons who lived a long ways off.
Dad's home had four big rooms eighteen by twenty feet, a long hall and dining room. At each end of this hall were double doors which locked and then there were long bars which went across them. There was a porch between the house and kitchen. I have seen mother and sister make beds enough for fifteen or twenty men and boys in that hall. All of the people around were glad to make room for these people.
There were two dancing platforms and lots of times they used two floors of the mill for dances -- making four dances going on at the time.
The mill extended out in the creek and a man drinking once had a fit, ran through the window, hit the water thirty feet down, where it was ten feet deep. The boys jumped in and saved him. I worked for Mr. Ward until December 1, 1904. He said, 'If you'll stay on, Fred, and oversee my work, I'll give you $12.50 per month, but I could not be persuaded to stay.
Marcus Trammell, Uncle Tom's son had come in from Coleman, Texas. I had already decided to go -- but stayed on awhile, going to parties and dances. Some of the old dances were. Old Blue Jay, Chase the Squirrel and Hands Around and the Irish Trot.
One night a friend and I were going through a graveyard. We did not see or hear anything but all of a sudden the horses stopped and looked very frightened. They could not be persuaded to go on so I got out and tried to lead them and still they would not go. The friend thought he would help me so we finally went on our way. I told him when we reached our destination to lets get a gentle horse and go back and find the ghost. We returned to the spot and found lying on a slab over a grave a very drunk man.
Later, I thought I would have some fun with this same friend. So a time that I knew he would go through the graveyard I, put on one of my mother's long white chemise and hid behind a tree and when he was near by began to rattle some chains. He instantly picked up a long rail and said, no ones going to scare me, so I hurriedly came out in my long white garment and the joke was on me.
Marcus and myself landed in Coleman after several days trip. When we crossed Trinity River, Texas, on the way out there, every little town we passed through were signs that said, negroes don't let the sun set on you in this country.
When I had been in Coleman a short while one morning I went in a store, started blowing my harp and playing an organ. Will Griffin walked up to me and ask if I wasn't the boy who came from Alabama with Marcus. He said ,"We can give you a job. I want you to drive me around in the country -- but this country is as wild as the devil. Are you afraid of stock? I told him no. He said,' I'm not going to tell you what I'll pay you, but I'll pay you what you are worth and I won't ask you to do anything that I wouldn't do.
When I first went to work I started canvasing and Will was with me. He knew this was the first time I had ever been and he laughed at me and kept telling me to knock harder and I did and was laughing too when the lady came to the door. She slammed the door to in my face. Will went back and apologized and explained to the lady about this visit.
They were selling Estey organs so we went down to the ranch and hooked up two bronchos to a wagon and we had to whip one nearly to death before he would start, but when he did, he started running. Will said, 'Give me the lines,' and he let them run themselves to death nearly on the trail and then they were broke. We went on up to the store and put an organ on and went north west to Balenger. Stopped at a place, Will got off and went in. It looked like it was going to rain so he got permission from the lady to leave the organ there. The man wasn't at home. Several days later we went back-- the man was there. Will told him that he was the one who left the organ. He said,' Yes, you're the one I want to see. Get that organ out of here right now.---- ---- ----"
After loading the organ Will noticed he had a gun and was moving his hand to get it but Will got his Cole forty-five first and told him he'd blow his head off if he moved. His wife came out and Will told him to let her get the gun and we started back to Coleman, Before we got 5 miles it was raining and we would have to stop every few minutes and knock the dirt off of the wheels to be able to go until we reached a place where other wagons had traveled and we didn't have any more trouble.
Will had a dog, Todd. He could whip any dog he ever saw when he got under the wagon, but he wouldn't fight until he did where were lots of wolves in heards and coyotes, rattlesnakes, prairie dog towns and Jack rabbit trails everywhere. A coyote couldn't catch a Jack rabbit if he got in his trail.
The farmers and owners of cattle dreaded droughts, hail storms and blizzard. The cattle and sheep would sometimes freeze. The following June after I went west, one day the sun began to get dim. I had never seen it look like that. The houses all had tin roofs and we heard a noise that sounded like hail. Grasshoppers as large as my thumb were covering everything. They were coming from Mexico on account of the hot wind. They darkened the sun for over an hour. These winds killed all vegetation in New Mexico and by natural instinct the grasshoppers always migrated east. One night Tom and Marcus, who were very mischievous and myself decided to put on a musical entertainment. The place where we were going to give the program was a good ways out. The people all came on horseback and brought their guns, some shooting them on the way out. This was very exciting to me as I was not used to such a life. Marcus and I were inside ready to begin. Some of the crowd started shooting the lights out and when they were all out and the place was in darkness they left. Marcus and I had hid behind the organ, wondering if they had killed Tom, for he hadn't come inside at all. We went out and found him and get our horses which, at first we thought were gone, but we found them grazing in a field not far away.
I had been selling organs quite a while and thought I was about the best salesman there was, I was some conceited boy. I went to a house and knocked at the door. A very old lady, I know she must have been nearly a hundred years old, came creeping to the door. I asked her if they had an organ in the house. Instead of talking to me she began calling, 'Sallie, Oh Sallie! I thought she was calling one of the family who would be interested in buying an organ. I was very elated -- but I soon felt different -- when she said, 'Sallie let that bull dog out.' I hurriedly told her that wasn't necessary, I would go.
After saving up some money I decided that I wanted to ramble some. Thought I would go to St. Louis, Kansas City and Chicago. Bought a ticket to St. Louis and when I arrived at Hannibal, called for a lunch of cheese. Then got on the car and started down the river to St. Louis, which was about a hundred miles. A man sitting behind me said, 'If you'll throw that box away, when we get to St. Louis I'll buy you any kind of dinner you want. I hadn't discovered before that it was limburger cheese. It was 2 a.m. when we reached St. Louis. Always thought the old Union Shed in Atlanta was a big thing, but when I got to St. Louis I decided they didn't have one at all. It was snowing when I arrived. There were plenty of hacks with blanketed horses to carry you any place but I thought I would stay at the depot and sit up. While sitting there a man came up to me and said, 'I'm in trouble and have got to tell my trouble to someone, and looking at your face, I know I can rely on you. 'I thanked him. He told me if I would go two blocks with him, he would pay me, that he and his wife were in serious trouble and he thought I could straighten things out. Someone I had never seen before called to me to come back. He said that he had heard what the man told me and that he was just telling me that to get me out, that it wasn't true.
'After rambling over several states in 1916 I landed in the Red Old Hills of Georgia at Athens by request of Flanigan and Flanigan to come here as they needed a piano man. When I had been working here about a month, Mr. J. W. Foster came in and Flanigan gave him work. One day Mr. Foster asked me where I was stopping at here. I told him I lived at Mr Bowden's Majestic Hotel. He then told me that they did not make a habit of taking boarders but that as we were working together he would like for me to board with them. They would board me cheaper too so I went to their home to live. One evening Mr. Foster ask me where my home was. I told him Freedonia, Alabama. He said well this is Fred Trammell. He told me that they were in Freedonia about the time I left to go west and also said that we had school together. He was about grown at that time and I was just a kid. I lived with the Foster's a long time. In 1918 at Monticello, Georgia I was playing set back one evening. My name was called by some one. A gentleman said, 'Is your name Trammell Whose son are you?' When I told him, he said that he was Mr. Oliver and that he went west with my uncle and he was the bravest man under the skies -- he would stay where no other man would.
While traveling I met the girl I married at Auburn and our first home was with the Fosters. We thought almost as much of them as our parents and he was always known as "Dad" Foster. He has been dead a good many years now but his wife, daughter and granddaughter, of whom we are especially fond still live here. As I told you at the first of this story, Flaningan and Flanigan, which was the first company I worked for here are in Winder now and I work some for them. I have also invented instruments for a one man orchestra and play a good bit. Go to different places, I'm invited to and give programs. My broken fingers, that were broken in the train wreck many years ago caused me to work on these inventions. With them I am able to play duets by myself with one hand and a little help from the broke hand. I also use my feet to play Piano & other instruments. These instruments consist of piano, drum, bells, bones, harp, xylophone, and other small instruments.
I will always be interested in the piano business as that is all I know and enjoy going over these old days that I remember so well.