Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
FAIRFIELD COUNTY
THOMAS C. CAMAK (white)
83 YEARS OLD.
Thomas C. Camak, widely known as a contributor of news items to the Fairfield News and Herald of Winnsboro, S. C., lives in a two-story frame house on his plantation twelve miles south of Winnsboro, S. C. His daughter-in-law, Mrs. T. C. Camak, Jr., and her two children live in the home with him and his wife. At the advanced age of 83, he is still active and a member of the County Equalization Board of Property, in Fairfield County.
"I am up here this morning attending, with a few other feeble-minded men, a meeting of the Fairfield County Board of Equalization. It's a curious thing the way people return property for taxation. For instance, two highly respected citizens live on adjoining lands that produce about the same crops per acre. One will return his property in value at seven dollars per acre, his house at five hundred dollars, making mention of two out houses at one hundred dollars each, four mules at fifty dollars each, etc. The other citizen will return his lands at three hundred dollars per acre, his residence at two hundred dollars, making no mention of outhouses, and return his mules at twenty-five dollars a head. It's strange the first man doesn't take exception to the prejudicial return of his neighbor, but he never does. The only fair way, it seems to me, is to have property returned at its full and just valuation.
"Again it is strange that all the boards I serve on are alive with interest in seeing that the real property of railroad, factories, and other corporations are assessed pretty high in order to bring in sufficient revenue to run our schools and pay the bulk of the cost of our expensive county government systems.
"I was born about ten miles east of Winnsboro in the Lebannon section of the county, just after a red rooster crowed three times in the nighttime, on May 11, 1855. It is reported that I came here into this world squalling and demanding nourishment and the favor of the superfine sex. In my old age, I have changed very little about the nourishment and the favor of the women of my household.
"My father was David Y. Camak; my mother, Jane Robinson Camak, Scotch-Irish on both sides of the parental house. My ancestors came from Ireland to this county, about the year 1765, and settled on Crooked Run Creek in Fairfield District, Craven District then.
"The first school I attended? Let me see! I walked four miles to a one-teacher school; first, to a Miss Helen Puit and then to a Mrs. S. B. Simmons, who taught in the same school. The building was known as the Cornwallis House, from the fact that Lord Cornwallis spent a day and a night there during the Revolutionary War. Is it still standing? No, the Yankees burned it, but on it now stands the parsonage of Bethel Methodist Episcopal Church in the Greenbrier section. It was a tuition school. My father paid ten cents a day for my schooling then. I attended five days a week, and I stayed all day. For my dinner, I carried a bottle of molasses, two buttered biscuits, and one biscuit with a streak of lean and a streak of fat bacon between it. We began in the old blue-back speller. As we progressed, we got into Robert son's arithmetic and used slates and slated pencils. I forget sang it to the tune of Old Dan Tucker. The whole school enjoyed this method of learning geography. All the boys and girls who went to this school with me are dead and zone. The last one to depart was Thomas Woodward Ruff. I can't remember how many boys there were, but I remember counting the girls every night after I went to bed. The number was exactly twenty-two. There was only one other boy, besides myself, that was big enough to court them, and me sure did our best. The influence of these girls, which was good, made me study hard at night and slick up my hair a little before going to school in the morning. I pause here, like Brutus in his address to the Romans, to ask you if you think the large school plants with the excellent equipment of today are turning out as worthy products as the old field of the sixties and seventies?
"What about the period of great hostilities between the North and South? Looking over church statistics, it is shameful that secession and war ever came about. Here was a young nation, not as old as I am today, founded on the principles of Jesus, patience, forbearance, long suffering, liberty, tolerance, and a declaration that all men are born free and equal. Why could not the sermon on the mount have been heeded? That would have provided for just recognition of what the South had done for the Negro race, a time to be set for their emancipation, and compensation to the individual slave owner for the property valuation of the slave. The Christian citizenship of our country lost a great opportunity when it did not stand between the Pharisaical traders and manufacturers of the North and the arrogant and proud land owners and slaveholders of the South and settle the question without bloodshed and on some social and economic policy fair to the Negro and not injurious to the southern white people.
"Well, at the end of the war, Sherman's army came thru our section raiding and burning. When they got to our house, they herded up all cows and sheep, put halters on the mules we had, made the Negroes catch our chickens - all except an old red rooster that got away under the barn - ransacked the smokehouse and, for pure meanness, emptied a tub of lye soap into our molasses hogshead. After they left us and marched on to Winnsboro, it was a long time before we saw an egg again and the old red rooster was very lonely; in fact, he didn't strut any more.
"We didn't have any coffee for a long time after the war. We used as a substitute, that winter, parched ground rye; in the fall, ground okra seed. Mother made our clothes; spun the thread on the old spinning wheel after the cotton had been carded into bats by the Negro women on the place. She could weave the cloth necessary to clothe the family. We took strips of bark from live walnut trees to dye the cloth.
