There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Approximately 3,500 words
Revision Code No, 1 A
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
MR. KERENSKY BECOMES A BARBER
Date of First Writing	January 20, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	John R. Queen (white)
Fictitious Name	Mr. Kerensky
Street Address	126 N. Walker Street
Place	Spartanburg, S.C.
Occupation	Barber and Beauty Supplies
Office Address	112 Magnolia Street
Name of Writer	Elmer Turnage
Name of Second Reviser, Date	Elmer Turnage, Mar. 23, 1939
Name of Third Reviser,
A glass case, four feet high and two feet square, stands conspicuously at the edge of the sidewalk, in a narrow passage between two buildings on Magnolia Street. It contains two or three song books, a hair brush, a Japanese comb, several bottles of hair tonic, and a variety of razors. Painted in bold lettering on the front of the glass case are the words "Ivan Kerensky - Beauty and Barber Supplies - Upstairs."
An old iron stairway in the alley leads to the second floor of one of the buildings. A padlock on the outside of the door is unfastened, but the door is securely fastened on the inside. A sheet of tin, substituted for the broken glass in the door, rattles and reverberates.
"Just a minute," calls the soft bass voice of Kerensky.
The lock clicks and the heavy door opens with a screak. "Good morning, friend. Come right in to the fire," says the smiling, 6-foot and bespectacled Kerensky, his 200 pounds radiating au unusual vitality for his 66 years.
The little room was filled with supplies which represented every phase of the beauty and barber business. Boxes of creams and lotions were stacked along the walls; sun lamps, electric clippers, and new and used barber chairs filled the room.
"Take a chair and rest yourself," droned Kerensky. "What can I do for you this morning? Ah, you would like to see some of my new song books. They're here some place, I'll find one in a minute. Pshaw, there they go - all over the floor!"
While Keresnky searched through a mass of books and papers, I sat before the fire glowing in an open grate. On one wall hung a variety of combs, brushes, razors, and other small articles which represented in part the supplies sold by Keresnky to the barber trade. A large draftsman's table was piled high with beauty aids of various description - hair tonics, massage creams, depilatories, etc. Some of these concoctions were made from Keresnky's own formulas and manufactured for him in New York. A few other tables, each equally disarrayed, added to the jumbled appearance of the room.
"Sparkling Songs, here it is - a brand new book, put out by the A.L. Showalter Company of Dalton, Ga. Now, let me show you one of the songs I wrote."
While thumbing through the pages Kerensky hummed the tune of the song he was looking for; then suddenly he said:
"Oh yes, number seven; the name is 'Since Jesus is Living in Me.' No, no, that is not my only song; I have songs in seven different song books."
He adjusted his spectacles, ran his fingers through his thin hair, and cleared his throat. "Now listen, Brother. Here's how this song goes - do-o-, sol, fa-a-a-, me, do-o-o," he read from the old-time square, or shaped-notes.
Presently ho forsook the old-time symbols for a gutteral hum to indicate the tune, occasionally supplying words where they belonged.
"Well, I'm glad you like my song. Nine out of ten of the churches like our songs, whether they use them or not. The only one in town that fights us is that little jack-leg Baptist preacher over there on Green Street, and because he doesn't like them, he's always trying to say something to hurt the books. I think his church would use our books if they knew how to sing the songs. Oh, yes, I've been fooling with music all my life. It's just a sort of hobby with me. I used to play cornet and several other instruments when I directed a band, but all I do now in the music line is to sing --- just a minute, somebody's at the door."
His heavy voice rose above the loud rattle of the tin on the door. "Come on in, the door's unlocked."
A moment later - after stumbling over some obstructions in the other room - a young man peered in at the door.
"I just wanted to get some more of that massage cream," he said. "It's the best I ever used."
The young fellow left with a 16-ounce jar of the pink-colored cream. It had cost him 50 cents.
"Now that's some of my own make," Kerensky said proudly. "You see what it says on the label - Kerensky Beauty Supply House, Spartanburg, S.C. I have it made in New York, for they can make it lots cheaper than I can because they make so much at a time. It's my own formula, though, made from pure cow's milk; Just before it clabbers. Of course it has a little oxalic acid and a few other things in it.
" He picked up an open jar of the cream and reached over and took hold of my hand.
"You think your hand is clean, don't you? Well, just let me show you something. I'll rub a little of this cream into the pores - now you see, it brings the dirt right out. Oh no, your hand wasn't really dirty - it was just as clean as you can get it with soap and water; but the cream brings stuff out of the pores that water can't reach. That jar really cost me 47 cents, but I sell so much of it that I can afford to let it go almost at cost. In fact, I used to have a large crew of girls who did nothing but sell my cosmetics.
"Now, getting back to the singing business - I've been messing with it regularly for thirty years. In the spring of 1909, Judge Brunett and I decided to form an association from the old-time singing custom, where people in the old days used to get together and have all-day singings. We met at Cunningham's school house, about 12 miles from here, with a group of people and formed what we called "The Spartanburg County Singing Association.' Soon afterwards, people from more distant parts became interested and we had to form another association. We met every Sunday, usually in a school house, but sometimes we would use the courthouse.
"There are now forty associations in upper South Carolina and part of North Carolina. Each association has a president, vice-president, secretary, and treasurer. I am the president of four different associations. We don't have an organized membership; anyone who wants to can come, and everybody has a right to vote in the election of the officers. A free-will offering takes care of all miscellaneous expenses, and no one receives any compensation for his services, other than the pleasure he gets out of attending. Attendance varies from 40 to 150, according to the number of people in the community. Some of the smaller counties have only one association, but there are several in this county.
"Five or six singing associations meet periodically and have a rally, or convention, and every year we have a state convention, when all 40 associations come together.
"Each association meets every Sunday morning at 10:30. Sometimes two or three use the same meeting place, each alternately taking the lead. Pianos or other instruments, when available, are used in the meetings, but the chief activity is group-singing. Sometimes we have quartet-singing, especially on every fifth Sunday, when the convention meets for an all-day singing. Often 30 to 40 quartets take part in these special meetings. Usually there are several hundred people present. The meeting is opened with prayer, followed by several short talks. Each person brings his own basket, and members of the community in which the meeting is held take charge of the dinner, spreading it on long tables from which all eat together.
"The state convention meets every August, usually at Clemson college. Besides the singing and talks, business matters are taken up at the state convention. Music publishers are there to display their hymnals; that's how I got into writing songs and selling books. The attendance at the big convention runs around 2,000.
"The first book used by the singing associations was the old Christian Harmony, written by the noted William Walker of this county. Two different books are used each year. They are collections of about 150 old-time songs and 50 new ones. The publisher selects and compiles the songs; then submits them to the presidents of the various associations before having the book published. The books now used are - Sweet Heaven, and Priceless Pearls. At the request of the presidents of the other associations, I collaborate with the publisher in getting out all the new hymnals. I also purchase the books and sell them to the members of the different associations. The wholesale price of the books runs about 18 cents per copy, and the retail price is 35 cents, but no profit is made, for many of them are given to members who are unable to pay for them. Local music writers often contribute compositions to the hymnals - an example is Mr. Sam Bishop of Saxon Mills, who has contributed a number of his own compositions."
Kerensky lit his third cigarette. "Now let's see," he drawled; "you want to know a little about my early life, I believe.
"Well, I was born October 2, 1873, in Burk county, N.C. I came of a family of four boys and four girls, but three of the girls were half-sisters. My father was considered a 'big farmer' in the section where he lived. He only lived to be 47, but my mother was 74 when she died.
"On the large farm where I lived, everything was raised, and all that we had to buy was a little snuff, sugar, coffee, and the like. The country was richly adapted to the growth of tobacco, and several acres of land were always planted in it.
"We also raised rice, which looked very much like oats when it was still in the raw form. The husks were removed in a beater, which was made from the stump of a tree which had been sawed off about four feet from the ground. The stump was hollowed out to make a receptacle for the unbeaten rice. A stick, made in much the sale fashion as a baseball bat, was used to beat the rice. It took an hour to beat out two pounds.
"About 4,000 bushels of com and 6,000 bushels of wheat were raised every year on the farm. Thirty-five to forty small hogs were killed each year to furnish meat for the family and the hired hands.
"The first school I attended was a small one-room log cabin. It was so well ventilated that you could throw a dog through some of the cracks. My first teacher was Walter Fearis, from Charleston; he boarded with our family.
"The hundred or so scholars who went to school were divided into several different classes. Reading, spelling, geography, and mathematics were the main subjects. The building contained a series of long benches, the front one being used by the reciting class. When each class was questioned on its lessons it would move to the bench at the back of the room, and the next class would move forward to recite.
"I was 11 years old when the family moved to the little town of Glen Alpin, N.C. Here I attended the Glen Alpin academy. At fourteen I went to Nashville, Tennessee, where I studied barbering under J.L. Jones, a nationally known teacher. I graduated from the barber college when I was 16 years old. Up to this time I had made only about enough money to defray my expenses. I came home for a year; then went to Chicago, where I took further training in the barber business."
"When I was 19 years old I went to Columbus, Ohio, to join the Army, and there signed up with the 4th Infantry. From there I was sent to Fort Spokane, Washington. During my first two years in the army I received private's pay of $13 a month, but was raised to $14 the third year. Of course this was not all that I made while I was in the army, for the government allowed me $12 extra each month for teaching school; and with what I made barbering, the whole amount was something like $150 a month. My official duty was drum major, but I also did other things. For awhile I clerked in the commissary department, and at another time I worked in the adjutant's office. One time when the colonel was away, the adjutant took his place and I took the adjutant's place; that was only for about ten days, though.
"One of my most interesting experiences while in the army was a hunting and fishing trip I took with some of the boys. We left Fort Spokane and went 65 miles up the Columbia River, crossed over and made our camp on the Canadian side. We stayed up there in the wilderness for ten days. Besides myself, the group consisted of Dr. Culp, Charles Bulb, Private Davis, Mr. Gardner, an old hunter and trapper, and Thomas Edison. Mr. Edison joined us after we set up camp; he was an intimate friend of Dr. Culp. I remember that he had several of his inventions with him. He had a little static machine that would send sparks out in every direction when the crank was turned. I asked him what he thought electricity was, and he replied: "Electricity is just electricity, that's all I know.' He also had a talking machine which had attached to it about a dozen listening tubes. We would sit around the camp at night with those tubes in our ears and listen to the music. One piece that Edison liked to play was The Sidewalks of of New York. Another thing he had with him was a machine into which we could look and see pictures in motion; it also was operated by turning a hand crank. I believe that it was the earliest type of motion picture machines.
"None of us got more enjoyment out of our outing than Mr. Edison. We all slept together, and when one turned over, all had to turn. Like each of the others, Edison took his turn watching at night for coyotes and other wild animals. I still have a picture which was taken of Edison as he sat in front of his tent.
"I was discharged from the army at Fort Sheridan, Ill., in 1897. During my three years service I saved $2,700, and it was this money that gave me a start in the business world.
"I went to Nashville, Tenn., where I joined the city police force. I stayed there about eight months. I then went to Chicago and rented a beauty and barber establishment, employing several men and ten girls, all of whom worked on the commission basis. I did not do any barbering, myself, for I was doing special work for the post office department and also for private detective agencies. I can't give out much information about that, for they want things of that nature kept under cover.
"I stayed ten months in Chicago, and saved about $800. From there I went to Caroleen, N.C., where I put up two barber shops. During my two years there I cleared about $2,000, most of which I invested in barber equipment.
"I decided that a manufacturing center would be a good place to open up a barber business, so in 1901 I went to Clifton, S.C. and set up a small one-chair shop; I also kept the ones in North Carolina. In a short while I had three shops going - a monopoly on the barber business in that section. I also established a weekly newspaper at Clifton, and engaged in other enterprises. I placed various sorts of vending machines in all stores and public places. By 1903 I was clearing about $300 a month; then came the flood and destroyed my equipment.
"I took the five or six thousand dollars I had saved and opened a 3-chair shop on Magnolia Street in Spartanburg. I also set up a small barber supply house. I joined barber associations; went to their conventions; visited manufacturers of barber supplies, and learned everything there is to know about the barber business.
"As soon as I came to Spartanburg I started a school for barbers and beauticians. It was the first school of its kind in the South; Atlanta established on the next year. My school was in continuous operation for about 25 years. During that time I taught 5,464 men and women the barber and beauty trade. My students are to be found in every state in the Union - almost every town --, and in five foreign countries. The thing that I'm the most proud of, is that not one of them has ever failed on an examination.
"During the war I was one of the two who passed the government test for the teaching of barbers. While Camp Wadsworth was located here I taught 137 soldiers the barber trade.
"The 3-chair shop I opened in 1903 was enlarged to a 6-chair shop within six months. In 1904 I opened up four additional shops. I followed the policy of getting several shops opened; then closing them to make a large one. My first year in Spartanburg netted me about $100 a month. Up to 1917 the increase in business and earnings was gradual. Net earnings and profits were of course derived from several sources. The barber shops were rented but the equipment belonged to me. I employed barbers to work on a commission basis; hired agents to sell cosmetics and barber supplies, and some larger equipment. Besides this I made a fair profit from the tuition of students in the barber college.
"The monthly profits of $100 in 1903 gradually rose to more than $1,000. During the World War my business reached an abnormally high level. In 1918, I converted the barber college into a 30-chair-shop - that was the largest shop in the world at the time. Our largest single day's business was $982.20, all clear profit. One barber earned for his day's work $156.20.
"At present I control 31 barber shops in and around Spartanburg, and several in North Carolina. They take in about $1,000 a day. My rating in Dunn and Bradstreet is $75,000.
"I've been married for many years but there are no children. Besides my interest in old-time singings, my chief hobby is hunting and fishing. At one time I was a member of 13 different lodges and secret orders."