A VISIT TO THE COUNTRY
Written By:
Mrs. Ina B. Hawkes
Research Worker
Georgia Writers' Project
Athens-
Edited By:
Miss Grace McCune
Research Assistant
Georgia Writers' Project
Athens -
WPA Area 6
September 14, 1939
 
September 9, 1939
Mrs. Fannie Busbin (White)
Winterville, Georgia
Farmer
Hawkes-
A VISIT TO THE COUNTRY
It was a lovely day in the early part of September, just the day for a ride out in the country. And as we came to the wide open spaces of Aunt Sarah's farm, the peaceful quietness of the country was a great contrast to the busy town we had left behind us. To one that loves the country, the first thing that comes to mind is just what it would mean to live in such a delightful place as this country home.
Aunt Sarah's farm has eighty acres and a large tract of timber land, there are six tenant houses other than the one she lives in. All the fields are white with cotton, and everywhere you could see were grown ups and children with cotton sacks on their backs. Great sheets of cotton were all over the fields, and it was piled high on all the tenant porches waiting to be carried to the gin. The corn was being put in the crib, and fodder was pulled and stacked away for the winter.
We had visited Aunt Sarah many times and we were in the habit of going around to the back door, as there was such a large yard to park the car in. The sand in the yards was so white that it hurt your eyes where the sun hit between the large beds of flowers and shrubbery as you rode up the long wide driveway.
A little farther around the house I saw a large supper song vine covering the arbor and loaded with supper songs. There were many trees in the yards and the pear and pecan trees were full of fruit, but the apple and peach tree, had just about stopped bearing fruit for the season, I picked a handful of scupper-nongs and continued on around the house. Near the chicken-yard was a large turkey gobbler with his feathers all strutted out like a fan, and every now and then he would holler, "gobble, gobble," then drag his wing feathers on the ground. The turkey hens were scratching out over the fields picking up grain. Aunt Sarah says they will stay out of sight all day and come back at night to roost. We could also hear the guinea's calling out to each other as they picked grain over the fields. I had never seen so many chickens before hens, fryers, and baby chicks. Aunt Sarah had always said that she liked to have plenty of chickens to eat when folks came to see them. Then, too, she sends chickens and eggs to the market to sell. Two pretty, fat, jersey cows were standing in the shade of a tree. They had just finished drinking a large tub of water drawn by one of the farm hands. Out in the lot was the hog pen, and we saw a large mother hog with fourteen of the prettiest baby pigs. Some were black and white spotted, while the others were white. They all looked like little balls of fat. The sunshine on their pink skin made 'em shine like silk. I had stayed out in the sun so long that I was ready to go in. On the back porch was a bucket of fresh cool water that some one had drawn from the well, and it was so refreshing after being out in the hot sun so long.
All this time no one knew we were there. Going in the house we found that Aunt Sarah and her grandson's wife were the only ones at home. Aunt Sarah had just taken an afternoon nap and was over at the window in her wheel chair. Her granddaughter said, "Come in, I thought I heard a car drive up, but I took it to be Henry coming home from the gin. He carried two loads of cotton to gin this morning for Mr. Jones, as Mr. Jones didn't have a truck, and Henry did. It's about time he was coming home too.
Aunt Sarah asked us to sit down. She said, "I'm so glad you came. It's such a hard job sitting around all day in a wheel chair. You know I'll be ninety years old now in a few months, and since this war started it brings back old memories of when I was just a girl." She had settled back in her chair and her sweet old face had a far-away look.
Aunt Sarah is a small woman with pretty soft white hair that still has a natural wave. You will always find her in a little black dress and white apron. She said, "Tell me something about the town people." But she had me interested now in her girlhood days and I wanted to keep her mind there if I could, So I asked her to tell me about herself.
"Well, honey, I haven't got the memory I used to have when I was young. I have had so many ups and downs since then. I just can't get my mind to working like I used to. Speaking of the war, you don't know nothing about that Back in my day, during the old Confederate War, I was twelve or thirteen years old then. I was going to school and church on horseback.
"But my school days was cut short because they took my brother Jack to war, and in about a year they took Pa. Jack had to fight, but Pa was a shoemaker and a farmer too. They was glad to get Pa because he could make boots for the soldiers. After Pa left us, Ma, Sister Sue, and me had to do the best we could. Sue and Jack was twins.
"Me and Sue got our ploughs and mules and went to the fields every day. We had men's work to do. We had to cut all our wood and do the things that Pa and Jack had always done. We got letters from them whenever they could get a chance to write, and that won't often. I know Ma always stayed worried, but Sue and me were young, you see, and we didn't know the danger they were in like Ma did.
"My old spinning wheel is in the attic now that we used then, and I want you to see it before you go. We had to pick cotton, then we would card it, get all the seed out, and made you don't know what that is, but it's what we had to do. Then we would spin our thread and weave it into cloth. We didn't have machines like you have now to make your clothes. We had to make everything with our hands. When we got a little spare time we knitted socks and sweaters for the soldiers.
"No, child, you don't know nothing about hard times. You see we weren't lucky as some of the people. Mr. Watts across for us, had just lots of slaves and their women folks didn't have a hard time like we did. Pa was fixing to buy us some slaves, but the war started and it taken all the money. You know slaves was high too.
"You know back in them days we had to get dirt in the smoke house where the meat had dripped and boil it to get our salt. Why, we didn't even have matches." She put her two wrinkled hands together and showed me how they would get two flint rocks and rub them together till a spark would fall and make a fire. "Yes, we worked hard all the time.
'One fall we had gathered our crops and thought we could manage a little the next year for we made a good crop. But we had a terrible storm one night and it blowed everything we had in the barn away. All the cottons seed and corn, too. We didn't have a thing for our next crop, or to show for our hard work.
"Well, the war broke. Pa and Jack had to walk all the way home. Pa got sick. Jack and one other soldier made a saddle and carried him on that. They had been gone about three years. When they come up we could not recognize them. They had worn the same pants and coat all the time, and their hair and beard had grown so long.
"Poor Pa, I won't ever forget how he looked." Tears were in her eyes as she stopped talking to think back. "Yes, I can see him now, sick, and his clothes was in strings where he had crawled through bob wire, briers, and mud.
"Oh! we were so glad for them to be home. But Ma wouldn't let them come into the house till they had stripped all their clothes off and taken a bath. After we helped them to get cleaned up and put Pa to bed, they began to tell us such awful things that had happened to them. I can't begin to tell you now, it has been so long ago. But sometimes it seems like it was yesterday.
"They didn't have any money when the war broke. All the food they got coming home was what people was good enough to give them. Sometimes Pa said, they would slip in old barns and get corn and eat it raw, just anything that they could find to eat. That is why Pa was sick. You see, he was aging a lot. Brother Jack, he was young and husky and could stand it better.
"I was seventeen when I met and married Jimmy. He was a good man, with a little land and a small house. He carried me there and we stayed till our son Willie was about six years old. My work was not so hard on me then if I had listened to Jimmy, but I was smart and I wanted more than we had. So I still ploughed in the fields, picked and hoed cotton, pulled fodder, and done just anything that come to hand.
"We got the land paid for. Then we cut timber and built these tenant houses, We let Niggers live in the houses here to help on the farm. So you see, as the years rolled by, my work grew less harder. I cooked for a good many of the Niggers too. I have cooked a wash pot of peas, beans, or cabbage a many a time.
"Well, Willie grew up to be a grown man. He got married one day and brought us a daughter home. We were glad because we had never had a daughter and it pleased Jimmy and me to have her. Of course, they lived here because we were getting up in age too.
"Ma and Pa died about this time. We had good rich farm land and plenty of fruits and vegetables. Nell helped me with all this after they married. We had such good times together. We canned up all the fruits and vegetables. And when we killed hogs or a beef we canned that too. We never bought anything much from stores like farm people do now. We always had everything at home.
"Well, one day Williand Nell gave us a darling boy, a grandchild, and we were too happy for words. It had been so long since we had any children at our house. Of course, we spoiled him and humored him outrageously as old folks will do. We gave him anything money could buy, that we could get.
"Jimmy passed away about this time. I was so lonely without him. The children tried to make up for everything and helped a lot. We always had a house full of company. We had lots of kin people, and they made our house a kind of meeting place for all occasions. We enjoyed it a lots though.
"As the years went by, horses and buggies went out, and automobiles began to be stylish. Willie decided he wanted one for Henry. Well, he hitched up the mule and wagon one Saturday with a load of produce to carry to town and get the supplies we needed at home too. When he came home; he said, 'well, the car will be out here in a short while'. I could not believe it, but sure enough my great nephew come driving it home for him. He stopped out there in the back yard. It seems as if it was yesterday. Willie went out to learn how to drive, He got under the steering wheel, my nephew beside him to teach him. Henry was in the back seat. Up the road they went and was gone about an hour.
"I looked out the window and saw them coming back. They turned in the driveway. We had just stacked some new lumber in the back yard to dry out, and it was stacked in the form of steps. Well, Willie got the brakes mixed up someway, and instead of stopping he just went right on into the lumber pile". She stopped and laughed as if she could see it all again. "Yes, he was yelling, 'whoa, whoa, by golly, whoa!' My nephew cut the switch and stopped the car. Henry told his daddy if he wanted to fly, he ought to buy an airplane.
"Willie and Henry both soon learned to drive, and we could go bout more often and quicker than we used to.
"Jack died then and left us two, they would one by one leave us. But we always had plenty of company right on. Henry was grown now and courting the girls, and one day he come home with my granddaughter, Tessie. She was a sweet woman and we all love her. Willie got sick and died just a few years after Henry married.
He died satisfied though; he wanted to see him married and settled down. He did want a grandchild before he died, but our little one didn't come until he was gone. He was such a bright, sweet child. Of course, we worshiped him. Sue didn't ever get married, so she lived with us. Poor Tessie, I know she had a hard time about then because there was all of us to keep her from correcting Junior. And he was such a bad little child. I can see it now, but not a one of us could see it then.
"Well, the baby grew to be four years old, and one day Sue decided she was going to wash. We didn't want her to do it because she had got to where she could not see so good. But she did anyway and she carried Junior with her. When she made the fire under the pot the blaze went up to Juniors little apron and just burned the little fellow to death. Poor Sue, Nell blamed it all on her because she had asked her not to wash. Of! It was awful. We could not and have not to this day gotten over it. Sue soon passed away after this, and everything began to be so lonesome around here.
"You see the years rolling by, and of course the tenant houses and our house don't look as good as they used to. Henry was the man about the house altogether then. I told him to learn everything about farming that he could, because all my land and houses was his at my death.
"Then Nell was taken sick and she lay in bed a long time. And while she was in bed, that was eight years ago now, I started to get up out of bed and tripped in the cover and fell and broke my hip and one leg in three places. The doctors didn't set it right or something and I have had to sit in this wheel chair. I can get about a little on my crutches too. Nell died and left us then. Just us three are here now to carry on. After I'm gone Henry and Tessie will have all this land to do with as they please. We have a new 1939 car now, and I forgot to say that I get thirty dollars a month from Pa's death, you know pension from the Confederate War.
"We have everything very comfortable now, I think. I enjoy hearing the man in the box most of all thought, she said, pointing at the radio. "That man in there sure is worried about this war too; he just talks about it all the time". I had to laugh as Tessie said, "Granny always seems to think there is a man in the radio. She can't quite understand how it works."
It began to get dark and Aunt Sarah began to worry why Tessie didn't start us some supper, but we told her that we just had to go and that our supper was already cooked and waiting for us to get back. She said, "Well, be sure and come again soon for I can't go anywhere now.
"I like to go to church sometimes. When I feel like it they help me in the car and go to church. I belong to the Methodist Church at Winterville, Georgia. I joined since I broke my hip. I can't go much, I am so old now, but I hear a lot of good preaching in that box there, (meaning the radio)."
So we left her with a big fat fryer for dinner the next day and some fresh country eggs.