January 25, 1939.
A Woman Executive,
President, C & S Laundry,
1200 Magnolia Avenue,
Knoxville, Tennessee,
Della Yoe, writer.
James Aswell, reviser.
STOPPING THE LEAKS
"From fine silks to soiled clothes was right much of a hurdle for a business woman, don't you think so?" Speaking briskly, Mrs. Sanders shifted the opened correspondence to the back of her glass-topped desk, placed a paperweight on it, and settled herself more comfortably in her revolving chair.
"It does seem strange, perhaps, for a woman to manage a steam laundry. Theoretically, you might say that any occupation that concerns the management of the home is primarily a woman's job. But the laundry business is different. Even though it's objective is to launder personal and household linens, and the majority of customers are women, the laundry, business is scientific and highly mechanized. In brief, it is just another one of those great modern industries that has invaded the home and taken over one of its most vital functions, or activities.
"Until I undertook the active management of my husband's business, I had no idea that a laundry was such a fascinating and many-sided industry. You'd be amazed to know how many angles there are, and how much there is to learn about just a commonplace household activity. It's a great game, too. I sit here at my desk for hours at a time, or poke about the various departments, studying and figuring on the next move just about as I would if I was playing a chess game with an expert and vast sums of money were at stake. And human lives, too. In fact, it's the human equation of this industry that interests me as much, and perhaps even more, than its mere mechanics and the profits it would yield.
"If anybody had predicted a year ago that I would be sitting here in this office, the president of one of the city's many laundries, and dealing with soiled linens for a livelihood instead of handling rarely beautiful and costly Silks, well, I guess I would have thought they were crazy. I am not an astrologist, a numerologist, or any other kind of an 'ologist, and I don't say that it was fate or written in the stars that I should be called to my new office. I am simply acting in the line of duty, a whole lot."
She faced the door as a man entered and placed a sheaf of papers on her desk. He said, "Them's yesterday's complaints, Mrs. Sanders."
She smiled and replied, "All right Shad. I'll get to them in just a few minutes. Thank you. And Shad, please leave the door ajar."
As Shad left, she explained, "I make it a rule to keep my office door slightly open so that any member of the organization may enter without benefit of an intermediary. I am determined to be an available executive no matter how inopportune the interruption, or how trivial the caller's object.
"Merchandising," she went on, "had been my life-time study heretofore. I began as a salesgirl when I was very young and kept right on working after I married. After a considerable number of years in apprenticeship as a salesgirl, I became general manager of a small store, the predecessor of the present great chain store now known as the Knox Drygoods, Inc., and which at that time specialized exclusively in yard goods.
"I loved the soft cool feel of silk. And I mean SILK. That was before the days of adulteration and commercialized silks. The grade we handled then was pure, and you might say straight from the cocoons of the now almost obsolete silkworm. So I devoted my major attention to the silk department. I grew to be an expert in buying and handling silks. All that you need to do to confirm the statement is to examine my past record. I'm proud of it. And I certainly did love my work.
"When the little concern where I got my start went into bankruptcy because of competition and the lack of sufficient capital to combat it, I got a job as saleswoman with the Miller Stores which has grown to be one of the most prosperous general merchandising stores in the South. I hadn't been there long until I was placed in charge of the silk department. I remained in that job thirty-one years. Incidentally, during seventeen years of that experience, I didn't lose one single hours work from sickness.
"Of course, I was away from the store a week or two at a time when I went to the eastern markets to buy. Those were swell times. Stopping at the fine hotels, seeing good plays, hearing good music, and mingling with the throngs on the great avenues of the big cities. I used to come back pepped up like a Bromo Seltzer. It used to make my associates green with envy. There were lots of them who claimed that my frequent trips to the east were the result of favoritism, and my aggressiveness in playing up to the executives. But you know better than that. To reach the top rung on any ladder, one has got to climb. And I went up, rung by rung, by sheer grit, determination, and the sweat of my brow until I reached the top.
"Pardon me just a moment."
Lifting the receiver of her desk telephone she spoke rapidly to a woman, whose shrill voice could be distinctly heard in the room. "Yes, yes, this is Mrs. Sanders. I'm the president. What can I do for you? Certainly, Mrs. Rutherford. Yes, Mrs. Rutherford. You are perfectly right. I'll give it my immediate attention. Thank you for calling." She placed the receiver on the hook.
"That was one of my best customers in the silk business," she said, "and one of the best customers of the laundry, once we get her complaints adjusted. She's a trouble-maker. That's always been her reputation, but I've known her a long time and can get along with her when none of the help knows what to do or which way to turn. My knowledge of people, and dealing with many customers all of my life has been a tremendous help to me in this business.
"You know how I'm going to handle this complaint? Well, I'm going to make a thorough personal investigation. Then I'll jump in my car and go pay her a personal visit. The good will of all customers is necessary to our business and I'll go to any length to obtain it. of course, I'll have to go see her after office hours, but I don't mind that. After a while I don't expect to be able to go to such length to build up patronage and good will, but just now it seems a vital necessity.
"Ours is a small business and while it has a good foundation, it has been steadily going down hill since my husband's illness. That is how I happened to take it over. The longer my husband was confined to the home and the more the business was delegated to others who were less scrupulous in methods and employed tactics in management that was not only losing customers but breaking the morale of the employees, the more we realized that if the C and S Laundry was to survive there must be a reorganization and the chief stock holders represented by one of their number. Sam and I own the controlling stock and since it was organized sixteen years ago Sam had been the general manager. Now I'm in charge here and am gradually getting affairs adjusted and we're practically out of the red.
"Last year we did a business of a little over seventy two hundred dollars. That's not bad when you consider the fact that we have only two small concerns--the service laundry employing thirty workers and the main laundry employing only sixty. But the general manager was ill-advised in expenditures and extremely remiss in stopping the leaks. He paid out over three thousand for advertising alone last year. That was all out of proportion to the need or funds available for promotion work. So, when I was made president and came on the job daily at regular working hours, the first thing I did was to clamp down on excessive expenditures. Some weeks we payout about thirty dollars for advertisements in the daily newspapers and often less. We don't run display advertisements often. We don't need to now that business is on the rebound and we are getting back lost clientele and many new customers.
"It's the small leaks that count in the long run in almost any business. Certainly that's true in the laundry business, especially when you take into consideration the prevailing prices for piece work. Take shirts, for example. We receive ten cents per shirt. It requires six people to handle a single shirt. And then when it's delivered, it must have the paste-board collar and front support and be sealed in cellophane.
"After 'I'd been in the office for a few weeks I noticed that when employees quit work most of them carried bundles. Not just once a week or every few days, but almost a daily practice. The manager explained that it was their personal laundry. Now, we'd allowed each employee a definite allotment of free laundrying, making a minimum charge for anything in excess of that. I found that all of the employees had taken advantage of the lack of supervision and that they were having relatives' and friends' washing done gratis, in addition to their own. The new checking system I've installed has stopped that leak. And it's saved the business many a dollar. It would be no exaggeration to say that the result of this check-up of mine, alone, will run into the hundreds of dollars in the course of time.
"Please excuse me again just a moment. Sorry to have these interruptions. What is it Emma? You're not feeling well? Have you finished your work? Everything in shape? Well, you may go. Hope you will be all right tomorrow."
As the girl backed out of the door, Mrs. Sanders twiddled with the paperweight, lifted the corners of some of the papers and peeked under, then snapped out, "That girl was a perfect Tartar for a while. But you noticed, didn't you, how humble her manner was when she came in to ask to be allowed to go home? She lied to me once, in a similar instance, and I found it out after I permitted her to go home before closing time. She told me that her work was done. But I found out through a complaint report, like this bunch here on my desk, that she had failed to sew back buttons that had been turn off of a school boy's shirts, and the laundry went out minus that service. Her job is to sew on buttons and help mend. After the heart-to-heart conference I had with her, following her first offense, since I became president she has been straight as a ramrod, and I can trust her now to almost any length.
"We have some picturesque characters in this business. I've worked hard to worm my way into their confidence, but once they accepted me as the new executive, I really believe we're getting one hundred percent efficient service from everyone of the employees. They now enjoy the work they used to regard as mere bread and butter objectives, to be discharged any old fashion and to be done as quickly as possible, regardless.
"This same Emma, who just left the office, has an aunt who has worked here ever since the laundry was purchased by Mr. Sanders. It was a run-down shebang, let me tell you. Filthy dirty building, neglected machinery, and a general atmosphere of zero morale among the employees. But all that is in the past. Let me tell you about Big Mag, Emma's Aunt. Well, she could out-cuss a drunken sailor. Her language was not only profane but vulgar and indecent. However, she was a good worker. Strong as a mule and just as stubborn. She had been working in the service department where the type or worker was not as high as that in the main laundry. She just about ruled the ranch there. By the way, she'd once been a bootlegger, so you know her background. We decided to move her and see if we couldn't improve her behavior through a better environment. Incidentally, remove her influence from some of the younger and more susceptible workers in the service department.
"When we placed her as first assistant to a woman twice her age, a Mrs. Satterfield, the forewoman who had been on the job nine years and was very dependable, Mrs. Satterfield balked. Being a very religious type, a Holiness or some other such sect, she vowed she would quit if Big Mag was to be placed as her assistant. So I called Big Mag into my office. I talked to her like a sister. Kept her here in my office for half an hour. At the end or our conference I said, 'Now Mag, I want you to make me a promise. Just one little promise.' Mag squirmed in the chair, and looked at the tips of her old felt slippers which she wore when on the job. Then she looked up, squared her jaw and said, 'Well, all right Miz Sanders. What is it? I promise.'
"Well, to make a funny story shorter, I'll tell you that before Mag left my office she had solemnly promised me that whenever she felt a cussing fit come on she'd come to my office and cuss me. That broke her. Now she and Mrs.
Satterfield are fast friends, inside the laundry and outside. And if Mrs. Satterfield ever gives up her job, which she may do when she is old enough to get a pension, Mag will get her job as forewoman. She'll get such a job before that, perhaps, if the business expands as rapidly as I now have reason to believe that it will.
"When I came in as president, just about eight months ago there was considerable resentment, not only by the office executives but by the workers, even those in the humblest jobs. They expected that I would be snooty, as they expressed it. In addition to their scorn for a woman president, their minds had been poisoned against me by the general manager who foresaw his eventual replacement. Insiduously he implanted seeds of discontent in their minds. If I hadn't made up my mind to begin with the workers, instead of the financial end of the business, I would have been confronted by the problem of insubordination and possibly a complete turnover in help.
"I began visiting among them and getting acquainted. Told them I was their friend and co-worker, and let them in on the secret of some of the struggles and labor problems that I had been forced to undergo. I asked their cooperation, made them feel that I needed it personally, and that they were not just cogs in a piece of machinery but each an expert in his line. Urged them to take pride in their work, and to regard their machines and other working tools as their own personal property and take the same care of it they would if they owned it.
"Even now, when the work of some department is heavier than usual and the employees are confronted with overtime necessities, I'll go and lend a hand. Lots of times I help fold some of the finer linens and even wrap parcels. They like that, and it has given them a different slant on a woman president. They now treat me with profound respect, but they no longer fear, distrust, or hate me. The rebuilding of their shattered morale has been one of the most fascinating and one of the prettiest pieces of work, if you might I call it that, which it has ever been my privilege to accomplish."
Mrs. Sanders got up from her chair and walked over to a window. On the sill was a window box filled with geraniums. She pinched off a dead leaf, leaned over and whiffed the pungent fragrance and said, "Just this little home-touch in my office has helped change the viewpoint of the workers. I've given cuttings to numbers of the women and they in turn have brought me slips from plants they've grown at home. I have a special flower peot my suburban home which I call the C and S flower garden. Everything planted there was a gift from one of the workers."
Then she walked over to a coat rack and ran her slender fingers down the sleeves of a sealskin coat. "You'd be surprised at the number of women and girls who come to my office for one reason or another, and will sneak over and rub my coat, just this way. Sometimes their eyes get as big as saucers. I know that deep down in their hearts they covet it. But I am not afraid of it being stolen. I leave it hanging right here on the coat rack when I leave the office on inspection tours. As I've told you, the door is always left slightly ajar.
"Building up the morale of employees is much easier and more pleasant than dealing with a dissatisfied customer. One woman with a sharp tongue can tear down an institution almost to its foundations. Excuse the expression, but some of them get so all-fired mad that I can almost taste the poison when they spit out their complaints to me over the telephone. Not infrequently they find that they were in error. The article they reported missing had never been sent to the laundry.
"A slight error on our part, the injury to same article perhaps in itself of no great monetary value, can be so magnified by some customer into an affront and an insult. To hear such a one rave, one might think all laundry employees and executives were criminals just out to plunder and destroy. Fortunately, such cases are rare in our experience. But we have had quite a bit of trouble at times with the customer, who has turned plunderer, and we are the aggrieved party. I mean the type whose racket is to take advantage of a laundry's reputation for prompt, unequivocal adjustment of complaints. We have learned by a newly devised checking system to weed out that type of customer. The type, I mean who makes a practice of putting in an unjust or strictly false claim. When they have been allowed financial compensation for more than three lost articles, we check their records and thereafter treat them as suspects. We're governed accordingly by further adverse reports of lost or stolen properties.
"Every article brought to the laundry is checked and rechecked when it arrives and when it is ready for delivery. We have two checkers who are whiz-bangs. And the best of the two is a young girl who was born a deaf-mute. How's that for a handicap? One of our best hand-pressers has a club foot. You see hand-pressing is very meticulous work. Take the fine, expensive monogrammed bed linens for example. The monogram must be made to stand out, and the iron must be the exact degree of heat, and care exercised to avoid scorching, a shiny appearance, or a single thread out of place. These special linens must also be folded by hand-folded so that the monogram or design will be displayed.
"Dealing with the linen closet executives in hotels, restaurants, and other public institutions is gravy to the laundry employees. It's all a smooth routine of checking, laundrying, and delivery. They're the ones who usually have to worry over misplacements. Toney make allowance for a certain percentage of losses, of course, due to patrons snitching towels and wash rags, so they are never very squeamish about their laundry bills. Therefore, in return for their consideration, we take particular pains to avoid oversights or losses to that type of customer.
"There are so many ramifications to this kind of work. I learn something every day that strikes me as being new, which I soon learn is not at all unusual but just a part of the detailed routine of any laundry. But I keep digging into all these little and big things to thoroughly familiarize myself with all there is to know about the business I intend, if business prospers, to make some innovations. Maybe invent some new kind of marvelous machinery.
"That invention idea just popped into my head. That would make Sam laugh. He always accused me of having little mechanical ability and associated my executive faculties almost exclusively with the silk business. He is very proud of the fact that I have been able to assume the job of president. And knowledge of the fact that things are already running smoother and that I am thoroughly enjoying the work has gone a long way toward his improvement. He's no longer so anxious and restless as he was when worry played its part in delaying his recovery. But he's still a very sick man. Frankly, there is little encouragement to hope that he will ever be any better than he is now. So I guess I'll continue in my new capacity as president and general manager of one of the city's fourteen flourishing laundries.
"I see a long road ahead of me now that I have taken the plunge. I have so much to learn about the past, as well as to plan for the future of our little business. We never had any children and Sam and I have been like the Siamese Twins all of our married life, going to work together in the morning, meeting for lunch at noon, and then making the trip home together in the afternoons after working hours. Neither of us ever discussed our respective jobs very often. He just agreed that he knew nothing about silk and silk customers, and I knew nothing more about the laundry business than that it was a paying or not a paying investment. We've always had a joint bank account. There's never been an argument over money in our home. A well trained servant keeps the household machinery well greased and running and all we had to do in those days when we got home at night was to relax and enjoy being together.
"When we were first married my husband was with the Sani-Seal Ice Cream Company. He didn't launch the laundry business until about sixteen years ago. We purchased a run-down business with our mutual savings, and he ran it to suit himself until his illness, which began about five years ago, and during which time it began to go backward again. Sometimes now I wish that we had discussed his work more often. It would help me to better understand some of the unexpected problems I now have to face. But I wouldn't think of talking the business with him now. It's my job, and he is to be the beneficiary of my levelest best efforts.
"No, ours is not a seasonal business. There are no charts by which you may guage a busy or a slack season with laundries. It reminds me of how it used to be in the merchandising business. The days that we ran full-page display advertisements and were prepared with extra sales people, to take care of a rush, fewer customers came than usual. And then again on other days, which we had reason to believe would be sluggish and quiet and there were no bargain sales announced, we would be so overrun with customers that we could scarcely wait on them. And they would fret and quarrel because they couldn't be waited on promptly.
"The price scale worries me now about as much as anything. Thus far it hasn't increased since the early days of the late depression when everything dropped down almost to rock bottom. All laundries have an "and up" provision on their price lists submitted to customers. But try and go up and see what happens. They change pronto to your competitor. So far as I am concerned, there's no amalgamation of laundries in this city. And we don't employ union help. That hasn't ever been a disadvantage, to my knowledge.
"Our wage scale is about the same as other industries, ranging from twelve-fifty a week to fifteen and eighteen dollars. All employees are required to report for duty at the same hour in the morning and have forty-five minutes lunch period. We can't have a quota system very well, or at least I've not given it enough thought to devise such a system. But no employee ever has more work to do than they can easily accomplish if they apply themselves to the work with reasonable consistency.
"When my husband first took over the management of the laundry, they had been working day and night. It was a rather shiftless bunch, as they had been subjected to a slave driver's method and had a tendency to shirk at every opportunity they found. The first innovation my husband made was to put an end to night work. He reapportioned the work and soon had them all eating out of his hands. He had a partner for a while. That explains the C and S name of the laundry. Mr. Crowder made other investments and we bought his interest in the firm.
"Now, I think we are beginning to pullout of the slump again. This one was caused, as I've explained, by mismanagement on the part of those entrusted to run the business after my husband's health forced his retirement.
"That was the rest period bell, "Mrs. Sanders glanced at a small bell over the door that sounded just at this moment. "If you really feel that you don't have time to make my social rounds with me now, come back some time and meet some of the members of our laundry family. Maybe by that time we'll be serving tea and wafers during our rest period. You never can tell! Anything can happen in the laundry business, as the saying is in laundry circles."