[North Carolina]
PENDERLEA
March brings spring to Penderlea. Tempestuous and sudden rains fall; warm winds sweep across the flat stretches --- drying the soil, opening buds, and tossing the tall slim-trunked pines. A gracious sunlight covers the land. Here and there men plow, or turn the rich black loam over newly planted potatoes; some fields are bright with new grain, in others rows of dark green strawberry plants begin to bloom; young fruit orchards are misted with pink and white; tobacco beds are white patches on the landscape. In the woods the maples are red with bloom, while fragrant wild iris, white violets, and plantain, flower among the roadside grasses. Sweet yellow jasmine is everywhere --- along ditch banks, twined around young trees, and even on fences surrounding hog lots.
It is new farming country. Some fields are in the process of being cleared, either bristling with stumps or pitted with ragged holes and strewn with grotesquely shaped stump roots. Adequate drainage is still a major problem. Although there are networks of ditches, a hard rain turns the dirt roads to black muck and floods many fields, often drowning crops. But as some of the more optimistic and far-sighted homesteaders say, "Come back in five or ten years, if this lasts that long, and you'll really see something."
A visitor to Penderlea would probably be taken first to "the Center", to see the finely equipped school building, the auditorium, the gymnasium, the community club house, the co-op store, the teacherage and the new office building --- all built around a square with grass, small pines and gravel walks. There are various storage buildings up at one end of the square and over across the road from the office the new hosiery mill, long, low and brick, has just been finished.
A Resettlement Project under the Farm Security Administration, located twelve miles northwest of Burgaw in Pender County, North Carolina.
"The Center" was planned in order to weld a homogenous community life for people whose backgrounds and experiences range from rural North Carolina to stagecoach days in the West or life on the seas. Many Homesteaders come to the auditorium for Sunday School, for church services every other Sunday, for Homesteader or P.T.A. meetings, for commencement exercises or possibly high school plays; many read books from the library, attend athletic events in the gymnasium, and until an N.Y.A. camp was established in the community club house, the men played cards there on rainy days when there was nothing else to do. Now they must gather in the store to smoke and talk.
However, the office building is the place most frequented by the Homesteaders; it is the place where they go to pour out their complaints, ask for advice or help. Perhaps this accounts for a feeling which is general among the people living on the Project; that the Center belongs to officialdom.
At the head of the official hierarchy is Mr. Robbins, the Project Manager. A day after my arrival at the Teacherage, the place where transients stay at Penderlea, one of the teachers who had talked with Mr. Robbins advised me to go to report to him what I was doing on the Project so the next morning I went to the Manager's office to make an appointment with him. After an hour's wait I was able to see him. He stood in the door of his office, his hat on the back of his head, while I explained briefly that I wanted to talk to the people on the Project; he looked at me with sharp brown eyes, an expressionless face, said it would be all right and went back into his office.
Later I made an appointment to talk with Mr. Robbins. This time I was asked to go in his office, although the door was discreetly left open a little (Penderlea, like any small community, is riddled with gossip). He watched me very closely and began the interview by asking, "Now just exactly what is it you want to know about Penderlea? I guess you know the history of the place. The government got this land because no individual could afford to drain and prepare it for farming; it was partial savannah and cut over land, I used to come up here to hunt and I remember that lot of it was covered with water most of the year. It was a big job to get the land properly drained and cleared; as a matter of fact the drainage problem isn't entirely worked out yet. Ten houses were built first, then three years ago 135 were finished. The idea was to get people with some farming experience who had nothing, and get them started here.
"Most of the land was new land and the farms are just getting in condition to produce this year. Up until now there haven't been enough crops to justify co-operative marketing, but this year we're going to start it. Mr. Bird's in charge of co-ops.
"The farms run from 14 to 40 acres, and we work out a plan for each one, according to the size, the type of soil and so forth. Mr. Dillard, our agricultural advisor is in charge of this and he gives advice on farming problems just as Mr. Snyder, the Home Economist, gives advice to the women in the homes. At the first of the year the farm plans and home plans are made up so we can estimate the amount of money it will take to run each family for the year, and can make a loan accordingly." For days the horizon had been hazy with smoke from huge piles of stumps that were being burned on newly cleared fields. Several of the people had remarked with disapproval that those were pine stumps that were being burnt --- rich, lightwood stumps. I asked about this. "Yes," Mr. Robbins said, "lots of those are lightwood stumps. The men don't have time to load those big stumps on trucks or to split them up. Besides they have enough lightwood around here to last them for twenty-five years. You can't sell the stuff; it's on government property.
"Yes, the silk mill will be a good thing. It will give the young people something to do and will supply the people with cash after the work stops around on the project. They are putting up these mills on several of the southern projects. At first when some men came here to talk to me about it, I didn't know, but I just sat here and listened to them talk about it. I didn't say a word and they didn't have any idea how I felt --- then I saw it was a good thing and I gave my consent.
"Well, there's not much to tell about me. I was raised near Raleigh, went to State College, was in the army. I farmed in Hyde County four years. I was County Agent in Pender County for twelve years before I was put in this job. One summer I was sent to Europe to study the co-ops over there for three months. I was in the Scandinavian countries most of the time, went to England and France too. In Denmark they have a number of co-operative farm communities --- we don't have anything like them in this country. Those people over there sure know how to farm, and they make the best butter I've ever eaten in my life."
Mr. Robbins lives in Burgaw. "He got this job because Representative Barden needed votes from Burgaw," several Homesteaders told me, "and Mr. West got his because Barden needed votes from Atkinson. They give the best jobs on the Project to people from Burgaw and Atkinson, too. It don't seem right."
"You know why the road was paved to Burgaw, don't you?" I was asked by Homesteaders. "Because Mr. Robbins and his crowd live there and travel back and forth. All the Homesteaders wanted the road to Wallace paved --- it's just eight miles to Wallace and it's eleven to Burgaw, besides everybody would rather trade in Wallace because it's a bigger place and the merchants are mighty nice to you. At first the Burgaw merchants treated people from Penderlea like they was on relief or something, but last year they tried to get people to come there to trade. They gave away free movie tickets and had barbecues and everything. Well, people went to the movies and ate the barbecue in Burgaw, but they still trade in Wallace. Course, all the Project money is banked in Burgaw, but that don't make no difference either."
Of Mr. Dillard, the agricultural advisor, the Homesteaders say, "He's a good man and could help us, but he can't do much on account of the ones over him." The new Home Economist Mrs. Snyder, arrives --- "We sure hope she'll stay a while and help us. The last two didn't do a thing, or care about anything but getting married --- didn't even live on the project." Mr. Bird, the head of co-operatives has not been at Penderlea long enough for the people to form any opinion of him. He is a gentle, pleasant man, and seemed glad to explain about the co-operatives. The Homesteaders Association is a holding company owning the store, warehouse, potato curing house, a grist and feed mill which are rented by The Mutual Association. The people buy their fertilizer and seed from the Association and can bring their produce to the warehouse for storing until it is sold, paying for storage either in cash or in produce. Mr. Bird is hopeful about marketing the crops this year. Already he has a buyer for two thousand bushels of last years' sweet potatoes, and he believes there will be a good market for the peppers from the 250 thousand plants the co-op is purchasing for the Homesteaders to plant.
The teachers are a part of the life at the Center, but aside from their actual school work, have little to do with the Homesteaders at Penderlea. In the afternoon when they are out of school, they go to the store for a coca-cola, then to the teacherage where they lead a dormitory existence. They loll on beds, sleep, gossip, listen to the radio, write letters, play Chinese Checkers or Ping Pong. Mostly they are very bored. The majority of them are young girls, just out of college, interested in how they can get out of Penderlea to see a movie, how they can get away for week-ends, when they'll have another date. One of them, a last year's graduate from the Woman's College of the University of North Carolina, expressed how they feel. "Oh, it wouldn't be such a bad place if I just had a car and could get out of here when I feel like it; at that I've been away every week-end this year. The trouble is, there isn't a thing here --- not anything --- not even a drug store where you can go and sit around. And you can't have any social life with these people. It's not like being in a little town.
"You know, I'm hired by WPA here; I'm supposed to be Recreational Director, only these people won't do anything. I tried to have a community sing and a square dance, but nobody would come, so all I do now is help with school athletics a couple hours a day --- I'm not supposed to do anything for the school, but they put me in charge of the gym so we can get around the rules.
"At first it worried me almost to death, because I didn't do anything but sit around; now I just send in my reports and don't worry about it. There's nothing I can do until they fire me. I get so bored though, I almost go crazy. There's not a thing to do here."
The Homesteaders are baffled by so many "young little teachers," and the general opinion is that "they're not as friendly as the ones we had last year." One woman said it didn't seem right to her that the new school superintendent was given entire charge of selecting the teachers for this year. Of course, he fired all but one or two of the old ones and put in the teachers he wanted, those approved by his bride. This information seeped through to the Homesteaders by way of Negro servants.
Some of the younger people are bitter about the attitude of the teachers also. One afternoon Nell and Doris, two recent graduates of the Penderlea High School, were going swimming with me and they drove me by the teacherage to get my suit. When I suggested that they come in the teacherage with me, they were very much amused and said that they would wait outside in the car. "Wouldn't they drop dead in there, Doris," said Nell, "if we were to walk in. Those wonderful teachers think we are dirt under their feet --- we're just Penderlea trash."
"Yes," said Doris, "They won't speak to you if they meet you face to face in Wallace. That is, there's not but two of 'em that'll speak. The others will look straight at you, and not even see you."
"Well," Nell added, "Miss Alley told one of her classes that Penderlea people were second class people, that you couldn't expect much of them. But that's not all. One night I double dated with some Wallace boys and a teacher. She didn't know for a while that I lived on the Project, but after she found out she didn't speak another word to me. When I left, she didn't even say she was glad to have met me. I might not be so much, but a least I believe in ordinary politeness and I appreciate it from people I'm with. The boys were so mad at the way she acted, they swore they never were going to have another date with her.
"Not long ago groups of teachers came around visiting us --- I guess they were afraid to come to see the wild Penderlea people by themselves --- and this same teacher was along. Mama asked if she knew me and she said yes, we had met. I didn't say a word. I was ironing and I just kept on ironing without looking up."
"How about the teacher who had a sister living on the Project?" Doris asked.
"Oh yes," said Nell, "One of the teachers had a sister living out on the new project and she was so ashamed of it she kept it a secret from everyone. Her own roomate didn't find it out for about four months. You better not let them know you're out with Penderlea girls, they'll think you're a second class person too --- or plain crazy to lower yourself like this."
Among the officials and the teachers at the Center, there are various little cliques which wage a petty warfare but there are times when all of them show a united front: when there are visitors of political importance. Visits from the Regional Director, Regional Educational Director, Regional Director of Home Economics and the like, cause ripples of excitement, but a visit from a Washington official is something which creates a stir for days.
The news arrived that Dr. Alexander, Administrator of Farm Security, was Coming to visit the project! Staff meetings were called and directions given to staff members --- "Mrs. Snyder, get a woman from Burgaw here to see about setting up a beauty parlor in the community house. I know two days don't give you time to get anything done, but you can have the estimates and so forth ready so we can show we're carrying out what was planned for that building. It's supposed to have a barber shop too. Mr. --, you see about getting those barber chairs in the room that's intended to be a barber shop." Directions were given that men should be put to work at specified places on the day of the visit --- clearing certain fields, ditching. A banquet was planned for the celebrities.
The next two days were filled with a fury of preparation. All the lawns around the Center were raked, windows washed, teacherage floors scrubbed, and flowers arranged; the teachers cleaned, dusted, washed blackboards, and rearranged their school rooms. There were committee meetings to arrange the banquet; Mrs. Snyder, the Home Economics teacher and the Project Nurse discussed the details at great length. "We'll have to go to Wilmington to get the cheese and things. --- Yes, we'll need more candlesticks. Oh, candlesticks and candles add a more festive air. -- We can rent tablecloths and napkins from that place in Wilmington, -- All in the world they're coming for is to criticise the school, we know that; that's all Dr. Workman ever does. -- Everything has to be real nice---"
The important day arrived. The Homesteaders, unaware that there was anything special about the day except that it was dry enough to beiin the fields, were out planting potatoes or plowing. At the Center all was tense. The teachers were out early dressed in their best sport clothes; Mrs. Snyder and the Home Economics teacher slaved away on food and flowers for the banquet; Mrs. Pate flustered about, getting teacherage rooms ready for the guests. First to come was Dr. Workman, long-faced Regional Educational Director. Late in the afternoon others arrived --- Dr. Alexander, Major Walter who is head of the Resettlement Division, Mr. Gordon, the Regional Director, and several people from his office. The banquet was to be at seven o'clock, but two important officials had not arrived --- Miss Smith, the Regional Director of Home Economics and her chief from Washington.
Everyone gathered in the big room at the new schoolhouse, a pretty room with walls and ceiling of polished pine boards, a large fireplace in the center, and one end brightened by the books of school and community library. At the other end of the toom banquet tables were laid for the fifty guests who stood about in stiff little knots, drinking tomato juice cocktails. The teachers bunched together in their several units; the office force plus wives and husbands grouped together; Major Walker smoked cigarettes, twitched and chatted with people from the Regional Office; Dr. Alexander conversed with a few of the highest local officials while his chauffer sat on a library table and thumbed through books. Suddenly there was a flurry, a chattering at the doorway. Miss Smith and her superior hurried in, shook hands with Dr. Alexander. Then they sat around a library table and talked until the banquet was served.
There were speeches from the main table --- the usual banter to produce laughs, exchange of compliments "for the fine work that is being done." Dr, Alexander's address was mainly for the teachers, although, as one of them remarked afterwards, "we weren't even introduced to the man." He spoke of the importance of the teacher's work, the importance of teaching the child something of his immediate world, of producing a community of intelligent, well-adjusted people instead of a few outstanding individuals.
When the banquet was over the teachers in the largest clique expressed their opinions. "It was the stiffest affair I've ever been to in my life," -- "I thought I'd die during Dr. Alexander's speech, it was so boring; he never does say anything." -- "I didn't appreciate what he said about Baptist and Methodist churches; they're no uglier than any other kind." -- "That food certainly wasn't worth any fifty cents; it was terrible." -- "Now tomorrow they'll all come and stand around and watch us teach. I don't know how they expect us to do anything with a lot of people in the room, staring." -- "Yes, they wouldn't come today when my room was all cleaned up." -- "I'd like to see them do anything with those kids I have." -- "Well, just six more weeks girls, and we'll be out of this place; Lord, I can't wait."
From the Center the roads spread in every direction, through several thousand acres of fields and wood, to the little white houses where 145 Homesteader families live. These houses vary enough in design so that they are not outwardly identical, but all are low cottages with green blinds and green roofs, all have the same trim white outbuildings, the same tent shaped, movable pig pens.
Some houses have four rooms, others five. All have plumbing, hot water, electricity, a fireplace in the living room and a flue in the kitchen. There are no heating facilities in any other rooms. Between the kitchen and the living room one portion of the wall is left cut so that the two rooms connect. Throughout the house the walls are finished in pine, painted in most of the rooms, left unpainted in the living room. These natural wood walls are very pleasing when the house is furnished with the simple, provincial type of furniture that the government sells, but since most of the Homesteaders can afford only a piece or two of it, they must use the cheap modern pieces they already had. After visiting several homes, the new home economics teacher announced that "These people certainly do need to be taught something about interior decorating."
Among the women of Penderlea there is great pride about the little patch of lawn in front of each house. Most of them have added to the shrubbery that was planted by the Project, they plant flowers and trees, and work at keeping everything trim.
I noticed the neatness of the lawns as I walked down Garden Road on my first day in Penderlea. The wind lashed at the tall pines and roared on across the fields behind the three houses which were close enough to form a neighborhood. A dumpy little woman under a sunbonnet was bending over a bench in the clean-swept backyard of the second house.
"I'm just picking the bad leaves off these collards," she shrieked above the wind, "I'm about done now so we'll go in the house where we can talk. Can't hear a thing in this wind."
We went in the back way, through a porch enclosed with beaver board and used as a dining room, through a clean kitchen with built in sink and cabinets, and into the dim living room which was crowded with an assortment of rocking chairs, tables, a radio, a government sofa. Large numbers of embossed religious mottoes adroned the walls, while ferns, begonias and other potted plants were crowded against both windows.
Mrs. Brooks poked the pine knot smouldering in the fireplace; she removed her apron, her sweater, her bonnet, then sat in a rocker with a leather covered seat. She spoke in a patient, colorless voice. While speaking, she held her hand in front of her mouth.
"I'm ashamed for anybody to see me looking like this. I had to have every one of my teeth pulled out and my new ones can't be put in till my gums are done shrinking. Last December I had to go to bed, my kidneys ached me so bad, and they found out it come from my teeth --- they was poisoning my whole system.
"We've been here at Penderlea three years this May, come from Sampson County. My husband, he was a school teacher in country schools so we never did make all our living by farming, but we always raised most of what we needed to eat. We owned a one acre farm, nine miles out from Dunn. It was a right good place, but it was so far away from everything I was scared to stay out there by myself with just the children when he was off teaching. I didn't much care when we lost that farm.
"He got so nervous teaching school, and we always had wanted to settle down on a farm, so when we heard about Penderlea, we wrote to them. Well, we didn't hear and we didn't hear, then someone told us the project had been stopped. Just when we had give up hope, we had a letter asking if we still wanted to come. We wrote we did, and they sent Mr. Duncan to see us. He talked to us for about a whole day and they sent us. I don't know how many blanks and things to fill out before they told us we were accepted. We was one of the first thirty families to come, so they let us pick out the house we wanted, and I chose this one. It's a pretty place to me. It'll look better after we finish cutting down all them big old pine trees in the front yard so I can have some flowers. We've taken out four and there's five more to come down.
"I like it here at Penderlea mighty well. You couldn't rent a five room house such as this and twenty acres of cleared land anywhere else I know of for $60 a year --- that's the rent we have to pay for it. One of the things I like about it is I can keep my flowers all winter and they don't freeze in this house the way they used to do in houses we rented at other places. Even when I put them in the warm room away from the windows, after the fire died down at night my flowers would freeze in those houses, but I've not lost a potted plant since we've been at Penderlea. The house is better built, I reckon.
"Yes, the understanding when we come was to buy the place, but we haven't made enough yet to start. They're real easy on you about the rent and lend you the money to keep running on, but before you commence to paying for your farm you have to pay back what you owe the government. We're going to try to make enough this fall to pay what we owe and start buying the place. There's no limitation on tobacco this year, so we're planning to out in several acres, if we can get somebody to help us grade it and let us use their barn for curing it. Last year we just had 6/10 an acre, but we didn't know anything about grading it then.
"It looks like tobacco is the best money crop you can raise. We've raised cotton, potatoes, sweet potatoes, strawberries, cucumbers and of course vegetables to eat ourselves. That's one thing my mother always would have - a vegetable garden --- and I guess I'm like her there. Potatoes were right good last year, we shipped over ninety five-bushel baskets, but the year before we had them planted in a low place and they rotted in the ground. Last year our strawberries were drowned out so that we didn't clear but $3.12 on them; cucumbers didn't bring much either,"
A pretty, teen-aged girl came in the room. "This is Margaret, my husband's daughter by his first wife," Mrs. Brooks explained. "I've always treated her just like she was my own, and folks say they wouldn't never know she wasn't. I haven't got but one of my own, he's ten. I'm glad we're living in Penderlea for his sake if nothing else. He can't get along in his books, but they've got a good manual training course in this school, and he's doing so well in that. I feel like he'll be able to get along all right if he knows how to do something with his hands. There're not many schools where he could learn manual training.
"We had planned to send Margaret up to Pineland Junior College to take a Bible course, but she's been helping up in the school library and now she's talking about going off somewhere and taking a library course. She's got a farm her mother left her, so she can sell that and pay her way. I went to school at the Tacoma Bible Institute in Georgia for two years and I wouldn't take anything in the world for what I got out of it. That's the prettiest place."
Mrs. Brooks walked to the yard with me, pointing out the shrubs and vines she had planted. Across a drainage ditch from her lawn, verbena was blooming in a bed which ran alongside the road. "Me and my mother surely worked digging that place up and getting flowers to grow in it. My mother was the one who wanted to do it. She said people would pass by and say 'Oh, isn't that pretty. The woman who lives there must be smart to work so hard to make such a pretty place along the road.'"
Over across from Mrs. Brooks live the Wells. I sat in their neat, clean living room, furnished with a linoleum rug, a sofa, a chair, a table and lamp, a photograph of Shirley Temple, two silhouettes, and one of Mrs. Brook's mottoes saying "The Way of the Cross Leads Home." I talked with pretty, twenty-two year old Paggy Jackson Wells.
"I like Penderlea," said Peggy, "except for the mud. It's so hard to keep the house clean, and Robert there gets blade as a pig when he plays out in the dirt." She glanced at her three-year old son who was stacking up blocks on the floor, and then turned to the crib where her new son, one month old, slept with a rubber pacifier in his mouth. "I don't know what I'll do when this one is old enough to go out too. Just looking after them and trying to keep the house decent takes every bit of my time --- I don't even spend much time cooking. They have some clubs on the Project for the women, kind of like Home Demonstration Clubs. I belong to the Happy Homemakers Circle, but I don't get to go all the time because I have too much to do or maybe the meeting will be at somebody's house way over on the other side of the Project --- too far to carry the children. No'm we don't have a car. There's not so many that do.
"The biggest help I've got is the electric washing machine we got from the Project. It saves me 50? every week because I don't have to hire a colored woman to do my washing for me when I'm not able. We got a Frigidaire from the Project too. The way it is, they let us use these things while we're here. If we move away we give 'em back, but if we stay here and buy this place they'll charge us for them. I think that's the way it is.
"Oh, yes ma'am, we want to buy this farm, but of course they have to approve us first. This is a four-room house and twenty-two acres of land go with it. This is the best place we've been since we been married --- that's four years ago. Up at Mt. Olive we farmed on halves, then out near Goldsboro we farmed on three-fourths because we supplied the team there. About three years ago my brother settled here and after we come down to see him, we sent in our application. We been here about two years now. Both me and my husband, was raised on a farm, so we expect to work hard. Some of them here just expect things to be handed out without doing anything.
"Here comes my husband home from work. He's been working over on the new part of the project, while it's too wet to plow."
A healthy looking young man came in the room and was introduced. Before going out to "feed up" he stood in the doorway and chatted a few minutes --- about Penderlea and the officials. "Lots of people on the Project think them men up in the office is mighty hard, but some people find fault with everything; you can't never satisfy them. I like Mr. Robbins and all of them all right myself.
"There's one thing we need here bad, that's a paved road over to Wallace. Then the buses from Burgaw and trucks and all would come through and we'd have a way to get out. The way it is now, if you need to get to town, you can't do it without you know somebody who's going or can borrow a car from someone. Well, most everybody has wagons and a mule, but it sure takes a long time to travel that way."
The baby had been fretting, so Peggy took him up to nurse. "He knows it's about time to eat," she said looking at the clock. "I feed him about every three hours the way Miss Homewood told me to. There's not a doctor at Penderlea, you know, but Miss Homewood handles about all the labor cases and tells you how to take care of the babies --- bathing them and all like that. She sure has plenty to do, because there're lots of babies born here. Everybody sure does like her.
"My mother come down to stay with me a while when the baby come. She sure has had her share --- twelve children in all, nine living. I don't want any more myself; these two are plenty for me."
Louise Eanes sat beside me on the sofa and smiled vacantly while one of her children grabbed at ray glasses, another pulled at my skirt, a third held a book upside down, clamoring to be read to, and a fourth sat across the room and talked loudly. There were Louise's four living children; one is dead.
Louise is thirty-one, her husband thirty-two. Both of them are from farm families near Roanoke, Virginia; both had grade school education. When they first married they stayed in Virginia with their people. Then they moved to Castle Hayne where they rented a farm for a year. When that, proved unsuccessful, they moved down near Wilmington, rented another place and trucked. This time they made good, but the man wanted his farm again which meant they had to go back to Virginia until they heard of Penderlea and were accepted there three years ago.
"We don't know whether we can stay here or not --- we'd like to," Louise drawled. "It's hard to make anything here. Last year we had beans and potatoes to sell. We didn't make much on the potatoes; we sold the beans but we lost 6? on every bushel, just picking and shipping, not counting fertilizer and what it cost to plant them. It would have paid us not to pick them at all.
"Yes, that's our mule. When we come they gave you a cow and a mule and just added it to the price of your farm; now they lend people the money and let them buy their stock. I don't see no difference, looks like it all amounts to the same thing in the end. You still owe the government the money either way. We don't have but only one mule and we're thinking about getting another one so we can have a team. You'r supposed to be able to borrow one, but other people always need theirs when you do."
After a few such bursts of conversation, the beetle-browed Louise lapsed into silence and devoted herself to beaming upon her energetic children. Her husband rushed into the room, snatched his WPA check from the mantel and announced that he was going to Wallace, "He's been out ditching," she explained. "They pay him by the yard for doing it."
The shabby, meagerly furnished room grew dim with twilight, and I rose to go.
Mrs. Gray was very glad to see me. She met me at the door with a stream of conversation which continued after we sat down. "I'm so glad you came, I like someone to talk to. There's not so many around that you can carry on a real conversation with; you tell these women 'ere something and their mouths drop open, like this. There's very few of them what seems to know anything much. You know Mrs. Brooks over on Garden Road? She has some kind of funny religion --- holy roller or something, but she's a nice woman and she's not so dummy like most of them 'ere.
"I'm English myself, Northamptonshire. I was just looking at this paper from Kettering, the big city what's nearest to my home town. I always read the papers from there to know what's going on. It's been about nineteen years since I left England, and I'm living for the day when I can step on a boat and go back to see my sister. This country's all right, but it's not home to me. My husband's American, from Maryland.
"I want to tell you my life has been what you could call real romantic. Anybody could write one of those true stories about it if they could put the words down right. I couldn't do it myself; I don't have enough education. In England they start the children to going to school when they're three years old so that's when I started. I went until I was thirteen, then I worked in a shoe factory --- a place where they make shoes, you know.
"I'm a war bride. My husband came over to Scotland on a horse boat in 1914. The war broke out and he couldn't get back home again so he stayed in Scotland and England. That's when I met him. I didn't have no idea in the world of marrying him then. In 1915 he joined a Scottish Ridg'ment and went off to Egypt for four years. Well you know how it is, young people write to each other, saying all that nonsense about love and sich things --- they don't know what it means a bit in the world, but they get off and get lonesome and they think about such foolishness. I didn't think at all about marrying him, but when he came back in 1919 we was married in the church at my home town. Right after that he left to come back to America and the next year I came. It was awful for me at first. We lived outside of Baltimore with my husband's people; they talked about people and things I didn't know anything in the world about; when I picked up a paper it was all about strange things. When my boys grow up and marry, I don't want them to bring no girl away from her country. People ought to marry somebody from the same place they come from, then they know the same ways and same people, they've got something to hold them together.
"I've seen something of this country. My husband was in the coast guard, and we lived in Connecticut, New Jersey, Norfolk, Savannah, Morehead City, and in Baltimore. When we were living at Cape May, I lost my two oldest sons. They were just little boys, ten and eleven years old, they went out in a boat and it turned over. We can't know why such things have to be, but I believe they're all for the best or God wouldn't let them happen. We must accept them without complaining. Don't you think that's right?
"When he was working at Morehead my husband heard about Penderlea and applied to get in. He never had done much farming, except helping around his father's place In Maryland, but he was so nervous he thought he'd like to be in the country. He's still nervous, smokes a package of cigarettes a day; rolls them himself in one of those little machines. He likes this place so much, he hates to go anywhere. I try to get him to leave the house some times in the evenings, I tell him I get tired of having the same face around me all the time and it looks like he would want a change too. He won't leave this farm less he has to, though. Today he's off working on those houses they're fixing up. We're glad of some work to bring in a little money.
"Won't you 'ave a piece of that spice cake there? I'll give you a glass of milk to go along with it. I'd give you tea, but I don't 'ave no cup to put it in. We're poor people, we live poor, but some of the people around here don't think so. Do you know what they said to me? They said, 'You must live good, you have prunes.' I like a bit of dessert once in a while and I try to keep some prunes on hand. We've laughed about living 'so good,' just because we don't eat like these people around here. Why do you know they can make a meal on a cold potato, corn bread and buttermilk. They've got to have their collards too. Kenneth, my boy, came home one day and said the children at school had laughed at a little boy who brought a lunch that wasn't nothing but cold collards and corn bread. I told him they ought not to have laughed, maybe that was all the little boy's mother had to give him. He moved away not long after that and I told the children it was because they had laughed at his lunch.
"I want my two boys and my little girl, Maryland, to grow up right if they can in Penderlea. I want them to have a good education, go off to college, and be something. There is a whole lot of wickedness in this place --- young girls of thirteen and fourteen running after boys --- their parents want them to. Now, is that right? The first thing that happens after they run after them, is they get in trouble and have to get married when they're sixteen or seventeen years old. Then their life is over, what have they got to look forward to? What kind of a mother does such a young girl make, that's what I wonder. A woman isn't developed until she's twenty-two. The parents here don't seem to care what kind of wickedness and trouble their children get into. It don't seem right atall, does it?
"I don't like it here for myself, but I hope we can stay. If we can make something and stay on until we can buy this place, we'll have something to leave our children. They'll get the benefit of our work anyway. All I want in this world for myself is enough money to get on a boat and go home for one visit."
The next time I saw Mrs. Gray she was hard at work. It was then mid-afternoon, and since five in the morning she had been sitting in the tool house in her backyard, cutting up potatoes. Ralph was helping her; Kenneth carried buckets filled with the slices out to the field and helped his father plant them.
A little later, on his way to the house to get a cigarette, Mr. Gray stopped to talk a few minutes. He was a very tired and discouraged man. "About a half acre more and we'll be done. It's been so wet this year I didn't know whether we'd get any potatoes planted or not. Seems like there's always something to happen and keep a person from making anything at farming. I never have worked as hard in my life as I've done the last two years, but there ain't one thing to show for it but debt. I feel like if I could get ahead just one time --- I like the farm, I want to stay here, if they'll give me time maybe I can make something of this place. The main trouble is this farm's so low. See them fields out there?" He pointed to two soggy fields, one with a few bedraggled- looking strawberry plants and the other with a scattered growth of oats, "Every crop I've ever put there has been drowned out. Before them fields are any good they have to have another drainage ditch running down through the middle, and I don't know when I can do it myself. When it's dry enough I'm busy in the fields, and I've been working over on the new project to make some money. I asked Mr. Robbins if he could get some of the WPA workers to help me out on the ditching; he said he'd see about it, but he never has. He told me I could have that new field over across the road only they never have finished clearing it.
"Up at the office they keep expecting us to pay something on what we've borrowed. I don't know what to do. I want to stay, but I'm afraid they won't let me if things don't go better than they have, --- Well, I've got to get back to the field...."
The Leflers are happy; they like it at Penderlea. "We tried farming for nineteen years in Cabarrus County, but I declare we just couldn't hardly make a living on those rocky hills," buxom, sweet-faced Mrs. Lefler told me. "Mr. Lefler came over here to the eastern part of the state on a trip and he liked the looks of this farming country so good, we sold out and moved to Bladen County. The farming was good there, but we wanted to get us a place of our own so when we read in the paper about Penderlea, we come down to see it and applied. Well, we've been here two years now and we think its fine. Mr. Lefler was born and raised in Cabarrus County, but he thinks there's nothing like this part of the State for farming."
There were eight children in the Lefler family until one boy was accidentally shot the day after they moved to Bladen County. The oldest son, Reece, worked in a cotton mill in Concord, but now he lives at Penderlea with his pretty wife and two fine looking young sons; the older daughter works in Lumberton as a secretary; Nell, the next daughter, went to Baltimore to take nurses' training but she didn't like it and came back home; the younger children are in school.
Dinner with Mr. and Mrs. Lefler and Nell was a pleasant experience. Over the well cooked food --- fried country ham, mashed potatoes and gravy, turnip greens with hard boiled eggs, spiced beet pickle, peaches and cream, chocolate cake and coffee --- they told me about Bladen County, about the beauty of their farm on the Cape Fear, about the old places along the back roads. Nell, who is particularly interested in wild flowers, described the varieties that grew near the river. Mrs. Lefler added, "Why you know, the National Geographic says this region right through here has more species than any other in the United States."
"No one around here is interested in wild life," Nell commented. "I wish there was somebody who would go out with me to collect specimens. These boys and girls here aren't interested in anything like that."
Mr. Lefler lingered a while after lunch to talk about the people in Cabarrus County, then he went to the fields. We cleared the table, washed the dishes, and left the kitchen to go sit in the living room, which might have been a model for all Penderlea living rooms. It was furnished with the attractive and appropriate government furniture; there were books and magazines and flowers, a few pieces of tasteful bric a brac.
"I certainly am glad you're not from Columbia University," Nell confessed. "Last year Dr. Mitchell brought some people from Columbia University down here, and I just hated them. They'd hang around the school, staring at us as if they thought we were some kind of queer animals and they come out here to the house. You remember, Mama, how they looked all around and watched us; they don't think we have any more intelligence than --- than --- some of these Negroes around here. Course maybe this part of the family doesn't, but anyway those people made me mad."
"What Nell means is they consider us on relief," Mrs. Lefler added gently.
"Yes, they'd come and look at us and then go away and write about us --- something like Tobacco Road I guess. But they can ask the dumbest questions you've ever heard in your life. I don't believe some of them had ever been in the country before. Everybody liked Dr. Mitchell, but they surely did hate all those people from Columbia University."
Mrs. Lefler had to get dressed for her church circle meeting over in Willard. She excused herself for a while and reappeared looking very nice in a print dress, dark coat, and straw hat. Nell was to take her in the family car, an old Ford "but it still runs," as Nell said. We collected a neighbor and her little girl, both of them dressed in pretty spring clothes and then started down the sandy road toward Willard.
Thirteen years ago Harry Rudell of Wichita, Kansas, put his wife, his three babies and his worldly goods in a Model T Ford and set out for North Carolina. In a sense, this was a return home, for Rudell's ancestors had gone from North Carolina and settled in Missouri; his wife's people, all of them Randolph County Quakers, had left North Carolina to settle in Kansas not so many years before. At one time Mrs. Rudell's father had owned a one hundred and sixty acre farm, on which he raised hundreds of bushels of corn, turkeys and cattle, and ten children. Then came several bad years, and he lost the farm. The children scattered.
When the reached North Carolina, the Rudells settled in Drexel, a little town in the mountains, and Mr. Rudell got a job in a small furniture factory. They lived in a company house with an acre of land around it. "I'll declare, that land up there is the best for farming I've ever seen in my life. On that one little acre we raised enough of everything so that we didn't have to buy anything to eat in the way of vegetables," tiny blue eyed, Mrs. Rudell said excitedly in the piercing tone of voice she has developed in order to be heard above any noise that her seven children might be making. "That land's a lot better than this. All you had to do was put the seeds in the ground and they grew up; here you have to pile the fertilizer to 'em and then they don't grow the way they did there. I loved the mountains. I don't believe I ever will feel at home here.
"It was hard to make a living there. The Huffmans owned everything --- the furniture factory, a hosiery mill, all the houses, and the only store in town. They would charge so much for everything, no matter how hard we tried we couldn't keep our store bill down. Why when fat back was selling for eight or ten cents in Morgantown, they'd charge eighteen cents a pound. They'd always figure up your store bill, and lights and rent, so that you'd have just $1.00 left out of your pay check when they had taken everything out. There was one man there who couldn't read, they'd cheat him every time. When he took his check in to pay his store bill, they'd look at his check first and then they'd tell him he owed exactly the amount of his check, I seen them do it myself.
"You know how we first come to hear about Penderlea? We read about it in Grit magazine. Harry, he wrote and asked about it, and it wasn't no time till Mr. Duncan come up to Drexel to see us and talk to us. He sure was a nice man. He was mighty good to us after we came to Penderlea too. We come down here three years ago in that same Ford car that brought us from Kansas. We had four more young'uns to bring along this time.
"We've got mighty good, neighbors at Penderlea, but the farming's not what it was in the mountains --- seem's like the soil's not as rich. It takes so such fertilizer here, that stuff costs plenty too. Harry's farmed in all kinds of places, but he says this is the hardest of any.
"Harry's sure been everywhere. He's a lot older than I am and was married once before he married me but I don't know a thing about his first wife --- don't want to. Anyway he left Missouri when he wasn't but fifteen years old and he went to Idaho; he's been in every state west of the Mississippi River except Louisiana. He's been in Alaska. His nephew is up there now with that government project; we seen his picture in the paper, where he went to Washington to make some complaints. Harry worked in mines, and run up cattle and done just about everything. One time he staked a claim for some land in Idaho, but President Roosevelt --- the other President Roosevelt --- said people could live on that land but it wouldn't belong to 'em. So Harry left. He didn't want no place that he couldn't own and pass on to his children."
Little six-year-old Ruth Ann Rudell piped up. "Papa was a cowboy one't."
"No honey, he wasn't no cowboy, he just help run up the cattle," Mrs. Rudell corrected. "You ought to hear him tell about them times in the West, about the time the government man caught the counterfeiters."
Mr. Rudell came in the house before starting the evening feeding. He looked old enough to be his wife's father, but with his white hair, burning dark eyes and aquiline nose, he was interesting and striking in appearance. When he spoke his words came in thick, barely distinguishable sounds --- the result of an operation on his palate several years ago.
"Yes, I've been around considerable," he answered my remark. "There's been a lot of change too since I stopped travelling. When I went to Lewiston, Idaho, the first time, I had to take a train to Dayton, Washington, and then go into Idaho by stage coach. The driver asked me where I come from. When I said Missouri, he said 'get up here on the box with me, boy.' He was from Missouri too. We left Dayton about sundown and rode all night with him driving that team of six horses just as hard as they could go; every ten miles he stopped to change for fresh horses. It was a bright, moonlight night and we passed a camp of Indians, dancing around and hollering. 'You scared, boy'? That driver said to me. 'No sir, I ain't scared,' I told him. 'You've got pretty good nerve for a boy,' he said. About nine o'clock in the morning we got to Lewiston. It was a lively place back then --- had nineteen saloons, two big variety shows and plenty of stores. The West had its own laws in those days. Every man carried a gun, and if things didn't go right, he'd use it. I never did carry no gun and I never did get into any trouble. When a fight started, I just got up and left. The best way to keep out of trouble is to stay away from it."
The next night I ate supper with the Rudells. I had been invited to come at six, and when I walked down Caswell Road the wet grasses on the roadside banks glistened in the sun. Three of the Rudell children, freshly scrubbed and dressed in clean clothes, met me at the front door, took my coat and hung it up, then bore me off to see the eight new red pigs. Mrs. Rudell, wearing a fresh, dark blue dress, was in the kitchen starting supper when we returned. Her cheeks were very pink from the heat of the range.
Mary, the oldest daughter, helped her mother; little Johnny clumped about in rubber boots and demanded, a pan of water so he could comb his hair; Ruth Ann, a beautiful six-year-old with soft brown eyes and golden- brown curls, put on her little apron and snuggled against me. The nine-year-old boy came in and watched the preparations. There was much to be done. Mrs. Rudell peeled potatoes and fried them; sliced thich chunks of ham fro frying; made up biscuits; put rice on to cook; made a cake and upon Ruth Ann's insistence iced it; opened a jar of peaches, and whipped cream; made coffee. The younger children stood wide-eyed with excitement while their mother opened two cans of Campbell's soup and a can of kidney beans. The big, round table in the living room had already been pulled out from the wall and laid with a clean cloth. Mary carefully set it. She opened a new box of paper napkins and again the young ones watched with interest and delight.
The preparations were still going on when Mr. Rudell came in from the yard, washed up, and sat down to talk with me. "I like. Penderlea," he began, "if I could meet my obligations. I can't. I don't make enough to pay the interest on the money we borrow from the government every year. How can I? I make $45 a month watching up at the Center, but the farm don't pay yet. My total cash income from farming last year was $85. I made that off the 7/10 acre of tobacco I had; my cucumbers and strawberries were drowned out. Mr. Britt, one of our neighbors, made $32 from farming last year. Besides the seed and labor, this land takes a sight of fertilizer and that's expensive. It worries a man to feel he's not meeting his obligations.
"The main trouble is marketing. The farmers here need to co-operate and work out some way of dispatching produce. Everyone bulling separately is no good. But you can't make these people see that. They go on, each man just for himself, and suspicious of the other fellow. I believe ignorance is at the root of it. It's a bad situation, though.
"Another trouble is the uncertainty. Since we've been here they've made so many changes, you can't know from one year to the next what's going to happen to you. I brought my family to Penderlea because I wanted a home for them, and I'd like to feel like they're going to have it a year from now, that all the hard work I've put into this place has been for something. This could be a good place, but the way it is now I believe I was better off working up in Drexel."
Mrs. Rudell stuck her head through the door. "Harry, there's one good thing here. We don't run up no big store bill the way we did in the mountains."
Mr. Rudell went on. "It worries a lot of people now because the project is talking about laying off the men who get the least pay. They're the ones that really need it. One of my neighbors who makes about a dollar an hour eight hours a day for working in the shops, got $500 knocked off his loan because he had put so many improvements on his place. There's plenty of us who've worked harder than he has trying to improve our places, but it don't show as much because we've not had the money to spend he has.
"I've thought plenty of times that Mr. Robbins ain't quite the man to be head of a thing like this. It's a hard job, it takes a man with character and background, a man who can say yes or no. Mr. Robbins is not that kind; you never do know where you stand with him."
A little after eight o'clock, Mary and Mrs. Rudell began carrying in the bowls of soup, and when all the food was on the table we sat down to eat. Mr. Rudell asked the blessing, and with an air of gallant dignity bade me to "feel right at home"; the hungry children ate in silence while Mrs. Rudell told about her two oldest sons.
"You know that silk mill they're building on the project now? Well, they've sent some of the young people off to learn how to make the stockings, then they can come back and show others how to work. Our oldest boy was picked to go off, and he's been in Pennsylvania three weeks now, lacking two days. He's already learned how to work three or four of the machines --- he likes it. He don't like it up in Pennsylvania so good, because the people aren't one bit friendly. He says nobody speaks to you. My second boy stays up at Mis' Eanes house and helps on the farm; my third one is here at home, but he's away tonight."
"When Mis' Roosevelt was here they had a big celebration and they had me to hand her a doll made out of corn shucks," Mary Boasted.
"That's one smart woman," Mr. Rudell stated. "I shook hands with her when she was here. There's lots against him now, but I'm for Roosevelt, always have been. I believe he's done as good as anybody could."
Mr. and Mrs. Britt and their daughter arrived before supper was over. Mr. Rudell urged them "to have a bite with us;" however, they refused everything but cake because they had already eaten. "Mrs. Britt helped me grade my tobacco last year. She's an experienced tobacco worker from Wilson. I don't know what I would have done without her," Mr. Rudell said. "She's promised to help me again this year but she'll have a bigger job on her hands. There's no limit to what we can plant."
Mrs. Britt, in purple silk, was homely but she was very pleasant. "I just love to work with tobacco; I'd rather do it than, anything else I know of."
Mr. Britt, embarrassed because he was still in his work overalls, interspersed the conversation with bitter remarks about Penderlea. They seemed to amuse him very much. "I've figured something out, and I think I'll try it if they ask me to leave the project," he said brightly. "There's a North Carolina law that a landlord can't put you off his place if you owe him something. Well, if they was to ask a person to leave here, and the person didn't want to and didn't have no other place to go, he could just not go. They couldn't put him off, could they, as long as he was in debt to them? Could they make you leave?"
No one could answer his question.
The talk about Penderlea went on and on, until Mrs. Rudell found some fiddlers on the radio. "I can't stand that kind of music, I like swing," the Britt daughter whispered loudly. She was the languid type of high school girl, very conscious of her permanent, her carefully painted fingernails, and the new borwn and white saddle oxfords that had already made a blister on her heel.
After the string band signed off, Mr. Rudell told the story of the counterfeiters in Idaho while Mr. Britt nodded. Then it was time to go home. Ruth Ann and Johnny were fast asleep on the sofa, out the other Rudells gathered around the doorway to tell everyone goodnight and to bid them come again.
"Wherever you've set out a tree or set a hen you can't leave a place --- that's what I've always heard --- so I guess I'll have to stay in Penderlea." Mrs. Swanson laughed as she said this.
She had been showing me the wide plot of land that she is making into a garden, pointing out the plants and shrubs she had brought with her from the mountains, describing the improvements she will make. And she had talked about improvements for Penderlea.
"Something I've been wanting to do is get the women to raise pure-bred Barred Rocks. If enough of them will do it, we can form a co-operative to market the eggs and the chickens. They are the best chickens you can raise. I know when I take them over to Wallace to sell, I get three cents a pound more for the Barred Rocks than I do for any other kind of chicken. I believe the women could make some money if we managed the marketing right, and it might stop them from talking so much.
"Penderlea needs some good co-operatives, and I don't mean anything like that affair they call a co-operative. We've got to get some markets; there're none anywhere around, but we could ship our stuff if we could get together on things. As it is now, when you have a good crop of something there isn't anything to do with it --- except tobacco."
There was a serenity about this woman, with her splendid head, her calm blue eyes, her figure which she says is "like a bale of cotton," and I understood why she is one of the leaders among the women of Penderlea.
"I was born near Clinton," she told me. "My father was a school teacher and when I was seven years old he moved to Wilmington, then when I was fifteen he moved to Wilkes County. I liked the mountains from the very first, but the people aren't friendly right off as they are in the Eastern part of the State. They considered me a stranger up in Wilkesboro until I married one of them.
"When I finished high school I taught myself to type and studied shorthand. I didn't know it very well, but I got a job with a lawyer who put up with me until I got to be so good he decided he could make a court reporter out of me. He used to make me go to court and try to take down the proceedings. I tried it for a while for practice sad I actually worked for a few days, making $10 a day, but I didn't have sufficient training to be a court reporter, I told the lawyer so, and I gave it up.
"I was ready to get married anyway. My husband's people were Wilkes County farmers. He had a job in the wood work factory. We started buying a place on the edge of town --- it was as pretty a place as I've ever seen anywhere. The house stood on a hill, way back from the highway. In front along the road there was a row of cedar trees and some tall poplars; there was a dogwood tree I could see from the house where a mockingbird would come every morning and sit, pealing his heart out; there was a pretty green lawn, and right in the middle I had a big circle of flowers with walks going away from it in four directions. Along the walks I had all kinds of flowers. Behind the house the yard sloped down to the barn lot where we kept a cow and chickens and to the garden. That was the best garden; we raised about everything we needed to eat and when my husband was out of work he made over ten dollars by selling some of the tomatoes we grew in our little patch.
"The depression got us. My husband lost his job, and couldn't find any steady work to do in Wilkesboro. I went back to work, but I just couldn't males enough to keep us, our four children, and my husband's mother and sister who were staying with us. We lacked about two thousand dollars to finish paying for the place, so there wasn't anything to do but give it up.
"We had read about Penderlea in the papers during the depression, and when we lost our place we wrote down here and asked about it. Mr. Duncan came to interview us, before we were accepted. We came December, over two years ago. I'll never forget the day we came. It was snowing hard when we left Wilkesboro with all of us and our things in two great big moving vans. We had a big box of plants, a box of chickens, our dog and cat, besides all the furniture and some things to eat. It was after midnight when we drove up to Mr. Duncan's house, and it was pouring down. He came out here with us to help us get fixed for the night. We dragged our mattresses off the truck, put then on the floor right here in the living room in front of the fire and all of us slept here. I was tired enough to die, but I couldn't sleep that night. I kept getting up to look out the window through the rain and the dark to see what kind of place it was we had come to. I could just make out some of these tall pine trees with that little bunch of needles at the top, and in the dark they looked like palm trees. In the morning they still looked like palm trees, and it was still raining. I thought this flat, muddy country, all full of stump holes, was the ugliest place I ever had seen. Our front yard looked like a bomb had struck it. For several days we couldn't build a fire in our stove, we ate the cold stuff I had brought with us. Mrs. Brooks was a good neighbor. She sent us hot biscuits and coffee every meal. We had to carry all our water from her house for a while. But the worst thing of all was the way it rained for three weeks, without stopping for one single day.
"I managed to live through it, but there were times when I thought I wouldn't. If I can make some of that money I was talking about by selling Barred Rocks and eggs, one of the things I want to get is a typewriter. I always have wanted to write, and if I had a typewriter I'd take the time to put down some of the ideas that come in my head. I know they're not anything wonderful --- probably no-account most of them --- but my children might be interested in reading them someday. And I want to write down the things that happen here in this community, tell what life is like here. Years from now, if Penderlea is successful and still going, people will be interested in reading about the early days when life was hard here.
Among the first thirteen families to come to Penderlea were the Van Bavels --- Bruno, his wife, Joanna and their two children. Today they are leaders on the project. Wherever you go you are apt to hear "Mrs. Van Bavel certainly is a smart woman --- she's one of our leaders," --- "Mr. Van Bavel is a mighty good farmer," -- "They're both Dutch, you know, come from Castle Hayne."
"You ought to have seen this place when we first come," Joanna declared proudly. "It rained so much that first winter you couldn't stir out of the house without miring up to your knees. They didn't have any houses finished so we lived in a little old shack that didn't do much more than keep the rain out. I almost couldn't get any milk for Peggy and Bruno (Frankie wasn't born then) because they made us get rid of our cow before we came --- said they wanted all the Homesteaders to have pure bred cattle, the same breed. Before we came they promised us that I would be able to get milk from the State Experiment farm, but it turned out that was five miles away from our house and the only way we could get there was to walk. It made me so mad that they hadn't let us bring our cow --- she was a good cow but we couldn't sell her so we had to give her away.
"And it wasn't no time after that until they let the Homesteaders bring in any old kind of cow. --- I wish you could see some of the wrecks they bring in. That's the way it's been from the first; the people running this place don't no more know than we do what nonsense we'll have to do next. They have to take their orders from some fellow in Washington who's never been near a farm, who got his job by pull. The politicians'll ruin this place if nothing else does. The office workers are going to do everything they can to keep us from succeeding because if we do, they'll be out of a job.
"We had some reward for being first, we got this house. In the houses they built then they used better materials and the plan is nicer, I think. This long living room with the dining alcove at one end is a whole lot better than those little box-like living rooms and no dining room at all.
"When visitors come to the project they like to show them these houses. It got so they'd walk in here before ten o'clock in the morning, and I'd be embarrassed to death. You can't get your work done and the house straightened up by that time of day when you have three children. I asked them to take their visitors somewhere else; they might get a better impression."
Bruno Tan Vavel was born at the Fair Hope Colony in Alabama, Joanna Meyer in Brooklyn, New York, but both of them grew up in Castle Hayne. Before they married, Joanna worked in the north in an office, then she went into domestic service because the pay was better. Bruno had several jobs in New Jersey filling stations, and finally in an automobile factory. Just when he was offered a raise, he told them he was leaving, "because," he said, "I'm going to get married." He wanted to go back to farming, and after the wedding in the Castle Hayne Presbyterian Church he and Joanna went to live with the elder Van Bavel. This didn't work so well, according to Joanna. "Bruno and his father are both hardheaded Dutchmen and want to have their own way about everything. Bruno thought things ought to be done his way, and Mr. Van Bavel had his ideas on farming, so they just couldn't agree. We moved up to Terra Ceia then, until we came here. We didn't have anything at Terra Ciea, but at least we weren't in debt the way we've been ever since we come here. We've worked like dogs too. I've about ruined my health slaving in them fields from early morning until after dark; I've dug out pine knots, I've hoed, I've worked my fingers to the bone raising nice vegetables and getting bulbs started. And we don't have one thing to show for it. You don't mind working if there's some hope, but nobody knows what's going to happen to them --- maybe next year you'll be asked to leave the project. If you don't stand in right with that bunch up at the Center they're just as liable to ask you to leave and you can't do anything about it.
"Last year we didn't make enough to pay for our seed. I had the prettiest vegetables. I tried some new things --- Chinese cabbage, kale, broccoli, but I couldn't sell any. No one in this part of the country wants anything different; they just stick to collards. So I lost money on those. Then we had some nice potatoes that the project was going to help us market. They had a man here who was supposed to be a marketing expert, but he didn't do anything besides sit around and get fat. (He resigned before they fired him.) They kept the potatoes up in the storage room, finally sold them for almost nothing, and sent us a storage bill. It would have been cheaper to feed them to the hogs, or throw them down in the creek bottom where people dumped the beans that were returned to them. I don't know how they can expect us to pay back our loans when we can't sell anything, but they do. I doubt if anyone could live here if it wasn't for the WPA jobs.
"This year it looks like we're not going to do much better. It's been too wet to plant potatoes, and if it doesn't soon dry off, it will be too late; our peaches and strawberries froze. We could make a $1.00 a bushel selling our scuppernongs to wine manufacturers, but the vines have to be put up and we don't have the money to 'buy wire and cypress logs. You have to have something like that; anything else will rot in a few years and it will tear up the vine if you change after it's full grown. We have over a hundred vines, but they won't bear until they're put up. I haven't even cut my daffodils, because they're shipping so many from Castle Hayne I would just have an express bill to pay if I tried to make something on them.
"What hurts is to see all those little stenographers and people up at the Center making a hundred dollars a month and riding around in cars. Then they bring us these crazy food budgets to worry over." She handed me a batch of papers. "See here, you're supposed to figure out the food you need for each person in the family for a week, a month and a year. Each person is supposed to get so much fat, green vegetables, milk, starches and so on, according to age. Hell, if I've got potatoes I'm going to eat potatoes; if we have extra milk, we'll drink it. But we waste a whole lot of time worrying over these blanks and they spend money getting an army of people here to file 'em. I believe they make us do them just to give work to people in offices.
"We have to make out a clothes budget too, as if you can know in advance how many pairs of shoes these kids are going to wear out in a year. They have to have this information when they figure out the amount of money it takes to run us for a year so they'll know what to lend us. I got into a hot argument with that Miss Smith, who's supposed to be such an expert. I told her that she hadn't put any money in our budget for groceries. 'Oh,' she said, 'you can raise everything you need to eat.' I mentioned some items you couldn't raise, sugar for instance. 'Oh,' she said, 'you could make sugar out of cane or use molasses.' She didn't answer when I asked her if she'd ever tried using sorghum in coffee. I guess she thinks there's no work or money used in raising sugar cane. That's the kind of nonsense these experts they send down here tell us.
"I could tell them something. Some of our neighbors have just cut down a whole stand of great big oak trees, to clear some land they didn't need and won't use for a long time. We need them oaks for wind breaks, the pine trees aren't much good. I couldn't believe it when I saw them starting to cut the trees, and I went over to ask them shy in the world they were doing it. They said they thought they might as well start clearing that land in case they wanted to use it sometime; and the office had given them permission to cut them fine old oaks. I hope they'll be satisfied when the wind picks up their top soil and carries it away.
"They can do some crazy things at that office. I never will forget the time they burnt up all our lightwood. It wasn't so long after we come here and the pine stumps had been pulled out of several of our fields --- good, fat lightwood enough to last us the next ten years, or we could, have made some money by selling part of it. I looked out and saw the smoke coming up out in the field so I told Bruno to go down and see what it was. When he found out they had piled up our lightwood stumps and were burning them, he rushed up to the office as fast as he could to tell them, thinking of course that it was a mistake. He just couldn't believe it when they said, 'Oh no, it's not a mistake, we've given orders for them to burn it up. Someone from Washington is coming and we have to clean up.' What can you do about such things?"
Bruno Van Bavel is a very cheerful soul, but he worries about his debt. "I owe around $1200 now, plus five percent interest. I don't see any prospects of paying it off either, so I can start buying the farm. I don't know of but about a half a dozen families on the project who've been able to get out of debt enough to start paying on their places; they did it with tobacco. We have all new land though and tobacco takes old land. We've raised plenty of stuff, but we can't find a market for it.
"It's going to be just too bad when all this WPA work stops --- I don't know how people are going to live. But this will be a good place when everybody is really poor. It'll be like Castle Hayne before they started making money there. Everybody will be in the same boat and know just where everybody else stands. There'll be a lot less jealousy and talk than there is now; there won't be any "pets" either.
"The land is good here. If you plow good and deep and get the clay subsoil mixed into the sandy loam on top, it's fine. I plow about eight to ten inches deep; in Castle Hayne they plow eighteen inches. You can't tell these farmers at Penderlea anything, though. They're going right on farming the way they always have, and they won't listen to anyone who can tell them a better way --- even when they can see it's better, when I get up in meetings, trying to be helpful, and tell what I've found is a good thing to do, they just laugh. They don't want to know anything. For instance, when I plowed up the land for my orchard out here, I used an old disc plow and it wouldn't plow shallow. I mean I got down into that day underneath. Mr. Duncan came by, he used to be in the office, and he said I had ruined ray land. He said I might as well let that field alone and go over to another one to plant my orchard. Well, I planted my trees in that field. The first year they didn't do so good, but after that they grew better than anyone else's around. Mr. Duncan wouldn't hardly believe his eyes when he saw them.
"Well, Penderlea is some place all right; it might amount to something yet but I doubt it. I never could be happy doing any other kind of work besides farming. It's the most wonderful feeling in the world to walk down a furrow behind a plow; any man that's ever done it won't never be satisfied at anything else. And I'm going to stick right here at Penderlea until they make me leave or the whole thing goes under.
The Homesteaders Meeting
Into the big, lighted auditorium the people filtered slowly. Most of them were farmers, wearing overalls and muddy shoes, but several dozen women cane in too, some of them leading small children or with babies in their arms. The people sat quietly waiting for the meeting to begin.
Mr. Robbins, dressed in boots, khaki trousers, and suede jacket, strode down the aisle and the faint hum of conversation died. He put down some papers on the reading stand in front of the stage and called the meeting to order.
"Tonight we've got to get through this meeting just as quick as possible so the Juniors can have the stage for practising their play.
"I guess we might as well get to the main business of the meeting. As you all know, we've been trying to work out some kind of plan to get medical service for the project. Well, I have here a plan to submit to you from some of the doctors of Burgaw and Wallace; I've discussed the matter with them and we have worked out something that we think you'll approve. There're six doctors from Burgaw and Wallace who have agreed to furnish medical service for a flat sum a year. Each family on the project --- there's about one hundred and forty-five families now --- pays $15.00 a year, and that covers all your doctor bills for the year no matter how many times you have to call the doctor; if you don't have to have him at all, you pay your $15 just the same. The money is prorated. From what I've seen here, I'd say most of you pay a lot more than $15 to the doctor in a year, and those that are lucky enough not to have to call the doctor at all ought to be glad to pay that amount. If it was me, I would. Now is there any discussion of this plan?"
Question from the floor: "Can you call any doctor you want?"
Answer: "You can call any one of these six doctors that you want. If you call one and can't get him, you can get any other one that you want. Of course, it has to be one of these six doctors."
Question from a man without teeth: "Does that include dentist doctors too?"
Answer: "No, the $15 a year won't take care of nothing but regular medical doctor's services. It don't include dentists, or hospital bills, or bills for medicine.
Question: "Well, will the $15 include labor cases?" (laughter from the floor)
Answer: "Yes, that will include doctor's services for delivery and for all necessary visits before and after."
Miss Homewood, the nurse arose. "Mr. Robbins, I want to make an announcement. Some of you people have gotten in the habit of calling the doctor for the least little thing, when it isn't necessary at all or when I could give you some advice. You just run up big doctor bills that you can't afford to pay --- or don't pay at all. Now I want to ask you people to think twice before calling the doctors to come way out here four or five times unnecessarily, especially after the new plan goes in."
"Is there any more discussion?" Mr. Robbins asked looking about as if he thought there wouldn't be.
Over at one side there was a slight disturbance, and a slight, blond man stood up. His vibrant, excited voice echoed through the hall. "Mr. Robbins, I don't see how that plan helps any. It looks to me like what we need is a doctor here on the project; we can get those doctors from Burgaw and Wallace anyway without having any association to get them. By paying just a little more a year we could get that doctor who offered to come here, live on the project, and have a clinic all the time. He would have equipment here and work with Miss Homewood. Isn't that the kind of thing we need? I can't see what we gain by the plan you've suggested; the doctor's are just as far away as they ever were. Couldn't we consider again the plan that doctor put before us?"
He sat down and there was silence. The Homesteaders sat like stone, Mr. Robbins stood and waited.
Then after what seemed like a very long time, he said, "If there's no more discussion, we'll vote on the plan and elect a committee to come to my office and confer with me on the details of the plan Wednesday morning."
The plan was adopted by an overwhelming majority, a committee including six men and Mrs. Van Bavel was elected.
"Is there anything else to come up? I guess it's about time we let the Juniors start on their practise," Mr. Robbins said.
Questions from the floor: "I want to know if it's too late now to plant my potatoes if it dries off soon. It's been so wet I couldn't get mine in."
Answer by Mr. Robbins: "I believe it will be all right to plant them anytime in the next week or so if it dries up enough. Isn't that right Mr. Bird? And if you got your potatoes in before the rain, look to see if they've rotted. If they have, my advice is to replant them. Now if there's nothing else, we'll turn the auditorium over to Miss Vincent and her juniors,"
Miss Vincent came out to announce that the play would be given the next night, admission for children ten cents, for adults twenty-five cents. She urged that everyone help support the school by coming. By way of inducement she produced several of the leading characters who were arrayed in the clothes and make-up they were to wear in the play, and each of them spoke a few lines. The play was about a marriage bureau and the great problem to get everyone paired off was satisfactorily solved it seemed.
The man who expressed his opinion at the Homesteaders Meeting was L.A. Stephenson. When he was fourteen years old, "Steve" ran away from his mother's farm near Kinston, went to Hew Bern and got a job as cook on a sailing vessel bound for New York. "I had cooked at home when my mother was sick --- knew how to fry eggs, make corn bread and fix collards, but that's about all, I was so ignorant I thought there wasn't nothing else much to cooking. Well, after I was in New York and got a job as cook on a freighter, I found out I didn't know very much. The second day out they put me to peeling potatoes, and they cut my pay. But when that trip was over, I knew how to cook. By the time I was seventeen I was a Chief Steward, the youngest out from New York; anybody at Jimmie Quillen's on Broad Street could tell you that. I've been around the world three times, I've cooked in a small-pox camp in Cuba, I was chief broiler and wine steward on J.P. Morgan's yacht, The Corsair.
"I was in the navy seven years --- in the east for four years, Mexico a while, and during the war I served as commissary steward in France, planning the meals for 35,000 navy men. I learned enough French in six weeks so I could make anyone understand me and I could write out all my orders in it; I had to learn the metric system of measurements too. When I was coming home from France the boat I was in torpedoed in the North Sea, went down like a rock. I swam around and kept afloat for seven hours until someone came along and picked me up. It didn't worry me much. I felt like it wasn't time for me to die then.
"After the war I went to school to become a Paymaster, and I took three international correspondence courses. I had to put in some more time before I could be a Paymaster --- they wanted me to go to the Phillippines. I had seen enough of that part of the world, and I was sick of it. It really gets you after a while. Why men used to pretend to be crazy when they were there so they would be sent back home. I've seen many a one take a little piece of string, stick it in a bucket and say he was fishing. Boy, when they'd send him back to this country to a hospital, he'd get well right off.
"They gave me six months to make up my mind. I had a good job in a butcher shop then, so I said nothing doing and stayed in this country. Three more years in the navy and I would be getting a pension, but at that time I didn't think it would be worth it. Three years later, when the day came that would have retired me with a pension, I went behind the counter of the butcher shop and cried like a baby. I mean they really work you in butcher shops, fourteen to fifteen hours a day. When I got out at night I was so tired I staggered along the sidewalk home. More than once a cop has stopped me about two o'clock in the morning, thinking I was a drunk wandering around.
"I worked as a policeman in Providence, Rhode Island --- got to know a lot about that place. They've got a good school there, Brown University, and that's where I want David to go when he's grown. I got to know lots of the boys in the fraternities there. I tell you what's a fact, I didn't feel like they knew any more than I did and I didn't have but a couple of years in a little school at Vanceboro. Why, I was so ignorant when I first went to New York and a man on the boat asked me what nationality I was, I said Southern. I didn't even know what nationality meant. That man took a lot of time with me and ' learned me a lot.
"When the depression came, I was working in Providence, in a butcher shop. Sigrid and I wasn't married then, but we went through the depression together. She was livin in an apartment with her sister, Helen and I was living with her sister's boy friend. We really had some good times together, I mean, even if we didn't have no money. I used to take the best cuts of meat from the shop up to Sigrid's and we would all four eat together. If you've got something in your stomach, you can stand almost anything. Those of us that was working pooled our earnings for all of us. Once a month we would get enough money together to take a trip down to see Sigrid's family in Newport. Sigrid and Helen fixed up something good looking to wear so their mother never did guess they were hard up. When she came to see them and opened the ice-box door, she'd see the very finest cuts of meat inside so naturally she thought they were doing well.
"After I lost my job in Providence I went to New York. Sigrid and her sister moved there too, looking for work. Sigrid got a job as housekeeper, maid, nursemaid, laundress --- in fact everything --- with a Jewish lawyer's family. She lost about 40 pounds working for those people. Sure, they treated her good, they just worked her to death, that's all. A Jew will always treat you good if he's taking it out of your hide.
"I had to go home to Vanceboro about then because my mother was sick, that's how I got started back in farming. I fired up my old car and drove back up to New York one week-end to see Sigrid. That week-end I married her. She didn't come back South with me right away because we didn't have any money. That was when she got a job as nursemaid for the son of the burlesque queen. Countess Nadja. The Countess was making a tour then around the middle west, and Sigrid looked after her kid for her, travelling right along with the outfit, but you never did see the Countess' strip act, did you Sigrid?
"When the company got back to the East, I went up to get Sigrid and bring her down to Vanceboro. I was trying to farm, but it wasn't so good and that's a Nell of a place to live. I believe there was more talk going on than there is in Penderlea --- if you can imagine that. Every night all the men gathered down at the filling station to gossip. They used to wonder why I didn't come join them, and I told them right out that I knew enough meaness already without learning any more. I'd a long sight rather sit home and talk to Sigrid or read a book or listen to the radio than to go off somewhere with a bunch of men to gossip, or drink or something. Some of these people can't understand that.
"We came to Penderlea three years ago. Do you know what we brought with us? We had everything we owned in our old car one trunk a suitcase, and bedding. We saw a furniture truck on the way and we asked them if they would deliver some stuff to us here if we paid cash. They said yes, so we stopped in Warsaw, picked out a washpot, bedroom furniture and some odds and ends of stuff. I paid for it with my bonus money. When we got done we had $7.00 left and we stopped in Wallace to get our pots and pans, salt, flour and some groceries. That didn't leave much. They lent us money to run on that first year because the land wasn't in no condition to put a crop in. You wouldn't know it for the same place it is now; it's getting to be a pretty farm. Boy, I mean I have put the work into it, and I intend to keep right on at it. You come back to Penderlea in five or ten years and you'll see something. It's just an experiment and you can't expect it to work out right away, but the people who want to stay and are willing to work are going to stick. They'll make something good. Sigrid's never lived in the country before in her life, but she's crazy about it and she's turning out to be a good farmer too.
"I get mad as Nell sometimes with the way they look after us. They even take the money the government lends us to run on for the year, bank it in a Burgaw bank, and keep our accounts for us. Every time we want some money for something, we have to go up to the office and tell them what we need the money for, then they'll write us a check for the amount we need. Oh, I know they have to do it that way lot of these people would take their money and go off and drink it up or buy a car or some such trick, but it gets under my skin just the same. I told them about it and they said "We know we don't have to do this for you, Mr. Stephenson, but we do for some people and we have to treat everyone alike.
"Another thing, I'm tired of being called a number. I told them, I said, 'I don't want anymore of this S-412 stuff; my name is Stephenson, L.A. Stephenson, and that's what I want to be called.
"I'm not afraid of Bobbins and he knows it. I'll tell him just exactly what I think of him and everything else, and I talk to him in the language he understands. I go right into his office and I cuss him up and down --- I done it one time when a visitor from Washington was there and that man just stood nodding his head in time to my cussing. I couldn't help but laugh.
"But that kind of straight talk gets results. Lots of these people can't do anything but hang their heads and walk out when he tells them something. They're afraid to sneak up. You saw how they was the other night in Homesteader Meeting. Did any of them get up to back me up when I objected to that plan? No sir. But they come to me after it was over and tell me that they think I was right. Sure, they'll raise their hands and vote for anything, but I bet not half of them that voted will pay into that plan. They don't know what anything's all about. They're just a bunch of sheep, ignorant as hell. You ought to hear them talk about the way Sigrid has raised David, because she's followed the government bulletin. They call him the baby that's been raised by a book; they joke about it and think it's queer, and everything now and then they'll ask me if we're still going by the book. Well, all you have to do is look at David and then look at some of these spindly kids around hero to know which has had the best kind of raising.
"I'm forty-four years old now, I've seen enough of the world so that I'm ready to settle down and make a home for my wife and son. This is a good place to do it."
Sigrid Haaland Stevenson is Norwegian. She has lived the greater portion of her life in Northern cities, but she loves the country and is developing into an extremely competent farmer's wife. She has her biddies, her plant beds, her strawberry patch, her crocks of milk and cream, and pats of butter in the electric refrigerator. Her house is clean and neat and comfortable; she has made slip covers for the living room chairs and painted the bathroom a pleasant deep blue and white. Fresh curtains are at the windows, sweet, clean sheets and towels are stacked in the hall closet. David, Sigrid's son is perfectly trained and beautifully healthy. He resembles his mother in appearance --- fresh, glowing skin, clear eyes, shining hair --- and in mental alertness. Already, at the age of two he is beginning to learn his letters, whereas Sigrid, who has never been beyond the seventh grade in school, is better read and more intelligent than many college graduates. In spite of this she feels inferior to people who have had the conventional amount of training, and she regrets her lack of schooling. When her husband bursts out that he knows just as much as any college graduate, she calmly diagrees with him, "No Steve, we don't know the English and grammar that we should, or the history either." But she has too much buoyance, too rare a sense of humor to let the matter weigh heavily for long. Besides there is so much work to be done and Sigrid wants to stay at Penderlea.
About the middle of April the strawberries begin to ripen, the Wallace market opens, and the people in all the surrounding territory work with berries, talk berries, think berries and eat culls for the next four or five weeks. Many of the Penderlea farmers have become discouraged by crop failures and market conditions and have given up trying to grow strawberries, but they are still very much interested in how their neighbors fare at the "world's largest strawberry market," and the weather is commented upon mainly in connection with this one crop. If it is cool, the berries will not ripen properly; if there is a rain, it makes the berries watery or washes sand on them; if it is too hot, the berries are apt to ripen too rapidly and become soft; if there is hall and it injures some, the berries that are all right will be more apt to bring a good price. At the middle of the week the berries bring a better price than they do at the beginning or at the end, because they arrive for the week-end sales in northern cities.
On a bright Saturday morning I went to the Lefler's farm over on the high side of Sills Creek Road. At first the house seemed deserted, but I found Mrs. Lefler on the back porch. She was standing at a big round table sorting the culls from quart baskets of berries. Along the side of the porch more baskets of berries stood in the sun, filling the air with their pungent, fruity odor.
"Come on and get to work," laughed Mrs. Lefler, cheerful and pleasant as ever. "Nell and the boys are still in the field, but I reckon they'll be done picking soon. I was helping them, but Nell run me away a while ago."
A small boy in overalls carried in a crate containing half a dozen or more baskets of berries still warm from the sun. "Nell says how many more baskets do you need to make up three crates?" he asked breathlessly.
"Well, now let's see, Son. There is 24 baskets to a crate and we have 54 here, so we'll need eight more --- a few more than eight to take care of them that can't be used. Tell Nell she'd better let you finish the picking and she'd better come on and help here."
In a few minutes Nell joined us. She flung off the large straw hat she was wearing, mopped her damp forehead, rolled up her shirt sleeves and started sorting with nimble, practised fingers, the berries that were knotty, too green, too soft, or too small were put in the dishpan of culls; the largest, reddest ones were put together to be used for "plating" the tops of the baskets.
"Nell can make them look pretty, can't she?" Mrs. Lefler said as we worked. "You might not think it, but that's hard to do. I've tried it and I can't plate the top to look pretty and even to save my life. It helps to get a better price if they look good. Of course, they'll most likely turn over a basket or two to see how the underneath berries look, so you can't get by with sticking bad berries on the bottom. If they find out you're doing that, it's not going to help you any on the market.
"The berries haven't ripened so good yet this year -- see how green some of them are on one side? That's on account of the cool weather, but a few warm days like today will make them ripen evenly.
"I've got between two and three acres in berries. Sid didn't have very good luck with them last year and wasn't going to fool with them again, but I told him I'd like to try my hand at 'em. So far I've had right good luck, and if it keeps up I'll make a little something.
"Now, Mr. Sutherland over across the road raises more strawberries than anything else; they're his main money crop. See that little new house out there near his barn? That's the house he's put up for his pickers. About two dozen nigger men and women will be put up in that little place all during strawberry picking time. The beds are built along the walls, one right on top the other.
"Yeh, and about a year from now there'll be a crop of strawberry babies," Nell said. "I was reading about them in some paper the other day. Niggers don't have any morals."
"Well, Nell, I guess it's right hard for them to have any, some of the places they're put in. Mr. Sutherland's house is the best one I've about ever seen for pickers. You ought to see what most people around in the country have. They go out in big trucks and get pickers from the towns --- even as far as New Bern, and then they can count on keeping them all during the season. If they was to get local help somebody else might come along and offer the help more money and take it away. I believe the pickers get a cent and a half or two cents a cup, but they can pick mighty fast. Some of 'em make around a dollar or more a day and besides they get their living.
"I'm going to fix some dinner now so you all can eat before you take the berries to Wallace."
Mrs. Lefler went into the kitchen while Nell finished fixing the baskets and packed them carefully in the three wooden crates which were carried out to the Ford by the largest boy. Nell went in to dress, we ate dinner, ending up with strawberry pie and cream, and soon after noon set forth for Wallace and the berry market. Along the way we stopped to put a quart of oil in the Ford, and the filling station operator who knew Nell took a look at the berries.
"They're pretty, Nell. What are they bringing?"
"Well, Thursday Mama got $3.05 a crate for them, but I don't reckon these will bring that much since it's Saturday."
The road into Wallace was dusty and bumpy. Many wheels had passed over it that week. Before we came in sight of the shed bearing on its roof the words "THE LARGEST (picture of a strawberry) MARKET IN THE WORLD, we were caught in a line of traffic and Nell stopped the car. Soon two inspectors came by, lifted the lids of the crates to look at the contents, then took out a basket and turned it over in their hands to examine closely the berries underneath.
"Good, clean fruit, young lady," said one inspector as he replaced the basket and marked the top of a crate with figures which indicated for the buyers the size, ripeness, quality of the berries. Nell didn't know whether she had a rood rating or not until a man passed by and told her that was a good mark she had.
From afar the voice of the auctioneer could be heard, blaring undistinguishable sounds over the loud speaker. The line of traffic moved slowly forward and divided to enter the two lanes that ran through the shed on either side of a center platform. On this platform were the buyers, and at the far end where a swivel chair had been placed on a dais, sat the auctioneer. He looked very comfortable as he swung from side to side, his hat tilted back on his head and his feet propped up in front of him. When there was a slight delay in the movement of traffic, he sang "A Tisket, a Tasket" into the microphone or chatted with some of his friends who stood along the sides of the shed, watching and listening.
The buyers, looking bored and indifferent, moved from one traffic lane to the other, flinging up the tops of crates to look at the berries. In front of us a Negro was driving a mule hitched to a two-wheeled cart in which there were two crates of strawberries; across the platform in the other lane a white boy drove a truck, piled high with crates that were held steady by several Negro hands; behind us in a broken down Chevrolet a white farmer and his thin faced children waited their turn without showing in any way the tenseness they must have felt as they drew nearer the bloc with their few crates.
The auctioneer rattled along in the manner understood mainly by the buyers. On the Negro's berries there was an original bid of $1.50. "Slug and a half, slug and a half, five and a five and a five," came the sing-song chant over the loudspeaker. One of the buyers raised a finger, which meant he had upped the bid five cents, another winked and the bid went up to $1.60. And here, in spite of persuasive sing-song, the bidding stopped so that the auctioneer finally said, "Sold at one dollar and sixty cents, drive on," and the wagon creaked out of the shed.
The bidding on Nell's berries started at $2.50 and progressed by means of finger raising, winks, and nods to $2.95. Then we were told to "Drive on." As we left the shed, a boy filled out a slip with the Lefler's name and address, the number and price of the crates sold, the number of the truck to which the berries were to be taken. We drove through the dusty lot, crowded with men and cars and big trucks, around behind a shabby abandoned house where truck number 16 was loading. One of the drivers jumped from the van where he was stacking crates and came to get the three from our car while a man signed the slip given to Nell at the shed.
"Well, that's all," said Nell backing with great difficulty through the cars, the trucks and wagons that had driven in behind her. "Here, you hold this slip. If I lose that we won't get any money for the berries. It's just as good as money now, but we have to keep it for two or three days then we bring it in to the Wallace Strawberry Exchange and they give us our money."
While we waited to get through the double line of traffic bound for the shed, we listened to the auctioneer who was trying to stimulate a bid for the few crates of berries a Negro man had brought to market in a battered looking wagon. The buyers looked coldly at the berries and walked away; even when the auctioneer tried to start the bidding at a dollar, there was no reply. Stung by this and the steady decline in prices during the day, he remarked to the adamant buyers: "Gentlemen, how can you expect us to keep this market going with such prices? Do you want us to give you the fruit? I'll take this man's berries myself, at one dollar --- drive over to truck number nine."
A Negro boy stood in line between a truck and a wagon. He carried a crate on his shoulder, which he put down on the edge of the platform when his turn came. For a cycle of work which began when the soil was broken for planting and ended when he carried that crate to a truck bound for New York, the boy received $1.50.
I remembered what Reece Lefler, Nell's brother, had been saying to me several days before when he returned from market. "What the farmers need is some kind of co-operative marketing to cut out the middle man. Most of the strawberry buyers are local buyers who resell to commission merchants who resell to stores, and the farmer is the financial backer. The farmer and the storekeeper take the risks, them others don't."
The Faithful Few, one of the five clubs for the women of Penderlea, was meeting at Mrs. Stephenson's house. The new Home Economist was just a little bit nervous because it was her first club meeting, but she had mapped out her program carefully. She had received instructions from the Washington office to get detailed data from ten families on every type of fabric used in the home and every article of clothing worn by each member of the family, the comparative lasting qualities, and the cost of each. She planned to distribute the blanks to be filled out at the meeting. "That's as good a way as any to get the information. What they want with it is more than I can see. I guess someone in Washington has to keep a job," she confided.
Sigrid Stephenson welcomed us at the door. Her living room was immaculate and cool, on a table was a large vase of Dutch Iris donated, she explained, by Joanna van Bavel. Mrs. van Bavel was already there, in her best blue suit; Mrs. Lefler was there wearing a cool looking print, her face red from picking berries in the sun; Mrs. Higgins, white haired and genteel, was talking to one of the two quiet young women whom I did not know. Mrs. Sutherland, looking very pretty in a black suit and a crisp white blouse, arrived late and breathless. She had been helping to pack strawberries. Her young daughter played outside with the daughters of the two quiet young women.
While we waited to see if any more members were coming, the Home Economist handed out the clothing and fabric blanks, and there followed a chattering about kitchen curtains, baby diapers, boys underwear, husbands work trousers, chair covers, little girls dresses, and the women's own dresses. "There's a blank here for street dresses, wonder why they don't ask about evening dresses. "I haven't had a new dress since I was married" "I buy sheeting and hem it myself ---" "Does making over an old dress count?" There wasn't time fo finish with the blanks before the meeting started, but everyone promised to fill then out at home and turn them in the next day.
The kitchen table and ingredients necessary for the demonstration were brought into the living room, and the Home Economist began to mix up a honey cake, following the mimeographed directions she handed out and explaining each step as she worked. The women watched with quiet interest, occasionally asking a question or making a remark. When the cake had been poured into greased tins and put in the kitchen stove to bake, there was a discussion period led by Mrs. van Bavel. The Faithful Few wanted to become a unit of the North Carolina Home Demonstration Club, but until they received permission from Miss Martha Smith in Washington they could not officially join the state organization. "I've written to Miss Smith about it," the Home Economist explained, but I haven't heard yet. Anyway we can follow the Home Demonstration Club programs. I have them."
Then the matter of buying canning outfits was brought up. If a certain number were purchased from the manufacturer, they could be had at reduced prices. The Home Economist made a note of the number of women in The Faithful Few who said they wanted the outfits.
When the spicy fragrance of baking honey cake filled the house, Sigrid Stephenson went in the kitchen to whip a big bowl of cream and lay out the proper number of forks and green glass plates. The children were called in for refreshments. They sat on the floor and watched with rapt expectancy until everyone was served with a large slice of hot, golden brown cake covered with cream. The cake was praised and eaten. Afterwards everyone stayed for a while to chat about their gardens, their children, strawberries, commencement, and what various people in the community were doing, until it was time to go hose and fix supper. The sun was low over the Stephenson's meadow as I walked up Sills Creek road with Mrs. Lefler.