"I'VE BEEN PREACHING EVER SINGE I COULD TALK"
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Field Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
August 1, 1939
July 17, 1939
Harold Irvin Bearden (Negro)
147 Strong Street
Athens, Georgia
Methodist Preacher
S.B.H.
"I’VE BEEN PREACHING EVER SINCE I COULD TALK"
A little cross-eyed Negro boy was stretched out in the long porch awing when I mounted the steps to Rev. Henry Murden’s parsonage. "Mame! Mama! Oh, Mama!" the child called lustily, "Here’s a lady to see you." About that time a mulatto woman appeared at the door, a small girl holding onto her dress. "Come in and have a chair," she said. "Don’t sit in that one though, the glare from the street hits you full in the face there. Sit in the one close by the table here. It’ll be convenient for your notebook to rest on the table.
Settling herself on the divan she volunteered, "My husband’ll be here in a few minutes, and I’m sure he’ll be glad to talk to you if he has the time. He’s going to drive over to Atlanta today to visit his parents." She giggled nervously. Apparently she was more than a little self-conscious. The youngster left the porch and joined his mother and small sister on the divan. Soon he had succeeded in arousing the little girl’s combative instinct, and the two children were scrambling over the floor. The mother’s time for the next few moments was engaged in quieting them. She seemed to feel that the situation demanded a bit of explanation. "My husband, as you know, is a preacher," she began, "and all this past month of protracted meetings visiting ministers and other church workers of our race and denomination have been with us. We even put on that play called Heaven Bound the last night. One of these workers told me before she went home that at one of the places where she stayed, the children were so bad she just had to leave and go to another home. I do try to make mine behave, but sometimes I have a hard time of it; they are so near the same age." She giggled again as she confided, "I've been married 8 years, and already I have three children; one's seven, one's five, and our baby will be four her next birthday. That's two girls and one boy. This last 4 years is the longest rest spell I've had between having to have babies. I sure hope I don't have to have another one soon, but it always has seemed to me like preachers have the biggest houses full of children of anybody.
"I know you think this is bad looking furniture, but it don't belong to us. The church owns it and the house too. When we first moved in here the inside of this house was a sight to see. That marble-topped table you see over there under the mirror was in the kitchen, and it was just covered with flour. I had to scrub like everything to get it clean enough to varnish and polish it, and that chair sitting by it was scarred up by the washtubs folks used to sit on it. I did scrub it clean but I couldn't take out those deep scars. Some folks just don't know how to take care of nice furniture. After we came here the church people were nice enough to buy this new rug and the curtains for this room, the bedrooms, and dining-room. They didn't buy 'em any too soon, for the things were badly needed to make the place livable. We have some nice furniture of our own, but after they started moving us from place to place so fast we just left it at his mother's house in Atlanta.
“We have been told that the man who is now president of Morris Brown College, in Atlanta, used to be pastor of the church my husband now serves here. They tell us he succeeded in getting the indebtedness of the church paid off, built this parsonage, furnished it, and presented it to the church. That preacher wasn’t married then, and he hired an old housekeeper. That’s been a long time ago, and it accounts for the furniture being so old. It's good enough for us now since I’ve succeeded in getting it cleaned up, but I’ve had to work like everything in these last 3 years to get it to look like anything.
"Don’t you want to see through the house while you wait to see my husband? It’s just a 5-room house, but that doesn’t count the little bathroom and the study. They’re too small to be counted as real rooms." I followed her into the front bedroom where the strong odor of a popular brand of cold cream assailed my nostrils. "Junior, have you been in my cold cream?" she asked in an aggrieved tone. "Yes, Mama, don’t you think I look lots better?" was the mischievous response. "No," she answered, and I was glad she made no further attempt to correct him in my presence. "That's the way it is," she told me, "you have to watch out or children will destroy anything you have. This is our guest room." The suite of walnut furniture was marred by many scratches. Clothes were strewn over the bed and on chairs. A jumble of small articles was piled on the dresser, and garments were hanging over the sides of an open trunk. The two small children lay flat on the floor noisily and gleefully scanning the Sunday funny papers. The conglomeration of objects in this room seemed to include a little of everything. Small pictures relating to Biblical scenes and subjects were scattered indiscriminately about the walls and in almost every instance they were tilted at a decidedly uneven keel. "I'm really ashamed for you to see our house today. It takes so long to get things in shape on Monday morning when you have to look after little children at the same time, and it's especially hard when you're trying to get ready to go out," she apologized.
She led me into another room saying: "This is where we all sleep." The covers were thrown back over the foot of the large iron bed; and the childrens' bed, also unmade, displayed dingy sheets. The bathroom adjoined the family bedroom, and like the bedrooms it presented a helter-skelter appearance.
"That small room to the right of our room is my husband's study," she explained. "It's small, but it does afford a place where he can go end close the door and be away from the confusion of the childrens' noise when he is preparing his sermons." Pointing to several suitcases piled in one corner of the cubicle, she said: "My husband told me the other day he didn't care what I did to the rest of the house but he wanted me to take my things out of his study. It seems like this is the only place we have for the suitcases." Books and periodicals were scattered over the light-colored oak desk and spilled down to the floor. On the desk I noticed a modern reading lamp and an electric fan.
Her attention was drawn by a huckster who rapped on the door. He wanted to sell garden products. This caused me to miss seeing the dining-room and kitchen, for she said: "Let's go back to the living-room and see what he has to sell today. Not that I want anything, for we’re leaving soon after my husband gets back, and he’ll be here any minute now."
She soon dismissed the huckster and sought a place to recline on the divan. Suddenly she leaped to her feet. "Please excuse me," she said as she hurried from the room. "I left the light burning in the study." She quickly returned. "I try to be as saving as I can with the lights and water, for the church pays for 'em and I don’t want to waste their money. They are very nice to us in many ways. Real often they give us pantry showers that sure do come in good, for we have so much entertaining to do.
"Our missionary society is divided into circles that take in the different sections of town. Mine is on this street, but you’d never know it, for so many of the women who lead the other circles don’t have room in their homes to do any entertaining, so I let them hold their meetings here. Some of 'em bring tea, some sugar, others lemons and crackers, and such like. I usually provide any little necessities that they happen to overlook and, in addition, I often fix up some nice little refreshments in advance to add to the enjoyment, I don’t mind," she giggled, "for I love to entertain. I give the teas for the women of the church, and my husband has his get-togethers for the men here. These little social entertainments go a long way toward keeping our membership happy and satisfied, They really do have more interest in the work of the church when they’re occasionally included in really enjoyable socials in a home rather than the ordinary church social in the church auditorium. Both of these types of socials have their advantages and uses in church work.
"No, mam, I never got to attend college. However, I did finish high school at Austell, Georgia, where I was born and reared. The only work I've ever done was to act as supply for teachers, and they just paid me what they wanted to. Sometimes I got $1.50 and the most I ever was paid was $6. It was generally according to the number of days I taught. Usually I bought a new dress or something else for myself as soon as I got the money, but if it was a good bit of money paid me at one time, I'd sometimes give mama a little of it. No, mam! Not me! I couldn't be a teacher this day and time. Children are too hard to manage now." She giggled again as she almost whispered: "I meant to go to college, but we got married and started out having children so fast that it takes all the money we can get just to support us now."
One of the children spied a car that was turning in the driveway, and before it had stopped at the side of the cottage, he called: "Here comes daddy, Mama. Get ready quick, so we can go see grandpa and grandma."
"We may not go today, dear," she replied, and turning to me explained: "Several white people attended our play Heaven Bound at the church last night, and one of them is a young artist. I noticed that he kept looking at this little 4-year old girl of ours and that he seemed to be writing something on a scrap of paper. When the play was over he sought me out and showed me a sketch he had made of her and asked me if I minded bringing her to his studio this week so he could make a painting of her. Since I saw a picture of the butler at one of the fraternity houses that this artist painted, I'm very anxious to have him make a portrait of our little girl. The butler's picture is just fine."
The minister came in and his wife introduced him to me, explaining that I wanted his life story. "Why, I don't mind," he said, "but I don’t have many minutes to be with you, as I plan to go to Atlanta in very short time.” I suggested that he appoint a more convenient time for the interview. "No,” he said, "that's all right. I'd rather talk to you now. Anyway, my folks can't go till I go, and we have the rest of the day for our going around.
"To begin at the beginning," he said with a smile, "I was born in Atlanta in nineteen-ten, and when I was 10 years old mother took me and moved to Chicago to be near her other seven children. Father didn't seem to mind being left in Atlanta and he sent us money regularly each month to help out with the family expenses. I was the youngest child and the only one of the family that didn't go right to work when we got to Chicago. I went to school. My brothers are spinners by trade and they work for Armour's Hair House in Chicago. They take animal hair and spin it into large ropes that are shipped to the furniture and automobile factories. Those hair ropes are chopped up to be used in stuffing upholstery and cushions on cars and furniture. My brothers earned $39.15 for a 5-day week. My sisters worked as maids.
"I finished Forrestville Grammar School, in Chicago, in nineteen-twenty-five. In grammar school I had been captain of the junior police, heed marshal of the school, and editor of our school paper, the Forrestville Weekly. One day, while working in the printing room, I got my hand caught in the press and 'most mashed it off. "Schools in the North are not conducted like they are in the South. Forrestville Grammar School was a three-story structure. A group of marshals on each floor helped to keep order. Over each classroom door and at each entrance door was a buzzer to announce the beginning of each 45-minute classroom period. Our Job as marshals included working these buzzers in the hall to start the recess period and to end it. Up there children don't march in and out with the teachers. The girls lined up in one file and the boys in another. There were about 2,000 children in that school then, but I'm sure there are many more on the rolls there now.
"After finishing grammar school, I went to Englewood High School for two years and was a sergeant in the Junior R. O. T. C. and. a member of the Englewood Booster Club. From there I returned to Atlanta to live with my father. He sent me to the High School at Clarke University, where I was a member of the Philomatha Literary Society and the Glee Club. Next, I entered Morris Brown College, where I was a member of the Phi Beta Sigma fraternity and the Political Science Club. I also had one year of theological training at that same college after finishing the regular literary course.
"Perhaps, before I go further with my own life, I'd better tell you something of my parents," he smilingly said. "Everyone's life is influenced by the parents. Father was born at Milledgeville, Georgia. His mother and father died when he was a baby, and Judge Fish reared him to be a house servant. He often said he was trained to do everything there was to be done in the house. When he was a very small boy he ate with the little Fish boys and slept in the bed with ’em. Judge Fish moved to Atlanta and took father along with him. When Judge Fish died father was old enough to serve in the capacity of butler for Judge Jones. He held that job until his employer’s death, then he became janitor of the Trinity Methodist Church, South, and worked there 50 years. I don't know what he made while he worked for Judge Fish and Judge Jones, for he never told us, but his janitor's job paid him $90 a month, and they gave him a dollar a week extra for washing dishes. When he grew too old for the heavy work the church retired him on a $30-a-month pension. Mr. Lewis Gregg, a distinguished Atlanta artist, painted father's picture, and it hangs there in the Sunday School auditorium. Father never went to school a day in his life. I seem to have forgotten to tell you that while he was acting as janitor for the church he also ran a dairy.
"From his earnings he paid for a home in the section of Atlanta called Pittsburgh, and with my mother's help he gave each of a his children as much as a high school education. One sister and myself were the only ones that went to college. She married soon after graduation, and died a few years later.
"Mother was born in Newnan, Georgia. Her family moved to Atlanta when she was quite small. She attended Star Street School before she went to Atlanta University. She failed to finish college because she married not long before time for her to graduate. She didn't work out after she married until she had raised her eight children. One by one, her seven older children went to Chicago and got work. She decided to take me and go up there to be near them. What father sent us to help with family expenses was intended for mine and mother's use rather than for the entire family, for the others were already independent in their own Jobs. Mother soon began a special kind of maid service. She worked from house to house and was paid $4 a day. Most of the families that employed her were very rich. I remember one family in particular; they were the Kilpatricks. Mr. Kilpatrick was a soap and cleanser manufacturer. I don’t believe his product has ever been marketed in the South. At least, I've never seen any of it down here. Anyway, mother worked for 'em and when she left Chicago she gave her place to one of my sisters, who is still in their employment. They pay her $17.50 a week and she spends every winter with 'em at Cocoa Beach, in Florida, where they have a winter home. I understand the old gentleman was too feeble to make the return trip to Chicago this spring so they are spending the summer in Florida.
"There weren't very many Negro families in the section where we first settled in Chicago. It was a Jewish neighborhood. After several colored families moved in, the Jews began bombing our houses. Oscar De Priest moved into the neighborhood, and they completely demolished his house one night. Strange to say, his mother lived right across the street from us and she was never molested in any way.
"In Chicago, I sold papers and delivered clothes for a pressing club after school. In summer, I worked at a hat and cap factory. My job was to sweep the floors and put snaps on the caps. You have seen those caps that have bills with snaps to fasten 'em to the cap crown. Well, it was my job to work the snap machine after I had completed my task of sweeping the floors. Full-time work at the cap and hat factory paid me $16 a week. The pressing club paid me a dollar for every afternoon I delivered clothes after school. For every 5-cent paper I sold I cleared 2 cents and my boss got the other half of the nickel. At one time I made $4 a night working at a factory where they made asphalt shingles. My job was to weigh the gravel after it was loaded into Georgia carts and run over the scales. Did you ask what Georgia carts ere? They're wheelbarrows.
"After my brothers and sisters were all married, mother came back to Atlanta to live with father and me. My brothers and their wives are now living in the house we bought in Chicago. They're awfully crowded there, but it's hard to find places to live in a big city like that. Living conditions are much more congested, and rents are very much higher there now than when mother and I were there. Everything is always higher in the North then in the south. I'll never forget when I came back to Atlanta and got my first week's pay envelope at the grocery store and meat market where I was clerking. It contained only $5. I sure felt funny when I found such a small amount in my envelope after I'd been getting twice that for much less work. While I was cutting meet in that store, the knife slipped out of my hand and I grabbed at it and cut my hand to the hone. It became infected, and for a time it seemed as though I'd lose that hand.
"As far back as I can remember I've always preached, but my people didn't want me to take up the ministry as my life work. One of my grandfathers and two uncles were preachers. Mother said she and father knew me better than I understood myself. She said that, with my disposition, I wouldn't take all a preacher was supposed to bear. I've found that lots of things are said that I don't like, but I take it on the cuff and try to make the best of any and every situation I have to face.
“Mother has said that I started preaching by the time I could talk. My first pastoral work was at Junior Church of Allen Temple of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, in Chicago. At the age of fifteen I conducted services for the young people of the church in an upstairs room. Services for adults were held in the auditorium on the first floor. One morning the pastor of the church requested that the juniors be brought down to the main services. Never dreaming of his intentions, we went. I was surprised when I was called on to sit in the pulpit with the pastor, but I was knocked off my feet, figuratively speaking, when just before time for him to announce his text, he whispered to me, 'Son, you are to reach to this congregation today.' I had intended to preach to my juniors on 'Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God,' and I proceeded to deliver them the same sermon I had prepared to deliver in that little upstairs room to a group of young folks. That great auditorium was packed, and when a hundred or more of the people came forward at the close of the services and told me I did real well, I began to feel better.
"Did it frighten you to preach to such a large audience when you were so young?" I asked.
"I'd overcome fear of great audiences long before then," he chuckled. "When I was about twelve or thirteen, conference for young people was held at our church in Chicago, I was to give the address of welcome. The pastor selected an address from a book in his study end I thought I had it thoroughly committed to memory. When I stood up before all those people I got about half through it and completely forgot the rest. Those people never cracked a smile or made a comment of any sort when I sat down in bitterest humiliation. Eight then the pastor made me go back to his study and learn the rest of the address, then hurry back and finish it before the audience. That experience was enough for me, and from that day to this I’ve never been frightened or the least bit nervous before any kind of crowd.
"I suppose you know the real cause of the original split in the Northern and Southern churches. I believe it was in the year 1787, when slaves still worshipped with the white people that they were pushed back to the church galleries to sit because their shouting annoyed the others. You probably know that the first slaves in this country were even more emotionable and excitable than colored people are now, and when they got happy they just had to shout. They couldn't help it. When this took place in St. George Church, in Philadelphia, the slaves left that church, and in 1790, a free Negro, a blacksmith by the name of Richard Allen, bought an old blacksmith shop and in that building the first meeting of the African Methodist Church was held. He did the preaching himself, and in 1816 this church was formally organized. Therefore, I belong to the oldest organized Negro church in America.
"What bothers me most now is the way people fail to attend church services. Some Sundays we have a full house, but all too often I preach to many empty benches. That’s most discouraging to a preacher. Another thing I don’t like is the members neglect to support the church. People will contribute to everything else and let the church come last. If there’s anything left after they have satisfied their worldly appetites they spend a little on the church. One reason they don't put the church first in their giving is they were never taught to do it. The last of the major things that detract from church support is that many people want to indulge themselves in every sin they're big enough to commit and still expect the preacher to be a saint. They can see no excuse for any little perfectly human error he may make, but will always point out his faults as their reason for not attending church and contributing regularly to its support.
"One point of our two-fold program is operation of the local church; the other is the 'connectional work.' Connectional work includes support of missions, both home and foreign; Christian education, and salaries of the conference officials, the bishops, and the presiding elders; and pensions for superannuated ministers.
"My first two preaching appointments were in Atlanta. I served first at Fountain Chapel and then at St. John's. Then I was sent to St. Paul's at Austell, Georgia. There's where I met my wife. I guess it was love at first sight, for we were married 6 months after we began going together. Oh, no mam, we didn't have a church wedding; we just married very quietly at her home. From Austell, I was sent to Atlanta to preach at Little Bethel Church. It was in a section of town known as Blanton.
"I served one year at each of the churches I've just mentioned. After serving a 4-year pastorate at Turner's Chapel in Marietta, I was sent here 3 years ago, and if I'm permitted to remain here one more year I'll have another 4-year pastorate to my credit. My church is supposed to be the oldest organized colored church in this city. It's my understanding that it was established by Dr. Lovick Pierce, but to show you how careless my race is in the matter of keeping records, the few old records of this church now in existence show Dr. Pierce’s name as 'Parce.’ We have no list of the charter members and we do not know the date of our church's organization. I understand the original building stood where the Georgia railroad depot now is. We do have a copy of the enrollment of this church in 1874, and it seems strange that not one of the people whose names are on that list are alive today. I have made a thorough check on this.
"Since I've been in the ministry more work has been put on me than it seems possible to accomplish efficiently. I've been financial secretary of our conference since 1933. It’s a Job to keep the records clear when a little is coming in from this place and that place all the time. However, each year my records are audited and found correct. In appreciation of this task the conference gives me a donation of from $20 to $25 annually. I am also conference president of the Allen Endeavor League. Among the Methodists of our race this organization functions much the same as the Epworth League in the white church.
"My term as a member of the board of control of the Christian Recorder extends from 1936 through 1940, and I'm also a trustee of Morris Brown College in Atlanta. The jobs are strictly honorary, and they require plenty of hard work, but there is no cash remuneration.
"In the first years of my ministry, when I was serving just one year at a church, my salary was hardly enough to provide the barest necessities for myself and family. However, the church members were good to us and gave us many pantry showers end such like. I received $850 a year in Marietta, and when I was sent here my salary was raised to $960 a year. Do you know there are people in almost every church who think the pastor should preach without pay? That being the case, how could we poor ministers live and carry on the work of the local church and the conference?
"Ministers can't please everybody. If we talk to some members a few moments longer than to others, some get mad. In one of my churches there was a woman whose confidence I couldn't get, no matter how hard I tried. She went about telling the other members, 'He's just one of them big city preachers that's come to a little town and thinks he knows it all.' This gossip was doing much harm, and I didn’t seem to be able to break down the barrier it was making between me and my congregation. Finally, one Sunday night after the services my wife and I very informally called at her home. Was she like an iceberg! We chatted on as though we didn't know of her attitude, end before we left she had forgotten all about her prejudices end was as nice as you please. Now I deem her one of our most loyal members, and her example as a faithful worker in the church is outstanding.
"There is often much unjust complaint about the failure of the pastors to visit the church members in their homes. Now, our race is not careful about recording names. In cases of sickness and death and other troubles very often the published names are very different from those on our rolls end how is the pastor, who has only been in the community's short time, to be able to recognize the different nicknames by which many members are known? If we do make a pastoral call in the home of someone who happens to be a member of some other church, then there’s plenty of trouble ahead for us, for the leaders of the other churches will be confident we are working on the sympathies of that family to win them from their congregations to our own.
"I hadn’t been here long before I found myself in an embarrassing situation. The church sent a man out to repair the roof on the parsonage and he was in our yard when I went out to get in my car to make a pastoral call. He had been drinking. I conversed with him a little while and asked him as tactfully as I could about his soul. Before I left I suggested that he give up drinking, and invited him to attend services at our church the following Sunday.
"’You won’t see me at your church, or no other church, Sunday,' he snorted, ’because all you damn preachers do is ask for money, and I need all of mine to buy whiskey with.’
"’Don’t you know you’re headed straight for hell?’ I asked him, adding, 'I’m sure you don’t want to go there.’
"’No, sir, I sure don’t. But if I do go there, it’ll be me, not you,’ he answered.
"’All right, my man, think it over, and meet me at church next Sunday,' I said as I drove off. Sunday came and I didn’t see him. During the following week he died very suddenly. I called by his home to pay my respects, and his family asked me to conduct the funeral. It was then I learned that he was a member of my church, but the name by which I knew him had not appeared on the church roll.
“I went to go on record as saying I don’t believe in deathbed repentance. You often hear of this, and it fell to my lot to witness one instance of it. It was tragic. A wayward girl was dying, and I was sent to talk to her about her soul. She talked sensibly enough, and readily accepted Christ as her Savior, but there was none of the happiness end contentment on her face that should be on the countenance of the new believer whose sins have been taken away. It will always be a question in my mind whether or not she was actually a Christian when she died. The Lord says in our Bible: ’You must come in my vineyard and work.' Those who repent on the deathbed have done nothing in life to lay up treasure in Heaven, and they only grasp at the Gospel as a sort of last resort.
"A couple who once came to me to be married asked me to keep the matter secret for the reason that the girl lacked 3 years of finishing her college work and they did not want to announce their marriage until she received her diploma. The young man insisted that I let him have the license to return to the proper authorities after the ceremony. In the course of the next year or two the bridegroom, became very much in love with another woman, and soon the announcement of his engagement and approaching marriage was published. His secret wife raised a howl. The husband denied the marriage, and no record was found of it at the courthouse. I was called as a witness on behalf of the wife, and we learned that the husband had never returned the license for recording. Through the efforts of the families involved, plus some financial aid, a divorce was obtained and the man later married the woman of his second choice.
"A deputy sheriff stopped me on the street one day to say: ‘There’s a Negro man in tail that wants to be married. In fact, if he doesn't marry the woman who has made a charge against him, she'll have him sent to the chaingang today. I followed the deputy to the Jail, married the couple, and the man was turned loose. He kept right on going and never lived with his wife. He said that the company she was expecting could belong to half-a-dozen others. She just singled him out, he said, because she thought more of him than of the others, and believed she could come nearer getting him to support her and the prospective child.
"Probably the oddest wedding ceremony I've ever performed was on the occasion that I married a couple of deaf mutes. While neither of them could hear or talk at all, both could read and write. They had planned a nice home wedding. I carefully rehearsed them beforehand. When the hour for the ceremony arrived I simply read the marriage service for the benefit of the large assembly of guests and signaled the man and woman, who in turn nodded their heads in consent when the time came for each to say, 'I do.'
"The shortest funeral I ever conducted lasted just 16 minutes. The saddest one was for a talented young woman who was killed. The most embarrassing one I ever had any connection with was when a certain family couldn't agree on the type of funeral service they wanted. After the body was in the church, the undertaker was given orders to roll it out instantly if a certain woman attempted to speak or to read a paper during the services. It was this woman who had been responsible for placing the deceased in the hospital where she died. She had taken money from her own pocket to administer to the needs of the sick woman and it was through no fault of hers that the patient died. The beneficiaries of the dead woman's insurance feared that any evidence brought out at the funeral concerning the provision made for the deceased in her last days might be used to force collection of a refund from the insurance money for expenditures made in the last illness.
"At a funeral far out in the country, the brother of the deceased took on so during the church services that he knocked the casket off the rack that held it. He screamed, fought, and cursed like a wild man when it was necessary for him to be removed from the church so the services could proceed decently. He had to be tied during the services at the grave, and as soon as the last shovelful of earth was heaped up on the grave he was released. At once he began running about the grounds, laughing and chatting with the people, as though he had not a care or sorrow in the world.
"Now this incident that I'm going to tell you is not so very nice, but it's absolutely true. We were to hold christening services at a country church for all the babies that had been born in that congregation during the year. Everybody was there in their Sunday best. You can just imagine what colored people in the country look like when they do come out in their best clothes. Some amazing costumes always appear. It seemed to me I'd never seen so many babies at one time before. Everything went on fine until we were christening the tenth or twelfth baby. Suddenly a very young woman sitting at the back of the church began screaming at the top of her voice. Some older women gathered around and removed her from the church. Try as I might I could not restore order and quiet, and the rest of the babies were christened under pressure of restless excitement. Just as we were about to end the service, an old women ran up to me with a bundle wrapped in a petticoat. ’Look! Here’s the youngest baby in the crowd,’ she cackled, ’Christen it before it’s taken home with its mammy. ’Without a doubt, that was the most embarrassing situation that has happened up on me in the 14 years I’ve been in the ministry.”
The preacher’s wife giggled. "That girl had no business going to church in her condition," she said.
"I agree with you, my dear," Henry Murden said. "I was told that her mother had tried to keep her at home. I’ve often wondered what became of them, especially of the baby brought in for christening within the very hour of it’s birth."
The preacher’s wife interrupted with, "Look at Junior! He’s fallen asleep on the floor."
"Excuse me, please, while I lay him on his bed," her husband said, as he stooped down and gathered the sleeping child in his arms.
Henry Murden is a tall and very slender mulatto. His light gray suit, white shirt, black oxfords, and gray socks were worn with, the air of a man accustomed to good clothes. His rough straw, straight-brimmed hat lay on a table by the front door, where he had placed it as he came in. Carefully closing the bedroom door behind him, he returned.
The ice man was passing. "Son," the minister called, "bring me a quarter’s worth of ice today."
"Now, Henry," his wife admonished, "We don’t need all that ice. You forget we're leaving home for the day and night too, perhaps. The pan’ll run over and the whole house’ll be wet."
"Yes, we do want that ice," the preacher insisted. "One of our church members has given us two chickens already dressed. I’m coming back tomorrow, and I’m not even thinking about letting ‘em spoil. You and the children can stay all the week if you like. Hurry now, and dress. I'll be ready to leave in a very little while."
He resumed his story; "All three of our children are just babies. When I told my wife the other day that our family would be complete if we just had one more boy, she almost made me leave home. I don’t believe in larger families than a couple has a reasonable prospect of being able to support, people of our race have been accustomed to large families and all too often they have not been financially able to take advantage of any instructions regarding diet they may have been able to learn. Yes, I’ll have to admit the colored people, as a whole, pay little attention to diet. I consider it most essential for growing children.
"Our race has, at last, awakened to the importance of education. They have experienced the handicaps of ignorance until they know that an uneducated person, white or colored, has little opportunity to advance in this world. I mean to finance a college education for each of our children, if it’s the Lord’s will." Henry Murden’s face was wreathed in an indulgent smile when he said, "junior told me the other day he doesn’t expect to be a mere preacher when he grows up; he’s going to be a bishop."
"Very few Methodist preachers can own their homes for the reason that they aren’t permitted to stay in one place long enough for it to be practical to buy a home, even if they could finance the purchase. When, at last, the conference retires them, most of them have gotten to the point that it doesn't matter to them whether they own's home or not. On that last statement I'm speaking strictly from the standpoint of my own race. Ask 'most any Negro Methodist preacher's family which they'd choose - a car or a home of their own - and they would speak up quickly to tell you that they'd prefer a home and the privilege of living permanently in it. Preacher’s wives usually dread moving around, especially where there are small children in the family.
"Our conference has ample reason for sending us from place to place. After a preacher has led one congregation for 4 years, he has either done his best or his worst in the matter of bringing the people of that place closer to God. By that time the people need a new preacher. Each preacher has his own way of getting next to his congregation, and it's best to make a change before his individuality becomes a rut.
"My active Christian service began when I joined the church at the age of twelve. Many people do not believe in infant baptism, but I certainly do. The Bible plainly says: 'Suffer little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.' I am a firm believer in permitting and encouraging children to join the church when they are very young, for the scripture says 'Train up a child in the way he should go and when he is old, he will not depart from it.' In another place it says, 'Train a child in the path of righteousness.'
"I've been going to church all my life, and it's almost true that I've been preaching ever since I could talk. It's my ambition as a young preacher is to lead my people toward better lives; to teach, them repentance and forgiveness of sins so that they will have a resting place in the hereafter. If I thought I would be instrumental in leading one person to Christ, I’d feel that the efforts of my lifetime were not in vain. However, I don’t mean by that I'd be satisfied to save just one soul, for I do earnestly pray that the Lord will guide me in leading scores of them into righteousness and that they will not depart from the teaching of his Holy Word," One of the little girls soon came to the living-room door and said; "Daddy, mama wants to know if you’re about ready to go. She says it's getting late," His pulpit manner vanished as he smiled at the child. "Yes, honey, tell her I'm just about ready," he replied.
As I was leaving, he said: "Let me tell you just one thing more. I don’t think I've ever enjoyed preaching to any congregation more than I have to my people here, and perhaps I’ve taken more pride in my ministry here for the reason that it’s said that the pulpit of my present church has never been occupied by a downright ignorant preacher. My family’s getting restless now, and really it is time for us to get started on our trip."
