"I LIKE AMERICA"
Written by; Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by; Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Field Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
July 25, 1939
July 10, 1939
Mrs. Mamie Lewis (Syrian)
Broad Street
Athens, Georgia
Drygoods store partner and peddler
G.M.
"I LIKE AMERICA"
The plate glass show windows flanking John Depoulos.' store entrance were crowded with articles indicating the wide range of his stock of drygoods and ready-to-wear merchandise. One window displayed women's and children's dresses, underwear, hosiery, shoes, piece goods and bedspreads. Part of the opposite window was devoted to a display of wearing apparel for men and boys, and the remainder of the small space contained luggage of various kinds from small, cheap suitcases to large, expensive-looking trunks. The two straight chairs that faced each other across the doorway had a used appearance as though they were placed there for the convenience of customers. I wondered if some past experience in the life of this man caused him to provide for the comfort of the weary shopper at the very front of his store. Just inside the door was a large icebox labeled, "Cold Drinks." This seemed another new departure for a drygoods store.
Close to the open door was a roughly-made table piled high with cotton socks and stockings in a range of sizes and shapes for the entire family. "Bargains 10¢ a pair," it proclaimed. The owner was leaving his small office at the rear of the store. He is a Syrian, apparently of middle age. He wore a dark blue business suit, carried his hat in one hand, and a bank book in the other. When he saw me he carefully placed the hat on a chair and smilingly approached. "Good a mornin', have-a da chair," he greeted me, and waving his passbook with its ac-companying checks and currency, supplemented by a small canvas bag in which coins clinked, Mr. Depoulos continued: "I gotta go by da bank. I call-a my wife. She sells you da goods. Oh, Mimi, come queeck!" he called. "Da lady, she ees here."
The Syrian woman who responded has long been known to her friends as "Mamie," but to her husband she is "Mimi." She is short and stout. Her thick black hair, brushed straight back from her face, was coiled low on the beck of her head, and the dark colors of her neat print silk frock were becoming to her brunette type.
The request for a life story brought smiles to their faces. Mr. Depoulos quickly said: "I been away too long. When I wassa there, old countree wassa all mud streets. Now boy notta long come from over there say-a streets all paved just like-a here and twice-a mo' ottabeels." He laughed heartily as he continued. "Firs' car I ever see in old countree wassa just a old ford. Some-a da folks was 'fraid of eet, and eet wabssa show for all-a da pipples. But I gotta go by da bank. Mimi, she talk for you." He stopped to receive the money for some of the bargain table hosiery selected by a couple of Negro women, and to hand them their packages before he proceeded in the direction of the bank.
Mrs. Depoulos was silent for several moments before she began her story. "I no spik-a da Eenglis' mucha da good. One woman come two, free months ago wantin' me to tell about old countree. I tella her I no talk-a good. I tella you what I can.
"You wants know town where I wassa born? It wassa Beirut, Syria. I no know my daddy. He die before I wassa two year old, I no re-member him. My mother wassa lef' with-a seex cheeldren to-a raise. T'ree-a girls, and-a t'ree-a "boys we wassa, and no-a money to buy-a da bread. No works a-there like-a here. My mother she-a do washing, clean-a da house, and cook-a for da rich pipples to make bread for-a her cheeldren. We hongree for-a da bread. My brother, he-a grow up and he-a git little wagon and haul theengs to help my mother.
"Lotsa times we have-a no bread. My mother hear of America where all-a da pipples make-a good livin', an' got plenty da jobs. She leave-a five cheeldren with a brother, and she take-a one boy and come-a to thissa countree. She work-a here t'ree year and send-a for a seester. All-a da time she send-a money to help ussa live back in old countree. My seester, she marree in thissa countree. She marree a Syrian that-a da been here long-a da time. He make-a da good monee.
"Mother, she live-a with my seester six-a year after da marriage. She gitta see ok. Doctor tell her come back-a to old home or no git well. Seester, she die in this countree and she no have cheeldren. Mother git worse after seester die. She-a grieve for dead seester, an' worry for cheeldren back in old countree. She leave-a my brother over here and she come-a back home.
"My marreed seester in old countree hear-a mother tell about America, an' she-a leave her husband and her son in old countree and say she send-a for 'em just-a soon she make-a da monee in America.
"Pipples in old countree raise-a da silkworms to make-a da livin', just like-a you raise-a da cotton in thissa countree. Oranges grow in Syria like-a in Florida, big-a da groves of 'em. We work-a with-a da silkwoims, pick-a da oranges, and wash-a for pipples. But it pore livin'.
"I marreed my husband - hees-a John Depoulos - when I wassa seventeen. We live-a together two-a years. Times wassa bad. Couldn’t make-a da livin’, and when our babee wassa six-a-month old, John, he leave-a there for thissa countree. We no hadda da monee for-a to come. He-a borree it, like-a you borree monee at-a da bank here, but I no can say it in Eenglis’, like-a we say in old countree. My seester not dead when he-a come, an’ he stay with-a her and with-a da other brother that-a come with mother, till he-a learn how to spik-a da Eenglis’. Then he peddle things, and send-a da monee and-a letters. War come. I no hear-a from him more for-a seven years. I gotta no monee and no-a food. Turks army come in-a our homes and taka-a da bread. All-a da bread and other food come in ships awhile. War stoppa ever’thing, no let ships come in docks with-a da food. We gotta no salt, no nothin’. We go hongree, an’ ever’body eat-a da oranges an’ grass. Some grasses maka-a da pipples seeck. They have-a da swelling an' die.
"Mother, she-a done fine when she first-a come back to old countree. But she take-a da seeck and die from-a da hongree. We go-a bed hongree. My babee, he cry-a for bread. I go six-a month an’ no see-a da bread. Little cheeldren die from-a da hongree. Sometimes many as-a twenty-five or thirty cheeldren die in a day. Hard times in old countree. We no had lights. Sleep in dark an’ be hongree. I been work all day for one leetle piece-a bread an’ take-a home to my babee. We eat orange peel to kill-a hongree. Pipples die in streets and nobody to bury ’em. Hawks an' dogs eat-a da bodies, leave clothes in streets. Whole families died from-a da hongree. One-a big family die all but-a two boys. They both seeck, an' one-a die. His brother eat-a his body. Jus’ so hongree he eat-a his own brother's body, an' pretty soon he-a die too.
"Ever'body seeck an' hongree. Ho could-a rest for - what you call 'em? - these-a little things that crawl on-a you. I no know 'em name in Eenglis' but they much-a like bugs. In Syria they 'bout inch long, and-so many pipples dead, they jus' crawl all over da streets. My brother and his-a wife, an' their-a t'ree cheeldren die. My brother's wife's family, they all-a die. The husband an' son of-a my seester what-a lef' 'em to come-a this countree, they die from-a hongree in old countree. All-a time she over here workin' for monee to send 'em, so they come-a here to her.
"A boy start out one day for-a see if hees-a seester wassa still livin'. They never see him no mo'. He done died in-a da street. They find-a his clothes an' shoes, but dogs an' hawks done eat-a da body. I no hear-a from my husband off in America, an' he no hear-a from me. He think-a I dead, an' I think-a he dead too. Letters he-a sent me come-a back with-a da monee still-a in 'em. He over here an' have-a plenty; me and my babee in old countree hongree for-a da bread. Hard times wassa on us.
"My cousin, she's-a been seeck long-a da time, and she's-a know for long time she gotta die. Her boys, they hongree an’ she no have-a nothin' to-a feed 'em. She-a sell 'em to a rich man for sack-a da flour, for she want 'em have-a da home when she gone. I work-a for family what say I can have-a da home with 'em but they-a no could keep-a my babee. I no take-a that home, for I keep-a my babee anyhow. They-a say give him away. I tell 'em queeck, 'I keep-a my babee: I no give-a him to nobody.'"
Mrs. Depoulos was interrupted by customers. While she was selling socks and dress materials to some Negroes, and suspenders and wash trousers to some white men, I gazed about the store. A partition shut, off space at the rear of the long room. Along one side of the salesroom the wall was lined with shelves that were filled with piece goods. An array of luggage was piled above the shelves. Counters and showcases displayed thread and notions. Long tables, laden with piece goods, wash trousers, bedspreads, curtains, and underwear, formed a line through the center space. A tall showcase held women's hats. The shoe department was near the partition at the rear of the room. Many of the shoes displayed of were antiquatea styles. Persons who cling to the old fashions in footwear know this and many a pair of high top shoes is sold here. Near the shoe department were long racks filled with summer dresses of various fabrics from cheap thin cottons to expensive silks. The general arrangement and grade of stock is typical of this section of town.
A man clad in overalls came in to exchange a pair of pants. They were too large he said. Mrs. Depoulos asked him why he had waited so long before returning them. "Why," he protested, "it ain't been no more'n two months since I got 'em, and I ain't wore 'em none. I just ain’t had no way to git back to towa before. I walked 'most all the way today, 'cepting when I catched a ride for a little ways at a time." Mrs. Depoulos laughed at him and said, "I know you’ve had 'em all-a six-a months. But I get-a you mo' pants." While she searched for the right size of garment for him, she inquired about his wife and children, and wanted to know when he was going to bring them in to trade. He told her that if he could "git away to fetch 'em, the old lady and the gals'll be in next Sadday to do a little tradin'." He continued, "But hit won't be much tradin’ they’ll do, for I ain’t got much money. I just had to come in and exchange these here britches today.”
She escorted him to the door chatting volubly in broken English, and when he had gone she took two bottles of coca cola from the icebox, opened them, and as she Joined me again, she said: ”Have-a drink with-a me. I know you're thirsty.” I accepted the refreshment and thanked her. She was ready to resume her narrative when a well-dressed man came in and asked for Mr. Depoulos.
”He’s-a no here,” she replied, adding, "He go-a by da bank.”
The visitor wished to deliver a refund for freight overpaid, and when I had witnessed lira. Depoulos' signature on the receipt, he departed, and again she picked up the threads of her story.
”Times wassa hard, an' I no could make-a da livin’ for my babee an’ me, till a rich woman that-a lived there got seeck. She had-a babee girl about as old as my babee, an’ so she-a send for me to nurse-a her babee. She have-a free mo' cheeldren ’sides her babee, an’ want me to-a live in house, take care of all-a da cheeldren, wait on-a her, do all-a da housework an’ cookin’. She-a say I could-a keep my babee with-a me if I-a come do all-a that. I go. She too seeck for have milk to nurse-a her own babee, so I nurse-a her babee with my-s babee. She been-a know she gotta die, so she want me to take-a da care her cheeldren after she go. She die. I stay on an’ cook, wash, keep house for-e da cheeldren an’ their father. Their babee, she git seeck, broke out in sores all-a over jus' like-a you call-a da eczema here. She peel off skin ever’ day like-a snake skin come off. So many pipples dyin’, ever’ body ’fraid of that little babee, an' they tell-a me no let it stay 'round-a my babee boy. Now, I been love-a da little girl, an' I worry 'bout-a her, but I no could throw her away jus' 'cause she seeck. I feed-a her right along side of my boy, an' sometimes have-a both of ’em at-a da breast same time. Girl babee git worse all time, an' finally she die. God, he take-a da care my babee an' me, for my boy, he not even seeck. I been-a work right on there till the man marree again. Then I hadda move, but I keep-a on washin' for him, an' in this countree what he-a pay me for washin' would-a be one dollar a week.
"Then a sack-a flour was from five to ten dollars, that-a you can buy now-a for a dollar. One loaf-a bread was a dollar. Rich pipples was all that could-a buy bread. I been hadda work so hard. I even cut-a da wood all day jus' for-a da bread, but no could make-a da livin’. Hongree all-a da time, times hard, folks still dyin' all ’round in streets. In many places no one able to bury ’em. Turks take-a ever'- thing we-a have, what we-a done work for they jus' take-a right on.
"One day me an' six other women take-a our cheeldren and-a start walkin’ for hunt work. Jus’ go place to place. Sleep on ground most-a da time. I tie babee on my back so I walk-a da better. The more we-a walked, the worse-a it got. Times bad then. No go half-mile till-a you see dead body in road. Ever'body out huntin’ work an’ food, but we no find-a. Got no place-a stay, got no-a food. We sleep on-a da ground, an' eat-a da oranges. We go back to-a old homes, an’ do-a best we can. We do-a da wash, cut-a da wood, an' when-a we can get it to do we clean-a da houses for anybody can give us-a da bread for hongree babees. Times, they hard."
Mrs. Depoulos sobbed a little while, wiped the tears from her eyes, and continued her story.
"I still think-a my husband an' my brother both dead in this countree. They, over here, think-a all their pipples dead in old countree. We just-a live some way till war end. My husband an' brother keep on tryin' find-a da news 'bout us. One day my brother, he find-a out his little-a girl, an' me, an' my boy, Jim, wassa still alive. They write, an’ send-a me big-a da check for five hundred dollars. Our joy, it big when-a da monee it come, for we wassa so glad we was livin', an' we could-a eat real food again. We hadda stay on in old countree till-a da things git straight so we could-a be let leave an' come-a thissa countree. We wassa long time comin' to thissa countree. They-a stopped us before we wassa landed, an' kept us in a place to examine us. My-a brother's daughter, they found she wassa seeck, an' they send-a her back to Syria. I beg an' I worry, but they-a say I no can bring her on with me. Other Syrians that-a they send back, they-a look after her. She stayed in old countree two years. Then her daddee got her in through-a da South America. She had got well.
"Me and my boy no spik'a da Eenglis' an' my brother he-a miss us in New York. Pipples was nice to us. Helped us git on-a da right trains to make it to-a my husband,"
While Mrs. Depoulos was waiting on customers, her husband returned, and smilingly asked if I had heard anything of interest from his wife, and if I'd like to hear more. I wanted to know what differences he had encountered in life in his native land and in his adopted country.
"Well, now," he began," there not so much-a now. That's what our folks say that comes over now, but I been away too long to know. Syria not look-a like here. Syria just rocky, muddy, an' hard to walk for rocks. When I left there wassa no business there. My old home place - it was Beirut - is not more'n 15 or 20 miles from Jerusalem. Now, they tell me it all paved from Beirut to Jerusalem.
"When I left Beirut nobody never sick there, an' folks go years an' no see no doctor. One reason it is, we no eat there like-a you do here. We no eat much-a da meats. Not even no hogs ees raise there. Pipples they raise plenty cows and sheep. Lamb plenty good for you. We still eat lamb in this countree. Best olive oil in world is made in Syria. It cheap there - pure good olive oil, not like-a what you pay-a your dime for in little bottle. We use olive oil instead of other grease - no use no lard - and I order it from New York. Git gallons at time. No, I tell for sure, before the Turks come an' make war in our countree, nobody hardly ever die till they jus' git too old to live.
"And our houses in Syria, they not same like your houses here. All our houses there made out-a rock. They got so many rocks in Syria, they have to use 'em for somethings," he chuckled, "an' so they use 'em for houses. Hocks make good houses; look nice too; last all time.
"War changed things in Syria jus' like everywhere. Then we no have good schools, jus' little school. No teach nothin’ but Syrian language. But now, one of the finest universities in-a da world right in old Syria, and pipples go there from here to learn. Syrians comes to this countree already spikin’ good Eenglis' that they already learned in the old countree.
"I no spika da Eenglis' when I git here, and none-a them that come with me could spik Eenglis', We no able then to talk." He laughed heartily, and continued, "I sure learn damn much since I been here. You know when we land an' git on train, we no know how pipples do here, ’cause we no can talk an’ ask. A man come by an’ handed ever’- one of us a box of candy while we talkin’ together on train. We try thank him best we can, an’ open up candy. It so good we eat ever' piece, an' ’sides we hongree, an' no know where buy food. We tell each other, Americans, they damn good to new folks. When all candy et up, man come back an’ say give pay for candy. We hadda pay for that damn candy too, but from that time we take nothing. Nobody could give us a damn thing till we learn to talk-a da Eenglis’.
”I went-a first to Cleveland, Ohio, an’ got-a da job, but never stayed long - just two days. My wife’s brother wire for me to come to Georgia, an' I no wait to git pay for them two-days work. I just come right on here to work-a with him, so I can learn-a da Eenglis'. Soon-a I start out to peddle for myself. I sell ever’thing I can pack in big suitcases. I peddle an’ I save, send monee back to my wife an’ babee in old countree. When I git ’nough monee I start me small eatin’ piece, what you call’em? Restaurant, that’s eet. I getta da man to help me in eatin' place so I can peddle right on, an’ I make-a da monee an' save eet.
"Turks make war in old countree an' I no hear from wife an’ babee. They no let me go to old countree to see ’bout ’em. We no been here long ’nough to git in army when thissa countree git in war. I worry ’bout my wife an' babee, but no hear from ’em till war, eet is over. Then I send-a da monee for ’em to come to thissa countree. That sure take lotsa monee. Jus' for the boat teecket one way it cost-a $250, and more monee eet take-a for da trains, eat-a an' to spend. You gotta spend monee if you travel. I no been back to old countree. Boat make-a me seeck all-a da time I on eet. Most things new an' strange to me in Syria now, so many changes. I would like-a take my grandcheeldren back there some day. They only full blood Syrian cheeldren in thissa town.
"My wife an' boy no spik-a da Eenglis’ when they come. Boy, he only seex-year old when-a he come, an' he learn fas’, but my wife, she learn slow. We have-a big times when other Syrians come-a here. We give-a da big feast, an' Syrians come from ever’where ’round, even from New York. They stay days an’ nights. Then we have old countree eatin’ an' dancin’ an' singin’. We love old countree music. But biggest time we ever have is when my son git marreed. Mimi, she tell-a you ’bout that. I gotta go see a man."
Mrs. Depoulos laughed delightedly. "He right," she said, "I slow to learn-a da Eenglis'. I been here most-a da year when I can say, ’Good morning.’ I think I never learn-a da monee. If I go in stores to buy I jus’ show ’em what I want, an' then I never know how much-a to pay. Monee in our countree all shiny like gold, an’ I think-a da pennies here like our monee, so I try-a pay for ever’thing with pennies long-a da time. But Jim, my son, he learn fast. We send-a him to school. Ever’- thing strange to me. I miss old countree an’ friends. But pipples here nice to me an’ I soon make-a good friends. I soon start-a da work. Stay in eatin’ place, peddle some. We lived in house next by eatin' place, an' my husband an’ me help each other work. Pretty soon we start thissa store an’ then we sell eatin’ place. My husband, my son, an' me, we all work-a here in store. We gotta have extra help ever' Saturday, an’ in fall of the year we have extra help all time. That busy time.
"Our son, Jim, he like-a da boys here. He go school with ’em, visit in their homes an’ they visit him. When he old ’nough to drive, we buy him car so he have-a da good time."
A man came in the store selling chickens. She made no purchase. When he had gone she laughingly told me, "Cheecken was the first word in Eenglis' my Jim learned to say, but after that it come fast enough.
"When Jim was-a 18 we start planning for-a him to marree. There no Syrian girl here for-a him to marree, so we send-a to South America to some of our pipple there, an' make-a da 'rangements for one of ’em girls to come here. We pay all ’spenses, an’ promise if she no like-a after seex months we send-a her back. She come. We like-a her an' she like-a us. Jim marreed her. He was still in high school when she come, an' he Jus' wouldn’ finish school after he an’ Mary marree. He quit in las’ year an' work-a here in store an' peddle too.
"We fix-a da big wedding for ’em. Eet too far for Mary’s pipples to come, so we made pictures of the weddin', the church, an' the crowds an’ send ’em to South America to ’em. We Roman Catholics, an’ the weddin' was in church. Church wassa full, our house wassa full. Them big times. Our friends come an’ Jim’s young friends come. Ever’- thing fine an’ grand. We had white satin weddin' gown made in old countree for Mary, Eet had long veil an' orange blossoms. Church was-a decorated very nice.
"After weddin' we have big-a da dinner an' danced old Syrian dances all night. We had plenty to eat an’ drink an’ smokes for the men. Our American friends never see nothin’ like our boy’s weddin’ before, an' they have-a da good time with us. We send-a to Atlanta an' New York for men to make music on Mg old banjo like-a we do in old countree at weddin's.
"Now Jim an' Mary have-a four cheeldren, two-a boys an' two-a girls. When I no work-a in store I take up all-a my time with-a my grandcheeldren. I like-a America an' I no want-a live in old countree no more, but I want Jim's cheeldren to see where we come-a from, where I was born in 1896 and Jim was born in 1915, where we were so hongree. Seems like long-a da time since then.
"Jim, he peddle 'round most-a da time, but he be here soon." Mrs. Depoulos stopped to attend to a customer. Soon I heard her call, "Jim!" A young voice, clear, but with foreign accent, answered, "Oh, yeah, I'm coining, Mama!" Jim is short and very slender. He wore a plaid shirt, white trousers and shoes. His boyish appearance was enhanced by curly black hair. An armful of bedspreads was deposited on the counter before he turned to his mother and asked, "Did you want me for something?" She patted him on the back and said, "Thissa lady wants you to tell her about yourself, an' your work, an' what you remember “bout old countree."
"I don't know much 'bout old country," Jim said with a grin. "I come here when I was six, an' was too little to remember. I gotta four fine babies myself now, an' two of 'em’s boys," he announced with a great show of pride. "My babies are the only full blooded Syrian youngsters in this town. Come see 'em sometime. You'll like 'em too, but they are had boys. They don't even call me daddy. They call me Jim and their mother Mary. They call my father and mother their mother and daddy," he said in mock despair.
"I gotta seex babies," Mrs. Depoulos chuckled happily.
"I like America," Jim continued, "I went to school here and had good times playing with my schoolmates. Those ball games were great." His eyes shone with enthusiasm as he added, "Oh, yeah! I like to play ball; never git tired of that. However, I don't have much time to play now. Have to work all the time. I got too smart and didn't finish high school. Just because I was getting married I thought I wouldn't ever need no more education. Oh, yeah! I wish now I had finished, but I guess I can get along in this world all right. I guess I can.
"I take my car full of goods and go out in the country and get good business. I've been doing this so long I have regular times to get to the houses and my customers look out for me. I've hired a colored boy to go with me to help get the goods out of the car and to pack 'em up and put 'em back when they've been shown. I've made lots of good friends on my routes and often they invite me to have meals with 'em. I arrange my routes to make short trips so I can be at home at night, except on the one week in every month that I spend in the mountains of North Georgia. When I first started peddling in the mountains it was hard, for the mountain people don't like strangers, 'specially foreigners. That's said to be because of their stills and the old quarrels between. mountaineers and revenue officers. I don't know about those things, but I do know I had a hard time making friends with 'em. Now they're used to my me and are my very good friends. Many of 'em wait to see my stock rather than make a trip out to some town to buy drygoods, clothing, and millinery. Another thing those mountain people don't like is the Negro race. There's some places up there they don't let Negroes come," he laughed. "That’s one time I always know where my colored boy is, for he's afraid in the mountains and stays close by me, but they have never offered to bother him.
"I found that the older people in some of those mountain sections had never seen an automobile until I began working up there. At first, they were scared of me and my car. I've been scared up there too. My worst scare was when a little girl ran right in front of my car. I turned quick as I could and just did miss hitting her, but I was so overcome I couldn't drive any more that day. My colored boy had to be chauffeur the rest of the day.
"One of my good customers in the mountains is over 80 years old. She had never seen or heard a radio until I drove up there one day and the radio in my car was playing loud on a very exciting and scary program. She didn't know what the thing was and it frightened her so she couldn't even stand up at first. I lowered the volume of sound, and after a long while I was able to persuade her to come out and sit in the car to listen to a program of old songs. She was happy as a child. After that she always wanted to sit in my car and listen to the radio during my visits to her place. Her family finally bought a radio for her and they told me she played it day and night until she got used to it. She's a good old soul and I like her a great deal."
"Jim," called a man in overalls who had just entered, "Are you coming Sunday?"
"Oh, yes, buddy," Jim replied, "I'll be there in a big way, with all the family."
"Good! We'll be looking for you," his visitor called as he left the store.
"That's one of my good country customers," Jim explained, "He's having a big barbecue Sunday and all his relatives will be there, for what you call it? Oh, yeah! I got it now, it's a family reunion. He’s invited me to come and bring all our family. Oh, yeah! We're going.
"I've been lucky for in all my traveling around nobody's tried to stop me or to hold me up - not one time. I do get on some bad roads and have botheration to get off of 'em, but that’s my worst trouble.
"I don't sell no goods much on credit on my peddling trips. Now and then, if they are old customers that I know'll pay me prompt on the next trip I'll leave a few goods, but I don't never let 'em get far in debt. Just a few of our best farmer customers we wait on till fall for the money for things we sell 'em during the spring and summer. There's mighty few of 'em that gets that long credit from me though.
"Farmers here raise cotton like our folks raise silkworms in the old country. The silkworm's the money crop over there. Did you see the silkworm in the window of a store up the street from here when they had their big silk sale not long ago? Oh, yeah'. We went and took all four of the children to see it. My mother, she cried and 'most had a fit. It made all of us think of our old home. My uncle and his wife in another town brought their children to see the silkworm too.
"We've done better in the dry goods business than we did running the eating place. We sold that house where we lived and run the restaurant after we started this store. Then we bought a six-room wooden house on another street. It was a nice house, but not much lot. We wasn't home much and didn't need a big lot. After I got married and wanted a place for the children to frolic in, we bought a home further out. It's nicer, but not much larger - Just one room more - and it has a big yard where the children can play without getting out in the street. We rent out our other house now."
Jim called the Negro boy and instructed him about packing Mrs. Depoulos' car for a peddling trip. "I go out in little towns an' sell dresses an' a few other things on Fridays,” the mother explained. "My Jim's in-a da store then to help-a his father. Sometimes I been sell-a lots. I no go 'cept on Fridays no more. Jim's cheeldren keep-a me busy, an' happy,” she added. "All Jim's cheeldren been-a christened in our Catholic Church, but they still-a too little to go to mass yet.
"Sometimes I go by picture shows,” Mrs. Depoulos continued, ”but we go mostly to parties and weddin's. When Syrians give-a da party here, other Syrians comes from far an' nigh, an' ever'body have big-a da times. We talk-a da Syrian speech, an' eat our way of-a da cooking. Long befo' party-time, we plan an' write so ever'body come an' bring babees. We want-a babees to know-a da old countree customs."
Mr. Depoulos had taken advantage of the presence of his wife and son in the store to look after business, and had gone out again, Jim was busy with customers, and Mrs. Depoulos was packing a stock of wash dresses for her peddling trip. I waited until she was ready to go. Jim told the Negro boy to go along and drive for her. She laughed. ”That's-a one thing I no learn in thissa countree. I no can drive ottabeel. We keep-a da two big ears, but if I go, somebody gotta drive for me. I would no go leave when you come-a see me, but I go these places ever' Friday and these pipples, they look for me. Good-a-bye! Gome back to-a see me."
