Greensboro, N. C.
THE BAILEYS
I waited in the living room after Mrs. Bailey had admitted me. Their home is furnished in Victorian style. As I entered the reception hall I saw that the stairway to the second floor was immediately to the right; the living room was to the left. Over the mantel in the living room, there hangs a large reproduction of a Rembrandt. Below this picture are photographs of the family. Centered on the mantel is an illuminated manuscript in an ornate frame, depicting incidents from Bible history. Its title is "The Bible in Classic Art."
On a rectangular center table a vase of cut flowers from the garden in the back yard, added a touch of beauty and fragrance to the room. The living room suite is of wicker. A piano in one corner of the room, a floor model radio near one window, and two chairs complete the furnishings. Prints of landscapes hanging about on the walls and a few nicknacks give a homelike atmosphere.
The dining room, kitchen and one bedroom, that of Mr. Bailey's, which he also uses as a den, complete the first floor plan. On the upper floor are the bedrooms used by the other members of the family. In the basement is a hot air furnace which is fired only during the extreme cold weather. Stoves and fireplaces usually furnish the heat for the rooms in immolate use.
Presently Mr. Bailey entered the room and with a cordial greeting made me feel very welcome. As we talked I observed that he used very good English, and that his vocabulary was above that of the average. He discussed world events and referred to historical facts with an air of assurance and accuracy.
"I married young," Mr. Bailey told me, "and have raised three mighty fine boys, "but they were a drain and a care, until they became self supporting.
"My idea about the size of families has changed from the one I had earlier in life. Unless a man is a millionaire, or at least has lots of money, he has no business having children."
The first of Mr. Bailey's three boys is William Hayward, a professional musician who directs his own dance orchestra, is married and has one son, five years of age. His wife clerks in Grant's store. Another son, Mike, works for a heating contractor. Leo, the youngest boy, is manager of the clothing department of a local pawn shop. The boys, including William and his family, live with the Baileys.
"The boys all received good educations -- I saw to that --" Bailey continued. "My education, from the class room, lasted only seven months when I was six years old. For the rest of my learning I went in and dug it out. You must remember that schools fifty years ago were sometimes far apart and it was hard to get an education in those days. I believe, though, that if a man wants an education he will go after it, and get it. If he doesn't want it, you can't force it on him. An education is a great thing, and an ignorant person is our greatest nuisance. My grandson, little William, is only five, but he is already going to school. He likes school so much he can hardly take time to eat." This with a justifiable glow of pride.
"He's a healthy little rascal too. In fact, we all are. A healthy person can eat anything he likes; they don't have to look for what they call a balanced diet. It will be balanced if you eat the things your appetite calls for. The secret of good health is; 'never eat all you want at any one time. Always stop hungry.' We have never had a hospital bill, and it's been a long time since we had to call in a doctor.
"I believe a fellow should buy his own home if it is at all possible, and to hell with the automobile. We rent this place. Those living in the village get their rent free. That is one advantage they have over us living outside the village. But since there are not enough company houses to take care of all the employees, there are lots of us that live wherever we want to. Some of the fellows live as far away as sixty miles. My place is about three miles or more from the mill. I walk it every day. I believe if I had been riding to my work all these years, I wouldn't be able to work today. It is the exercise and fresh air the year around that helps keep me in such good physical condition.
"I've been active, though, all my life. At seven I was working around my father's farm and at nine I could plow as straight furrow as any man; I didn't want a slow horse, either. I worked in turpentine from the time I was ten until I was twelve. Then I spent three years cutting and hauling logs to the saw mill where we sawed them into lumber.
"I was fifteen then and I left the farm and got a job with the railroad and stayed with them until I was seventeen. I didn't like railroading, so I looked around for another job and found the best paying one I could get, with my education, was in textile work.
"My first job in a textile mill was with the Holt Mill in Burlington. I though then I would learn the business from the bottom up. I have worked at practically every job all the way through the mill, except as superintendent. I have never had any desire to be a superintendent. I found that the machinist received the best wages. I had a natural bent for this kind of work, so I started out to become a good machinist. By beginning at the bottom and sticking to it, I was able to pick my own job. I have followed this trade now, for about forty years, and have worked with several different mills.
"I often think of my first pay back there on the farm -- $8.00 a month, but --" he added reflectively -- "that was all right then."
"My work is not easy -- not as easy as say, the automobile mechanic. He works with parts milled to 1/1000th of an inch and every piece of machinery he handles fits perfectly, which makes it easier for him. In my work the pulling and jerking of the machine throws the many parts out of adjustment. These have to be readjusted without any machined or accurately fitting parts as a guide. The mill machinist must know when he has his machine properly adjusted. He uses his head in the place of precision instruments.
"But that's just part of life," he added philosophically, "I have learned to take things as they are. I've always said that human nature can't he different today to what it was 2000 years ago. A Man back there, called 'Jesus of Nazareth', pointed out some truths of human nature that are the same today. Then way back in the days of Adam and Eve, God said: "Henceforth thou shalt earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow," and up to now I've never heard that He has repealed that law. So you see we all have to work and sweat to make a living.
"Some people try to make a living without working for it. It's all right to have the other fellow working for you, if you treat him right, and pay him a decent wage. If I owned a mill, and had the necessary capital to run it on, I'd furnish the hands with houses rent free, the way they do here in the Cone Mills. I believe a wage of $5.00 a day for machinist is a just and fair amount; the next in line would get $4.00 a day, and the lowest I'd pay, that is for the unskilled worker, would be $15.00 a week. I don't think anybody should have to work for less than $15.00.
"I expect a mill owner to make a reasonable profit, but I don't think he ought to take it all. The people I am working for have always done better by their help than any other mill owners. Of course, I don't know how much better they could do. I know that they make lots of money, but after all, it takes good management to make a profit. I remember when the Cones started these mills. Everyone knows they began on borrowed money. Today their capital on all their interests is about $200,000,000. They have a mortgage on North Carolina.
"I don't expect to be a mill owner, but I will stick to my trade as long as they will let me work. If I could follow the kind of work I really prefer, I would be a farmer, not that he has any advantage over the textile worker, or the man employed in town. The only advantage I would have over either would be that I would enjoy that kind of work more. Pleasure in work comes from working at the thing a man likes best to do.
"I think a man should like everything he does. He should like to take part in civic life, in politics and every activity which touches his life. I am sixty years old now, and I haven't missed voting at an election since I have been old enough to vote. Nobody tells me how to vote either. They hand me cards and ask me to vote this way or that, but I have already tried, every way I know how, to find out all about the different candidates before election day. I just throw away the cards, 'cause I have already decided how I'm going to vote long before I reach the voting booth.
"That reminds me of a movie I saw, once," and he recited an amusing incident. After I had laughed politely he went on to say, "There is a theatre in the mill village and they show very good pictures, too. I believe movies are always educational, even for the youngster who goes to see the Western. I've had parents to tell me that they don't approve of the wild west pictures for the children because they see fighting and killing. They do, but it is the bad man who always gets killed and that teaches the boys that "crime doesn't pay." There is always a good lesson in any picture if we take the right attitude toward them.
"The best thing Greensboro could do would be to have Sunday movies. It would cut down the wrecks and death rate from automobile driving, because lots of people would spend a quiet afternoon at the show instead of roaming around with no place to go and with nothing to do.
"But I won't be able to change the law by myself, and like the old saying 'boys will be boys' -- 'people will be people.'"
