Date of first writing:	November 28, 1938
Family:	Lillian and Early Holbrook (white)
Address:	Jonesville, North Carolina
Occupation:	Tenant Farmers, Mill Workers, Laborers
Name of Writer:	Mrs. Clalee Dunnagan
Name of Reviser:	Claude V. Dunnagan – Jan. 11, 1939 Federal Writers’ Project, Winston-Salem, N. C.
HOKE AND LU COY
The woman sat motionless before the door of the squalid cabin and gazed across the river. I could see marks that long, bitter years of suffering had left on her face, suffering that seemed to find vague consolation in looking at the blue hills. Below us, between stretches of bottom land, the sluggish river flowed, winding its sprawling course down the valley until it was lost in the haze of a typical river-bottom fog. The sun had sunk behind the hills and the heat of the August day was slowly giving way to a chilling coolness that drifted up from the misty bottoms. The woman turned in her chair and fumbled for a can of snuff. She filled her lower lip. Then she sighed and relaxed again, as though listening to the incessant croak of frogs that came up from the flats, and the far-off baying of dogs in the hills beyond the river. Presently she spit out a stream of tobacco juice and turned half-way toward me.
"You welfare folks been doin' a lot of good, I know, but it just don't seem like we ever net much help. ‘Course you got a heap of folks to look after....they's poor folks all around... I reckon we was just meant to suffer...like as if the Lord wanted it that way. It just don't seem right, though.” She paused a moment to chew on a tooth-brush made from a sweet-gum twig.
"I'm afraid we didn't know your circumstances, Mrs. Coy," I said quietly. "You see, we don't even have a record of your past history at the office. That's why I came here this evening.”
She smiled wanly. "Well, my life ain't been very happy or interestin’. It seems like it's just been one trouble onto another all these years, ever since I run away an' not married...."
"You ran away?"
"Twenty years ago, exactly, as I recollect. I left on accounta Pappy....he wanted me to marry an old man who was awful rich. He was more'n twice as old as me and I didn't like him much anyway. Pappy got mad one night when I said I wouldn't marry the old man…his name was Carlton...he used to own 'most all the land this side of the river for miles up and down. I packed up what clothes I had and went to Winston the next day. They didn't know when I left....I went out when they wasn't at home. Jobs wasn't so scarce in those days as now...I got work in the cotton factory pretty easy in Winston. It didn't pay much...not more'n enough to barely live on, but I managed to make out, and when the goin’ got hard, I never done nothin' like some girls do sometimes....I stayed in a boardin' house next to the mill.
"And then, after I'd been there about two weeks, there was a new boarder at the table. He was about my age and good lookin'. I reckon he'd just cone into town 'cause he didn't seem to know anybody. He seemed sort of lonesome like I was. Later on we got to talkin' to each other after meals and sometimes we'd go for a walk after workin' hours. I reckon we done just like most anybody else'd done. We got married about a month later and he moved in with me. I don't recollect when I was ever so happy. It seemed like somethin' in a dream...like most times never comes true. It was so nice, coming home from the mill together, eating together, going to the show…..”
She paused a moment to draw a ragged shawl around her shoulders. The air rising from the bottoms was beginning to grow chilly, and I could tell by the slightly pinched expression on her face that she felt it, but she had not suggested going inside the cabin, although there was a fire in the open hearth.
“It don't seem like it’s hardly cold enough to build a fire," she said abruptly, "lesson you're gettin’ chilly.”
“No”, I said, and she turned once again to stare toward the hills. I waited silently for her to continue.
"It didn't last long," she said presently. “Times got hard and the mill shut down to half time. Me and Hoke was laid off, with less'n fifteen dollars between us, and nowhere to go. Hoke used to be a carpenter once so he went into town and tried to cot some work. It seemed like nobody needed any help then, an the money we had saved was almost gone.
"Then, one night, Hoke read in a paper where they was wantin' hands to tend farms up in Virginia. They was offerin' half of the crops for the renter. We thought it would be a good idea since the mill wasn't coin' to hire any hands for a long time. And besides, I as expectin' a baby and the country is a good place to raise babies....cities are so smoky and dusty. Hoke was sled, too. I remember he said to me the night before we went to Virginia. 'It won't be long 'fore we'll own our own farm, Lu, and then we can have a good place to bring up the children. The mountain air'll be fine for the little ones, and for you, too...” When we got to Virginia, the house we had was a three room log cabin, but it was big enough for us. The barn needed repairin' and some fences put up. It didn't take Hoke long to do it, though it was a lot of hard work, and I helped him as much as I could up till the first baby was born........that was little Luisa, after my name." She paused momentarily to spit. “She's married now....with two little ’uns of her own. They live down in the country a piece with Jud's folks." Then she rose from her chair slowly and turned toward the cabin door. “I better see after the little ‘uns a minute...I reckon they're all asleep by now, and they'll be needin' some cover on ‘em since its gcttin' colder..." She went slowly through the door and I heard the mumbled complaints of the children as she attended to them. A moment later she came back out the door, took another dip of snuff, and resumed her seat in the chair.
"It seems so awful lonesome like since Hoke left," she sighed, "even with the little 'uns to take his place....” She paused a moment as if trying to remember where she had left off.
"I guess farm rentin's 'bout the same everywhere....don't hardly make enough to eat, after givin' the landlord his share. It was that way in Virginia. When the tobacco was sold, and the corn traded at the mill, we had about thirty dollars left to live on till next crop. I guess that was why Hoke wanted to go to High Point and work in the mill. We left that fall and went to High Point, where we moved in with Hoke’s folks over near tracks. They was awful nice but they didn't have nothin' neither, just like us. Finally Hoke got a job in the furniture factory at twelve dollars a week. We helped at the house some, what we could, and when little Luisa got sick it took everything we made to pay the doctor. When the second baby come, that was little Willie, Hoke was out of work. They'd been layin' off a bunch at the factory and Hoke was one of the first to go. It seems like things just started gettin' worse and worse along about then. I remember settin' at the window night after night, just starin’ across the railroad tracks toward the mills, big, black, and dark, ‘cause they wasn't runnin' any more at night like they use to. Hoke said they couldn't sell all the furniture they made, and they was cuttin' down expenses. It just didn't seem right, though, when all them people that worked there was laid off without anything to live on a-tall. We didn't know what we was goin' to do.
"Then, one day I got a letter from home sayin' that the mill folks was buildin' a lot of houses to rent to the workers. Hoke bein' a carpenter, wanted to go to Jonesville and see if he could got a job holpin’ build the houses. We packed up and went to Jonesville the next day, with Luisa, Willie, and all the furniture we had, which wasn't much.
"When we got home, we moved into a big, ramblin, frame house that looked like it was about ready to fall down. We couldn't pay the rent in advance, so the landlord said he would wait till the first of the month.....you see, Hoke got a job doin’ carpenter work as soon as we got there, 'cause the mill people was lookin' for good carpenters and Hoke had done a lot of buildin' in his time. When he got his first check, is paid the rent and bought some furniture on the installment plan. It wasn't much, but just enough so the house wouldn't be so bare...we'd bought a bed in High Point when little Willie was born....it was enough to get along on till we could do better.
"Things went along pretty good while the buildin' lasted. Then one day Hoke come home one night and said they wasn't any more work to do on the houses, and all of ‘em had been laid off, and they wasn't takin' nobody on at the wool mill across the river. The last night he worked, I remember, he'd got his last check, and I'd asked him to go to the store and gat some flour and meat. He built a fire in the stove before he went, and I went across the hill to Annie's house to get the children where they was playin'. That was one of the awfullest nights I recollect. Seems like that was just the beginnin' of my real trouble. When I got back to the house with the young ‘uns, I heard a funny funny roarin’ upstairs. When I went up the steps, it was so hot and smoky I couldn't see. The whole upstairs was on fire, and in a minute the flames was droppin' through the ceilin'. I grubbed the little'uns and ran out in the yard.
"It didn't take long for it to burn down. Some of the neighbours ran in and saved a few chairs, but 'most everything got burned. I reckon I was cryin’ pretty bad 'cause when somebody touched me on the shoulder, I didn't pay much mind to it. It was Pappy. I remember what he said that night, when the fire was 'most out, and all the neighbours had gone home. 'Bring the youn'uns and come on over to the house. I reckon we can make room….’
“When Hoke come in later on, he din't say much. He just sorts set and stared at the fire, like he didn't hardly know what had happened. It was then that we decided to go to Greensboro whore Hoke heard they was buildin' a new factory. I remember Pappy said before we left, ‘If you don't go, you can stay here till you get another place, 'Course, we ain't got any too much room....or vittles, but I reckon we can share what we got....' We didn't figger to stay with my folks, though, and we left for Greensboro two days later."
She hesitated a moment. From across the bottoms there came the far-off baying of hounds.
She stirred in her seat without looking toward me.
"They're huntin' in the hills again, tonight,” she said in an even voice. "Sounds kinda like when Hoke used to go fox-huntin'. They'd always come around the north side of the mountain when they struck a trail. I guess they're on a trail now, the way the dogs are carryin' on.” I didn't say anything. As the expression in her eyes deepened, I could tell that her thoughts had momentarily slipped into the past. Suddenly she turned to me abruptly.
"You ever been in Greensboro?”
"Yes”, I answered.
"Then you know where the mills are that make the Terra Cotta pipes. That was where me an Hoke took the children. We moved in a mill house when he got a job helpin' build the new part of the factory. That's the longest we ever stayed in one house. When the factory was done, the mill folks didn't want us to stay in their house less'n Hoke went to work for them. So he went to work in the plant where they molded the pipes. It was awful hard work but he soon cot used to it, and he was makin' enough to feed the youn'uns and buy clothes for 'em, so we wasn't so bad off for a time.
"Then one night Hoke come in awful late. He didn't say notnin'. He just went to bed. I didn't know what was the matter, but I didn't say nothin’. The next night, he was out late again. Later on that week, one of the neighbors said she'd seen Hoke with a bad woman up at the other end of town....said she knew that woman was tad on accounta how she made her livin'. A lot of the menfolks in the mill section went to her house at night, an' lots of 'em married men, too.” She paused and sighed.
“I reckon most women would've give up and quit, right there, when their husband done like that. But I couldn't. I had two little ‘uns and another comin', and nowhere to go, without Hoke. I just hung on and prayed that he'd see his wrong 'fore it was too late. It hurt an awful lot, and I couldn't see why he done it...and him lovin’ the little'uns so much. They wasn’t nothin' to do but just wait and hope...' As she paused again, I heard a noise around the side of the cabin, as though someone were walking slowly toward the house. A moment later the figure of a young emerged from the shadows, leading by the hand two small children. As I glanced at Lu in a half-questioning look, I saw her start up in her chair.
"....You here, child": Why?....”
The girl released the hands of the two children and began sobbing.
"I couldn't stand it any longer. He’s been drinkin' again."
Lu reached forward.
"Give me the baby.....I want to hold him. Bring out another chair and set."
"No, I'm tired....I want to sleep," she said. "There'll be room for me and the babies here…..?"
Yes, child," Lu answered. "Always."
The girl moved inside the cabin with the older child. Lu continued to sit in her chair by the door, holding the baby in her arms. Presently the child was asleep. Lu rose from bar chair with a faint sigh and carried it inside to its mother, who was lying with the other child on a pallet on the floor. In a moment, she was back in her chair, staring again across the bottoms toward the dirt, moonlit hills. Then she turned to me and spoke softly.
"It seems like Jud don't care any more...not like when him and Luisa was married. He's bean drinkin’ now onto two years, and she's boon leavin’ him off and on all along, but it don't seem to make no diff'runce....he keeps it up......"
She turned again toward the hills and resumed the expression of calm resignation that had been on her face all evenin.
"It ain't that I mind lookin' after the little'uns....I'd rather thay was here anyway….when he's been drinkin'...but it upsets Luisa so. She don't seem like the same as when she was my little girl..." She paused and sighed again.
“I was to where we was livin' in Greensboro, wasn't I?..... Well, we lived there for nigh onto eight years, and I reckon if it hadn't been for a letter we got one day, we'd be there yet...me and Hoke and the little 'uns. It was from a lawyer in Aldentown, 'bout Carlton..... the one that wanted me to marry him 'fore I left home. He was dead, and the letter said he'd left me a patch of land down by the river, and I would have to come home to be there when they read the will. So we packed up and went home two days later….after Hoke had quit his job. You see, we always wanted a patch of land where we could own our own little farm and raise the babies on...where it wasn't so smoky and dusty like around the mills in Greensboro and High Point. Hoke and the little'uns was awful glad to go to the country. The patch of land wasn't as big as we thought, 'cause when the lawyers got through handlin' the will, they said we owed 'em some money for their services, and they got more'n half of what was loft 'cause we didn't have no money, much.... ‘least not as much as they said we owed 'em, so they agreed to take some of the land instead. It seemed like they wasn't nothin' else we could do, but give it to 'am.
"With the little money Hoke had left, he bought some lumber and built a little two room house on the land...it would do till we could make a crop, even though they was six little 'uns by now. We put most of the land in tobacco and corn. The first crop wasn't any good. Seems like they was too much tobacco crowed that year and Hoko said the buyers had found it out and wouldn't give much for it. We didn't get hardly enough to pay the fertilizer bill. Next year, we got a little more for tobacco, but the corn wasn't no good. The river got up and ruint most of it. We didn't see how we was hardly goin’ to live till next crop.
"Then, one night, Hoke come in and said he'd heard they was goin’ to build a lot of new houses in Greensboro, and he wanted to go down and see if he could get a job for a while. I did’t want him to go….what with the young'uns bein' so little and not much help with the crops. But he said he could make more doin' carpenter work than by farmin’, and he said he'd send us some money to live on till ho decided whether to keep the farm or sell it. I reckon that was the first time I found out how much I missed him when he was away so long. I couldn't hardly get used to him not comin' in every evenin’ with mud on his shoes, and pickin’ the guitar and singin’ 'The Old Gray Mare' every night around the fire-place. Even with the little 'uns at home all the time, I got so lonesome I couldn't hardly keep from cryin’ sometimes." She paused. "It ain't that way now...”' she said, softly, and in the dim light of the moon, I thought I saw a wan smile cross her face. “A body can sot used to 'most anything after a long time has passed, I reckon.” She stopped to get another dip of snuff.
“Hoke hadn't boon gone more'n three weeks when my youngest brother Joe come to live with us. He had three little 'uns and his wife had just died, and they didn't have nowhere to go, so we took 'em in, since Hoke wasn't hone and Joe could help around the farm. We was getting’ a little money from Hoke along and we managed to live. Than come fall, and it seemed like everybody was catchin' colds. First, Joe's youngest 'un got down with it, and then Benny, my least'un took sick. They kept gettin' worse and when we called in the doctor, he said they both had the measles, and that Joe better take his young'uns away 'fore everybody caught it. Joe moved away, to a little shack up the river a piece, and later on, back in the mountains somewhere. I ain't never seen him since.
"I’ll never forget what the doctor said that last night when little Benny was layin’ there so pale and sick. 'I've done all I can do...all anybody can do….' He went away and never come back. Little Benny died that night while I was holdin' him in my arms. It seems so strange God took him away when I needed him most, and him so little and innocent. I couldn't hardly think of puttin’ him in the ground...he looked so white and pure like an angel layin’ there that night....Hoke come home for the buryin' and we carried little Benny to the cemetery up on top of the hill behind the church. All the neighbors was there, weepin', and prayin' and singin'. It hurt so bad I couldn't cry. We put him in the ground beside Ma and Pappy...the'd died while we was still in Greensboro. We stayed there by the grave for a long time that evenin', not sayin’ nothin’ but just standin' there, lookin' toward the hills till it got dark……"
As her voice trailed off, she seeded to be studying the landscape.
Far away, the hills lay silently, like ghost mountains blanketed in a sheen of dim moon-mist. “Seems like the hills don't change or move...like people.....They been here for years, and they're still here, just like the night when me and Hoke was up there lookin’ at ‘em. I reckon they're part of me now, I been livin’ with ‘em so long….sorta like they was gods theirselves…….
“After that happened,” she continued, after settling again in her chair and turning half-way toward me, "Hoke went back to Greensboro. He sent us a little money along. It wasn't much, but we managed to live, with what we could raise around the house. Then, after a spell, Hoke quit writin' home. He didn’t say nothin’ 'bout what he was doin' nor whore he'd gone. The letters just quit comin'. I wrote to some of the folks I'd remembered in Greensboro and High Point, but they hadn't seen him. I just gradually figgered he'd died or loft for good. 'Long 'bout a year later, one of the relief ladies from town coma over to see us. I told her what had happened and how we didn't have nothin' to live on through the winter. She said she couldn't give us no help if Hoke was able to work, and she'd have to find out whether he was dead or not. A week later, found out he was still in Greensboro, out of work and livin' in a shack down by the factory tracks.
"They said they could got him a job doin' carpenter work on a house if he'd come home, and he did. I'll never forget what he told me that first night he was home: 'I was shamed to write you, Lu, he said that night, 'all the time knowin' I'd have to, sometime. It was after the little’un died that I got so I didn't care about livin', about anything, almost. Then everything got so bad I couldn't get work, except barely en to get somethin' to eat. And, I remember how his voice sorta crocked when he said this, 'I couldn't come back and face you without tellin’ you what I'd done down there all the time I wasn't writin’ you. Then I saw what I'd been all along, ever since that first time when we lived in Greensboro. She wasn't there when I left, thank God....You too hard on no, Lu. I been half crazy ever since I left here. You ain't mad, now I told you, are you, Lu?.....' When he finished, I just put my hand on his and said, as I recollect it; 'I ain't mad, Hoke, You told me. That's enough, ain't it? Besides, we need you.....the young'uns do. Now you got a job beginnin’ tomorrow that'll give us a chance to start all over. We got to forgot everything that's happened. It seems like a bad dream, and dreams don't mean nothin’. We're goin' to be happy, what with all the littler ‘uns growin ‘ up. We’re goin’ to live a little now….’
The next mornin' Hoke put on his overalls and started out the door with his tool-box. He stopped and kissed me before he left. I watched himn goin' across the hill toward the road, never thinkin' it wee the last time I’d ever see him alive. Later I learned he'd caught a ride to town with Hb Nichols, who was goin’ to work on the same house as Hoke. I never heard what caused the week….they run into another car at the end of the bridge across the river. Some that was there said Hoke died right off, without ever knowin’ what happened….." She sighed heavily and touched her eyes with the corner of her apron.
"….we lost the farm on account of I mortgaged it for some money to give him a fittin’ buryin’. I didn't, mind, though....it was the last thing I ever done for him….though he would t'o had it that way....he was always so unselfish and kind-like....
“We moved back here to the old home 'cause the rent’s not so high as on the farm. Little Willie's been workin’ on the WPA for a while now... he ain’t very old but he's a heap of help…just like his peppy, too.... and it seems like the government's doin' a lot for folks now...if it hadn't been for 'em I just reckon we couldn't 'o made it. They been awful good to us....”
She straightened up in her chair and turned to me.
"They ain't nothin’ else, much, 'cep'n some things that don't matter much," she said slowly. "I reckon it’s 'bout the same as any other poor folks….just hard luck on top o’ hard luck. Seems like it's God's will somehow....."
A minute later I took my leave. As I neared the foot of the hill, there came the sound of movement inside the cabin. I glanced back and saw Luisa standing in the doorway. I could barely hear her words.
"It's gettin' damp, Ma," she said. "You'll catch your death at cold.”
“Yes, it's gattin’ colder," Lu answered softly.
The dogs were baying again across the hills. From the river there came the incessant croaking of frogs. A heavy mist was rising from the bottoms. From inside the cabin, Luisa’s voice came again.
“You comin’ in, Ma?”
“Yes, child,” Lu answered. “I’m comin’.”
