Mrs. H. B. Philip
195<text not clear>, Largo Place
South Jacksonville, Florida.
Personal Interview (Cont)
Rose Shepherd, Writer.
RED BANK <text not clear>
(JUDGE HENRY BETHUNE PHILIPS)
"The survey of Red Sank gives the name which was known to the Indians and later to the Spanish--a great bank of red clay, utilize' in the early 1850's in making brick for the plantation houses, and <text not clear> ter used commercially by Gamble & Stockton," said Mrs. Philips.
"The first home built by Albert Gallatin Philips was frame, but it turned, and the brick house now known as 1230 Greenridge Road, Colonial Manor, was erected in 1857, the year Judge Philips was born, at least it was completed and the family moved in dicing tae early fall of that year. The brick were made by slave labor, were manufactured right on the plantation between crops of cotton and sugarcane, and it took two years to complete the large mansion.
"The table over there in the corner," (indicating a heavy light-colored wood center table, with a circular three-foot wide top)" was made by the slaves from a large chinaberry tree on the old place they called it 'Pride of India,' It is all hand-fashioned and rushed smooth, without polish.
"By a coincidence, my old family home near Spartanburg, South Carolina, Clean Springs District, was also known as 'Red Bank.' My family name was Smith, and my mother was a member of the Anderson family of that section.
"The following is a translation of the Spanish survey of Red Bank:
I, DOWPDRO MARROT, Captain of the Battalion of Infantry, Regiment of Cuba, and Judge Commissioner of the Governor, and Commissioner in Chief of the Province of East Florida, have made the survey of land commanded by His Majesty:
I certify that at the plantation called Red Bank there were measured and delivered 13 caballavias and 17 acres of land to the inhabitant Francis Flora, whose family consists under oath of eight persons, VIZ: Husband, wife and six children.
The first line runs East 95 chains,
begins at a cypress marked with a cross on the
border of the St. Johns River, and
En<text not clear>s at a stake with the same mark,
Bounding the line of Solomon King.
The second line runs North 69 chains,
Begins at said stake, and
End, at another with the same mark.
The third line runs South 75 Chains,
Begins West 85 Chains
Begins at said stake and
Ends at a pine with the same mark of a
Cross at the St. Johns River, bounding the
land of George Harrison.
Its front runs along the border of the aforesaid St. Johns River. All according to the orders which I have.
The surveyor, Don, Josiah DuPont, signed it with myself, and the aforesaid not knowing how to write, made a cross (X).
In testimony thereof, and that it may serve for information at the office of the Secretary of Government where the parties have to apply for their respective titles, I give and present Sea Bank,
March 1, 1793.
(S) PEDRO MARROT
(Turn over)
(Diagram)
I, Antonio Alvarez, Keeper of the Archives of East Florida, hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and correct translation of the original in the Spanish language filed in my office.
FITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE at the city of St. Augustine, Territory of Florida, this 12th day of March 1831.
(S) ANTONIO ALVAREZ, KEEPER OF THE PUBLIC ARCHIVES.
"The first home built by Judge Philips's father on Red Bank Plantation was a frame structure in the section now known as Granada," said Mrs. Philips.