There are three versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore all three versions have been included in the project.
 
I AIN'T NO MIDWIFE
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athena
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athena
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
Mar. 24, 1939
 
March 14, 1939
Mary Willingham (Negro)
140 Cohen Street
Athens, Georgia
Practical Nurse
S.B.H.
I AIN'T NO MIDWIFE
I knocked on the door of the brown painted cottage, but there was no response. The key was in the door so I knocked again, harder this time; but still there was no answer. As I turned to go a Negro boy across the street yelled in a shrill voice, "Her dar, her's in de back yard washing' if it's Miss Mamie you'se wantin' to see." I thanked the boy. "You'se much oblige," he replied.
Walking around to the back yard, I found Mamie putting a kettle on a fire that was burning around a boiling washpot filled with clothes. "Good morning Mamie," I greeted her, "I'm surprised to find you at home. I was just taking a chance."
"yes, mam, I ain't had no job in gwine on a month now."
"Are you taking in washing?" I asked.
"No, mam, I'se just doin' my own fambly washin', least I is this mornin'. I does have two small washin's. I means I called myself havin' two, but the folks didn't bring 'em last week and they ain't brung 'em so far this week.
"Come on the porch and sit down whilst I wash, 'cause when I gits through I'se got to go to town. I meant to wash outdoors in the sunshine, but my husband and daughter got off befo' I had a chance to get 'em to move my wash bench off of the porch for me."
I sat down and watched her as she worked. Mamie is a stout woman of medium height and tangled gray hair frames her gingerbread-colored face. She was wearing a blue uniform, a white apron, black slippers, and gray cotton hose.
She spat into the tub of clothes, stood up straight and said, "Miss, does you know where I can git a job?"
"No," I replied.
"What!" she ejaculated. "Outen all the folks you knows!"
"That's true, Mamie, I surely don't know of a job that you could get right now." I told her.
"I sho don't know what us pore Negroes is gwine do," she grumbled. "When I first started to work I got more to do than I could keep up with. Now, the folks goes to the hawspital, and when they gits back home some of they folks comes and stays with 'em 'til they's up and about again. I reckon folks just has to do that way to cut 'spenses."
"How long have you been working out?" I asked.
"Let me see now, since 1924," she answered. "You know I ain't no midwife; I'se a practical nurse. I'se holped doctors and midwives, and I'se maided and cooked. Lord, have mercy! I had to spend my money as fast as I could git it feedin' my chillun and payin' house rent. I got my 'stificate to do practical nursin' in 1926. It took me 2 years to git it. It used to be any person could wait on a 'oman havin' a baby, they could go ahead and cut the cord and tie it if they knowed how. Now, that's all changed. If you don't have that 'stificate they'll put you in the penitentiary for life. I hope to git my next 'stificate in 'bout another year, and then I can call myself a midwife and pull down $55 a week. Then I won't have to worry 'bout my meat and bread no mo', 'cause I means to save for a rainy day.
"I don't know when I was born 'cause I didn't know nothin' fall 'bout my ma. I recomembers seein' my pa all right 'nough. I can guess at my age, but I really don't know jes' how old I is. I tells ever' body that. I 'spect I will be 'most forty- nine my next birthday. I was born on a farm down here in Clarke County, and all I ever done in my younger days mostly was work in the field. I'se just been in town 'bout sixteen years. I used to have time and money to go to see my folks, but I don't no mo'. Like I done tole you, my ma died when I was a baby. My sister raised me part of the way, then some white folks took me up and I lived with 'em years and years. I lived and worked in the house with them white folks 'til I married.
"The reason I started takin' keer of the sick is that my husband's sister that was nursin' a white 'oman took sick and give me the job. I went there and liked the work and the white folks liked me. They paid me $8 a week. That was a good lady what I nursed. I had to work day and night and had to do somethin' for her all the time. She would say, 'Oh, please rub my legs. Oh, please scratch my head. If you will only rub my back, I am so nervous.' She had the shaking disease; her hands and legs was drawed up something awful. Her aunt said it was caused by bein' a senarvis (stenographer). She had done that work so long workin' her fingers on a typewriter that she 'most lost use of her hands and arms, and that condition spread over her whole body.
"The first real nurse I ever seed was a white 'oman. The folks where I lived in the country had her to come there and nurse one of the chillun what was took bad sick. One day she went out in the yard to the lavatory (latrine) - folks didn't have them places in the house to sit on in the country. The lavatory was hid back of a grape arbor. She was passing under the arbor on her way back to the house when a bug got in her ear. She went to the kitchen, put a little white somepin on a match stem, got some warm water, and worked with her ear a long time. I thought that was fine doin's. I said to myself, 'If she can do things like that, I can too.' Right there and then I decided to be a nurse.
"Not so many years ago I was nursin' a white 'oman and got in trouble 'cause I told her her pulse was too fast. It happened like this:"
Mamie stopped talking long enough to spit again into the tub of clothes, and to rub a few strokes on the washboard before she related the anecdote.
"It was Sunday and my day to git off," she began. "I fooled 'round the 'oman's room awhile atter I'd finished what I had to do for her. Her sister told me not to tell her I was go in' home to rest. I went downstairs and the sister axed me, 'Mamie, did you tell Miz Morris you'se gwine home?'"
"'No, mam,' I said."
"'Well, you go back and stay with her a little longer and then you slip down and I'll let you off,' she ordered.
"I done this. Miss Maybelle, a white 'oman that didn't have a bright mind, was there to holp Miss Susie, and she sont her up to stay with Miz Morris whilst I was gone. Miz Morris axed Miss Maybelle, 'Where's Mamie?' Miss Maybelle told her she didn't know. 'Well, you go find her and tell her I said come here.' When she come down huntin' me, Miss Susie sont her right on back upstairs. Miz Morris kept on sayin', 'Where's mamie?' but Miss Maybelle, she wouldn't say nothin'. Then the sick 'oman yelled, 'Maybelle, is you foolish?'
"When I got back Miz Morris was nervous and restless. I felt of her pulse, and axed her, 'What's upsot you today?'
"'I got mad 'cause you left me,' she said.
"'I knowed somepin had done upsot you. You ought to be more keerful,' I told her.
"Right away she wanted to know, 'How did you know about it?'
"'Never you mind,' I told her, 'I know all right.'
"She kept right on insistin', 'If you don't tell me I'll call my sister.'
"I was afraid she would try to git up and she was gittin' too excited over just nothin', so I said, 'I knowed from your pulse; they was too fast.'
"They had done sont for the doctor atter she fust started gittin' excited, and he come in 'bout that time and felt her pulse. Right away she axed him, 'How is they, doctor?'
"'All right,' he said.
"'No, they ain't neither,' she come back at him, 'they's too quick.'
"'How do you know they is?' he teased her.
"'Cause Mamie said so,' she bragged.
"'Well, if she has got to go 'round tellin' sick folks such things, we'll let her go,' he 'lowed. That floored me. The idea of her tellin' the doctor right befo' my face what I had told her. I ain't never told another sick person 'bout theyself no mo'. That 'oman had somepin the matter with her they called anemia or something. Not long atter that they took her to the hawspital and give her new blood more'n once, but she was so far gone that new blood wouldn't take up with her. She died about six months later in that hawspital.
"Just befo' I got my 'stificate to do practical nursin', me and one other 'oman was called on to observe a operation for a tumor. The 'oman lived in the country and her money was short, so to cut 'spenses her sister had her to come to her house in town for the operation. She had a colored nurse, named Nancy, who thought she knowed it all. When the day of the operation come the doctor that had been 'tendin' on her in the country rolled up in a big fine car and had two white nurses with him. It made that Negro nurse hot so she took herself to the kitchen. In a little while another doctor come to do the operation. He was a Athens doctor and the other one lived in the country. Well, when he got there and started fixin' for the operation Nancy stayed right on in the kitchen, and didn't show herself. Atter they had put the 'oman on the table when one of the white nurses started to give her ether, that doctor looked around, and said: 'Where in the hell is Nancy?' Somebody told him she was in the kitchen. 'What in the hell is she doin' in the kitchen? In here is where she belongs.' They sont for her and she come in the room, but still she didn't do nothin', Just folded her arms and stood there like a image. One of the white nurses whispered to her to git somepin outen the town doctor's kit for a stimulant 'cause the patient was gittin' nervous. Nancy was bending over the kit and that doctor looked 'round and saw her. He said: 'Nancy what in the hell are you lookin' for?' The white nurse told him, the patient was gittin' nervous and she was 'fraid she was gittin' cold.' He said: 'Hell, she don't need nothin', she's all right.'
"He was mad anyway. The house didn't have no electric lights, and there wasn't but two little windows in that room. It was dark. The doctor fussed 'bout not havin' enough light and said the patient ought to be in a hawspital. It scared her husband 'most to death. He dashed downtown and bought a $5 flashlight. It was 'most as long as my arm.
"Well, like Nancy, that sister thought she knowed it all. They had to have needles, thread, scissors and gauze. They called for plenty of hot water to keep their hands clean. They had to pour the water over their hands into a slopjar, so the sister told me to carry it out and empty it. After the operation was over they began to check up on the gauze. Every piece had to be 'ported. One piece was gone. We searched everywhere for it, so it was 'cided that it had drapped in the slopjar and was throwed out. Of course, I didn't know not to empty it then 'cause I hadn't had no 'sperience with the likes of that. That sho larn't me a lesson. After the patient was well enough she went home to the country, but she didn't do no good. Atter a 'zamination they 'scovered that gauze was sewed up in 'er, 'cause they could see the strings through the place. They had to cut her open again and take it out. That didn't amount to much so it was done at her own house. Don't you blame them doctors. They couldn't see good in that dark room and there was so much discharge. As to Nancy, she has played out. The doctors got out with her and won't call on her no mo'.
"Once I was with a colored 'oman what had had a tumor for 'bout thirty years. The colored doctor called in this same white doctor. When it was taken out they weighed her tumor on cotton stulyards and it weighed nearly forty pounds. Everythin' went off all right that time. They had their rooms whitewashed nice and things was as clean as could be. I have worked for that doctor many times since. He is a good man and a fine doctor, but you had better not make him mad.
"Befo' I left the country a colored 'oman that was going to have a baby in about three months said she stepped out the door and fell. The doctor came and said she couldn't carry the baby no longer. He cut off the pains by givin' her a shot in her arm. The colored doctor sont to town for a white doctor. He come and said he would have to take the baby, so he sont back to town for two mo' doctors. When they got there they said, 'Git a long table.' It was got for 'em. They put her on that table and took the baby by one of them Cessare'-an operations. The doctor said she never could have had that baby, 'cause it was so big at six months on the way. Of course it died.
"Now, Miss, one thing I wants to tell you and you ain't got to put it down on paper if you don't want to. Anyhow folks knows how they gits here and 't'aint no need for to be ashamed of it. If they is ashamed, then all I can say 'bout 'em they's powerful good-for-nothin'. I know I'se jumpin' from the colored to the white folks and back again, but that's the way these cases comes to me."
Again she spat in the washtub and began: "Well, anyway I was called on a case where a white girl that wasn't married had a ' baby. Her ma sont for me, but when I got there the baby had dona come. The girl was on the bed and the baby was lyin' on the flo' on a old piece of quilt. The girl's ma wouldn't touch it and when I seed how things was I didn't touch it. I did spread somepin over the baby and went for a midwife, 'cause I wasn't after havin' the law on me for doin' somepin the law didn't 'low me to do. After the midwife come and done what she was 'sposen to do and put the baby on the bed with the girl, I took charge and stayed 'til they was ready for me to leave. But to have a baby on the flo' ain't nothin'. All pore white folks and Negroes does that when they ain't able to have no doctor. They calls theyselfs savin' 'spenses. I knows that's bad, tellin' you that, but it's the truth. They jes' puts a piece of old ragged quilt on the flo' and gits down on their knees. It makes the pains easier, and the baby comes lots quicker.
"I nursed one mother and baby where the mother was as spoiled as the baby. The baby would cry and so did the mother. That baby cried day and night, so they called the doctor. He come and didn't do a thing for the baby. He told them there wasn't a thing wrong with it, 'cept it was spoiled. He said, 'Make the parents go to sleep and you keep your hands off that baby, only when it's necessary.'
"I sho did enjoy workin' in that house. They was up'ty folks and was good to their help. Mr. Henry was a good man as ever lived; no matter what come or went he was as calm as you pleased. Nothing upsot him. He treated his wife like he did his little boy. He told me one day, 'Well, Mamie, I has three babies now, my son, my wife, and the new baby.' But I sho made that white 'oman mad with me. I told her nice folks like her didn't have such big old babies. I just said that in a jokin' way 'cause every time the baby cried it looked like she thought I wasn't doin' my part by it. After I made her mad I was skeert he would bless me out. The maid and cook said he was a good man but he didn't stand for talk like that to his fambly. So I played like I had a sore throat and was 'fraid to be 'round the baby, and eased 'way from there.
"One man I nursed with bladder trouble just couldn't stay out of the lavatory. He just wouldn't use the bedpan; he was so proud and dickety that he didn't want the nurses to see him. One day he was comin' from the lavatory and had a spell. We caught holt of him as he swayed back and forth like a drunk man. Every time we begged him to git on the bed he would say, 'Oh, let me be. I'm on the bed, I don't want to git up.' When we did git him on the bed, he died in a few minutes. I never did understand what made him have that spell.
"When I was nursin' a 'oman once that had a cancer, I was doin' the things I was sposen to do, and left her setting by the window in the sun. I heard her call her sister who was doodlin' 'bout in the house. I run to her just in time to catch her befo' she fell out of the cheer. A fit had struck her. Her sister thought she was dyin' and began yellin', 'Oh! Lord, she is gone and died!' I felt of her pulse they was strong enough. I said, 'No, she ain't, git me the camphor.' 'It's on the dresser,' she told me. I couldn't find nothin' but the rubbin' alcohol, so I just rubbed her down with it. I asked Miss Jane to holp me to git her in the bed. She wouldn't touch nothin' but her foots, so I took her head and Miss Jane her foots, and put her on the bed. The doctor come and give her somepin to quiet her down. That was 'bout five years ago and that 'oman is still livin'.
"Well, I done got these clothes washed, now I'se got to hang 'em out. 'Scuse me, I got to git my clothespins." She went into the kitchen. "Good Lord, Miss, it's done twelve-thirty. When does you eat?"
"Oh, not as long as you are willing to talk," I told her. "I can eat any time." She went out in the yard and began to sing: "'Come to Jesus Now.'" Looking at me she said: "You can talk. I can hear you and ain't nobody else gwine to hear you."
I told her I would wait until she finished work.
"Just as soon as I hang these clothes out, I'se got to go downtown so you'd better ax me what you wants to know now." She continued to hang out the clothes. "So it's my schooling you wants to know about now?" she said, "I got as far as the second grade; that's how come I can't talk proper now. I went to school in Morton's Chapel. It was a church house. Us chillun went to school there during the week days and to church and Sunday school there on Sunday. That's the way us done in them days. Now they has a reg'lar echoolhouse.
"I don't hardly know how I met my husband. I believe when I met him he was with his first wife. I thought he was the prettiest man I ever seed, and he said he thought I was pretty too. He told me when I seen him again that I had the prettiest legs; they was so big. I was just a little fat low squat. I never seed him no mo' in about four years. Then he was separated from his wife. When I seed him he was on the job. I knowed his face and he knowed mine. Us went together a year befo' us married. Us got married all right but there wasn't no big weddin'; just a crowd of folks come to the house to see the preacher say a little somepin over us. I has four chillun, two girls and two boys; two of 'em is in Atlanta, and two lives here with me. The girl what is home with me, her husband wants her to go live with him. I told her she wasn't gwine do it 'cause atter they married and befo' the baby was born he run off and left her."
Mamie had finished hanging out the clothes and started in the house when a large German police dog came out of a dog house and barked at her. "I Just hates this big old dog. I wish my son-in-law would come and git him," she complained. "I has to keep him chained up so he can't run off. Now, you Just go on back," she addressed the dog, "'cause you ain't gwine git none of this somepin t'eat I'se got for my hog." She picked up a market basket of bread scraps from the yard and set it on the porch.
"Miss, if you wants to talk to me you'll have to come with me in my bedroom." I followed her through the kitchen. "Come in here first I wants you to see my daughter's room. She lives in Atlanta and she is gwine move her furniture when she gits a room there."
There was a conglomeration of things in the bedroom. The room and its contents seemed clean but revealed no attempt at orderly arrangement. A walnut bedroom suite was crowded against chairs and tables of various kinds, a pink bedspread clashed with the red drapes that framed the dingy scrim curtains at the windows, and a cheap rug, of red rose pattern, added a wide splash of color.
We went back to the kitchen where a round table, surrounded by chairs in the center of the room, was easily accessible to a small wood-burning cook stove. Pots, pans, dishea, and cutlery, as well as food, were scattered around apparently at random.
We went through a narrow hall to a bathroom which was complete with tub and other conveniences. The fixtures were cheap and crude, but they were a source of pride to Mamie. She lived in a house with a bath and indoor "lavatory." "Us nurses knows the needcessity of these things and us does without other things, but us has to have our bathrooms," she declared.
The small hall also led to a room barely large enough for a battered iron single bed and an old oak dresser. "I stripped this bed this mornin'," Mamie said, "and I ain't had time to make it up yet." The mattress tick was split its full length, exposing lumps of dingy cotton. She opened another door, saying, "Come in here. This is my bedroom." In her room were two iron beds, an oak dresser, a mahogany center table with a coal-oil lamp on it, two rockers, several split-bottom chairs, and a heater. A linoleum rug of gay design was on the floor. It was a clean but untidy room.
"Have a cheer," she said, "and 'scuse me while I fixes my hair." She began combing her tangled hair straight up on her head. After several minutes of vigorous wielding of the comb, she began plaiting it in large braids over her head. Then putting on a black hat, she said, "I'm goin' to git me somepin t'eat, I can't do without food as long as you can." She returned in a short time with a plate of biscuits and stewed fruit. "I would ask you to have some of these peaches and biscuits, but I knows you wouldn't eat it. This here fruit ain't got a bit of sugar in it, 'cause I didn't have none to sweeten it with," she apologetically declared.
"No, mam, us don't own this house. Us pays $7 a month for it. Us used to pay $9 a month, but times got so tight the colored 'oman that owns it had to cut the rent 'cause us wasn't able to pay that much. All her chillun got grown and left her so she picked up went to Detroit with 'em. I couldn't 'ford to pay proper rent for no sich house as this, with a lavatory and plastered walls, I sho couldn't. I'se been livin' in it 5 years this last gone August, long enough to own it.
"Oh, my Lord! Times sho has changed. I don't know what in the name of the Lord is the matter. When you talks to folks 'bout a job, they say they have to do the best way they can to save money.
"I'se a good old Baptist. I jined up with the church when I was a girl. I don't know how old I was, but one thing sho I'se been in the church 'most nigh thirty years. I Jined up with Morton's Chapel out here in the country.
"A blind 'oman come through here onee and give a music singin' at that church. We paid 10¢ a head to hear her sing. That was the way she had to make her livin'. She said her ma had fourteen chillun, seven born with sight and seven blind. She was one of them blind ones. After the singin' was over she said the church was a great big Morton and a little bitty chapel, and that was sho what it was. The Mr. Morton that give that chapel was one grand fine man.
"Oh, I forgot to tell you 'bout one case what was a puzzle to me. It was a white lady I nursed. I reckon her time had come to die anyhow. That evenin' I went home for 'bout two hours to rest, take a bath, and put on a fresh uniform. It was four o' clock when I got back to the house. I found her lyin' on her side and they told me she had been that way every since I left. I turned her over on her back, sponged her off, and put on a fresh gown. By that time the doctor had got there, 'zamined her, and give her somethin' to make her rest. I told the fambly to stay in the next room and if I saw any change in her I would let 'em know. Her pulse was reg'lar and she was breathin' all right, all she seemed to need was rest. Well 'bout 10 o'clock that night she raised straight up in bed, expelled gas that sounded like a cannon, and fell back on the pillow dead. I 'lowed she busted somethin' inside her when that happened,--it sho beat me. I called the fambly in and told them what happened. The doctor come and left. The lady's daughter said, 'Lets wait twenty minutes befo' we calls the undertaker. Mother said be sho that she was dead befo' a undertaker was called.' 'Bout twenty minutes passed and the 'oman didn't show no signs of life, so the undertaker man was called. He come and took her away. That sho did make me feel creepy, waitin' to see if she was gwiner come back to life.
"Now I've told you all I knows 'bout the things I'se done, and I can't stay here no longer. I wants you to give me 5¢ to ride to town on the bus; I is too tired to walk.
"One thing sho, you stayed here 'til you finished what you come for without gwine to eat. That beats me; I has to have my eats on time. I knows you'se hongry. I got to go now. Thank you for this nickel."