Mrs. J. C. Jackson
194 Yonah Ave.
Athens, Georgia
December 16, 1938
C. F.
The home of Mrs. Jackson is at the edge of town, in about the highest elevation of any part of town. The house is a very comfortable six room frame building, with a large lot, shade trees and some flowers and shrubbery. Mrs. Jackson and a daughter who is a stenographer, completes her family. An apartment is rented, as all of the house is not needed by the family and it also provides a small income for Mrs. Jackson.
The following story was taken at two visits, evenings last week. On December 1, 1879, I was born in Oglethorpe county, near Arnoldsville Georgia, in Wolfskin district, about two miles south of Cherokee. Corner. I was the fourth child of a family of five children, The oldest child, a sister died when she was a baby. My father bought a small farm, and built a log house and moved there the year I was born. We only lived there a year, as they found out the neighborhood was not the kind we would want to live in. The people who lived nearest us made themselves equal with negroes and were not the kind of people our parents wanted us to be brought up with. They got the man to take tin place back and bought another place about two miles from where we were living and in a good neighborhood. All the land to be used for farming had to be cleared up and a house built. The house had one large log room with a chimney at one end and two small windows with wooden shutters and two doors. On the front was a small porch and a small bed room at one end. A long room on the back side of the big room was for a kitchen and dining room combined. They also built a corn crib and stables for the horses and cows of logs. Long rails were out and split to make pasture fences for the stock. The other four of us lived, were married and all four were windows and widower. The oldest sister died about two years ago, about eight years after the death of her husband. Chestnut wood was used for fences when they could get it. The rails were put close together and hogs, sheep, goats and geese could be kept in the same pasture with horses, mules and cows.
When the farmers had land to clear up the men would help each other roll logs, building houses, clearing up land and such things and the women would cook a good dinner at the house where they were working, which was enjoyed by all. When the corn was hauled up and put in a big pile the neighbors would come in and shuck the corn and such racing and fun they would have. When the corn was all shucked and put in the corn cribs, there was another good supper. The ladies also had spend-the-day quiltings. There were parties and square dances. If any of the boys should be drinking the other boys would take him out of the house and sec that he went home. My brother was older than I was and we would go th sociables (as they called them). I never learned to dance but I liked to try then and did not see any harm in it. We had picnice, in barbecues in the summer time and in the winter we would have sit -to- bedtime parties, Daddy always made a barrel of persimmon beer and we always had peanuts and popcorn which were cooked over hot coals in the open fire place. Father and mother would join us in our fan and I believe we were happier then than our children are now. I know we loved everybody more and lived more innocent lives.
My father hired wages hands which were paid about fifty cents and day or sometimes less. A lady who lived here until recently told me last year that her husband worked for my father for fifty cents a day and that would go lots father than several dollars would now. We all worked when we were large enough to. I can remember dropping corn and peas in the fresh plowed furrows as early as I remember going to school. My father would tell me to drop a hill of corn every time I put down my right foot. Mother would call us to come to the house if it looked like it was going to rain. I remember one time I was going to the field with My brother and sister and I called to mother and told her to call tie if it rained - and they laughed at me.
We were taught to be respectful to everyone - even the old negroes, we were taught to call Uncle and Aunt. One time my father, my brother and another bou made a shang high chicken and frightened some of the negroes. They took a mans shirt and had the box to put his feet through the sleeves and then his hands through on his fest and tied a towel over his head and fixed a point out like a chicken mill and put a pillow behind him for a tail. One negro was about to jump out of a high window.
My father had bought a large sack of sugar and set it in the room where my sister and I slept. I awoke one night and saw a negro trying to open the window and I called my father, who was soon after the intruder. The negro was one that worked for us. He dropped his hat under the window, in his rush to get away. The dogs tracked him to his house. He told father he was going to steal sugar out of dat sack. Ther went to the boys father and ask him what he wanted him to do, whip the boy or let the law have him. He told father to whip him and we didn't have any more trouble with him.
The school was a little one room log house 4A (here). We studied the blue back spelling book, reading, grammar, geography, arithmetic and writing. We would write on a slate or in a copy book. We had spelling bees and the best spellers would turn down the others. We had an hour for dinner and after eating our dinner, which we carried from home, we played games. Some of the games were base, stealing sticks and mumble peg. The one that got beat would root the peg, that is pull it out with your teeth. One day a mischevious girl pushed my head down so hard that it got my nose full of dirt. They all promised not to but it was to great a temptation for her. Our teacher would stay around with the children and there seldom ever was any trouble. One day in the time of books, this same girl gave me a pin and told me to pin two girls dresses together that was sitting close together and I did before I thought. One of the girls got up all of a sudden and their dresses were torn. I had to tell that I did it and the teacher gave me a good tall and said that she should whip me. It sure did hurt me because I had not thought before I did it how bad it would be and I don't think the other girl did either. We were taught to be honest and to tell the truth. I think we need more of that teaching now. We were taught to he courteous and respectful when older people were talking. To get up and offer older persons our chair and to be quiet and many other good things, which are sadly needed in this day of higher education. At one place I went to school we had to walk about three miles through field paths and about a mile of the way was through a thick pine woods and our parents had to make a path by blazing the trees so we would see which way to go. We had to walk a foot log across a creek and go through a pasture. One day we thought we saw a bull and we ran until we were all out of breath. We would see jack rabbits as large as a small dog we thought and we heard wild turkeys too. Nothing serious ever happened to us. Father and mother were od fearing and father would have family prayer every night and ask od to take care of us. When we were small father and mother would take us and go to church and sometimes we would go spend the day with neighbors and they would spend the day with us too.
We didn't get lots of toys then, as children do now. Our parents didn't think we needed many - thought it was wasteful and unnecessary. Once my youngest sister buried her doll in the pasture and when she thought of it and went to get the dolly the cows had stepped on her.
My parents planted a large orchard of all kinds of fruits and a strawberry patch. I know they were the best I have ever tasted. We only had school in the winter when there wasn't any farm work to do and a little while in the summer when the crops were layed by. We did not have graded schools then and only had one room and one teacher. We had good, kind teachers that we loved as we did our class mates. We read the bible the first thing in the morning and all repeated the Lord's Prayer with the teacher.
We had several kinds of yellow peaches and white and pretty pink sided ones. There were red and yellow apples horse apples and sweetning apples on the old crooked tree that grew by the garden gate. These fruit trees were not bought from nurseries as they are now. The seed were planted or sp route given by neighbors and friends were grafted at home. Everyone was ready to divide, if they had seeds and plants that their neighbors did not have. We enjoyed watermellon and cantelope as well as fruits in the summer. I'm sorry for all the children who cannot go to a watermellon patch or climb trees and gather fresh nice fruit.
My mother was a great gardener. She would have a good garden all the year. She worked it herself and would have vegetables by rotation. In the winter months there were cabbage, collards, turnip salad and onions and a much greater variety in summer with which most of us are familiar. She would save and improve (by selecting the best) her garden seed and always have plenty and enough to divide with her friends. One time green coffee had been bought which would have to be parched and ground before using and in this she found a few white cornfield shap beans. She planted the seed and raised lots of beans. I have picked enough for dinner from one vine. We lived at my childhood home until. I was nineteen years old. There never has been another place as dear to me although it was humble. We sold that place and bought another one three times as large and a larger house about twenty-five miles west of my old childhood home. It did not see the old home for over thirty years and there wasn't anything hardly left to remind me of the old home we loved so dearly.
Well in our new home we made lots of new friends and in the spring of the first year there I met my husband to be. He was walking down by the river with a big bunch of wild honeysuckles in his arms the first time I ever saw him. He told his people that I was his girl. He was with me during the summer every time that he could be. He lived in a town about eight miles below my home. It was before automobile times and he would hire a home and buggy to come to see me. He was fourteen years older than I, but I never thought of the difference in our ages. We were married at home on September 24, 1899.
We went to house keeping in one of our own little 3 room houses and my husband bought the household and kitchen furniture. He owned a store, a mill end several houses and lots and was working hard and saving all he could. I wanted to go to places and he just wanted to work and stay at home. Finally I did not worry and grieve to go and tride to please and help him. He had been real sick before we married, so he said he wanted to save enough to live on before we spent much.
We had been married quite a few years when our baby girl was born and we loved her dearly. I said I did not believe I could love another as well. In about three years a precious baby boy was born. About this time my husband built a cottage up in town near his store. It was a very hot and uncomfortable summer. We lived two doors below a whiskey dispensary, Of course my husband did not drink, but seeing people drunk and so much if the effects of it, worried me. The people that bought the whiskey would sell or pawn anything nearly to get money to buy it. We have a large family Bible they a man brought to my husband and wanted $125 for it. It was awful, the way they would go there just before the dispensary was discontinued. They would go like hogs to slop, in droves. If I got out to go any place, a policeman would have to go in front to make a way to be able to get by. I know the easier it is to get whiskey, the worse it is.
About six years later we had a large store built where we had been living and moved in a house near a creek. The children played in the sun, sand and creek and soon looked rosy and healthy. That year another little boy born to us and he was the finest and sweetest of all. He only lived fourteen months and was taken seriously ill and died in ten days. My husband, who fairly worshipped him grieved so for him until I was afraid it would affect his mind. We moved back in town, near a school so the children would not have far to go. We were all sick that spring. My husband was seriously ill and only lived ten days. I moved in the home of a friend and let the children finish that term of school. I then stored my furniture and we spent the summer with my parents.
In the fall I rented rooms on the outskirts of town near my husbands people, as they wanted me to. In October after my husband's death in March my baby girl was born. She was so tiny and sweet. When she was twenty-one months old she only weighed twenty-one pounds. People said what a pity, that she had to come after her father's death, but I did not feel that way as I knew she would be a joy to me and she was. She has always been so sweet, loving and kind, always trying to do something for me. My husband left us enough to live very well on but I denied myself everything I could and tried to educate the children and keep a home, with high tax and insurance and up keep of the property, loss and damage to property, I have lived hard and the children are taking care of themselves now. I still have a home, which could stand quite a few repairs. I am satisfied as I have done the best I could and am very thankful for what comforts I have. God has been good to me although I have suffered a lot, I know it will not be so long before I go on with my dear ones that has gone on. I am striving to be ready for that reward that the Lord has promised to them that has come through much tribulation.
Another version of "Just a Traveling, Rambling Man That Settled Down in Athens Town," entitled "The Piano Salesman," can be found on pages 1687A-1703.
Name and Places as they appear in "The Piano Salesman"	Names and Places as they appear in Just a Traveling, Rambling Man That Settled Down in Athens Town"
his employers	Flanigan and Flanigan
Boswell sisters	Stillwell sisters
Mary	Virginia
college	Alabama State College
plantations in Alabama	Freedonia, Alabama
Susan	Sallie
James Brewer	John Christian
"moved out to the west side of Texas somewhere"	Gilmer, Texas
Uncle Reuben	Uncle Putty
west Texas	Gilmer, Texas
one of mother's nieces	Mrs. J.W. Cranford
a noted criminal lawyer	Mr. J.W. Cranford
my cousin	cousin John
Abe Solomon	Sol Ward
Miss Mary Smith	Miss Corrie Griffin
John Johnson	Ben Tillman
the miller	Frank Hagood
Solomon's millpond	Ward's Mill
Matthew	Marcus
Marfa	Coleman
the proprietor	Will Griffin
partners	Flanigan and Flanigan
"moved their home office to another city"	Winder, Georgia
"I met the girl I married"	"I met the girl I married in Auburn"
one of the other men	Mr. J.W. Foster
the same employers	Flanigan and Flanigan
