Names of characters changed, but not place names.
Date of first writing: January 25, 1939
Name of person interviewed: John A. Mayo (white)
Address: Washington, N. C.
Occupation: Attorney at law
Name of writers William L. Vaughan
Name of reviser: George L. Andrews
JOSEPH MANDELL
Under the present requirements for admission to the bar in North Carolina, Joe Mandell would never have been a lawyer. Whatever success he enjoys today in his profession is due to financial difficulties, and the press of poverty during a period of panic. In 1931 at thirty-eight years of age, with a wife and two children to be provided for, he found himself in the midst of a depression, totally without property and with no certain means of livelihood.
Of this experience, he says, "In 1923, I was offered a job with a real estate firm in Asheville at $400 per month. I had just been married. For a period of five years I did well. I built a home and invested in it $3500, all my accumulations up to that time, and borrowed more than $5000 besides. It was during the Asheville real estate boom, and things were going fine. The company was making money, I liked the work, was pleasantly situated, and life went by like a song. It was a busy life. Days, and sometimes nights, were crowded with exciting deals. For a time wherever we turned our hands there were opportunities for investments with profit. We were doing business largely on a shoe-string, and we did not take the time, thought, or precaution to protect ourselves. Almost every piece of property was mortgaged. We would purchase, assuming the existing mortgage, and resell at a paper profit, then sell the papers at a large discount on our company endorsement and guarantee. Prices first rose gradually, then they 'sky-rocketed.' It was exciting. Everybody went crazy. Suddenly there came a 'slump,' followed quickly by the crash. Our sponsor withdrew his support and left the company without financial backing. Two of us tried to carry on, but the end was inevitable. No reasonable amount of money could have overcome the handicaps. It was only a matter of time, and the end came quickly.
"I emerged from it absolutely flat financially. My home and all accumulations were gone. I even lost my $10,000 Government insurance policy, from which I had unwisely borrowed all the accumulations. I lost everything I ever possessed except my good wife and children.
"I returned to Washington, N. C. where I had always lived, and started selling real estate and making loans for loan companies on home investments. I did very well for the first year, then the 'slump' struck here, and believe me it was terrible. Necessity forced me to do something to provide for myself and family. Through the generosity of a good friend Iwas given desk space In his law office, a phone without rent or charge, and his influence and encouragement. We handled commercial law and collections, and I managed to weather the storm. During 1930 and 1931 conditions were terrible again. Time hung heavy on my hands, and to keep from going crazy from enforced idleness, I began to read law. As time passed, I became impressed with the possibility of passing the bar.
"When I took the examination I passed successfully, and shortly afterwards, secured a small office and hung out my shingle--and here I am. The Lord has been good to me and helped me ever since, and I am very grateful.
"I started out in politics and was elected Judge of Recorders Court, and have held the office ever since, without opposition. I'm grateful and thankful to the good people of my county for this feeling toward me. Also I shall never forget my lawyer friend for his kindness and encouragement during what was to me one of the most trying periods of my life."
Mr. Mandell is forty-six years of age, having been born March 26, 1893, in Washington, North Carolina. He was married April 10, 1933, to Miss Martha Siler of Belhaven, North Carolina, and has three sons, ages thirteen, eleven and eight years. His father was of Irish descent and his mother German. Early in his life, his father failed in some business venture and lost everything, except a modest home in Washington which belonged to his wife. With confidence gone and ambition destroyed he was never able to come back. There were also two sisters. With income small and very uncertain, there were not even funds to pay taxes on the home, and repairs were out of the question. So it became necessary, early in his boyhood for him to stop school and begin work. Of this he says:
"The most effectual influence in, perhaps, my whole life came when I was about eleven years of age. Although I had only completed the seventh grade at school, and despite the fact that a public high school was available to me, the opportunity came to me to go in the office of Mr. E. J. Symes, a local lawyer, who had had the misfortune to lose his eyesight. My duties were varied, and for a youngster, the hours were long, the confinement close, and the responsibilities heavy. He was a lawyer of force and energy, in the prime of life, with a growing and expensive family.
"His activities suddenly halted, and the tide of his life abruptly turned in a new and untried channel, it became necessary for him to begin life over again, and build anew. Naturally he was at first helpless. His income was suddenly interrupted, and physically he was as dependant as an infant. He wanted a dependable boy to lead him about in his effort to follow his profession, to stay in his office with him, to read to him, and to write and run errands for him when necessary. He was unable to pay much, and in the beginning he was more my teacher than I was his helper.
"When I applied for the job and was called to the interview, he gave me a newspaper and told me to read. I came across the word 'certificate' and could not pronounce it distinctly, or properly accentuate it. He stopped me and taught me the correct pronunciation and accentuations, before permitting me to proceed. It made upon me a lasting impression and I shall never forget it, neither shall I ever forget him.
"Although my earnings were small, the experience and association was invaluable. It was an education the like of which couldn't have been elsewhere secured. Not only was my mind developed, but my character, habits, and general outlook on life were greatly influenced for the good by close association with this strong and determined personality. He was my friend, my employer, my teacher, and a 'Daddy' to me.
"Coming to me at a most impressionable age, the example of his grit, determination, fighting spirit, his exalted sense of human justice, his high ideals, made upon me a lasting impression and gave me a self-confidence and judgment of values I otherwise would not have gained."
He sat with his elbows on his knees, his chin in his hands, his body bent forward, and in his eyes a dreamy, far-away look. After a long silence he continued:
"I stayed with him for two years, and until his death. In the beginning I was paid seventy-five cents per week and my highest salary at the last was $1.25 a week. During that time I saved my earnings and paid the County and City taxes on our home. Ever since that time, through good or bad times, even while in foreign service in the World War, the payment of those taxes has been my first obligation. My father is dead, my mother still lives, though an invalid. My sisters are both married and have families. The old home is rented, but still in the family."
He stood up, strode back and forth across the room and continued, "I do not believe in large families for people with small incomes. Voluntary abortion, for either married or unmarried, I believe a sin. But birth control when properly practiced, under professional direction and advice, is, in my opinion, perfectly justified. In fact, I think it an evidence of improper indulgence and bad judgment for people to bring children into the world to face poverty and want. Children are entitled to the ordinary comforts and necessities, and they certainly have a right to that consideration and foresight which would reasonably assure to them such protections in advance. I certainly favor scientific birth control in all cases where professionally advised.
"My family is now as large as I can, with my present income, adequately provide for. I think it would be a great mistake, to increase it beyond that size. While my income is at present adequate, and we are able to have all necessities and many comforts, when our boys are prepared for college, it will hardly meet our needs.
"Of course I am hoping they will want a college education, and if they do we are intending to see to it that they get it. But, for that, my present income would not be sufficient, and some other arrangements would be necessary. Anyway that is a matter for the future, and I am trusting we may be able to meet it when it comes."
The Mandells live in a new home on Front Street in Washington Park, a small development on the north shore of the Pamlico River, just east of Washington. Here live in modern homes and apartments, some of Washington's best known and most prominent business, and professional men. Just across the street a short distance from them, beyond a narrow rivershore park, stretches the smooth waters of the Pamlico River. The surroundings are quiet and restful, the lawns and parks are well-kept and the trees festooned with Spanish moss. From time to time the motors of passing boats may be heard, and the flush of white sails are not infrequent.
Shortly after their return from Asheville, they moved into a rented house in Washington Park, near where they now live. It was the property of a non-resident, and one among the first homes built there. But it was in a bad state of repair, and the owner could not be induced to keep it up. Rental property there was scarce, but finally they were able to find another house, where they lived until they could build their present home, which is a two-story, square brick structure set in the middle of an ample lot facing the river, with brick garage in the rear. Well arranged, with six rooms, bath, and all modern conveniences, the house while modest is quite comfortable, very attractive and ample. Outside, the lawn is smooth and velvety, with sufficient shrubbery. The rooms are clean and tidy and show the care of a good home-maker and housekeeper. The furnishings are tasty and appropriate.
Mrs. Mandell is a graduate of Meredith College, Raleigh, North Carolina. The boys are husky and healthy, neat in appearance and well-dressed, and show good training. They attend public school regularly, where they stand well in their grades, and are known as seriously studious. The family are regular attendant at the First Presbyterian Church, and Sunday School, where Mr. Mandell is a deacon and an active member of the Men's Bible Class.
He says, "I believe religion is good for morals, and I do not believe in Sunday moving picture shows. However, I've attended Sunday pictures at times, while away on vacations, but at home I am consistent. As a church member, I attend all church meetings regularly, and contribute to the church by pledging so much money each year and strive to always meet the pledge. However, because of the very small attendance on the Sunday night services in all the Washington churches, I would favor union services at night, alternating among the different and various congregations in the city. It seems to me that attendance on church has fallen off considerably since the World War. While my children are willing attendants on sunday school and church services, and seem to enjoy it, they've been brought up thus from infancy. My wife and I have both attended regularly with them, and we've tried to teach them to like it. I am very proud of my family. My wife has always been a willing helpmate and a fond mother, and my boys are all industrious and well disciplined. Although, my early life was full of deprivation, and my father a poor manager, yet our home was a happy one. To me poverty was not a handicap, but rather served as an incentive and a spur to my ambition to do something in life and be somebody worth while.
"I am proud of my father's Irish ancestry, and by no means ashamed of my mother's German descent. So appreciative am I of my Irish blood that, while I was stationed in the north of England during my foreign service in the World War, I made a special trip up to Dublin and Belfast, and spent some days in County of Mayo. I was charmed by the Irish people. I met many of my name, but, since we cannot trace our ancestry definitely, could not of course find any direct kin."
"Did you meet any of the famed Irish beauties?" I asked.
"Yes several," he replied. "One especially I remember. She was a beauty. I saw quite a bit of her. We had considerable correspondence for awhile afterwards, and I still have her picture."
"But, what does your wife have to say a bout that? Is she, by any chance jealous?" I asked.
"By no means," he replied. "She has no reason to be. She knows she alone is the first and last.
"I have all my life, striven to overcome the handicap of limited education. And but for associations and experiences connected with my various employments, I could never have succeeded in overcoming it as much as I have. After the death of Mr. Symes, I went into a local bank where I worked for several years. My duties were varied and the experience was valuable, and gave me an insight into, and knowledge of business life as applied to banking. Then for several years I was employed as stenographer by H. S. Wills and J. D. Garth, Attorneys, where I added still further to a sort of familiarity with law and the routine of a law office. All this time I was reading certain phases of law. Then for about two years I was employed by the First National Bank, where I became Assistant Cashier, in which position I was serving when we entered the World War in April, 1917. On August following, against the advice of my employers, I resigned and enlisted in the Air Service. I was sent to Kelly Field, San Antonio, Texas, for training, and on October 23, 1917, was sent over on the British S. S. Baltic, at the same time General Pershing went over. As Master Signal Electrician and Sergeant-Major, I had quarters on the officer's deck. During the cruise, a radiogram was received on the ship to look out for subs. This information came to me, after which, while I was standing on deck looking out to sea, I saw some dark small object pop up and suddenly disappear. At first I was petrified with fear and unable to move; I thought it a periscope. When I had sufficiently recovered I reported it to an officer, and produced a big laugh. It was only a coot.
"When we were about three hundred miles out from the Irish Sea, we were picked up by two destroyers, which accompanied us in. I served as Sergeant-Major, a non-commissioned officer, in England during the balance of the War, and never went to the front.
"I remember quite vividly an incident which occurred while I was on leave at one time in London. I was stopping in Marylebome Square one night just eight blocks from Charing Cross Railroad Station, where some troops were awaiting transportation. Three German planes passed over and bombed the station, killing sixty-six soldiers. Afterwards I went down to see the results. This is as near as I came to real fighting, but I can imagine how it would have made me feel.
"Back home after thirteen months overseas service, with my family and friends, and returned 'Buddies,' I felt like 'Happy days are here again.' But my joy was short-lived, for I had no profession, to take up, and no job awaited my return. I returned to Washington from Camp Upton, New York, where I was mustered out, arriving here on December 31, 1918. No civilian can now realize the mental concern veterans went through in their readjustment to civil life, following the close of the war. Our families and friends were happy to have us back, alive and uninjured, and In that joy overlooked our anxiety for the future, and our depression from sudden enforced idleness and inactivity. For thirty days I 'loafed' and, with nothing to do, I thought I would go crazy.
"However, On February 1, 1919, I was employed by a real estate corporation here, that was very busy and on the up and up. It was the rising tide of real estate activity in this section, tobacco prices were at the top. Money was plentiful and easy to get, and every farmer had ready cash. Frugality and balanced judgment were a thing of the past. The price of farm lands shot up and anything would sell. Everybody tried to speculate, and no farmer was satisfied with his acreage. Like a beginning tornado, as time passed and as the climax approached, the thing gained momentum, and people became less guarded and more foolish. Real estate values continued to climb, until they reached unheard of prices.
"Our company was as foolish as the rest. With little real cash and available assets, we were doing business on a shoe-string. Most property handled was sold subject to one or more prior mortgages and usually the company accepted a subsequent mortgage for its profit. Often we received insufficient money to cover our cash outlay, and sometimes no cash at all. In order to get cash the company would sell its paper at a big discount and guarantee collection. It was a busy office and the time was full of excitement and thrills.
"The fall of 1919 brought the craziest, most active conditions we had experienced, and we entered the year 1920 flushed with success, and with full faith and high hopes for the future. But as the year wore on and as summer passed and the fall approached, an undercurrent of uncertainty crept in. Then in September, 1920, when the East Carolina tobacco market opened with a crash of prices, almost like a clap of thunder from a clear sky, the world went black. It was but the beginning of the end.
"While I remained with the company until the spring of 1923, our organization had dwindled, and I was about the last remaining employee. During 1921 and 1922 our activities were more in the nature of efforts to salvage the wreckage. From the fall of 1920 it was evident the company was bankrupt. Real estate activities slowed down and finally ceased, and to this day there is very little real estate market in this town and county. Although I am now a practicing attorney, I have never lost my lave for the excitement of the real estate game, and even today, now and then, I succeed in putting over some deals. Although my income today is fully as good as it was then, and certainly more secure from sudden interruption, I cannot help feeling at times that 'them were the days."
He turned to a stand at his back and handed me a picture of his wife and boys, with his home in the background.
"Of course," he continued, "my chief pride is in my family and home, and my ambition is to be able to comfortably provide for their needs, and adequately prepare them for the future, There in the picture you see all my possessions, except ray $5000 Government policy, which is all I can now carry, and our two cars. On account of the distance we live from my office it is necessary for my wife's convenience to have an extra car. For a long time we had to get along with one, but now that we can manage it we keep two. It was even necessary for us to have a car before we were able to own a home. About three years ago, I had a run of luck, made some extra money and was able to build. While the home is not entirely paid for as yet, we are well on the way, and with no change of luck, I will be able to make the grade.
"My professional and family life and associations are happy. I know of no other line of work I would now prefer, and my wife is an excellent housekeeper and a good cook. She knows all the ins and outs of balanced diet and calories, and the proper selection and preparation of meals, and we are able to have a suitable diversity of food.
"We also watch the family health, by having physical examinations at regular intervals. We have occasionally found operations necessary on myself and wife, and tonsil operations on the boys, some of which has required some short hospitalization. All this has not required an unreasonable proportion of my income, and I have had no great difficulty in meeting such expenses. My work is more or less routine, except for the usual diversity of a law office and a recorder's court hearing. I manage to get along without a stenographer. I know typing and have managed so far to do my own work. I am usually at my office by eight o'clock in the morning and always home at five in the afternoon, unless unavoidably detained. I usually spend my evenings at home with my family. But do, occasionally, go to a picture show, but by no means make it a habit. My leisure hours are spent mostly in reading--mainly law and biography. I do not go in much for fiction or stories. We now employ one servant for the housework, but my wife can do it when necessary. She did so when we were hard up. We have known by experience how to live frugally at times and liked it."
"Are you in politics, a regulation party man, or an independent," I asked.
"I am necessarily, what you might call a regulation party man. For several years I have held an elective office in a Democratic county. No Republican can under present conditions be elected. In fact, the county and congressional district have not failed to give a majority for all Democratic candidates--local and national--for some twenty years or more. Democrats scrap out their differences in the party primary and then support the nominated candidates. In the primary election, I suppose I am a sort of an organization man. My father was a Democrat and I have always been one and shall always be. So in practice I am a strict party man. I believe it is best for me and all others to support the party candidate and not the man."
"In national affairs," said I, "what do you think of the present trend?"
"I am for Roosevelt one hundred per cent, but as to the New Deal, I'm not so sure. Seems to me we should begin honestly to get away from so much overspending. As in my private life, I try to keep out of debt, so I think our National policy should make a determined effort to get back on a cash basis as soon and as rapidly as possible."
He locked his desk, reached for his hat and coat, rose to go, and said, "It's been nice to talk to you, and I've enjoyed going over old times, but it's five o'clock, Mrs. Mandell and the boys will be expecting me."
