All names have been changed
Date of first writing:	January 18, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	Jesse Powell (White)
Occupation:	Business man (Retired)
Address:	217 North Wilmington Street
Place:	Raleigh, N. C.
Name of writer:	W. B. Sedberry
Revisers:	Edwin Massengill-W. J. Sadler
No. of words:	About 4,000
TEE TOWN PEDDLER
In the living room of his boarding house sat Peter Bruton in one of the half-dozen well-arranged overstuffed chairs. The light from the reading lamp behind his chair shone on his bald head which still had a few hairs on each side. He didn't have on a coat, and his vest was unbuttoned, showing a newly laundered shirt without a collar. The gold collar button emphasized his prominent adam's apple. The right lens of his horn-rimmed glasses was cracked in three places, causing him to blink his eyes frequently.
"Go get the life history of somebody who wants his name in print," he said, when he learned the purpose of my visit. "I know some people who are always getting their names in the paper. If they can't get it in any other way they'll get drunk, or might go so far as to commit a crime, just in order to see their names on the front page of a newspaper. Personally, I don't care for my name to be in print.
"I'm in favor of this government work," he continued, abruptly changing the trend of his remarks, "even though there are a lots of people kicking about it. I've always been a Democrat. Old Man Schmidt, a New York Republican who came down here years ago and made enough money to retire on, was arguing with me the other day. He said that all the money the Government was spending now would have to be paid back sometime, and asked me how it was going to be done. I told him that I didn't worry about that because both of us were old and we wouldn't have to do it. Then he said that our children would have to pay it; but I said that didn't worry me either because I haven't got any children, and I'm not expecting any this late in life.
"You know, I don't think the Republicans have any reason to kick about the Roosevelt Administration. In my home town of Hickerson, I know three Republicans who have big paying jobs with the Government, and there's plenty more here and in Washington and other places. I don't remember the Republicans ever giving a Democrat anything. Those Republicans I spoke about in Hickerson are good friends of mine and we kid each other a lot. They say they're Democrats now that they've got good jobs, but I don't know about that. You can't tell how they vote. They said they got their dose of the Republicans during Hoover's term, and I told them it sure did take a big dose to cure them.
"If I expected to get a government job, I'd have to go back to Hickerson, I reckon. I used to have some political pull in Vicks County. If the Government couldn't give me a job as big or bigger than the jobs they gave my three Republican friends I wouldn't have one, because they've always been Republicans and I've always been a Democrat. All my people were Democrats, and I'm not going to break down a family tradition like that. I remember hearing about how the Republicans treated the South when they were in power, and it would just make hell hotter if I voted for them.
"My daddy was treasurer of Vicks County for eight years and sheriff of the county for twenty-one years. He was beaten in only two elections. I remember when everything else would go Republican, but Daddy would always be elected on the Democratic ticket. Somebody asked me once whether he was mean and crooked or just too good. They said nobody could hold a public office that long unless he was one or the other. The way it was is that we just did a lot of hard work for him and spent a lot of money. I'd go around the side of a Negro house and hand out money. That's the way to get votes. You know, certain types of people have to be paid. I've given away gallons of whiskey, and I've even had to drink with some of the people I gave it to, but if it'd get votes that was what I was supposed to do.
"My daddy was as good to his children as anybody's and he was a smart man, too. When he died he left $5,000 to each one of his children. He had to be smart for he had seven children, four boys and three girls. I think that was good for a man to save that much when money was so scarce. In those days they didn't pay big salaries like they do now.
He would often say that he didn't have such a good education but he was going to give all of his children all the education they wanted. Five went to college. My younger brother and myself wouldn't go to college, like fools.
"All of us were taught by private tutors, and I went to the academy in Hickerson for awhile. It was a three-room academy, run by a Mr. and Mrs. Doggett. I learned a little at the academy, but I learned more from Mrs. Bagwell, who had a school in her home. She had left her husband because of his trifling ways, and she was teaching school for a living. She had a little oak stool she put between her knees for me to sit on and recite my lessons. She kept a twelve- inch hickory stick, and she wouldn't fail to crack me over the head with it when I didn't know my lessons, or when I misbehaved.
"Public schools at that time were not very good. They were mostly for the lower and poorer classes of children. Many of them would have lice and itch, and most of them were just plain dirty. I got tired of going to school to Mrs. Bagwell and went to a School run by a Mr. Pilkington. They were all about the same. I only had one book to study. It looked like he didn't enjoy but one thing and that was whipping me. He sure did make a good job of it for he raised blue welts on me many times. I quit school soon after that and went to work.
"My brother had finished college, am he accepted a job in the bank in Hickerson. He made $40 a month which was good money in those days. In fact, people were talking about how much money he was making and how well he was doing to be such a young fellow. Well, I stepped out and got me six drays and started picking up laundry. I made $40 a month at least on that, and on the side I had the agency for two New York papers and made money on those. I know I made more money than my brother in the bank. It didn't look like it to the people, so they never talked much about how well I was doing. But I didn't care about that. I was my own boss and had eight people working for me, and I was sitting back drawing in the money.
"I went in the wholesale business with my brother. We handled heavy feedstuff, groceries, and tobaccos. We had a capital of about $10,000 and a good reputation; so we could get all the credit we needed. And we did a big credit business. We worked approximately a fifty mile radius around Hickerson. There was not so many trucks and cars running all over the country then peddling merchandise. In those days a reliable firm like ours could get an order for enough stuff to last a man for a month. Now the dealers know somebody else will be by tomorrow so he only buys a one or two-day supply. I used to sell any little buyer 1,000 Cinco cigars at $40. They cost me $35--that is just one example. Try and sell a retailer today 1,000 cigars and he will think you have gone crazy. Of course," continued Bruton, "the long profit was not in cigars or any kind of tobaccos, but in the feedstuff. I remember one unusual item we had--it was apple cider. We made more than fifty per cent profit on that and for a long time it sold well. The dealers would punch holes in the keg so air could get into the cider and set it up until it would get hard and sell it by the drink. They made 200 per cent profit, I reckon," I laughed Bruton, "that stuff had a real kick in it. I've seen many a days' business when we had cleared $300 profits.
"Naturally being a young fellow and making plenty money, I did quite a bit of running around the country with girls, just having a good time. But I was really serious about Sally, my wife. She lived out from Hokeson and it was so far for me to drive my horse to see her that I had to go on the train. That kind of handicapped me for I couldn't get over there as much as I wanted to. She had plenty of other fellows going to see her, but I just out-talked them all and persuaded her to marry me. We took a short honeymoon and came back home so I could continue to look after my business.
"I told Sally she could have built just the kind of house she wanted on a piece of property I already owned just a little ways out of Hickerson. She wanted a small bungalow and that's what we built. That left plenty of ground for a garden and a large front yard. I planted grass in the yard and let my horse graze out there. We had a car then but I couldn't sell my horse. I loved her even though she was too old to drive, so I just kept her. Why, that horse loved Sally more than anything. In the summer when Sally would sit on the porch, she would go up and lay her head right in Sally's lap. I had a picture taken of that and the house, too, but when we moved here I lost it."
Just at this time a short and fat lady walked in the room. Her face was round and her cheeks rosy. It was Sally, his wife. Smiling, she said, "You know good and well that you wrote me every day for months, begging me to marry you, and the nights you didn't come to see me you called me long distance and talked dollars' worth at the time. I don't know what you would do without me. I should have taken the advice of my mother and father and never married you. You know they didn't want me to marry you."
"Come now," said Bruton, "you know they were afraid I wasn't going to take you off of their hands. Why, they even threatened me several times." Bruton laughed, seeing he was teasing his wife.
Bruton excused himself, and after he left the room she continued:
"That is true about the horse and our home. We were getting along fine then, but our downfall came in 1929. The business failed. Peter went in business again. Well, he will tell you about that, for he just loves to talk. Since he hasn't got a job he don't do anything else but talk. My father and mother really was opposed to my marrying him, but I thought I knew more than my parents.
"My mother and father are both living. They live on, their own farm six miles out from Hokeson. My mother has been an invalid for twelve years and we have had to keep a nurse with her all the time. I don't get a chance to go to see her very often. One of my boarders carried me over there last Christmas and I spent the day with them, but I had to be back that night to look after my house.
"Two weeks before Christmas we had to send Mother to Carlton Hospital. In fact, my sister was there at the time and she telephoned me that the doctor didn't expect Mother to live two days. But the doctors at Carlton are pretty good, and Mother started improving the first day she was there. She was so dissatisfied over being away from home on Christmas that the doctors let us bring her home Christmas Eve. They said it was just a matter of time before she'd have to go, and that they could help her only temporarily.
"Just yesterday I had a letter from my sister, telling me that Daddy was down flat with arthritis--that disease that makes big knots swell up on your legs and body. He's been troubled with it before but would get better and be able to do a little work around the farm. It sure is a wonder I'm not dead. You can see what a handicap I'm working under. Every day I wonder if I'll get a call that other is dead or that Daddy isn't expected to live, and I can't get away to go see them. You see," she said, "I have to see this house is run right, and meals served on time. Peter don't know how to do a thing around here but talk."
While Sally talked she emptied ashtrays. The room was very neat, with no evidence of dust or dirt. The rug on the floor looked as if it had just been cleaned. The room was warm, but Peter could be heard shoveling more coal into the furnace.
"With the high cost of coal, food, and other things, it looks like I'm going to have to go up on my board," Sally said. "I get only $30 a month from the people upstairs. If you'd like to I'll show you; I've got to go up and see how everything looks up there. I have some vacancies now, and to come out on this house at the prices I charge, I'm bound to fill all my space.
"These are nice large rooms," she said. "There's plenty of space in them for three people. You can see that I have three single beds in here, and then it isn't crowded because the room is so large. Each room also has a nice large closet.
"The man who rooms in here is a nice man. He has been boarding with me for three years. He's an insurance man. This front room is where Mr. and Mrs. Janney stay. They are very congenial people and have two cute little girls. Mrs. Janney works for the WPA and her husband is another insurance man. I give them a special rate on account of the two children.
"This room across the hall is vacant. I've got to advertise it in the paper, I reckon. These beds are practically new, see, and just as good as I can buy. The bath is at the back of the hall. We also have a bathroom downstairs. It connects with the front room, so I get more for that room, because the bath is used only by whoever rents the front room.
"The trouble with advertising room and board in the newspapers is that lots of people just call up and bother you. Someone called up the last time I ran an ad and asked if the room had a private bath. It old him it was private when he got in and locked the door. I was just tired of answering all such questions.
"I have as good a Negro maid as anybody can have, but you can't trust any of them too far. So I come up here and look around to see that the rooms are cleaned up properly. Now, you can see where my time goes to. Here it's almost dinnertime. I have to supervise all the cooking. I don't get a minute to read the morning paper until after supper."
Her husband came in and said, "I wonder, Sally, if you'll let me have a cup of that delicious coffee you can make? My breakfast didn't quite suit me."
"You know my rules, "she replied, "nothing after eight-thirty. But I'll break over to you as usual. I'll declare, I certainly am spoiling you. You all sit down at the table and the one that spills anything on the tablecloth has got to give me a dime to get it cleaned."
The table was long and had eighteen chairs sitting around it. Sally went out and returned with a four-quart enamel coffeepot. "Do you want some toast or anything else?" she asked her husband.
After declining the offer, Bruton said:
"You see, I have diabetes, and have to watch my diet very closely. With the variety that my wife serves, though, I can always get the foods that I want and those that don't hurt me. When you have diabetes you have to watch your weight and stay heavy enough to throw off the sugar. A few years ago there was a man in Hickerson who died from diabetes. He was so thin he looked like a walking skeleton. I've seen him stop on the street, pull out a hypodermic syringe and take a shot of insulin. He had holes all over his legs and arms where he had had to shoot that in him to stay alive. Insulin won't cure you but it'll keep you alive and able to be about. I have to take a certain amount of exercise. You can't take any alcoholic drinks, with diabetes. Even a glass of beer will make mine lots worse. I just have to leave it all off. I reckon I drank my share when I was a youngster, anyway. Everytime I failed in a job or business, it wasn't depression or anything like that, it was whiskey in the eyes of the public. I don't care what you do, if you're a drinking man and fail it is laid to the whiskey you drank.
"As I started to tell you, for my outdoor exercise I'd get something to peddle from door to door. I just walk from place to place trying to get enough money to pay my expenses. That gave me good outdoor exercise. I made money on a cleaning preparation I had. But not enough to pay peddler's license and they got so hot on me in Hokeson I just quit. Another thing I peddled was headache powders. They were hard to sell because they weren't advertised as much as B. C. powders and everybody just naturally asked for B. C. I'd offer the merchant twenty per cent more profit on mine and show him the formula on the package was identically the same as B. C., but, it seems like to me, the independent merchants of today are too lazy to even recommend something they can make a profit on.
"As I told you, I was in the wholesale business. Well, the depression of 1929 got me as well as hundreds of other people. By then the chain grocery stores were moving in the towns we were in. The independent merchants didn't have any cash to amount to anything. The farmers were not getting enough cash for their crops to even pay their fertilizer bills. Well, we were carrying the retailers and they couldn't pay us. So we went out of business.
"I then moved down the street a few doors and opened up a retail grocery. I was doing a big credit business, and just as soon as a spotter for the chain stores saw I was doing business, they leased the store right next to me. I couldn't compete with their prices. I'll tell you, they sold inferior merchandise and would short-weight the people, too. But they seemed to like it. They'd come to my store when they didn't have the money to pay for their stuff, and when they had money they'd go to the chain store and pay cash to get cheated. They ran me out of business.
"I decided to try and get a job with a chain store. I went to see a chain shoe store and carried five letters of recommendation. They first said they could use me, but when they asked my age and I said thirty-six they said I was too old to work for them. The manager said the company wouldn't let him hire anybody over thirty years old.
"I finally got a job with an industrial insurance company. I was field man for them, and I made enough money to make ends meet and keep up the payments on our house. I was transferred here nine years ago and I've been here ever since. Soon after I came here, the home office cut off fifty per cent of the field men. That cut me off. But I didn't care so much as I'd been working like a dog fifteen and sixteen hours a day. I then tried collecting a debit.
"Let me tell you, this working a debit for an industrial insurance company is nothing. They don't pay enough to keep your old pants patched. Don't let them fool you. I've seen them come right in this house and sit at the table and tell you how much they were making, and then have to back out of the door to keep us from seeing a hole in their pants. I know that business from one end to the other. They'll give you a debit to collect, and you'll start out and can't collect. Well, they won't let you mark it off until you've written enough new business to take the place of that you mark off. That comes out of your pocket if you haven't written that new business. When the end of the week comes you've made between $15 and $20.
"Anybody that can get a job anywhere else in the world will not take an insurance debit. Why, I've eaten in a Negro's house many times--just so hard up I couldn't afford to buy lunch. My boss was with me one day, and an old Negro customer of mine had cooked a chicken for her son who was coming home after an absence of several years. We smelled the chicken cooking and she asked us to have some. Honestly, he like to have eaten the whole chicken. The old Negro told me he ate more than any white man she'd ever seen. I couldn't make any money but my wife couldn't see why. She learned to check my book and then she learned why. I was offered jobs with two companies, but they were no better than the one I had. So I just didn't take them.
"I wish now I'd taken advantage of the college education my daddy offered me and studied medicine. A profession today is the only way a man can make money. I think the doctors have the easiest life of any of them. They just have to know a little Latin and they start out practicing on the public. I wouldn't be surprised if they didn't kill a lot of people. I remember one time a druggist asked me to look out for the front of his drug store for him, and if a prescription came in to call his brother upstairs and he'd come down and fill it. Well, sure enough, a man came in with a prescription and I called the druggist's brother. I was standing there watching him and a funny expression came on his face. He told me that the prescription would kill anybody. Then he asked me to stall the man until he could get the doctor to change it. I told the man it would take quite awhile to fill it and to come back later. When the druggist got the doctor on the phone he was drunk. The doctor told him to fill it exactly as it was written. The druggist refused and they got mad and had quite an argument. After three days the doctor got sober and came down and thanked the druggist and apologized. But that's the way it goes. Suppose that druggist hadn't been right on the job; somebody would have been killed and nothing said about it.
"I didn't go to the War because I had a pull with a doctor. You see, my brothers went and I thought some of us ought to stay home and look after things, so I just got this friend of mine who was a doctor to tell them that I wasn't able. You know, today I'm not, physically fit to stand an examination for an insurance policy, but three out of four doctors right here in this town passed me. When I was selling insurance my boss was in town and sold my barber a policy. I told him that the barber had heart trouble and wasn't a good risk. He told me to let the doctor decide that. I collected only fifty cents from him. As I was going to work two months later somebody told me he had been found dead in his own barber chair. So I think all the doctors are after is the almighty dollar.
"I don't have any children but if I did I'd make every one of them be a doctor. If they said they didn't want to be doctors I'd get me a stick and beat them until they decided they did want to. Children are all right and I don't know why I never had any. I sometimes wish I had two or three. All my brothers and sisters have anywhere from two to five. I don't know why, but for some reason the stork never came to my house. I reckon it's best, the way things have turned out for me. When I was transferred here I had to give up my home in Hickerson after having it nearly paid for.
"I've always tried to live right. I'm a member of the Methodist Protestant Church in Hickerson and keep my church dues paid up. I reckon if we had a Methodist Protestant Church here I'd go to church more often, but, as it is, I don't ever go. My wife was a Baptist before we were married, but she joined my church. We listen to the sermons on the radio every Sunday. I have to turn it on loud enough so she can hear it in the kitchen, for she spends most of her time back there.
"Well, after all, I've tried to live a clean life. I've made money and I've lost money; I've drank an awful lot of whiskey in my day and I've stayed sober. My wife has worked hard for the last few years but one of these days I'm going to get another break and repay her for the trouble of looking after me now."
<text not clear>
