Life Histories
S. Brill
117-119 N. Poindexter Street
Merchant, Jewish Native of Russia
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Writer, W. O. Saunders
Elizabeth City, N. C.
As Told To W. O. Saunders
I am a Jew--a Russian Jew by birth and accident. I am an American by my own choice. And I like it. I have lived in three countries; Russia, Germany and America All have been good to me; I have found people about the same in all these lands; but it is America that I like best, because there is something about this country and its people that makes me feel at home.
I am 60 years old now. I came to this country in 1905 with $2.00 in my pockets. In 1931 I was worth a hundred thousand dollars. In 1932 the Depression got me and I was back where I started. But I am not complaining. I have my wife, my Children, a lot of friends, a home to go to and my health. Why should I complain? I ask you!
I was born in a little town in Russia--in 1879. My father was a contractor. He was a specialist in building sugar factories. He was well fixed. But once he took a contract to build a factory and put all the machinery in it. He knew how to build. He had had little experience with machinery. This job broke him. His health failed from strain and worry. He died when I was 12 years old, leaving my mother with eight Children, of which I was the youngest. We had no money--nothing.
I went to work when I was 12 years old; worked for a sister and her husband who had a small store. My sister did not treat me right; I decided to run away. I went to Odessa.
How did I get to Odessa? Odessa was 300 miles away. I had no money--not a cent. I bummed my way. I went down to the railroad station and slipped into a coach on a train bound for Odessa, concealing myself under a seat. I was a little fellow.
About midnight a passenger on the seat, who had discovered me, told me that the conductor was coming through the train to look for hidden passengers, I scrambled out from under the seat, went outside and climbed up on the roof of the coach. That way I found myself at a junction just outside Odessa some time next morning. I got off at the junction, because if I had stayed on the train until it got to the station I would have been discovered.
My face was black with soot and my clothes full of cinders. I must have looked like a nigger. I knew nothing about Odessa; knew nothing much about anything. But when I got in town I started walking up a street. One street seemed as good as another.
I had walked many blocks up this street when a woman standing in the doorway of a little store called to me. She wanted to know where I came from and what I was doing in Odessa. I told her how I had run away from home, told her of my trip on the train. She asked me if I had any relatives in Odessa? Did I have any money?
When I told her I knew no one in Odessa and had no money, she asked me to come into her kitchen, which was in back of the store.
I followed her into the kitchen; she placed a basin of water and a towel before me and told me to wash up. She brought me a clean shirt; it was one of her husband's shirts and too large for me; but it was a clean shirt. She gave me breakfast and she brushed the cinders out of my clothes.
All the time she had been asking me questions until she had learned about everything that could be known about me. I had told her that I had come to Odessa to look for look and she offered me a job in her store at six rubles a week.
My job was to stand in the door or on the sidewalk and persuade customers to come into the store. I wasn't such a bad looking boy and I had good manners. I made good at my job. I worked for this woman for three years and when I left her she was paying me 75 rubles a month. That was good money in the old country in those days, but I earned it. And I'll tell you how I earned it.
There was a market space near the store where members of a large Bulgarian colony near Odessa used to bring their produce to offer for sale to the city people. It wasn't long before I learned their language. Members of a German colony near the city also came to this market place. I learned to speak German. Soon I could call to a German or a Bulgarian in his own language and tell him to come into our store and see the bargains we had today. I would hail a Bulgarian in his own language, "Kulaka," meaning come here. He liked it. I made friends with those Bulgarian and German farmers and got their trade.
I was 15 years old now and got a job in another store at 100 rubles a month. When I was 21 years old I had saved up 300 rubles. And then I was the age to serve in the army. But I didn't want to go in the army. I took my savings and bought my way out. I had learned that payment of 200 rubles for a doctor's certificate of disability and 100 rubles to the enlistment officer was what it took to keep out of the army. The doctor's certificate was only for one year. Every year I had to pay 200 rubles for a new certificate and slip the enlistment officer another 100 rubles. But it was worth it, and I was making money.
A friend had told me that I should go in business for myself. He said I should go in the junk business. But it wasn't exactly a junk business he meant. Taking his advice I learned my way among the inporters' off ices on the waterfront where there were always samples, damaged goods or rejected shipments to be picked up. Sometimes it was a lot of lace. Again it might be a lot of farming tools. Once they built a grain elevator and when the great length of conveyer belt came for it, they found it about a quarter of an inch too narrow--just enough too narrow to let the grain sift through. They had to sell that belt. Nobody wanted it; I bought it at my own price and sold it for a nice profit. How did I do it? I cut it up into assorted widths that could be used almost any place belting was used, and found a ready market for it.
Another time there was a big fire in a sugar mill. The owners asked for bidders for the wreckage. It was a condition of the sale that the buyer should remove all the rubbish and clear the site by a certain date. The owners also agreed to buy any of the salvaged brick for the inside walls of their new building if the buyer would clean them up.
Another young fellow and myself bought the ruins for 2000 rubles. It looked like a pile of bricks big enough to build a small town. When we had got far enough ahead in removing the bricks, we found that most of the machinery had suffered but little actual damage from fire, water and fallen walls. The owners tried to claim the machinery, but our contract was plain and, after a lot of argument, the owners paid us 5000 rubles for the machinery. We made about 6000 rubles on that deal. What did we do with the money?
Well, me and my partner were young and wild as rabbits. We went to Vienna, we went to Paris, blew the money in on women and high living, and came back broke. That was before I had married and settled down.
I married in 1905 and made a lot of money after I married. My wife was a great help. And then the pogroms broke out in Russia and my wife was frightened. She lived in constant terror. We fled to Germany, leaving all our property behind. When we landed in Germany I had 10 rubles in my pockets.
I could speak a little German, but not enough to get a job in a store. I had never learned a trade. Things didn't look so good for me, but before my last ruble was spent I got a job in a cigarette factory. They didn't have cigarette machines in those days. Cigarettes were rolled by hand. Cigarettes were in great demand and some of the factories employed 200 or 300 men and women bench workers. It took me three days to learn to make cigarettes and my pay was 22 marks a week. A mark was then worth about 24 cents in American money. We paid six marks a week for a room. We could live on that.
There was no feeling against the Jews in Germany then. In fact, I never went among Jewish people to look for a job. My employer was a German.
But Russia was not far away. My wife did not speak the German language. She was unhappy. Unknown to me she planned that we should come to America.
My wife had a relative in Norfolk, Virginia. She wrote to him and asked him to send us tickets to come to America. The tickets cost $16 apiece. We had lived only eight months in Germany. We came third class, or maybe you call it steerage. The tickets included bed and food. We slept on bunks with mattress and pillows and enough covering, but the food was not so good. The trip consumed 16 days from Bremen to Norfolk. The ship served two kinds of food, one for Jews and one for Gentiles. They gave us Jews mostly salt fish and potatoes; the Gentiles got pork and beans.
I shall never forget the morning we landed in Norfolk. I had two dollars in my pocket, a little trunk and some other luggage. I could speak no English. But I had a writ-address of my wife's cousin. I showed it to a Negro drayman on the steamer wharf. He piled our luggage into his wagon and we climbed in with it. Sitting on our luggage in the wagon we rode up to the house where the in-law lived.
In Norfolk my in-law gave me a job in his store, tending the furnace, sweeping floors, washing windows and general handy man. It was a year or more before I learned enough English to go behind a counter. And then I had my troubles. I remember one day a woman came in and wanted a half yard of piece goods. Half sounded so much like our Russian word elphen that I began to measure off eleven yards. A Mr. Silverman was in the store and came over to the counter and told me the lady wanted only half a yard. I was speechless.
My wife's cousin paid me six dollars a week. We could live on that. A pound of steak cost us only 16 cents in those days, and the butcher threw in a piece of liver and some soup bones. We would have the liver for breakfast, soup for lunch and steak for supper.
After working for my in-law for three years, I had saved up $290. I decided to go in business for myself. I rented a small store and stocked it with groceries. I was learning to speak English without using my hands and shoulders, but not making much money--maybe fifteen or twenty dollars a week. And then one day I ran into an old friend who asked me what I was doing. I told him about my grocery business.
"You are in the wrong kind of business," he said. And then he told me that I should get into the jobbing business, buying up bankrupt stocks, fire damaged goods and odds and ends of unwanted stocks in the larger stores. I decided to take his advice and sold out my grocery business. A funny thing; I had put exactly $190 into the business and $190 was exactly the price I got for it.
There was a stock of bankrupt goods to be sold in Suffolk, Virginia, only a few miles away. I bought a ticket to Suffolk, looked at the goods but decided not to buy. A few days later I went to one of the larger merchants in Norfolk and asked him if he had any discontinued lines he wished to sell cheap. He took me to the top floor and showed me a rack of women's coats that were out of style and told me I could have the lot at $2 each. There were 40 of them. I took them home and that night I called in a woman who ran a cheap coat and dress shop in a cheap neighborhood. She paid me $160 for the lot.
I made good in the jobbing business. After 20 years in America I had saved up $60,000 to $75,000. I should have stuck to this business maybe. But I had an opportunity to share in an investment in a bankrupt store in Scotland Neck. My partner and I made over $3,000 in that store the first season. And then I bought him out and ran the store myself for nearly three years. Eight months in the year I kept the store open only on Saturdays. Other days I was back in Norfolk or on the road, looking after my jobbing business. I liked the town, the store was a money maker. But things were booming in Norfolk in 1929 and, tired of traveling and wanting to settle down at home, I let one of my sons have the Scotland Neck store and I opened a big store in Norfolk with a branch store in the town across the river. I considered myself worth a hundred thousand dollars then. And then everything went to smash and I lost everything.
But I didn't give up. I had my health, I had my family, lots of friends and some credit left. I came to the town where I now live in 1933 and started business again in a small way. It hasn't been easy going, but I can always tighten my belt. For a time I lived at a hotel; but I found I could be quite as comfortable by fixing up a bed room and a kitchenette by partitioning off the back room in my store. I prepare most of my meals. I like it here, because when I get tired of an afternoon I can slip into my room and rest or take a nap maybe. I go home every Saturday night and come back Monday morning. I don't always enjoy the trips home; the family always fixes up some place to go and usually there is too much to eat. I'm sixty years old now and can't take it like when I was a younger man.
How do I like America? I like it fine; the people over here have always been kind and friendly to me. I have never been insulted but once in my life. That time it was like this. I was running my little store in Scotland Neck when a fresh young man strolled in one day and began to make funny faces and talk like a comic Jew on the stage. When I made no reply to him he used dirty and insulting language. I was in the shoe department and I picked up a shoe stretcher and gave him a crack over the head. He fell out. When he picked himself up I showed him the way out of the store.
That night his father, a prominent man in the town, came to me in a downtown drug store and said to me: "Do you know what you did to my son?"
I told him that I knew very well what I did to his son and that if he ever came into my store to insult me again I probably would kill him. The man might have attacked me, but about that time a prominent citizen stepped up and said to the man: "Your son was in the wrong; Mr. ---- (that's me) has been here two years now, we all know him; he is a good citizen, minds his own business and your son would have had to say a lot to provoke him." The man turned and walked away. The incident was never mentioned again. I have only one life to live; I have tried to live that life straight and clean. I pay my taxes, I pay my bills, I never take an unfair profit, I give to every appeal for charity. I am not used to insults and I do not know how to take them.
Sure, I like America; it is a fine country; it would be a better country if everybody who say they believe in God and Jesus would practice the things they say they believe. For myself I haven't much what you call religion; I have seen too much and read too much. But my wife still holds to her old faith. She says to me, you must not mix milk foods with meat foods. I say to her, "You're right, Mama." I respect her faith; I respect any man's honest beliefs. But I have no use, personally, you understand, for a religion that tells me that I shall not drink from a bottle of wine that is touched by the hand of a gentile. Some of the old Jews still hold to beliefs like that. I don't like that and I don't like these old fellows with their long curly beards and unwashed bodies. One of them comes in my place begging for the synagogue; I say to him, "trim those dirty whiskers and clean yourself up and I'll give you five dollars; but as you are I give you only fifty cents." I can't blame gentiles not liking all Jews; I don't like some of them myself. But there are a lot of disagreeable people in the world besides fanatical Jews. How about Hitler and Mussolini? Let me tell you this: I would want only one more hour to live for the privilege of killing that dog Hitler; I have only one life to live and I'm not anxious to die, but I would die happy if I could have the pleasure of ridding the world of that mad dog of Germany. He is persecuting the Jews now; when he has robbed them of all their savings he will begin to pick on the Catholics. There can be no peace on earth and no relief from the taxes we pay for armies, battleships and fighting planes so long as Hitler and Mussolini are loose in the world. I am a Jew, yes, but I am a man first and an American citizen who believes in fair play, in honest industry and good citizenship.
