(FORM A) (Circumstances of interview)
(State) Louisiana.
(Name of worker) Jeanne deLavigne Scott.
(Address) 624 Canal Dank Bldg.
(Date) 12 December 1938.
1. (Name& address of informant) …Bernard Trondle, 335 Chartres St., New Orleans, La.
2. (Date and time of interview) … 12 December 1938 : 9 to 10:30 a.m.
3. (Place of interview) … Cabinet-making and antique shop of Trondle, 335 chartresSt.
4 - 5 …
6. (Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.):
Trondle’s shop is in one of the very old buildings of theVieux Carre. It is crammed to bursting with old furniture, which looks as though it had not been touched for a century. Dust is everywhere --- that fine, brownish dust which settles on all things old and quiet. Trondle moves among all these things as though he were made of thesame ancient materials, brown with fine, clean dust himself, his shoulders bent as though over his work-bench, his deep-set eyes fringed thickly with whitened lashes, his knotted hands moving over some bit of smooth old wood like friends nodding to cronies in passing.
He chews tobacco --- quietly, sparingly, economically, but a drop or two of liquid escapes at the corners of his mouth and tinges his white moustache here and there. His hair is a thatch of white interspersed with black.His feet move slowly, his thoughts busier than his legs. He stands for long intervals, thinking, smiling a bit whimsically, recalling this and that, and declaring that so much has happened in his cabinet shop that the half never could be told.
He pets his two cats --- immensely fond of them, he is. One is lustrous black with a few white spots --- plump and sleek and friendly, yet duly coy; that'sButs, and he is nine years old. The other one is Pete; he is mostly white, equally plump and friendly, but addicted to deep sleep and lots of it. Trondle caresses then proudly, telling how he took in Pete, o small bedraggled kitten, from the street and tamed him --- with shrimp, apparently.He dwells at length upon the vast delight which shrimp afford the innards of all cats.He admits that the cats occupy his most comfortable chair at all times --- the chair that he has placed near the door, so that he can rest between-times and conveniently peer out at passers-by and speak to those who are friends.
He admits that he stands, rather than disturb the smug felines --- stands on legs which occasionally suffer from rheumatic twinges, and which are crooked like his shoulders and arms.The cats are so precious, so contented, so very necessary to his day.When they are cold, he shivers forthem, tucking then away in blankets upstairs where he lives.They must have milk then, freshly warmed, and brought to them so they need not get chilled. That Trondle gets chilled is of no consequence. There is dust enough to keep him warm.
He moves about amid his ancient chairs, his dismembered clocks (he says clocks do not sell, but he buys them constantly because he likes them), his ragged cobwebs, his cloudy windows crowded with old furniture and bits of material. His tools lie here and there, but the disorder is part of his habit and does not interfere with his ability to find anything at will.
The old shop, cluttered as it is, runs back and back. Somewhere,away at the rear, a staircase rises from the midst of cabinets and bureaus and tables and whatnots. It rises to the second story, where Trondle lives.He is unmarried. His family consists but of himself and his two cats. He is sixty-nine years old this day --- the twelfth, of December, 1938. His father, born in Germany, came to this country a few years before the War Between the States, and taught Trondle all he knows about cabinet making. "I grew up in it," Trondle says, straightening his shoulders. He himself was born in New Orleans, and after his father died kept on with the shop, making furniture and dealing in antiques.
He stands as he chats --- for the cats sleep in his chair. Drawings litter a table --- beautiful, precise drawings, showing carved table-legs and such. It does not seem possible that any human being could penetrate the jungle of brown wood within --- all manner of things, in all stages of disrepair. They are at once his stock and his material.His life hasbeen packed with little incidents, which have grown like trees until they make up his pleasant days in these slower years. The whole place it dingy, with a pleasant dinginess --- it is his background, peopled with all those who have entered and talked and touched his industry and his creations. They come back to him, time and again, but only as memories. They went away and never came back.
And it is of these he talks, the smile settling at the corners of his kindly mouth, along with the brown of tobacco and the stubby white moustache. But the plump cats --- they do not go away. They are anchored, even as is Trondle, to the mass of nondescript brown furniture and the room upstairs, and the days during which they dream blissfully of many things unutterable. The court House is a half-square away, rising majestically like a mammoth white bathtub.But Trondle is as far away from the Court House as life is from death. The court House is of today. Trondle lives with yesterday, making it alive and wonderful, as youth lives with tomorrow.
(Text of interview : Unedited) ……
Oh yes, I can remember a lot of queer things. Queer things. There are always queer things happening, and nobody knows why. I remember there were two woman came. One was looking for a bureau just a little larger than a washstand, with columns above and below, she said. She had been looking for it for the last fifteen years, she said. So I says, "I just got one like that that you're looking for," I says. "Where is it at?Where is it at?" she cries out. "It's upstairs," I says. "How do you get upstairs?" she says, as though she never could get up there quick enough. So I brought her upstairs, and she stood right in front of the little bureau, "Here it is," I says, "just like you'vebeen wanting for fifteen years." And I thought I had the very thing. "Well, well, well.'" she says, short of breath. "I never thought I would be able to find one like that --- I never did think it! Well, well, well!" She looked it all over, like she'd never soon the beat of it. And then she walked away and downstairs and didn't even price it. I was astonished --- dumfounded. I couldn’t even speak. But she walked down the stairs and off she went. That was ten or twelve years ago. It was queer, like a lot of things. She looked like fifty years old, short in stature. And I never saw her before or since. Queer.
There was a woman who came in with a little boy, her son he was. She began pricing this and that, a number of things. The little boy kept talking; "Mamma," he says, "Mamma, you can't buy that!” I didn't understand whether she didn't have time to buy, or maybe she was already crowdedwith furniture, or what. I ignored him, but I didn’t know why he should act so. And she kept on pricing and pricing, and he kept repeating."Mamma, mamma, you can't buy that!” And she still kept on pricing and pricing, and he kept up, "Mamma, you can't buy that," and she kept on pricing again. "Mamma, you can't buy that --- you got no MONEY!" the boy screamed at her, and pulled at her dress. She went kind of grinned, and I kept on grinning, too. She went right on pricing things, and then she left. That was about ten years ago, something like that, and I've never seen her since, Queer, you would think.
There was a young woman about four-five years ago. She cane in looking for a mahogany mirror frame. She told me just how she wanted it. What shape and all, and something about how it should be carved. Well, I showed her one that was just the size and ever thing like she said. She looked at it as though she wanted to eat it, and then she asked me if I didn’t have a pair like that. Just a pair. I told her no. All odd ones I got, no two alike, and that was all I had. She says, "But this is just like I wanted, if you only had a pair.I would take the pair of them." I wanted to please her, and so I looked them over and looked them over.I didn’t think I had any pair. But all at once, here Isee I had another one that just matched that.I pulled it out and I says, "Well, here is one, after all."She said, "Um-huh." She kind of looked at it and looked at it, and then she said, "Well, I'll let you know about it." She went out and I never saw her any more. It seemed queer like.
Now, I'll go to auctions sometimes. I met a man at an auction and he was bidding on a bookcase. But a woman overbid him and he didn't get it.No, he didn’t get it.
So I went up to him and told himI had a bookcase made in the same shop, same make and everything, and that mine had the original carving on and this one didn’t have it. And the interior of mine was veneered with bird's-eye maple, whereas the other one was only stained yellow inside. Just stained yellow. Poplar-wood stained yellow. And that mine was worth more than twenty-five dollars more, and that yon will admit that when you come to see it. "And I’ll sell you mine," I says to him, "for sixty dollars instead of the ninety dollars you bid on this one." So he says, "Where at?" And I says, "In my antique shop." "What? In an antique Shop? I’m coming down to see it!” And he came down, and I said, "Here it is, You'll admit it is worth more than twenty-five dollars more.I’ll sell it to you at thirty dollars less.” And he said, "Well, I’ll let you know about it." And off he went. That makes fifty-five dollars less--- saving him fifty-five dollars, and he never came back, the foolish thing. Goes to an auction and bids a whole lot more for an inferior piece. He didn't know furnitur , that man. Very queer to act like that. Queer folks sometimes. They come in here to be queer, seems like.
Of course I had numbers of pieces people paid a deposit on, and they never came back, deposit or no deposit. About fifteen years back, people even paid the whole price sometimes, and never came back to get their things.Maybe they forgot or maybe they died, I don't know. But it's queer that they should do that way. They must have been queer folks themselves, seems.
A long time ago I knew two school teachers. Their mother had a lot of old furniture --- spotted mirrors, and so, and never any of it fixed up. They wanted their mother to get rid of that old stuff, but she wouldn't. Then she died, and they got rid of every bit of all the old stuff, and replaced it with modern stuff.They thought it was fine, but somehow it wasn't right. After they had replaced it, they had it for a while, and then they got sick of that modern stuff. They got sick of it, sick of it. And they sold it off, and replaced it with old furniture. I had it, and I sold them the last lot --- a whole houseful of it. They said they felt at home again, after the old stuff was in the house, more as it used to. Well, that's the way it goes. Old, now, old. Very queer, some folks seem to be. Very queer.
But I could tell more stories than that. Only some days I think of some things,
