January 3, 1939.
William Olive
Retired Primitive Baptist
Preacher.
Cottage Grove, Tennessee
Ruth Clark, writer,
Revised by Aswell.
LIKE A SHADOW THAT DECLINETH
Parson Bill sat in his rocker by the south window where the winter sunlight was warm. His worn brown hat was canted on the back or his head because, "I might git a draft and that makes my head roar now that I'm ninety of age." His cane, a stout polished hickory stick, was at his side and his Bible lay open in his lap. There were straight-backed chairs in the room and an unmade bed. On the walls were pictures of the large Olive family in its several branches and a highly colored Cardui calendar.
"I set here the livelong day," said Parson Bill, meditating on the will of the Lord." He spoke in the singsong way of country preachers, stressing words here and there, nodding his head and patting his foot in a kind of ragged rhythm.
"I set here and I do think of all the years I've been in the vineyard, the vineyard of the Lord. Oh, you must know they's a Gospel train--yes, a train of living Truth which is the Word. Yes, and hrist is the engineer on-a that train and no corpse can ride that sweet train. But when he is raised up from death's corruption--oh, when that great day comes!--the elect will walk in the newness of life. God bless your soul, he will git on that- a train! All creation cannot stop him! No, when he is quickened by the spirit no harm can come him anigh, amen."
The parson sank back in the rocker. He looked over his silver- rimmed spectacles and said more quietly, "My heart ain't set on the comforts of this earth. Heaven, sweet heaven, is my home and- oh-- I'm beginning to git homesick. I set here and think of all the saints that is already gone over yonder. I think how soon I'll jine that heavenly host. I won't bother about who's there and who ain't, but I will rejoice with them that is.
"I was born over here in about a mile of old Union, that good old Primitive Baptist church. My grandpappy Perry come over from Virginny and he settled at Como. He built the first store at Como.
"The old man had dropped his scriptural manner. He ran knotted age- speckled fingers along the smoothness of his cane. "Yes, grandpappy he brought my mammy and her one sister from over there. And he brought twenty- five slaves and they helped build old Union Church.
"My grandpappy Olive come from North Carolina. Him and ten other families, all in one slew. They settled close to where Cottage Grove now is on Walnut Fork. My pappy was jist a shirt tail boy then, jist ten of age. He helped my grandpappy Olive clear their land, for he was a dutiful son.
"Mammy and Pappy was married a hundred years ago. The Lord didn't bless them with increase. Jist me--I was the onliest child, and it takes three children to make for increase. After I was born they moved over in the edge of Obion County. And Mammy did pass away from the consumption. Multiply and replenish the earth, so Pappy married again.
"We got along pretty well. I didn't never go to school much. We jist hunted and fished and trafficked around when we wasn't busy in the crop. I like to fish better than anything else. Folks lived at home in them days. Made their own wine and drunk it. The young folks had play parties and dances, but I did not fancy them much. So I reached my manhood stage here in the West Tennessee country.
"I was eighteen and more when the war broke out. 'Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers as the heat in a dry place, even the heat with the shadow of a cloud.' I jined the army then, and so is the sons of men snared in an evil time when it falleth suddenly upon them. "Yes, I went into the Confederate Army. Remember it like it was yesterday. Yes, I was setting in my tent, jist a soldier boy, before the fight at Chattanooga. I was reading my Bible and thinking if the Lord see fit to call me in that day's battle, I'd be lost. I did not have the hope, the blessed sweet hope, that passeth all understanding. I tried to pray but I could not pray. No, I hadn't never prayed .
"My dear old uncle that was a Primitive Baptist preacher was in that Confederate Army. He sought me out in my tent there before the battle begun. He see me studying my Bible and he did ask me about my soul.
"I did hang my head, I had to say, 'I have no hope, I cannot pray.'
"Well, that good old man looked sad and said, 'Oh boy, I'm sorry to hear that. The Lord will call a many a one before this trouble's over. I never see you drinking, Bill. I never see you gamble. I never see you do a thing ungodly, Bill, so I thought you had hope, that blessed hope.' He jist turned on his heel and went out and left me.
"But what will be will be, and the Yankee balls jist buzzed me past and done me no harm at all. Oh, it was intended for me to come through that fighting without brack nor flaw. Never a bullet made in the northern lands could touch Bill Olive then.
"The battles I fought in, they's so many and mixed together in my head I can't remember but two. The one at Chattanooga and the time the hosts did meet at Shiloh ground. It was a Saturday morning when our regiment was ordered to go towards Shiloh. We marched all day and night."
Parson Bill again dropped his sermon style in the excitement of the things he recalled. "We fought in a trance all, day Sunday. It was Monday before we got a thing to eat. I got around behind the corner of a church. I'd load and fire, then I'd jump back to load again. Bullets was flying thick and fast. A six pound cannon ball hit Ben Roberts right in the breast. He was as close to me as you are now.
"That morning early my pardner, Burl Duke, said he knowed he'd be dead before night. The firing got hot, so I fell down in a corn middle, flat on my belly. I looked and see Burl coming, falling as he come. Oh, his heart was shot all to pieces. I see my company retreating, so I run and got behind a rail fence and peeped through a crack a while. They was a rabbit and a red heifer calf come through that cornfield, hard as they could tear. I laugh every time I think of them. That battle lasted all day. In the night I went to my tent. Captain Lacy was wounded and in my tent, so I made me a bed out of three oak poles and slept next to a wounded Yankee. Maybe I ought en to done it but r stole a good knife out of his pocket.
"The Yankees they caught me and I got in prison at Bowling Green and stayed three days. They was an agreement on both sides that all prisoners would be paroled and sent home. I jist stayed three days till they paroled me. I was jist broke down sick and wore out. They was a widow woman named Tissel and her daughter taken me in and kept me till I was well. I walked from Bowling Green to Union City. Wasn't no trouble to git food and a place to sleep. Anybody through that country'd help a Rebel out.
"I wasn't at home but two or three weeks until General Forrest ordered all paroled men back. I stayed then till the War was over. We was fighting to keep the slaves. But it's a good thing they's freed. Still, they sure would have hit the nail square on the head if they'd colonized them niggers. It ain't best to have two races of God's children mixed. One is going to boss the other every time that happens.
"My first wife, Emma, see me two years before I see her. I always thought that was funny. I was with General Forrest. We was after Berry and his clan of bushwhackers. They had committed several outrages around old Shady Grove Church and in that neighborhood. We rode up to the church. Meeting was a-going on but we didn't disturb. We jist stopped to rest. A lady was at a window. I was setting on my hoss. She beaconed with her hand this a- way, for me to come there. I rode up to the window. She see by the uniform I was a Confederate soldier.
"She says, 'Who are you and what are you doing?'
"I told her we's after Berry and his clan. She says, 'Well, I hope you git him.' she was a teacher and taught right there in that church. I talked on a few minutes. Emma, my first Wife, was a-setting right across the aisle and heard every word I said. When the war was over and I come home, I was riding to church one day and overtaken her. She was on hossback, too. I taken one good look at her. Her eyes was as the eyes of doves by the rivers of water. Yes, and her face is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars and her mouth like lilies. So I says, 'You will be my wife.'
"She jist laughed and said, 'Oh, I reckon not .'
"I says, 'I'm a-coming to see you.'
"She says, 'All right.'
"So next Sunday I hitched my hoss at her front gate. Wasn't long till we was engaged. I told her I wanted to make one crop before we was married.
"And she says, 'And I want to make some quilts and things.'
"We went to work and got us a little start. Then we was married."
With his chin on his chest, Parson Bill sat laughing to himself. "Such a way to git married! Did ye ever hear of such a courting in your life?
"There's Emma's picture on the wall, as pretty as a pink. She was as good a woman as God ever let live."
He stared out the window for a while working his lips soundlessly. When he spoke once more, it was in his nasal preacher's chant. "It was after we's married that I found that salvation which God give us to work out. You can't work it out until he gives it to you, no more than you can work out a garden when you ain't got no garden. By grace are ye saved--by grace through faith lest any man should boast!
"Oh, whoso boasteth hisself of a false gift is like clouds and wind without rain. Oh, I'd be afraid to boast in the sight of God, amen. I'd be afraid to boast for fear I'd be like the forty and two children that was eat by the she-bear. Oh, but that blessed sweet hope is a great thing!
"Yes, I was a-hoeing tobacco one day and a-meditating on the sweet word of God. I begin to look around for some place to hide--to hide from man. God bless your soul, they's no hiding from God. Him of the all seeing eye! No, I wasn't a-wanting to hide from him. Black and vile sinner, worm of the dust as I was, I wanted to seek the Lord. I went-a to a thicket of sumacs. Yes, down-a on my knees there I found God. I jist lost myself. I don't know what I said or what I done. I shouted praises unto his name. I sung songs, I done everything but hoe. Wasn't long till night. I didn't say nothing to Emma till I laid aside my garments and sought sweet repose for the night.
"I was a-laying in the bed and I begin to laugh. Emma was setting by the fire knitting. She said, 'Bill, what is wrong with you?' I hadn't never acted that silly before.
"I told her that the Lord had blessed my soul and that I was one of God's elect. I told her that heaven was my eternal home.
"She said, 'Why, Bill, this evening about four o'clock, this very evening, I knelt under a big oak tree and God come to me.'
"I 'm telling you we had a sweet hour! On wings of glory and sweet salvation! For the Lord had come to us both the same day.
"We jined the church and was baptized. I was twenty-two then. I was twenty-eight when I felt the call to preach. It kept going through my mind, 'Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature, and lo! I am with you even to the end.' That jist went through my mind and through my mind till I couldn't rest nor find no peace.
"I told one of the brethern I'd felt a call to preach. So next conference he got up. He announced that Brother Olive had a gift. One of the brethren says, 'I want Brother Olive to preach over at my house this very night. 'That was the beginning. I was of a poor stambling tongue but I knowed it was ordained from my mother's womb, and if I'd stay in communion with God he'd give me-a utterance.
"Yes, I preached the Word and the Truth for fifty and six years. They jist ain't no telling how many thousand miles I've gone over. Oh, I've preached in pretty nigh every old. Baptist Association in West Tennessee.
"If you ain't an old Baptist they's one thing you don't believe. You don't believe you are old as God is. For listen. 'Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me! For thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
"The Old baptist believes in a general resurrection and that the whole law was give to Adam. He could do as he wanted but he must not eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge. Satan was a standin by and laughed to hisself and says, 'I'll tear that up!' so he tackled Eve. He tempted her and she did eat and we through Adam all become sinners. All must die, but while we was yet sinners Christ died for us. The Lord says, 'Mine elect have I called.' In the words of Peter the second we must make that calling sure. We know we're saved if we love the brethern. Bless your sweet life, I can clasp the hand of any man who has been redeemed by that precious blood and call him brother, be he black or white, Jew or Gentile. Children of God know each other. A tree is known by his fruits."
Parson Bill talked doctrine for a time. Then he said, "So for many a year did I labor in the vineyard. Three times I married and they was all fine women. Sons and daughters and grandsons and granddaughters of my seed gladdened my days. But though thou shouldst make thy nest as high as the eagle, I shall bring thee down from thence.
"My son Lawson mocked the Lord. Yes, he departed from the ways of righteousness and become as the ravening beast. Oh, he was a masterless man and his hand turned against his brethren. He lived in outlaw ways and fought and gambled and seeked the flesh-pots.
"So it come to pass that my boy was shot down, shot to death in a drinking brawl and they bringed him home. At first my faith it wasn't strong. I felt hard towards the boy that shot my Lawson. But now I know, bless you, that the boy couldn't noways help it. It was set from the beginning of this world for him to shoot Lawson. God raised him up for that purpose and he couldn't help it."
Parson Bill was tired. His voice had grown more and more uncertain and his chin kept dropping on his chest. "My days is swifter than a weaver's shuttle," "he said. "Like the shadow that declineth... they's none abiding... and that rabbit and the heifer come running through the field... so she beaconed me with her hand ... I suppose..."
Parson Bill was asleep in the warm sun.