<text not clear>
John Messick (Blind)
Durham, North Carolina
February 28, 1939
LR[Leonard Rapport]
JOHN MESSICK; PEANUT MAN
My daddy was a seaman and was doing his last twenty years when he drowned off cape Hatteras when the battleship Huron went on the rocks. Hurn wrecked off hatters November 24, 1877, with large loss of life. 34 men who saved. It was a U.S battleship. This accurted a year and a half before Mr. Messick was born. L.R. He came to this country from Glasgow, Scotland and joined the navy when he was eighteen. Everything that was on the Huron was lost, not a person was saved.
My mother was born in Dublin, Ireland, and she and my grandmother and great-grandmother and one uncle all came to this country and settled in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. My father met my mother once when he was on furlough in Philadelphia and a notion to go to Pittsburgh. I was born in Pittsburgh sixty years ago this week.
My father sent my mother to Princess Anne County, Virginia, when I was four years old. I was the only child. There was an older boy but he died when he was five. My father was drowned right after we moved to princess Anne but we stayed on there, farming. My Messick mother married again. We raised potatoes as a money crop and corn and vegetables, and I did fishing, trapping, and rafted in the logwoods.
When I was fourteen I went to New York and worked in a grocery store at what's now a Hundred and Fifty-Ninth Street and Broadway but what was then out in the country. That was forty-six years ago. I've been back several times since and out there is all built up in race nouses.
From there I went to Fort Wayne, Indiana and served my trade as a glass-blower. I didn't particularly plan to into that; I just happened to be out there and ran afoul of it and went to work.
After I served almost four years at just barely enough to live on - to exist, you might say - I left Fort Wayne and went over to San Antonio, Texas and enlisted in the First United States Volunteer Cavalry to go to Cuba in the Spanish-American War. Wood and Roosevelt to <text not clear> The First Volunteer U. S. Ceverly at san Antonio. Major Leonara Wood was our commanding officer until we got to Cuba. After we got there Wood took. Charge of the Island and put Theodore Roosevelt in charge of the troops. I knew Roosevelt. He was a good man. He was a man when he spoke to you he spoke kind and gentle but plain; he meant what he said. I was with him at San Juan Hill. I was wounded one time but wasn't laid out but three days. I got crocodile poison from the briers the Spaniards had sprinkled for us. The Spaniards were good fighters but they shot from the hip, not from the shoulder. I follow their war over the radio; it looks like now they're done for.
I don't belong to the Spanish-American War Veterans; I don't even get a pension. All my discharge cards got burned up and I can't locate none of me men who remember me. His Name not rolls as given in the back of theodore Roosevelts book an the Roughriders. Most of them were from New Mexico; A Number of the men were from new Mexico; Several companies of the Roughriders were of almost exclusively from there was one from Wilkesboro but he's dead, so he don't do me any good. I've tried several times to get a pension but I never have been able to.
I went with Colonel Roosevelt in 1901 on one of of his hunting trips. I was fireman on his yacht and we went about three thousand miles up the Nile. And I visited him several times when I was in Rhode Island; he had a home near Pawtucket. Roosevelt did not goto Egypt Until 1909. Did not have a home in Rhode Island.
When we came back from Cuba they discharged us at Montauck Point, New York. The Roughriders were discharged at montauck point and I came down to Little Washington, Pennsylvania and finished up my glass-blower's trade. I was making fruit-jars and bottles.
I never went to public school a day in my life. In Princess Anne the school I could have gone to was ten miles from where we lived. There was one real close in North Carolina - we lived as close to the line as from here to Ninth Street - but they wouldn't let me go there. My mother didn't have the time to take pride in me like she cught to; her second husband took down with swilling rheumatism and she had to take care of the place. I taugnt myself;I wore out two or three of those old Holmes blue-back spelling books wandering around the Country. Every time I'd stop I'd have it in my hand. The summer after I came back from Egypt with Colonel Roosevelt I went to Richmond College in Richmond and took a ministerial course for a year and a half. I was informed to go there at Little Washington; the pastor at the First Baptist Church was from Richmond College and told me that was the best place to go. Finally 'Fessor Boatright and I fell out and I quit school. I never did any preaching.
When I left Little Washington I gave up bottle-blowing; machines were coming in then. I went back to New York and went with the John Robinson Circus. We showed New York and Boston and split in Boston and part went to Detroit and part back down to New York and then to Liverpool, England. I happened to be in the last crew. We showed Liverpool, York, Hampshire. Over there when we put down in a place we put down for two weeks. I was doing these three ring trapeze acts. I did swings and riding and hoop-jumping - I'd always been an active somebody.
We worked on around into Dublin but I didn't meet ay mother's people. From there we went to Scotland and after two weeks in Glasgow I quit the snow and went to see grandma. She was aged; she was a hundred and four years, three months, and nine days old when she died. She was right active; she'd get up and cook breakfast and clean up her nouse. She died about six months after I got there.
I stayed there seven months - until a month after she died - and then I joined the navy. The brig Wyoming was in Glasgow and I joined up. We went on up the Mediterranean and into Judean waters; the Turks were ruling Judea then. We went abreast of Jerusalem Out they wouldn't let us ashore. I saw the mountain Christ was crucified on. We got most all the por ts; I served three years.
When I left Richmond College I went up to Providence, Rhode Island and went to work with the Whiting Machine Company, putting up machinery. I puttered around up there for a little while and then they sent me out on the road. I went down to Petersburg, Virginia, and put in some cards - carding machines. I got these two fingers torn up there and that's where I quit them.
After that I got a job with the government at Cape Hatteras cutting the copper out to the battleship Huron. They were cutting and I got wise to it and went down and got a job. Nobody even knew my daddy was on the Huron till I went to work. I started in the middle of April, 1903, and stayed about three months.
From there I went to the Panama Canal as a steam-shovel engineer with a one year contract. A piancer Got there a year before congress decides on building it. I was there about twenty months. I got a hundred and twenty-five dollars a month and found board for twenty-five dollars a month. Panama then was full of mosquitoes and yellow fever.
I left there and came back up north, stopping along through one Southern stages. I ended up in Wadesboro where I met my wife and we got married. I was weaving in a mill in Rockingham and she was working there too.
I didn't stay in Rockingham out about a week and went on to Charlotte and stayed there about two months in a mill. Then I came back to Wadesboro and went to telegraph operating. When I was in Little Washington I'd taken a business course and studied telegraphy on the side. I stayed there about a year and went back to the mill business. I worked in the mills in Rockingham, a then went from Rockingham to Darlington, South Carolina, from Darlington to Rockingham, Rockingham to Greensboro, Greensboro to Spray, Spray to Winston Salem. I worked in Gilmer's department store in Winston. In Spray I kept books five years for the mill - from 1915 to 1919. During the war I had to work so hard at it - many a night till ten or eleven o'clock - my nervous condition gave way and I had to quit.
From Winston we went back to Rockingham where I worked in the mill a month and a half or two months, and then we came to Durham. My wife she just wanted to come here.
I went to work here in the Erwin mill; I always liked working in the mills. I was dodging around there in the mill from one job to another, and worked at Erwin thirty-five days and went blind. I went blind right at my work; there wasn't any aches or pain or anything, it happened just as quck as you can blink youreye.
I stayed in the hospital nineteen weeks and had three operations on one eye. They don't have no hope at all now, I was taking this typhoid serum and it happened four days after the third dose.
I stayed around home for about a year. It was right hard to adjust myself. I'd been a pretty fast walker and it took about a year to cool myself down. At first I'd walk smack into telephone posts, brick walls, anything attall.
I started out selling peanuts and popcorn and then I ran a little confectionary and then a wienie stand and then a plate-lunch cafe. All told, I was in that business about eight years. I had to get out on account of my health. Now I'm getting too old for the business.
I've been selling roasted and salted peanuts since then. I cook, roast, and salt my own peanuts on a little electric oven I've got here. I sell all over West Durham. I tried to get a concession at the courtouse so I could handle confectionary and drinks but they wouldn't let me have a place. They tried to teach me some at a plant for the blind they got here; they make mattresses, chairbottoms, belts, and such. The trouble is they make around eight or ten dollars a week but they don't get out two weeks work out of the month.
My wife works in the Erwin mill, making sheets. She rents this house from the mill; we'll have been in it five years this May. We were in the mill's village where the houses are better; it's against their rules to let a woman have a house where there's just one to work out they made an exception and let us have this one. They take a dollar a week out of her pay for rent, twenty-five cents a room.
My wife's mother who lives here with us used to tag tobacco sacks but now she's too old to do much and they don't bring sacks around anymore; now with the wage and hour law it's all done by hour hands. They make a lot more by the hour, Lord, a lot more. They used to get a dollar-eighty for two bags and it cost twenty-five cents to have them hauled here; by the hour they get three-fifty or four dollars a bag.
We were Baptists but after Lillian - she's our child; she's finishing high school this spring with a commercial course - got big enough to go we changed to the Presbyterians because their church is right close here and it was such a far walk to the Baptist Church for her.
Our collie dog is about fourteen years old; she's saved my shins many a hard lick. She's so jealous that when I'm walking with Lillian and she holds my arm that dog'll walk between us.
We get both the daily papers but no magazines. In politics I'm more, for the man than the party. Sometimes I'll vote, sometimes I won't.
There are six thousand of us blind in the state and a hundred seventy thousand dollars a year blind aid. That would be two-forty a month if we all got it on the same basis. I got blind aid for seven months and men they cut me off. We had a cousin who stayed with us here who got in the CC camp. One day when just my wife's mother was here the woman from the blind commission came around and asked momma where he was, and when she told her he was in the CC camp she cut me off. She never asked us any questions - never asked us anything about it; just cut me off. We never got any of his money from the CC camp and I've got letters to prove it. She went up to the null and saw where my wife drew seventeen dollars one week and she claimed she was making above the average and we weren't eligible; lots of weeks she doesn't make near that. I'm going to take it up with the county commisioners and if they don't help me I'm going to the governor, and if I don't get any satisfaction from him then I going to take it to the President.
For a while I got in real bad shape from taking BCs. I reckon ninety-five percent of the people around here use them, but I wouldn't say over ten or fifteen percent use them regular every day. There was one old gentleman and his wife used to take fifty cents worth a day; he bought from me as long as I was in the restaurant business. I was running next to the A and P store and I got right smart of the BC trade from the mill. It got so my wife used to take some in with her when she went on. The people working there knew we carried it and they'd get her to bring them in. I sold a lot to mill people and a lot to people who didn't even know what a mill was, hardly.
BCs come two doses in a ten cent pack or six dosess in a twenty-five cent pack. Most take it with a Coca-Cola; put a BC in their mouth and take a swallow of Coca Cola to wash it on down. I sold a lot of BCs, a lot of them. If I can get hold of them again - as I reckon I will - I ought to be able to put out two or three gross a week. Sometimes they'll use CM, sometimes Stanback, out it's mostly BC; I guese because of late years they broadcast so much. BCs are made here in Durham; Bernard and Council - that's who it's named after - were just poor boys when they started making it and now they could retire with plenty of millions for the rest of their lives if they wanted to. They sell them all over the country. There's a young man who was raised right across the railroad here who's been in Del Rio, Texas about three years with BC. That's his headquarters and he works the country around there; he's doing good, too.
I started using BC about four, five, six years after I was blind. I used it regular for two or three years, maybe longer man that - I don't know. I remember I got in bad shape. I got so I might take as many as ten doses a day. When I was taking it like that it was tearing my nerves to pieces; I was as nervous, ill, and Contentious as I could be. When I got down in bed they called the doctor - Dr. Boone and he come, and time he poked his head in the door and seen me lying back in bed and seen my face, he said, 'Huh, another BC dope eater.' My wife says he said, 'Dope fiend.' You can tell a BC eater that quick, too; they say over at Duke Hospital just as soon as you come in they can tell by your lips being, blue. If you notice the lips, you can tell. If they take one or two or even half a dozen a week you can't but if they take as many as three or four a day you can.
It's no habit forming drug there's no habit about it. You just take one to ease your pain and after while you'll take another. I've taken a many a one when I didn't have an acne or pain. I still take one every now and then when my eyes get hurting, I won't say people who take them regular can't do without them - they just don't do without them.
After I quit using BC regular I come in one day and went over to the sink and was washing my hands. My wife was hollering at Lillian over some little thing - Lillian was just a little bit of a thing then - and the last I knowed was drying my hands, and I fell. They took me to Duke. It'd been five months since I'd taken any but it must not have all got out of my system.
