"I CATER TO COLORED PEOPLE"
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
and
John N. Booth
Field Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
July 13, 1939
June 19, 20, 1939
Lorenza W. Reid (Negro)
243 Bridge Street
Athens, Georgia
Barber
S.B.H.
"I CATER TO COLORED PEOPLE"
Bill Reese was not at home when I called at his address. Seeing a woman idly rocking back and forth on the <text not clear> in a Chair shaded by a huge pecan tree, I made inquiry as to his whereabouts. "This here ain’t what he lives, but he’s in the house gittin’ my daughter to address some letters for 'im. Set down and rest yourself," she invited, as she removed a green-painted cushion from a chair and carelessly threw it on the grass. I took the proffered chair, and the woman continued: "Bill lives in the house next door all by hisself. All his chillun is grown and gone away from here, and his wife’s been dead nigh nine year now."
"Bill," she called, "if you’re through with them letters, come on out here. That’s a lady here what wants to see you, and she’s got a great big book in her hand. I don’t know what that’s for ’less she’s taking the census or somepin' like that."
Bill promptly appeared on the porch and came on out to where we were sitting, "Miss," he said, "if you went to see me come on over to my sister’s home, ’cause there ain’t nobody at my house." He seemed self-conscious and meticulously mindful of the proprieties.
His sister, a mulatto, joined us on her front veranda, and after inviting me to occupy her awing, she sat down in one of the modern porch chairs with the evident intention of hearing Bill relate his life story. Her daughter, attracted by the conversation, came to the door and stared with evident Curiosity for a moment, disappeared, and returned shortly bringing with her a small square of wood covered with pegs. "What are you making?" I asked. "Oh, this is just a weaving board," she replied, "I'm weaving a purse. I've made one already. I make 'em out of the stocking rings that we get from the hosiery mill. My other purse is white, just like this one, but I may make some colored ones to match my dresses, for they don't cost but 35¢ a pound, and a pound goes a long ways." While the girl talked Bill cut a chew from his plug of tobacco and when he had expectorated with accurate aim at a spot a few feet from the veranda, he looked at me and began:
"My father was the personal property of Dr. B. J. Fritz, and soon as he was big enough to be trained for a trade his master arranged for him to learn how to be a barber. High-class white folks liked to have their own barbers then and they wanted 'em well trained, and professional men like pa's owner liked to have at least one slave that could do what they called valet service now. The man pa learnt his trade from was a Mexican who catered only to white people. When he took pa in hand he started him off blacking shoes, and before he finished with him he had trained him to do anything that come to hand in a first class barber shop. At the time of pa’s death, him and his brother-in-law owned and ran a barber shop together.
"My mother’s owner was also her own father, and for that reason I’d rather not tell his name. You know things like that was common in slavery time. Masters often had children by their slave women. He was kind to ma, and she was kept on duty in the big house as a maid. She didn’t have to do field work. Ma’s owner was a mighty prominent man who had a fine home out on Milledge Avenue. There’s where I was born September 12, 1863, right about the middle of the big war.
"Colored children learns to work mighty early. I wasn’t but six years old when I started working. My first job was taking pa’s meals to the barber shop, sweeping out the shop, washing spittoons, and shining shoes. By the time I was eleven or twelve years old I made from a dollar-and-a-half to as high, as three dollars in one week. Money was mighty scarce in them years that followed the war, and I had to give every bit of what I earned to ma to buy victuals and clothes.
"I wasn’t but fourteen years old when I took over a shop of my own. I had been helping one of my uncles in his shop for a couple of years, and he up and sold his business to me. I catered to colored people. They wasn't nigh so aristocratic about the way they looked then as they are now and whiskers were much more common. A great many folks didn't care much how they looked,” he chuckled. "Maybe that's how come I was able to get by with a barber business of my own when I was so small I had to stand on a stool to reach a man's head. I don't believe I could have got by with shaving 'em if -we hadn't had reclining chairs, but it was the haircuts that I had to climb up on a stool to do. I was a real artist at shaving and cutting hair.
"At that time - it was in the 1870's - this town wasn't anything but a little village. There wasn't but one business street that amounted to anything. That was Broad Street. Clayton Street just had a few little one-story houses of no importance. In the middle of Broad Street, about halfway between Jackson and Thomas Streets, was a cistern for use of the fire companies, and a public well was on the corner of Jackson and Broad Streets.
"I done real well for a boy of my age. I even managed to average clearing from five to six dollars a week, and when there was special excitement in town I made lots more. Commencement time at the university, fireman's tournaments, and circuses always brought crowds to town that meant fine business for barbers. By that time my father had got to be such a heavy drinker that I had to support my mother and help with raising my brothers and sisters. Pa was spending 'most everything he could earn on whiskey. Where we are right now belonged to my father and mother then.
"The white barbers would call me in to help out in their shops when they were rushed, or if some of 'em wanted to go on vacations. We worked on the check system, as we called it then. You got fifty cents out of every dollar you took in. When you shaved a man or cut his hair you made out the check for what he was to pay and then you turned the money over to the proprietor of the shop. On Saturday nights the money taken in during the entire week was checked against your tickets. Most of the shops still work on that same old check system. It's been the go ever since I can remember, and it does save lots of confusion and arguments. But that means a man is paid according to the actual work he does, and the man that brings the most business to the shop gets the most money.
"Pa and his brother-in-law set up their shop on Broad Street on the top floor of a place where a big furniture store is now. It seems right funny to realize that there wasn't no barber shops or shoeshops on the ground floor in those days. The chief reason for that was that rents was so much higher for them first-floor places. Talking about them shoeshops, all the beat class of white people had their boots and shoes made to measure by handwork. Them shoemakers took the greatest of pride in the style and looks of the shoes they turned out.
"I've paid out plenty for rent on shops in my day. For that first little upstairs place, I was charged $4 a month rent during the 4 years I was in it. When I was 18 years old and opened up a downstairs shop in a building on Jackson street my rent jumped to $10 a month and I paid at that rate for 13 years. Then I moved across the street to the old Bloomfield Building, where I had to pay the $8 a month during the 3 years I was there. Next I tried a basement shop under the building that stood where the Citizen's Pharmacy is now, but I didn't stay there long, as business was not good in that cellar. I moved into the Hunnicutt Building on Thomas Street, where I stayed 13 years, paying $8 a month rent. My next location was on Washington Street. I stayed there 2 years, and during that time I paid $15 a month. When I moved into the basement of a building on Wall Street, where Michael's store is now, I paid $17 a month at first but it wasn't long before they decided to double my rent. I stayed on because business was so good there. While I was still renting that space the building caught fire and burnt to the ground. In fact, the whole block was destroyed by that big fire. Folks said that fire was caused by somebody in the Odd Fellows Hall, on the top floor of the building over me, throwing a match in a stack of papers. I never saved even a match.
"I then built my own shop out here in this neighborhood, close by my house. I done all my work out here for a while, but I decided to open up another shop uptown to catch the good business that we know as ’floating trade.' You can’t get that in a residence section. You can build up a right good regular or permanent trade in your home community, but you have to have a downtown shop to get the transients and to keep busy all the time. About two years after the World War I moved my business back out here to my shop on the edge of our yard, and all my work has been done out here ever since, except just occasionally when I’ve done a little work in the downtown shops just to accommodate the proprietors when they’re short a man because of sickness, vacation, or any emergency. I’ve been on this basis for 18 years now. Yes, Mam, I’ve been around Athens a long time, and if I live to see the twelfth day of September, I’ll be 76 years old. Athens has always been my home, and I expect it to be home to me just as long as I live.
"I’ve had several hobbles or side trades aside from my barber work. One of these was raising pure-bred Poland-China, Berkshire, and O-I-C hogs. I used to get $5 apiece for my pigs just as soon as they were six weeks old. Poland-China hogs grow to be very large, and the meat is coarse. Berkshire hogs don’t grow quite so big, and their meat is lots finer grained. I also raised and sold lots of fine chickens. The breeds I had the best success with were Rhode Island Reds, Black Minoroas and Dominicas. There were two white ladies in this town who used to try to see which one could beat the other at getting what broilers and fryers I had on hand soon as they were big enough to sell. Each one wanted all I had, so when my chickens were old enough to sell I'd call those two ladies up, and if I had eighty chickens ready I'd tell each one that I had about forty ready, and sure enough each one would take the entire number that I told her about, thinking she was getting ahead of the other. They paid me from thirty-five to forty cents apiece for them, according to market trends and the weight of the fowls.
"In all the years of my work I've never had any trouble with anybody I came in contact with, and I never had any real unpleasantness in my shop. Of course, there's always some that you just can't please, and I've had ’em come back and say, ’Don't cut my hair like you did last time; I didn't like it,' or 'Don't shave me so close as you did before; My face was sore for a week afterwards.' Those sort of folks just try to make you think they are extra particular about themselves, and they think that'll make you give 'em special attention. I still shave my customers with an old-fashioned straight razor and I make the lather I use on their faces from a good grade of pure soap. If I find out a customer has tender skin I always use castile soap to lather his face with. I don't have so many customers through the week, but on Saturdays I have all that I can 'tend to. I still charge my same old prices of 15¢ for a shave and 25# for a haircut. These have always been my prices.
"When times were good I made from 40 to 50 dollars a weak in my shops downtown. Since there's nobody to keep up but me and I just work out here at home, I still make enough for my own living. I get the rent from the four houses that I own. Two of them rents for $10 a month each, I get $5 for one, and $3 a month on the other. I used to get $5 a month from that last one I mentioned, but it's got into such a bad state of repairs that I let a man live in it for $3 a month if he would agree to repair it and keep it up as part of the rent contract. He's lived up to his bargain and he keeps it up in good shape. It costs so much to keep up rented property that I have to spend my money on the houses I keep tenants in and let the one I live in go without repairs. I'll have to do something right soon or my own home is going to fall in on me, or rather my roof will.
"After my wife died and the last of my children left home I tried renting out my house furnished at $15 a month to a man that brought his family here from Florida, They seemed to be the right sort of colored folks, but after they thought they had got in my good graces they began to pitch wild parties and to keep a gang of rough folks in my house all the time. I couldn’t I stand that, so I made ’em leave. Then I fixed up one room to live in myself and stored all the balance of the furniture in another room. I get along pretty well in my one room. As for cooking, I can cook a chicken as well as any woman. I cook to suit myself fine.
"I’d marry again if I could find the right kind of one woman for a man of my age, but one that'd suit me and stay with me would be hard to find. There’s plenty of women I might be able to talk into marrying me, but I’m afraid I’d get one that’d stay with me just long enough to get things going her way and then leave me and sue for my property. I like living alone better’n that.
"I’d show you through my house, but it's in such a bad condition that I’d rather you didn’t see in It. It’s a seven-room house with a bath and electric lights." Here he broke off his narrative suddenly when he became aware that his sister and niece were convulsed with laughter at his remarks on the subject of remarriage. Annoyance and embarrassment destroyed his poise. He quickly asked me to excuse him, hut invited me to return on the day following.
At the time appointed I arrived at his own house. Bill was sitting alone on his veranda, but his sister soon joined us. while he readily incited me to have a chair, he was reluctant about talking. "I told you about all I knew yesterday," he protested, "and I don't feel so well today anyway. I've got an awful cold and my throat's too sore to do much talking." When he had grumbled about his health, the hot weather, and a few other things, he finally said; "However, since you've walked down here in this scorching sun at this time of the day. I'll try to talk for you if you'll give me an idea of what else might be of interest.
"My home here? Yes, Mam, that's something I can talk about with pleasure. I always thought it was a beautiful place when my family was here with me and I could have the heart to keep it up nice. It's still beautiful to me, but I don't reckon a stranger sees much to admire but the big old oaks, and look over there in the chicken yard at ray pecan tree. That tree furnishes shade for my chickens and bears some mighty fine nuts. I bought this place from four sisters, giving each of them one hundred dollars for her share. My wife was one of the four sisters. We married right here in the parlor of this house, and soon after that I bought the place and remodeled the house. My wife's youngest sister stayed on in the house with us for four years, then she married and moved to another part of Athens.
"My wife's father was one of the representatives from this county to the State Assembly right after emancipation. He was stubborn and hot-headed, but he was a very intelligent man. There were two men of our race elected to the Legislature in Clarice County about that time, and the other man betrayed his trust to his race, just like that colored man did in Oglethorpe County, but my father-in-law stood pat, White men bought the influence of some of the other Negro politicians but my father-in-law wasn't for sale. They couldn't buy him, no matter how hard they tried. The colored politicians had a big banquet and public speaking here in Athena, and it's said that somebody put poison in the oyster soup my father-in-law consumed at that affair. I know the name of the jack-leg politician that was accused of poisoning him, but what’s the use of telling it now? The white men sure lived up to their promises to those other colored politicians that they bribed. The one in Clarke County was given enough to live on in grand style for the rest of his days, and the man in Oglethorpe County got five head of mules and a considerable amount of land. I've forgot just how much."
Bill's self-conscious attitude returned with the completion of his peroration on the subject of his father-in-law and politics of the Reconstruction era. "Excuse me please, Miss,” he apologized. "My throat's so sore I can't hardly talk and I've been taking sweet milk and turpentine for it all day. I needs a drink of water right now."
While he was gone I approached the front door and peeped in. He had not exaggerated as to the bad state of repairs. Plastering had fallen from the walls, and the sagging celling looked as though it might drop at any time. I could see through the open hall to the back porch where shingles were piled helter-skelter as though they had dropped from the roof over that porch. In the hall there were several chairs and tables and a hall tree. The furniture was covered with dust. Spider webs and dust obscured a picture that hung near the front door.
The frame house sits on an embankment high above the street. A privet hedge partly encloses the yard. Cement steps and a paved walk displayed wide cracks. More permanent in appearance than anything else I observed were the brick supports on which the house rested. The porch furniture was a cane suite cons is ting of two chairs, a swing, and a settee. Bill occupied one chair, his sister the other, and I sat on the settee facing an electric light fixture that seemed about to sever its moorings by the lintel of the front door.
Bill soon returned and handed me a palm leaf fan. "Fan yourself with this, Miss," he said. "I brought out this piece of pasteboard to fan myself with while I was reading the sports section of the paper before you come this morning. I've got an electric fan but it’s all packed up with the rest of my things." He grinned as he continued, "I've got something of 'most everything packed up in that one room where I keep the things I ain't using. When the doctors used to be called to see members of my family that was sick, they often told me, 'Bill, we enjoy coming to your house, for no matter what we ask for you've always got it.' We didn't have no Negro physicians then.
"I didn't tell you how fond I used to be of hunting and fishing when I was talking trades and hobbies yesterday, did I? Well, in winter time I hunted birds, 'possums, coons, squirrels, and rabbits. In summer I've caught many a fish in that old river you see flowing along over yonder. See how red the water looks today even though we ain't had any rain? The river's muddy and red because it's been raining up the country somewhere. I'd love to hunt and fish now if my health would let me, but I have to be satisfied to sit and read about other folks' hunting and fishing, I do still get some pleasure out of my chickens. Tending my chickens ain't much like bird hunting, but the chickens taste mighty good when I get 'em cooked and on my table, and there's lots of satisfaction in that. I still sell quite a lot of chickens. I used to make a good deal of money out of the turkeys I raised and sold, but this section's too thickly settled for turkey-raising now. Turkeys like a long, wide range. Those big commercial hatcheries with their electric incubators have about put the little men out of the poultry business, and as for hogs, I can’t make money raising ’em any more for they are shipped here by the carload and sold cheaper than I can raise ’em. I don’t raise hogs and turkeys for sale any more. I took off a hen with seven little biddies this morning and if luck’s with me they’ll be mighty good eating in about 10 or 12 weeks.
"I’ve always tried to conduct myself so as to be respected by the white people as well as by my own race, and I really don’t believe I’ve got an enemy. Just listen to this! During the World War my daughter went to seek a Job with the exemption board in this town. When she was filling out the application blank, one of the white men asked what her name was. She told him. 'Do you mean that?' he asked. ’Yes, Sir, I do,' she insisted. ’Well, well,’ answered the man, ’If you are as good as your father you’re all right.' One question was, ’Can you he trusted to handle money?' Without waiting for my daughter to answer that, the man said, ’If she's as honest as her father I can trust her.’ It wouldn’t he hard to make you believe that she got that job would it? That's the truth. She did.
"My wife was a graduate of Atlanta university. After finishing college she taught in the city schools of Athens here. She stopped teaching when we married, but the first thing I knew she was taking in sewing to beat the band. She was such a fine seamstress that she often took in from 50 to 75 dollars a week. That was when she was sewing for the women that used to be allowed to run those houses down on the river. Those women were always nice and polite when they came to our house to get their sewing done. You see it was strictly a business proposition with my wife. No matter what she charged them to make a garment they never argued, they just paid it. My wife kept three other seamstresses busy helping her sew in those days.
"Only eight of our ten children lived to get grown, and two of them died after they were married. Those two little children of ours that died were both girls, and both of ’em died of cholera infantum not long after they started teething. We didn’t let our children work out until after they finished college, for my wife and I together made enough to take good care of all of ’em during their growing years and while they were students. My wife cleared as much or more than I did at my trade. As to what I made selling pigs, chickens, and turkeys, I never kept no account of that. We were lucky if our income from those things covered the expense of the pork and poultry we ate at our own table. Both of us together raised and educated our children, and then built the four other houses I now own besides this one.
"In this lot I have three-fourths of an acre. Course that big old pecan tree makes it so part of the land at the back wouldn’t do much good raising vegetables, and these fine oak trees in the front yard draw the moisture from whatever flowers we plant. Talking about that pecan tree, I’ve gathered about a hundred pounds of nuts off of it each year lately. What I don’t need of ’em for myself, I always send to my children. They eat what they want and sell the rest and send me the money. It’s surprising what good prices they get for ’em.
"When I went to school all the free schooling we had was in June, July, and August. When I got as far as I could on that free schooling, I attended Knox institute, but I had to pay $1 a month tuition. We didn’t have graded schools then. We just had classes, and different teachers for certain subjects. I surely do believe in education. Ignorance is dangerous, for an ignorant person doesn’t have any reasoning power.
"Two of my children are graduates of Atlanta University, two of Spelman, and one finished at Clark University. One of my daughters didn't want to be a teacher, so she went to Tuskegee and went in training to be a nurse. After one year at Tuskegee she went to Savannah and took more training at the Georgia State industrial School. She came home sick and stayed with us about 3 years before she married. She lived only 3 years after her marriage. No, Mam, she didn’t have any children.
"One of my boys took up the tailor trade at the Georgia Industrial School. When he came back home he opened his own tailor shop and ran it about £ years before he died. He left a wife and a baby boy. His son is grown-up now and makes his headquarters in Boston. He travels on a boat all about South America with a surgeon that does lots of some sort of research down there. We had put that grandson of mine in school in Augusta, but he ran away and went to Boston. He says he wants to study for medical practice. Traveling with that surgeon has influenced him that way I 'spect. His mother married again and went to Orangeburg, South Carolina, where her second husband died. The last I heard of her she was head nurse in a hospital at Anderson, South Carolina.
"My daughter who attended Clark University met a man from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, while she was still in college. She taught school here and in Greensboro, North Carolina, several years before they married. Her husband is a very intelligent man and earns $3,600 a year. He is head of the Young Men's Christian Association in Pittsburgh. He was sent to Russia last year. They don't make any racial distinctions in Pittsburgh. My daughter tells me the white people come to her house for tea, and she and her husband are invited to visit in the homes of the white people there. They all meet together for the lectures my son-in-law gives.
"While one of my daughters was principal of a school in Buford, Georgia, she met a bandmaster who lived in Atlanta. He used to go to Buford and other towns to give concerts. After they married they moved to Columbus, Ohio, where he took a civil service examination and became a mail carrier. They have three children. They want me to close up my old house and come up there to live with 'em, but I'd rather stay right on here and be independent. I know well enough that in big cities money melts like snow before the sun.
"My only single daughter used to keep books for an insurance company here and she has also kept books in Atlanta. She always wanted to be a personal maid to a movie star. She had several friends who made good money working as maids for movie stars in New York and out on the west coast. About three years ago when she was working in Atlanta she took a vacation trip to visit friends in Los Angeles, California. She never came back, but she often writes me that if I should get sick and need her she'll take an aeroplane for home. No, Mam, I don't know who she maids for or what wages she gets However, I do know that if she wasn't pleased, she'd be working some other place.
"My only living son makes his home in Atlantic City. He married an Athens girl before he moved off up there. He does some sort of office work for the city, but I don't know just what it is or what they pay him.
"Sometimes when my children come home to visit me they act too citified, and I just wade right in and call 'em down. I tell 'em to put down that city stuff when they're 'round me and act like I raised 'em to behave, and to talk like they oughta. It's a sight the way they learn to talk and say their words when they've been up north awhile, and their little children don't know any other way to talk when they come back down here. Tea, Mam, they sure do know they've got to mind me when they're here in my house. They know I don't put up with none of the foolishness they take up with when they're away.
"When they took my oldest daughter from here to operate on her in Knoxville for appendicitis, I felt like she never would come hack alive. I was right. She died on the operating table. People ain't so apt to die from appendicitis now, for they 'tend to it in time, hut when my child died they hadn't learned so well how to handle that disease. It's the same way about tumors. Many a person has died from tumors, but now they seldom do, for the doctors have learned how to remove 'em in time, and the patient soon gets well and strong and goes back to active work and has a chance for a long and healthy life.
"Have you noticed that it doesn't seem like folks are living as long now as they used to? So many young folks die out. I think that's caused by the way lots of folks are living. There's so much dissipation and wickedness, clean, moral living is lots more apt to lead to comfortable old age. I don’t think diet baa got as much to do with it either. Of course, if a person is already sick they have to be careful what they eat until they are well again. Some folks live longer eating just whatever they’re able to get to eat than others that are able to pick and choose just what they think is best for ’em.
"I don’t ever vote. What’s the use? Our race gets no consideration a fall when it comes to community improvement in Negro sections. At least there’s mighty little done with tax money for Negro residence areas. That’s mighty noticeable to those of us who have to pay taxes on our real estate, and it discourages us from voting.
"As to religion, I’m a Methodist. While I was converted when I was about thirty-five, I was sixty before I ever joined up with any church. All through my life I’ve taken an active interest in church affairs, attended Sunday School, and contributed regularly to the various enterprises of the Methodist denomination. Naturally, everyone come to think of me as a member. Once during a big revival meeting a flock of preachers kept coming to my house to persuade me to Join up with ’em. One of my daughters was at home on her vacation then. She had been teaching school in a town where most of our race were Baptists, and she had married a Baptist and had Joined his church. During this revival she called me out in the hall away from all the others and said, ’Papa, if you’ll join the Methodist Church tonight, I'll join with you.’ I told her if it meant that much to her I’d join with her. So that night when the preacher asked for converts, and while the congregation was singing Shall We Gather At The River? my daughter and I went arm in arm down the aisle and Joined the church together." Bill’s face shone with an elation that he had not before evinced. This was evidently a fond recollection.
"Miss," he began, after a moment’s pause, "wouldn’t you like to see my little barber shop?"
"I’d be delighted to see it," I told him.
He fumbled in his pocket, but his plug of tobacco and his knife seemed to be all that he could find. "’Scuse me while I get my key," he apologized. "I usually keep it in my pocket, but it looks like I musta left it in the house this morning." He disappeared inside the house. Bill is a blue-eyed mulatto, and his thin white hair is in ringlets about his head. He is proud of the eight well-preserved teeth now left in his mouth. Four of them are on the upper right Jaw, and the others are on the lower left jaw. Many stubs of other old teeth, worn to the level of his gums, can be seen when he talks. One side of his mouth bulges constantly with tobacco and expectoration is a frequent necessity. He wore a blue shirt, gray wool trousers, gray hose, and black shoes.
He soon returned. In his hand was a straw hat that was yellowed and streaked. As we walked down the steps into the glare of the sunshine he carefully donned his hat, but was quick to remove it again as soon as he had unlocked the door of the small shop that stood a few yards from his veranda. "Well, Miss, how do you like my shop?" was his eager inquiry, as we entered. "I think it's just fine, Bill," I exaggerated. "Thank you, Miss," he said. "It's good enough for my customers." use." The interior of the small place is guiltless of paint, and the pine planks that were grooved and fitted closely to cover the walls and ceiling gave forth the odor of resin and turpentine. The carving on the walnut-framed mirror, fastened securely to the wall behind the adjustable barber chair, was of the gay-ninety period, or perhaps an earlier era. A 20-gallon hot water tank was convenient to the faucets that were a part of the only really modem looking fixtures in the place. The many calendars tacked here and there on the wall provided notes of gay color. A blue checked apron was thrown across the arm of the barber chair. Bill proudly pointed out his electric fixtures, and called my attention to the cleanness and tidiness of his shop. However, it had been tightly doled until our entrance, and I was glad to get outside again to inhale a long breath of fresh air.
When we came out of the shop Bill's sister had disappeared from the veranda. I had started toward the street when he called me back and insisted that I see his chickens, particularly the hen with the newly-hatched biddies. In the chicken yard a drove of fowls responded to his call, "Chickee! Here Chickee!" They crowded around his feet. "Miss," he said, "I do enjoy feeding ’em and watching 'em grow. It's nice to raise things."
The postman's whistle was heard at the front, and Bill almost ran to meet him. "I'm just sure he's got me some mail from my children," he explained as I tried to keep pace with him. "They never fail to write me and they have agreed and arranged among themselves so that I get a letter from one or more of 'em every day that comes. Each one knows his or her day to write and sticks to that date. They all know how lonesome end restless I'm apt to get if I don't get mail from 'em every day. I do get so awful lonesome to see 'em sometimes, but I know that this town is too small for 'em now, and then besides there's nothing for 'em to do here that would be as profitable as what they are doing where they are. I'm not the one to interfere with their lives. Some of these days my single daughter may come back to live with me," he mused, "and if she does I'm going to put our old homestead here in first-class condition for her. It's all right for me to live by myself in it like it is now, but it would never do for her. I'll have it nice for her.
"I've never visited our children, but my wife used to go to see 'em. Why, once she even took an aeroplane from Atlanta to Chicago, and how she did love to ride in them things!"
Bill was tearing open a letter when I left, and he paused long enough to say, "When you come this morning I didn't think I could talk much, but after I started telling you about my children I forgot all about my sore throat."
