FROM POVERTY TO PLENTY
Original Names	Changed Names
E. W. Faucette	Abe Feimster
Grist	Huston
Laughinghouse	Porter
General Grimes	Captain Peters
Date of first writing	May 12, 1939
Person interviewed	E. W. Faucette (white)
Address	Chocowinity, N. C.
Occupation	Farmer (owner)
Writer	W. L. Vaughan
Reviser	Edwin Massengill
Number of Words	about 2,500
FROM POVERTY TO PLENTY
It was one of those brilliant days in the late fall when the sun seemed to pause in its southward swing to shine again with all its june spelndor. The bare, hot earth cast up the sheen of a noonday in summer.
Abe Feimster sat on the edge of the low porch which extended around the front of the house the only person in sight. Spread around him on the floor were carpenters' tools and several pieces of new flooring. So busily was he engaged, and so intent on his work, that he did not notice the approach of anyone up the avenue leading to the house.
To the right stretched broad acres of ploughed and unploughed fields. On the left along the avenue and adjoining the yard lay the barnyard dotted with out buildings. Two puppies frolicked about the clean, grassy lawn. But the buildings were not in keeping with the natural beauty of their surroundings. The outbuildings, though sufficient, were small, unkempt and apparently unsubstantial. The dwelling itself was unpainted, weather-stained, and blackened with age. Built low to the earth, it sprawled out across the inclosure of the yard, with many outside doors opening directly upon the porch. A small portion of it went into a low upper story with an end gable facing the front and its only window covered by a piece of screen wire tacked over the outside, at places torn loose, and yellow with rust and age. The entire building gave little evidence of attention to repairs, except such as were necessary to hold it together and keep it weathertight. No improvements have been made in many years.
Abe came out to the car, with a friendly smile, and extended a hearty handshake. Tall, spare, and erect, his clean-shaven, ruddy face showed the coloring and health of sunshine and the out-of-doors. His appearance was neat, and his clothing, while suited to farm duties, was clean and orderly. His bearing was easy and confident, and his entire personality pleasing.
"I am patching the porch floor," he said. "A part of it has given out. I am simply trying to keep the house together and livable. It is not of sufficient value to remodel, and money spent in a complete repairing would be almost wasted. My wife is a young woman and will probably outlive me by many years. I have very seriously considered building a new, but money put in nice buildings on a farm is just that much tied up with no prospect of recovery. In case of sale, farm buildings seldom bring a reasonable proportion of original cost and seldom full value. Good farm land is different. Even with sorry buildings, or no buildings, it sells as readily and at as high value per acre. Good buildings just don't seem to count. Of course, they look better and are more attractive and comfortable, but in dollars and cents they just don't pay. If my wife were suddenly left a widow she would probably have to abandon the farm, and tenants have no pride in good buildings and under their care and occupancy they rapidly deteriorate. Under the tenant system, without strict management and supervision, even the land, much as it would pay the tenant in returns to keep the soil up in productiveness, rapidly declines. So I am trying to do the thing I think best for my wife in the future.
"This place was not inherited by me. In it I have no pride of ancestry. In the settlement of my brother's estate, it had to be sold to make assets. I bought it as an investment and because, for several years prior to his death, I had farmed it. Until my marriage about seven years ago, for several years I had lived here alone. It was a good farm then; it's a better one now. All my investments have been in improvements of the soil and the land. There are now about 120 acres cleared, which is about double the original acreage, but at sufficient price I would sell it. I own several other farms, but I own nothing by way of property I would not sell at sufficient profit. As the old saying goes, my wife is about the only property I am interested in which I would not part with at a price.
"This place is generally called the Huston Place. I have known it for some thirty-odd years. When I came here in 1904, it was occupied by two Huston brothers and the children of one of them, three daughters and one son. My brother preceded me by one year and had cultivated a tobacco crop on the place and lived with the family. I spent my first year here and worked for my brother as a farm hand for wages. I was just turned twenty-one. I hadn't even sufficient clothing, and all I made that year went for necessities. My brother fell in love with the oldest daughter and afterwards married her. When the widow of the last owner died the place descended to a bunch of heirs who were not interested in keeping it. My brother bought up the various shares---partly through sentiment---but never lived here afterwards. I have occupied it ever since.
"Although the house has no semblance of colonial models, a part of it is undoubtedly very old, possibly dating back to late colonial times. The back wing is a part of the original building. Its timbers are mortised and pegged and were hewn from leaf long pitch pine. It certainly dates back many years prior to the War Between the States, and it is known to have originally belonged to the so-called gentry. In fact, the owners just prior to and just after the War were two spinster sisters, the descendants of original owners---a large family of wealth and social distinction in the old South. But wealth does not 'specially respect or favor distinctions, and the up heavels of war shattered their social fabric and swept away the family fortunes, leaving but another instance of the casualties of war. Most of those of the generation immediately following the War were utterly unfitted by either attitude or training to cope with the hard realities of life, and so the old homesteads have mostly fallen into more thrifty hands."
For a time he sat silent, reflecting, his eyes fixed on some distant object, yet apparently seeing nothing.
"I have accumulated," he said. "Trained in the school of experience, I learned early in life from bitter poverty and hard labor and deprivations the lesson of frugality and close application. Just as they of that generation who were schooled in the social graces and surrounded by leisure and plenty and who were not fitted for the grim battle with the hard realities of life, I, bred in poverty and reared to hard work have always felt the lack of social experiences and the want of education and culture. Due to the customs of their training and the surroundings of their youth, they learned little of the practical side of life; without fault on my part, I missed their advantages. The consciousness of these shortcomings has driven me relentlessly onward in the pursuit of a competence and has ever confirmed in me the determination to succeed.
"At the age of twenty-one, in poverty, I faced life without training and with no education. To begin with, it was a question of meat and bread. I knew only farm work, and so I began there as a mere laborer. But then life held little promise for me, and I was without outlook and purpose. That came later, and gradually.
"In 1905 I cropped on the old Porter Place, which my brother later bought and occupied. I cultivated ten acres of tobacco on shares, and cleared $200, $100 of which I saved and which I reckon I still have today. It has been my nest egg, so to speak. My third year I made nothing; cleared just about $1.40. The following three years I was employed as overseer on the old Captain Peters' farm, and from my salary I saved $1,000, the first $1,000 I ever possessed. My, but didn't my heart jump whenever I thought of it. My first actual investment was $100 for stock in a farm supply corporation. Although the company later retired from business, it still owns the building, and I suppose my stock is good for par at some future time.
"I have never suffered any losses in land, but I had my lesson. As the saying goes, 'the shoemaker should always stick to his last.' In that crazy period of speculation about 1918 to 1920 when farmers seemed almost able to snatch money from mid-air, I invested $7,500 in some wildcat, get-rich-quick marl and fertilizer company stock and lost every cent. Since then my savings have gone principally in lands, and in a few local enterprises where I could personally watch them. And gradually my savings have increased. On farming operations my earnings and profits vary, but I am almost always able to make something. For the past six years my annual income from all sources has averaged, perhaps, $3,500 to $4,000. For the six years prior to that it was perhaps about $2,000. With my present holdings and investments and with average conditions, such as prevail today, my income would be sufficient for all our ordinary needs in the future.
"We can't get away from the tenant system. If we did, some of our people would go without bread, and this does not apply to the Negro tenant alone, either. About the poorest and sorriest tenant on my place is a white man. He just can't seem to manage to get along, but there is nothing else he can turn to for bread. One time the owner of a good farm by inheritance, he went from bad to worse, until now he has less than nothing. In spite of my supervision and direction, he usually manages to come out behind. On the other hand, I have Negro tenants who usually come out ahead. But I cannot turn him adrift to starve, or worse. He and his brother started life with equal shares of a good farm. The brother made good; he failed.
"I have always wanted to be a lawyer and to get into politics, to go to Congress. Too late now, of course, but I shall never feel quite satisfied. As an outsider and a mere voter, I have always been interested in public affairs. Although I have never sought to be even a local leader and have always been too busy with my own affairs to aspire to local public office, I have always voted. Although I am a Democrat and a strict party man, I believe in clean politics and honest officials, and in the primaries I always support the man I think best. But after the primary, I consistently support the party nominee. I admire men of the type of some of our Congressmen and I think I would enjoy such a position of power and influence.
"Naturally, I am a follower of the President. I believe sincerely in his policies and have faith and confidence in his administration. I believe in its agricultural policies and voted last year for tobacco acreage control. I expect to support it when the question is again submitted. I cannot forget what tobacco farmers went through in 1920 and what they have been through several times since then. I also remember conditions in 1932 and 1933. In the period of my re-collection---and I am now fifty-five---this President is the only one who has made any apparent effort to influence legislation in favor of and for the benefit of agriculture. Manufacturers have had their tariff, and industrial centers have flourished under it; wealthy estates have been built up; but until now the farmer had to face the uncertainties and vicissitudes of his occupation, unaided and unprotected by artificial barriers of legislation. Under present administration farm policies he has, I feel, the assurance of an even break and a fair chance in the economic distribution. At least the odds are not so much against him as formerly.
"I was born in the early 80's, less than twenty years after the close of the Civil War. My father was first a merchant but failed about the twelfth year of his married life and had to turn to farming. He became, and always remained, a mere two-horse tenant farmer. We were a large family, six boys and one girl. I know too well what the average farm family went through in those hectic days. All had to work, and I mean work hard. Only at twenty-one was each boy free to go his way into the unknown world and seek his future, and the freedom and enjoyment of his own income.
"No, I have no children, and at my age I do not want them. I married late in life, after years of bachelorhood, a woman much younger than myself. I would be unwilling to leave her a widow with the sole care and responsibility of children. And besides, I just don't believe in large families. One of a large family myself, where poverty meant a desperate fight against sheer want, where ease was unknown, and where real relaxation and enjoyment was almost impossible, I acquired a dread of the wolf at the door. This, and my consciousness of the lack of social graces, probably explains my late marriage. I had neither time nor the poise I felt necessary for social pleasures. Yes, I wanted it, but I was very sensitive. And my knowledge of my personal shortcomings kept me apart.
"I can read and write---self-taught---and I have sufficient native and acquired ability to attend to routine business affairs, and be at ease in business contacts with others. And I seldom find it necessary to seek help from others. In the home we have a radio and get magazines and sufficient daily papers, and I can do sufficient reading to keep fairly well posted on current events. We have a car, of course, and some of our evenings are spent in town. My wife enjoys the theatre, but often I loaf about and wait for her on the outside, talking with friends until it is over. I am not a church member, and I do not attend Sunday School or any other regular services. However, we do visit churches, mostly indiscriminately, and I sometimes contribute, though not systematically. My mother was a member of a sect which does not believe in missions and church schools, and I suppose I have absorbed more or less her faith. I believe in diversions but do think many of the modern amusements are demoralizing to the young. I am probably a bit strict and puritanical in my ideas, and it may be best that I should have no children to rear and train in this fast moving modern world.
"Personally, my routine day begins at five in the morning when I get up. As I keep six head of mules for farm work, a cow, and other livestock and as I have always cared for them myself, it is necessary that I start early; otherwise, my day is given largely to farm management and supervision. My tenants and farm hands work ten hours. My own day ends when I am able to get through. We usually retire at about nine-thirty in the evening.
"We, of course, have good and sufficient food, and a well-balanced variety. I am no faddist and have inherited a belief in substantial eats, but experience has taught me how to select. I have had digestive troubles and have had to resort to hospitals and doctors. At present, I am thankful I enjoy good health. I have never been what you might call immoral, though at one period of my life I consumed too much liquor. But I have learned better, for I suffered physical consequences which I could easily trace to overindulgence. I am no fanatic on the question, but personally liquor is not for me. So far as I am concerned, others may do as they like."
He opened the car door and stepped out, still talking, but his covert glance toward his work plainly indicated that he wished to return to his unfinished task.
LAR
