<text not clear>
Ida L. Moore
<text not clear>
I stood there and watched the hope which had shone in his eyes die away and I heard his voice, slow and weary, explain. "For a minute I thought you was the lady from the employment office come to say you had me a job."
He dropped the hammer with which he had been mending a rickety chair, ran his hand through his hair and said, "Won't you go in," I want up the steps to the porch and sat down in the swing. The man followed after and seated himself in the only chair on the porch.
"I noticed as I passed by that the mill wasn't running," I remarked. "What's the trouble?"
"Why, the mill here shut down five months ago never to open again," the man answered. "Most of the machinery that's any good has been moved out and shipped to other mills. Then a heap of it went to the junk dealer."
"What about the houses?" I wanted to know. "Does the company still own them?"
"Two real estate companies bought 'em. It's been about as sad a sight as you'll run across to watch some of the old hands move away. This here was home to 'em, been all the home they've knowed for thirty or forty year. We had to move off the street we was on too --- come to this place yesterday --- we've not got things straightened out yet --- but we've just lived in the village two years and don't have no long attachment to no particular house. Negroes have moved in to the house on the other three streets. All the mill people that was left has moved on to this street. Some of us may be movin' again soon because we've not got much means of payin' $3.00 a week house rent. I'm paid up for two weeks. After that I'm just a hopin'. My hope has wore down about as thin as my clothes though. I'd not believed back in '32 that it woulder lasted this long. It was just at the end of Hoover's time that I first gotout of a job. Workin' in Fort Mill, South Carolina where I was raised and the mill shut down. Seems like after that I'd not more'n get to another till it would shut down too. Gettin' even part time work here for two whole years was like --- well, I don't know hardly how to say it but it was sorta like bein' so sick and tired you didn't believe you could hold up your head another minute and then findin' yourself stretched out on a good soft bed. In four years I had been to five mills and spent nearly a year in the country workin' from sun-up to sundown for my board."
The man stopped speaking and turned his head away from me to gaze down the street. He was not an old man, perhaps between thirty and thirty-five, but he looked old now --- old and defeated and resigned. It was the way he sat in his chair, the listless manner in which his hands rested on his lap, the way he held his head, which gave him the appearance of age. He seemed a definite part of the street that stretched before him in depressing stillness. I waited for a long minute hoping that he'd tell me something about the jobs he'd had in the past few years. But still he continued to gaze down the street. He turned his head only slightly when a man passed by; he spoke to him in a monosyllable; then rocked backward a little in his chair. Throughout the whole length of the street there was no sign of life, no people moving about. Only an occasional open door or a curtain at a window gave evidence that the houses were lived in. Finally I spoke and the man turned toward me as if drawn out of a depressing dream.
"Why did you go to the country?" I asked.
"Because they was no where else to go," the man replied. "The mill shut down so sudden and for awhile I didn't know which way to turn. Then my uncle told me he thought maybe Mr. Rains would give me work on his farm. He give me the work but I've not got the pay yet.
"Me and my wife had bought up right nice furniture and we hated to move it into the rundown house he provided for us but we was needin' a shelter too bad to be choosey. The house had a faulty flue. One day right after dinner when me and Gladys was workin' in a field a half a mile away our house caught on fire and burned to the ground. When I first saw the blaze I started runnin' and didn't slack until I got there --- Justin time to see the roof fallin' in. We didn't save even a change of clothes.
"The neighbors was right good, though, give us what clothes they could spare. Mr. Rains fixed up a outhouse he had, been used once for a crib. We moved into that and made out the best we could. I kept workin' hard as ever and took a notion my work was worth more'n what we got to eat. I asked Mr. Rains for a pair of overalls but he wouldn't get 'em. Somehow that made me so mad I couldn't keep working in his fields no longer. I left that night and went to Charlotte and got me a job at the old Highland Park Mill. As soon as I drawed my first pay I sent for Gladys and the two children. We went up town and bought us a little furniture on time and it seemed like we was about to begin living again, though I wa'n't makin' what you would call a big wage.
"Well, sir, we'd paid about a third on the furniture when the Highland Park shut down and I was on the hunt of a job again.
"Papa had come to live with me. It was right touchin' to see him try to keep my spirits up when he was so worried he was pretty near crazy hisself. Truth is, he did lose his mind before he died two year later, and it won't a thing but his pride hurtin' cause he couldn't still hold a job in the mill. After the mill had closed on him at Fort Mill he believed for a long time that he could get him a job somewhere. He had the name of being one of the best loom fixers anywhere around, but Papa was almost sixty then, and 'course he didn't have a chance when hundreds of young hands were beggin' for jobs.
"After I left Highland Park I went to three mills before I finally got a job. Pamona wasn't a big mill and it didn't pay much, but Lord, I was thankful for that job. Gladys couldn't come right off because Jenny, the third one, was only a week old, but by the time I drawed the second time I sent for her and the children and Papa. It was hard to tell then whether a mill would be running from one week to the next though some of the bigger mills was flourishin' and puttin' on two shifts to keep up with the orders. I just wouldn't allow myself to think much because it seemed like I couldn't stand it if Pamona shut down and left me without a job again. We bought a little furniture and started over like we had done before. Pamona run exactly nine weeks from the day I started to work. It seemed to me if I could go out in the road and have a truck run over me and kill me dead that minute it would be about the most merciful thing could happen to me.
"After Pamona, I worked spare hand at two other mills, but never got enough ahead to send for my family --- some days I thought I'd lose my mind thinkin' about Gladys and them children and Papa sittin' back there in Pamona with nothin' to eat and no way of helping theirselves. --- just sittin' and waitin.'
"Finally I got on here at East Durham and it won't long till I had my family with me. We've managed to pay, pretty near, for the furniture we got this time. They've been mighty nice about lettin' me keep it and once I get regular work again I can finish makin' the payments in a little while."
In the house across the street two little girls, about six and seven years of age, had come on the porch and with their elbows propped on the bannisters they gazed solemnly across at us. Their hair hung in uneven sprigs about their pale faces. Their dresses were ragged and loose-fitting. They straightened themselves up presently and with a slow rocking to and fro which pushed them one against the other they were singing a song. Their voices floated across the street, childish voices with a certain dreary rhythm. Now and then the words were distinct and one line found its way into their song again and again.
"There'll be no bur -- dens there," they sang as they kept time with the slow motion of their bodies.
"They're in bad shape over there," the man said to me. "Six children and the man and his wife. He got a job a few weeks back, drivin' a truck, but he just makes $8.00 a week. Them two on the porch was in the refuge home back in the winter. They've got a awful good turn for singin' not to be any older'n they are.
"They're not very healthy looking children," I remarked.
"Most on this street ain't," the man said. "They've not had what you'd call the proper food for a good many months. One of the biggest things in the commodity sack, goin' "by quantity, is beans and dried beans is just naturally too strong for the summertime. My children has to eat more of 'em than is good for 'em I know, but like my neighbors I've got to the place I can't help myself no longer.
"I've done every way I knowed how to get a job. When I heard that the mill was goin' to close for good I went up town and registered at the unemployment office. It wa'n't long before I was goin' up there every day or two to see if they had anything on the list I could do.
"The company let us stay on in the houses till they sold 'em last month, and I'm tellin' you it was a God's blessin' for most of us. I couldner paid rent to save my life. 'Course I drawed a little compensation then but it didn't allow for no rent. Though I kept on goin' to the unemployment office I couldn't get any sort of work. With the comin' of spring I went from house to house askin' for odd jobs and now and again I got windows to clean. And one lady give me a job diggin' up a yard and sowin' it in grass. I got $4.00 for that.
"Then one day when I went up to the employment office, they told me a silk mill in Blackstone, Virginia was wantin' weavers and they had recommended me. Told me to go up there and the job was mine. I come home, borrowed $3.00 from a friend and set out. Once I got up into Virginia I walked for miles. I tried to thumb cars but they'd just pass me by --- seems they have a ruling up there against hitch hikers and, too, I had on my overalls. Tain't everybody that'll pick up a man when he ain't dressed up.
"When I got to Blackstone I met up with a feller that worked in the silk mill I was goin' to. I asked him if he knew where I could find a boardin' place and he told me, sure, come on round to where he stayed and his landlady would make arrangements to take me. They told me here that before I reported for work in the mill to go to the employment office in Farmville and register. I caught the bus over so as to be back in Blackstone to go to work that night. When I told the woman my name was Clarence Byrd she got out a list and found I was on it, and she fixed me out a card to take to the superintendent. When I got back in Blackstone I had just one dime in my pocket but that didn't worry me; a job was waitin' for me, and a boardin' place too. It was half a hour before time to go to work but instead of goin' to the boardin' house just across the street from the mill I went straight and gave my card to the Superintendent. He looked at me and then he looked at the card, 'We've changed our minds," he said, "and we're not putting on any more weavers. I'd a felt good then if he'd a knocked me down instead of sayin' them words. He seemed in a awful big rush to get somewhere else but I had thought enough left to ask him to write on my card the reason I hadn't got the job. I knew the Durham office might think I'd not been to Blackstone at all. He took the card and wrote across it, No Vacancies. Then the thought come to me he ought to sign his name and when I got back to Durham I was glad I had that much proof.
"I knew a dime wouldn't buy a night's lodgin' and I was too miserable to look for the park --- if they was one there. I went over to the boarding house and the woman was lookin' for me. I upped and told her everthing and laid the dime on the table. 'Reckon I better be on my way to the park,' I said to her, 'but if you'd give me just a little somethin' to eat for that dime I'd be glad.' She handed the dime back to me and said, "I've knowed hard times myself. You're welcome to free lodgin' tonight and no word said. Supper is ready and you might as well come on and eat too.'
"She got up and fixed my breakfast real early the next mornin' and while I was eatin' she left the dinin' room end come back t'rectly totin' a little box. She opened it up, took out a dollar bill and put it down by my plate. 'I'm the treasurer of the Missionary Society,' she said, 'and we've been makin' a collection for foreign missions and while I'm not against foreign missions myself I've got a stronger belief in home missions --- I don't think I'll have no trouble explainin' to the Society.'
"I thanked her the best I knew how and she set there studyin', not payin' much attention to what I'd said. 'You'll be a right good piece from home when the dollar's rode out, won't you?' she said finally. I told her I would but not near so far as I'd be without the dollar.
"It was plain to see she was busy thinkin' up somethin' and after a while she commenced talkin'. 'Don't go to a bus station," she said, 'but get out on the road and flag a bus --- that way you don't have to buy a ticket 'til you've had time to talk with the driver. If you'll explain to him the fix you're in, I believe he'll let you ride more than a dollar's worth.
"While I finished my breakfast she got up and fixed me a big lunch, enough to last for two days in a push. I tried again to tell her how thankful I was for everything and then left.
"When the bus reached the first rest stop and all the passengers got off but me, the driver said, 'Buddy, you'd better get your ticket," and that give me a chance to tell him my story. When I'd finished he said, 'You've sure hit it hard and I've got a heap of sympathy for you. Your money'll take you just to Clarksburg but if I can manage I won't put you off there. Just before we get into Clarksburg you go to the back of the bus and pretend like you're asleep. If you stay hid well enough I won't have to notice you've not got off.'
"Well, I slept right on into Durham or rather I stayed in the <text not clear> of the bus with my eyes shut. When we reached the last rest stop, and everybody had got off the bus again, the driver come to me and told me when we got into Durham not to get off the bus until he drove round in the parking lot and nobody would notice me. I felt like hugging that man I was so grateful to him. He said his name was Hardisby and I told him they'd sure give him the wrong name --- wasn't anything hard about him.
"It wasn't easy to tell Gladys the job had fell through. Her and the children hadn't had a bite to eat all day and there wasn't even a bean in the house. The people up at the employment office couldn't hardly believe what I told them and I think they wouldner if I hadn't had the signed card. They investigated it and found out the superintendent of the mill had just neglected to tell the Farmville office they had changed their minds.
"One day about four weeks ago when I was up at the employment office they said they had me work to do on Friday and Saturday in a grocery store. On Fridays I start at work at twelve o'clock and work as late as I'm needed that night. Then I start at seven o'clock that night restocking the shelves. That job brings me in $3.00 every week and I just hope I can hold on to it 'till I get regular work.
"Miss Clark, one of the ladies at the employment office, is trying to get me on a construction job as a pipe fitter. I've not had no experience at that but I believe I could learn. She says I wouldn't make so good for a year or two but once I got learnt up so I could join the Pipe Fitters' Union they'd be a good livin' in it for me.
"They's no future for a man at the cotton mill now and I want to get away from it if I can. Miss Clark has been awfully good about holdin' out encouragement, but that don't feed a man's children or buy 'em clothes either. There's not been a rag of clothes bought here, up 'till last week, since the mill shut down. I was obliged to get me a pair of shoes if I kept on workin'.
"Two weeks ago my work compensation started again --- don't know how they arrange it but well as I understand it's the beginnin' of the new work year --- and I' drawin' $6.50 from it now. The three dollars I make at the store brings it up to $9.50 a week. But that won't feed folks like they ought to eat and pay house rent and a water bill and the other things it takes to live."
A threatening cloud had gathered in the east as Clarence Byrd talked and now quite suddenly the rain began to pour. A fine peppery shower blew in cm the porch and we got up to go inside. We entered a room containing two beds --- one of which quilts were substituted for a mattress --- an old dresser, and three chairs. There were four children in the room and they were eating big biscuits which they seemed to enjoy. A woman with a baby in her arms and a biscuit in her hand came from the kitchen and seeing that a stranger was present she went back for a moment to lay her bisuit on the table. "It looks stormy," she said as she sat down in the vacant chair.
The rain lashed against the windows and lightning brought quick vivid flashes of light into the dark room. Two of the children hovered close about their mother's knee and the other two grouped themselves around their father's chair. Sometimes when the thunder crashed with a terrific sound the children grinned at one another in a half-frightened manner, and then, uneasy with themselves, hit solemnly into their biscuits. None of us talked for a while and I sat there reading the list of "Home Blessings" which hung on the wall.
"The crown of the home is Godliness,
The beauty of the home is order,
The glory of the home is hospitality,
The blessing of the home is contentment.
The largest of the girls ventured away from her mother's knee and walked warily toward the window at the end of room. The storm outside seemed to overwhelm her and she stopped two feet short of the window and turned around as if to draw assurance from the sight of her family. The little girl next to her in age, crept up slowly and stood there grinning at her sister with a wide protruding-tooth grin. There was an old woman's seriousness about the older child's face, and looking at her sister she said, "Thunder don't hurt you,". The man and the woman exchanged smiles and the woman, taking on a lighter mien turned toward me to say, "Have you ever been here to this village before?"
"I was here last October," I replied. "The mill had just started running again after being closed for two or three weeks."
"Well, it's shut down for good now," the woman said. "This ain't like the same place it was in October. Niggers down there on the three lower streets. One day a man come around and put signs an all the houses, 'For Colored Only.' The people hadn't been notified to move out and they was mad. Boys got together of a night and broke out the windows in nearly all the houses. Some talked of mobbin' the niggers if they moved in and that had the niggers scared off for awhile. But Mr. Blair, the man that had bought the houses, offered to give colored families free rent for two weeks and move their furniture without charge besides. It wa'n't long till the white folks was out and the niggers was in.
"It was sad times, I'll tell you, when the movin' was goin' on. Just a handful was goin' on to steady jobs and the rest never knowed what was ahead. We don't yet. They was big families of children and their parents didn't know where they'd find a shelter for 'em. But you know, it seemed to me that outof them I seen move the pitifullest one was poor old Miss Marthy Steele. Her and Mr. Steele had lived here for over foty years, been in one house twenty-five. Nobody 18ve ever seen loved flowers better'n Miss Marthy and she had a yard plumb full. I went over that mornin' she was movin' and she was diggin' up a rose bush to take with her and I've wondered a heap o' times if she got it to live. It was a right big bush to be movin'. I took the spade and helped her dig awhile myself, first one flower and then another. She tried to tell me where she had got the different plants and how long they had been planted, but directly she started cryin'.
"Somehow I never thought I'd have to move from here," she said. Then I commenced cryin' too.
"We never had to move as soon as the rest 'cause our house won't on one of the regular streets. It was settin' off down there by the little Park next to the mill. Course it won't but just a little piece from the last house on Piece Street and it put us right in the neighborhood with the colored people. We got along all right the three weeks we lived there after the Negroes moved in but trouble may happen any time. The white people around here are still mad. The other day a negro boy was comin' from the store and two white boys started pickin' at him. I think they took away from him part of what he'd bought, then jumped on him. The Negro boy went home and told his daddy what had happened and the man got his gun and started runnin' up the street to settle with the white boys. Four men on this street got their guns and were ready for him. Somebody run up to the store and called the police and in no time four cars was out here. The Nigger had run off in the woods but it didn't take the cops long to find him. They settled it somehow without having to send anybody to jail, and I've not heard of any more trouble comin' from it. It sure had us scared for a while though. Looked like we was gonna have a regular uprisin'.
"You know, the way I see it them white boys was at fault. I've not got no hard feelin's against the niggers for movin' in. My feelin's are against the white man that moved 'em in. Both white and colored will do the best they know how to help theirselves along and I guess it looked like a good offer to the niggers."
The storm had subsided and the rain fell in a slow drizzle. The children began to move about and talk among themselves and shortly the two older ones were arguing as to the ownership of a scrap of black checked cloth.
"Bring that here, Daisy," Clarence Byrd said and the child came forward with the cloth. "This is one of the patterns we made," he added. "It's a pretty piece I think. We had some patterns that run as many as six colors of fillin'."
"Tell me how this piece of cloth is woven," I said holding up the black and white scrap.
"I don't know hardly how to tell you," Clarence Byrd replied. "It would be a heap sighteasier to show you. What you start off with is the warp. The best way I know to describe it to a person who don't know anything about it is to call it a big roll of thread that makes the length of the cloth. It's hooked up into what you call the harness, each thread of the warp being run though one of the little eyes of the harness. The fillin' runs cross ways through two sets of thread on the warp. Now it's a interestin' thing the way the fillin' works. It comes out of a little box, a magazine, and drops down into the shuttle that runs back and forth in the warp. The pattern of the cloth is regulated by the pattern chain fixed on the opposite end of the loom. If one color of thread is to run six picks you set six notches on the chain and then if the next color is to run four picks you set four notches. You don't know what a pick is, do you? Well, it's when the shuttle runs through the warp and back again. I reckon you're wonderin' what becomes of one kind of fillin' when the pattern changes to another. There's a little box at the other end of the loom and when it's time for another color of thread to drop down out of the magazine the shuttle that's been carryin' on the pattern drops into one of the little partitions of the box and into there to start movin' again when that particular kind of thread is needed. As I've said before you've got your pattern chain set and there's no way for one kind of fillin' to run more picks than's already been set up in your pattern. I said there's no way, but what I mean is if the loom's not out of fix.
"Lint waste, or a lumpy place in the fillin' will cause a pick to break. That's where your real work comes in. You have to null the batten off top center and set the pattern chain and take the shuttle out and throw it through to the single end or the magazine end of the loom. Then you let off on the pick gear about two or three inches. Then it's ready to start. The shuttle picks the thread up where it broke off and keeps from having an uneven pick in the cloth.
"Weavin' is a man's job because pulling back the batten and adjustin' the loom for beginnin' again after a pick has broke is heavy work for a woman. A weaveroom is a sight that anybody ought to see though. You stand by a frame and watch it run and it seems almost like it's got a mind. I've made many a yard of cloth in my life and I wish I was down there now taking off a bolt. Runnin' more looms than you can keep up with ain't as bad as walkin' in the streets lookin' for a job.
"It's all I know, cotton mill work is. But I honestly believe I can learn pipe fittin' if Miss Clark can just get me that job. Lord knows, I hope it won't be many more weeks now. A man can just set around and wait until the heart's gone out of him and him not much fit for any job.
