In an otherwise identical version entitled "The Company Will Look After Me, the handwritten comment "exc" appeared on the top of page 12164, lines twenty-three through twenty-four were deleted, and all names and places were changed.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: WILL BOOZER. REFORMED BOOZER
Date of First Writing	December 29, 1938.
Name of Person Interviewd	Will Boozer (Negro)
Fictitious Name	None
Street Address	428 Charles Street
Place	Spartanburg, S.C.
Occupation	Storage (ice) man
Name of Writer	R.V. Williams
Name of Reviser	State Of ice
WILL BOOZER, REFORMED BOOZER
Will Boozer, negro, has been working for the Hygeia Ice and Coal Company in Spartanburg for 33 years, and he would like to be there "thurty-three mo' years if stormy wedder wouldn't git me." Will is 56 years old now, and although he doesn't like the plan of the officials of the company, he will be retired on a pension next year.
Will was born on a farm near White Stone in Spartanburg County, and spent his youth working on the farm.
"Us didn't have much money atter layin' -by time. Tuck 'bout all us made to pay for what us done tuck up. If us chillun got a piece of stick candy and an orgage at Christmas time, us thought us was mighty lucky. Eben de ole man don't know how much money us was going to git when us got the cotton picked. He allus say he leave de bookkeepin' up to Mistah White. We stayed on his place. But the best I 'members, us nevah had much cash.
"I come to Spartanburg thirty-four years ago las' July. I went to work for Mistah Crocker at de gas plant, and I stayed wid my Aunt Emma down on Baptis' Side. I got twenty-five cents a day to start wid, and den dey raised me to thirty-five cents. Don't sound lak much money, but cash went a long way in dem days. Fat back was three and four cents, en' you could git jus' 'bout all de beans or peas you could tote for a quartah. Git good overhawls for fifty cents. Shoes 'bout de thing what cost you mos'. Dey was 'round dollar and a half a pair for good shoes. But den dey was good shoes. Dey was made outta sho'-'nough leather, and dey last whole lot longer den dese shoes we gits today.
"I jus' dont 'xactly 'member what things cost in dem days, but I sho' can tell you dat a little money went long ways. When I went to live wid Aunt Emma, I give her two dollars a week. Dat tuck care of my room and board and my washin'. Dat left me seventy-five cents for myself. We worked seben days a week den. When I got my raise, I give her fifty cents each week to save for me. All I spent wag for chewin' 'bacco. Wasn't much else to spend for den."
Will does not yet understand why the "gov'ment" is interested in his life history, nor does he like to discuss the reason why he lost his job at the gag plant.
"Ain't no use lyin' 'bout it," Will said, "I loss out down dere 'cause I'se hittin' the bottle mighty heavy. Mistah Crocker kept tellin' me I'se going to lose my job, but dat wag de first real money dat I'd evah had. I 'spect I'd been a pretty good nigger till I come to work at de gas plant. But one day, I come to work with de misery in de head. Ole Tom Moore gimme a drink o' cawn. Dat stuff jus' run me wild. Mistah Crocker say for me to go home and come back nex' mornin'. Nex' mornin' I come in drunk agin. Mistah Crocker found me 'hind the coal pile where I was sleepin'. De fires what I 'sposed to be lookin' atter in de boilers done mos' gone out. He tell me he going to gib me one mo' chance. De very nex' day, I'se fellin' bad, and I goes and gits me a half gallon. Didn't cost but thirty-five cents dem days if you knowed where to git it. Mistak Crocker seed me coming a-staggerin' up to de plant. He just tell me to go to de office 'cause I'se through. I reckon dat ole cawn made me kinda crazy ' cause I tole him I wasn't quittin'. I was a mean nigger den. He Knocked me down and throwed me out. Den he say dat if he catch me down dere again, he's going cut ray throat. I'd sobered up by dat time, and I sho' took off."
"'Bout a week atter dat, yo' daddy seed me when he was going to work. He axe me how come I ain't workin' an' I tole him I been laid off. Somehow, he find out from Mistah Crocker what happened, an' de next time I seed him, he cussed me cut for telling him a lie. Dan he say he'll give me a job at de ice house if I lay off booze. I promised I would. He put me work rollin' coal to de boiler room, 'an he worked me mos' to death for 'bout two months.
" In dem days, dey made all de ice wid steam. Dem big boilers would eat up dat coal 'bout fast as I could roll it in. I sho' was glad when wintah time come, an' dey shut down one of de boilers. I'd been thinkin' 'bout dat a long time, an' I figured I'd have me a easy time when de cold wedder come. But de day dey shut down the little boiler, dey put me to loadin' coal on wagons. Dat was wust dan rollin' coal 'cause I had to work out in de cold.
"One day, Mistah Hagood come and tole me he going to change me from de coal pile to de storage room. Hit took me a long time at first to git used to workin' in dat storage room. I'd mos' freeze to death. I soon got used to it, an' I can stay in dere all day now.
"Mistah Hagood, he was a mighty good man. He owned de ice house at dat time. I 'spect he 'bout de bes' man I'se evah knowwd. Nevah will forget dat ten dollars he gib me.. You 'members dat, Mistah Vance, 'cause you was in it. You and de Hagood boys kinda hang 'round de ice house all de time. Y'all lak to play in de shavings room. 'Member when us ship off a car of ice, us puts shavings over de ice? Mistah Hagood kept dat room 'bout full of shavings all de time, an' you boys go in dere and tumble down on de shavings pile. I'spect it was 'bout fifty feet high, an' y'all climb up to de top and roll down. Ain't no use me tellin' you 'bout dat 'cause you 'members. But I sho' nevah forgit dat day when Mistah Elmer got buried when dat big pile of shavings caved in. I 'members y'all come -a-runnin' from dat room and tellin' me Mistah Elmer is undah dat pile of shavings. I run down dere and grabbed de pitchfo'k. I dug in, but I sho' was scared I'd hit Mistah Elmer. 'Bout dat time, somebody done tole Mistah Hagood 'bout it, an' he come flying down dere. You boys was all crying. Y'all done thought he done been smothered under dem shavings. I 'spect I got him out jus' in time. My pitchfo'k hit his shoe, an' when I seed dat leg, I jus' reached in and drug him out. He was 'bout sufcated, but us beat him on de back, an' he come to. Nex' Sat'day, Mistah Hagood give me ten dollars extry.
"Dat ten dollars sho' looked big to me. An' it sho' got me in a lot of trouble. I figures its time to do a little bit of celebratin'. When I come to work dat nex' day - hit was on Sunday mornin' - I sho' had a terrible headache. Mistah Hagood say for me to go home and take some oil. I tuck off, but I didn't take no oil. I had a hangover. I went home, and ole John Jackson, who stayed next door to me at dat time, he come ovah to see how come I ain't workin. Dat time, you could git a quart of likker evah month. John jus' had got a quart. He tole me a good drink would help me out. I ought a knowed bettah. I tuck one den drink, and den he sold me de rest of what was in de bottle 'cause his rent man is coming round de nex' mornin' an' he ain't got no money.
"I got jus' plum drunk, an' I got it in my crazy head to go back to de ice house. I went back dere and went in de storage room an' tole Will Harrison to git going. Dey sent him in dere when I went horns. He say I'm too drunk to work, an' for me to git going 'fore de boss come ' round. I don't 'members much what happened, but dey tells me 'bout it nex' day. Anyhow, Me and Will started fighting, an' I picked up a pair of ice hooks and started atter him. He run out de storage room to de platform. I'se rite atter him. Dere was some white ladies out dere gittin' ice. I kep' on cussin rite in front of dem. Mistah Hagood come out de office wid yo' daddy atter him. "Cap" Williams say for me to stop cussin' an' to git in de back. Dey say I tole him to go to hell. He started at me, an' I throwed dem ice hooks at him. If dey had hit him, hit sho' would have kilt him. Den I pulled out my knife. When I done dat, he picked up de crow-bar on de platform an" hit me ovah de head wid it. Dat knocked me cold. Doctah Black come down dere and sewed me up.
Deny dey sent me home in a wagon.
"I went back to de ice house de nex' mornin' to see if I had some money comming to me. I nevah did know jus' how much I had coming to me. Evah I needs money, I jus' went to the office and axed for some. Dey kep' 'count of hit in dere. Mistah Hagood tole me dat morning dat I done been paid in full. He say I'se fired which I knows. I begged him for my job back, but he say he ain't going to allow no drunk nigger workin' for him.
" I sho' didn't know what to do, 'cause jobs was scarce in dem days. 'Bout dat time, Miss Harris and her sistah come up. Dey was de white ladies what I cussed in front of. I 'pologizes to dem, an' I tole dem dat dat was de first time I been drunk since I come to
work at de ice house. Dey went on into de office and commenced talkin' to Mistah Hagood. I tuck off for home.
"I went back to de plant de nex' day to git some overhawls what I lef' dere. Mistah Hagood seed me in de yard an' he calls me to de office. he say Miss Harris axed him to gibe me 'nother chance. Den he cussed me out, an' he say he going to try me out once mo'. I was de happiest nigger you evah saw. I ain't nevah took a drink since dat day."
During the summer period, Will has charge of the cold storage room in which ice is placed and withdrawn when needed. In the winter time, he works part of the time in the storage room, and part on the coal yard. Sometimes, he drives a coal wagon. He always drives a wagon when delivering coal because he has never learned how to drive a truck.
"Druther drive ole Tome and Jerry dan one of dem trucks," Will said. "An' jus' 'cause dey are hosses, dem young niggers drivin' dem trucks allus sayin' how slow I is. But de boss says I can git coal 'livered 'bout fast as dey does. Dey take dem trucks and carry de coal where it gotta go. Den dey unload and loaf 'round a long time. Sometime dey take de trucks atter dey unloaded and go to some nigger join an' stay dere till dey figure it's time to git back to de plant. When I drives, I keeps my hosses movin'. Lotta times I gits back here 'fore dey do.
"I ain't 'sposed to haul coal at all. I'se sposed to hab charge of de storage room. But my legs ain't what dey used to be. Dey start hurtin' if I stay in dere too long. When dey gits lak dat, I go to de boss an' he puts me in de coal yard or on a wagon. De days what my legs don't hurt, I stay in de storage room all de time. But de boss lets me drive when I gits ready."
Will was married when he started to work at the ice plant. but he does not remember the exact data.
"I jus' don't 'member when it was," Will said, in discussing his family. "Us had five chillun. Tom - he de oldest - he got killed in dat automobile accident rite atter de war. Henry - he de nex' oldest - he got de 'flu' and died in 1923. Mary married Will Dawkins and dey lib in Detroit where he works. 'Lizbeth and Martha work here as cooks. Mary (Will's wife) used to work out but she done had to gib up her job, 'cause she gittin' too feeble and old to do heavy work.
"Us gits along mighty fine wid what me an' de girls makes. Us been livin' in dat same house on Char/ ES Street for 'bout twenty years. If I knowed den what I does now. I'd own dat house. We done paid 'noggh rent to paid for dat house. Us pays five dollars a week now. One time, us didn't hab to pay but one dollar a week. I makes fourteen dollars, an' de gals' gits five dollars each 'cides their meals 'cept breakfus'. I'se got a radio, an' all de furniture been paid for a long time. I'se well fized on inshorance. I'se got company inshorance ovah here. 'Cides dat, I'se got some wid de Commonwealth I'se had for a long time.
"Mos' money I'se evah made here was during de war time. De kids was coming along 'bout dat time, an' I didn't have to go to war. I worked rite on here, couldn't git much help during de war. Lot of de niggers here quit and went to work at de camp, dem dat didn't hab to go to de war. Us had a lotta trouble gittin' good workers dem days. If de boss say somethin' dey don't lak, dey jus' quit, 'cause dey knowed dey could git a job mos' anywhere.
"Durin' de war days, sometimes I made much as six dollars a day. I'd come to work at five in de mornin' and sometimes I work till midnight. Dey paid us ovahtime den. An' on top of dat, us gits lots of tips.
"When de camp first comes here, us uses six trucks to carry ice out dere. I 'members dat 'fore dey put up dere ice plant out dere, us could git 'bout anything us wanted for ice. Do boss put me on a truck wid Mistah Shores. Us loads up thirteen blocks and take off for de camp. When us git dere, dere was lots of dem companies of soldiers what didn't hab no ice. Some of dem soldiers climb up 'side de truck and say dey get to hab ice. If us hadn't sell it to dem, dey would jus' take it away from us. Den dey was still buildin' de camp, and de people what worked out dere wanted lee too. Dem soldiers allus paid for de ice, an' mos' times they gibs us mof money dan us 'sposed to git. T'was a while us couldn't hardly git to de places where us 'sposed to liver de ice.
"But dem days didn't las' long. De general say dat ice gotta go where it 'sposed to be 'livered. Dem sentries would meet us at de camp. Dey would look ovah our ordahs and tell us which way to go. Lotta times dey put one of dem M.P.'s on de truck wid us so dat nobody don't git ice 'cept what is 'sposed to. Dem M. P.'s was harboiled. Dey don't, take no foolishness off nobody.
"Dat wintah of de war sho' was cold. Coal was hard to git. I 'members one time we don't hab no coal on de yard. Jus' couldn't git it. De gov'ment was using a lot at de camps, an' dan dey was shippin' lots across de watah. Dere was one time dat you couldn't buy mo' dan five hunnert pounds at a time.
" I made good money durin' dem times, but I wasn't no bettah off den dan I is now. Cost lots to live in dem days. An' when de depression come on, dey done cut wages long time 'fore things come down. Lak I said, wages is de first thing to come down and de las' thing to go up."
"Will has witnessed the growth of the Hygeia lce and Coal Company from a small plant to its present rank as one of the largest ice plants in the State.
"Sho' been a lotta changes since I first come here,' Will said. "Dey don't have but one tank and one engin' when I started work. Now, us got two tanks and two engines. Us can turn out 'bout two hunnert tons of ice evah twenty-fo' hours if us has to.
"When us put in dat second tank, dey put up dat big smoke stack. It was hunnert feet high. It had a ladder on hit, an' on de top was a platfo'm what you could walk 'round on. I nevah tried to climb dat ladder but one time. Niggers 'round here dan said I was scairt. Dey say dey gib me fifty cents if I do it. I got 'most to de top when I looked down. De ground seem lak it was a hunnert miles from where I was. I sho' did git scairt. I couldn' go on up, 'an I couldn't come down. I sho' was froze to dat ladder. I prayed de Good Lawd if He'd let me git down. I'd nevah git on dat thing agin. Seem lak it tuck me a year to git down.
"Dey tore down de smoke stack when dey put in 'lectricity. I don't lak to go in de engin' room now. I'se scairt of dat 'lectricity, 'an I nevah goes in dere 'less I has to. I done seed too much lightnin' in dere when a storm comes up.
"Talkin' bout 'lectricity, dese here 'lectric 'frigerators hurt de ice business. But it look lak one thing come 'long, somethin' else happen. When I first come here, us nevah iced no peach cars. Now us ices hunnerts of cars evah year, since dey started growin' all dem peaches up yondah 'round Gramlin'.
"Us has to git ready for de peach season. Dat's 'cause us needs mo' ice dan we can make. Dat's our rush season anyhow, and de peaches come in jus' at dat time. Long 'fore de peaches git ready to ship, us starts fillin' up do storage room wid all de ice us can pack in it. An' us makes all de ice we can durin' shippin' time. Eben den, us has to git ice from de Greenville plant to help out.
"I allus lak to see dat time come ' round, 'cause us gits lots of ovahtime during dem days. One time las' summer, I made twenty dollars one week, an' I nevah come under eighteen while dey was shippin'. De company built a icing station up dere at Hayne Shops. Us carry de ice from here up dere in trucks. Durin' de night, us ices up de 'frigerator cars, an' den dey is tuck to Inman or Gramlin 'fore daylight. When dey is loaded wid peaches, dey is brought back to Hayne for de re-icing. Den dey is sent on dere way."
The interview with Will was interrupted when one of the "pullers" came out of the tank rooms and told him they were ready to start "pulling" again. Will hurried into the storage room to catch the next "in-shoot" of ice from the "dumps." The 300-pound blocks of ice came sliding through the trap doors, two at a time. Quickly, Will caught them with his hooks and placed them in line, ends up. And while he worked, he sang his own version of a popular song of a few years ago, "Stormy Weather."
"Stormy wedder," Will chanted, "since me and my gal ain't togeder, keeps on rainin' all de time. Sho' hope stoomy wedder don't git me."
Will was perspiring freely when he emerged from the storage room, although the room is kept at a temperature of 12 degrees.
"Sho' I sweats in dere," Will said. "If I didn't I'd know I'se sick. I gits to sweatin' when I done placed up fifteen blocks. I handles sixty blocks on each dump. 'Cose I see how come you can't see how I Handle dat many three-hundred pound blocks, but dat's easy.
Hit jus' come easy atter you git used to it. I catch dem While dey is still slidin', gibs dem a jerk, 'an up dey comes on do ends."
Will is hoping that there will be a change in the company's plan to retire him next year.
"Mistah Harris tole me 'bout two weeks ago dab I got to quit nex' year," Will said, "but I'se heard some good news since dab time. Hit all started 'bout three Months ago when Mistah Sheldon - he de big man from Charleston - come up here to inspect de plant. He come 'round to de storage room an' axe me if I don't want to quit 'cause I'se gittin' old. He say de company will take care of me long as I live. I tole him I wanted to keep on workin' long as I could. I'se old, but I can handle dat storage room bettah den any nigger here. Den Mistah Harris come 'long as say What he did. But de good news I got come last week. Mistah Harris say dam dat he's 'cided to take me out de storage room and let me do odd jobs 'round de plant. Lak sweepin' up, and cleanin' up de yard, ar' things lak dat. He don't say what day going to gib me for dat, but I knows dey will take care of me. Jus' 'tween you and me, I "spect I'll be rite here in de storage room nex' summer.
"I knows I'se a nigger, 'an I knows I'se gittin' too old to do de job lak it oughta be done. I'se going to do what dey tell me to do.
" Dat's 'bout all I knows to tell you 'cept I can't figure out how come de gov'ment wants to know all about me. I don't owe de gov'ment nothin' 'cept my security, an' Mistah Coggins takes dat outta my pay. Seems to me dat dey would want to know somethin' 'bout de big men in town. Lak Mistah Clevlland or Sheriff Henry. But I 'spect dey knows what dey's doing, dey allus does.
"Dey tells me I git a pension from de gov'ment too, when I gits to bo sixty years old. I ain't nevah axed de gov'ment for nothin' yet, and I sho' wont long as I'se able to git by. I know de company will look atter me when I ain't no good to dem any mo'. I'se worked hard since I been here, an' when you does a thing good, you'll git looked atter. Kinda lak what Preecher Smith said at church las' Sunday. He say if you know how to do a thing good, jus' keep on doing dat thing as long as you can. He say some people got mo' talent den others. He was preachin' 'bout telents. I sho' 'joyed dat sermon. He say if all of us does de best wid what we got, de Lawd will take care of us.
"You got a good job wid de gov'ment. You listen to an old nigger, an' you stay wid dem and do yo' work good. If you does dat, dey going to look atter you. Any man what works hard, and does an hones' day's work, he going to be looked atter. An' if de man what he's workin' for don't look atter him, de Good Lawd will.
S. C. — Excellent
De Company Will Look Atter Me
Ice plant worker. Farm boy. Early work experience. Lost out because of drink. Began in ice plant. Rescued buried boy -- rewarded. Got drunk -- fought -- fired -- taken back -- stopped drinking. Family does well. Same house twenty years. War-time earning experience. Company wants him to quit. He wants to work -- will. Amply provided for -- company -- government pension.
Features: Negro's confidence of company caring for him, because of faithful service.
Names changed.
