Two other versions of "The Tale of a Tailoress,"
both entitled "A Versatile Craftswoman," can
be found on pages 2616A-2637 and pages
13565-13586.
Mrs. Margaret Davis
142½ N. Jackson Street
Athens, Georgia
December 9, 1938
G.M.
THE TALE OF A TAILORESS
The way gane karri tailor shop led up a long flight of steps to a narrow hall that would have been dark at midday if a light were not kept burning there.
A friendly voice saying, "Come in,” answered my knock on the first door at the head of the stairs. Mrs. Harris a large, dark headed person, attired in a neat print frock, was talking with several men from the local dry cleaning establishments; they had brought large bundles of clothes to be repaired.
"Just have a seat,” she said. ”I'll be with you in a little while.”
Several chairs were grouped about a heater that successfully combated the cold of the December day. Here, in the sewing room, were two long tables used for cutting out clothes, and for marking garments for alterations. Finished clothing almost filled the long rack at one end of the room. Between two large windows a smaller table was flanked on one side by an electric sewing machine and on the other by an old-fashioned pedal-power type of machine. After the customers were gone him the Negro boy, replenished the fire and went to the back room where he does all of the pressing.
”Did you think I never would get through with them?” asked Mrs. Harris as she joined me near the heater. It is that way all during the day, but that is where most of the business comes from now, for I don’t get as much from the stores as I used to, but business is not as good as it should be this time of the year. I have all that I can do, and I don't take but very few things to make since I have been running the shop by myself, for I don't have time. But all this is not interesting to you, I know!”
A short period of polite insistence on my part was necessary before she considered herself sufficiently urged to continue. She laughed and said, "I do not think my story would be interesting to anyone, as I guess it is just like anyone else’s. I have had my troubles, like ’most everyone does, but you can have it, if you care to listen while I work. I like to talk, and I do get lone some by myself, as I do not have any help except on busy days.
"I was born November 18, 1887 in a two-room log house on my Grandfather john Williams place in clarke county, out near where Princeton is now. When I was two years old we moved to the paper mill, now called the lord Mill, but the old paper mill building is still standing; it’s in too bad a condition to be used for anything now.
"My father and ambrose Stanley the two men that run the paper machines; ’en-jines' they called them then. Of course they had helpers, but father or Mr. to be on duty all the time. If one of them was sick or off for any other reason, the other had to stay on the job until the one that was off duty returned. Miss sol yates was the only woman they used in that part of the mill, and counted the paper. It was made in large square sheets ready for the printers.
"Old man Dear was the man that run the finishing machine. Many's the time I've watched them work when I was a child, for it was all so interesting to see the machine run. Out from the paper mill was the rag room, where the rags were sorted and put in different bins. Each color had to be put in a separate bin to itself. They bought old clothes amongst the other rags used to make the paper, and all the buttons had to be cut off; they sure watched out for that, for a button could ruin one of those paper machines.
"When I was six years old, I was started to school, but it was not like the schools are now. School was in Old Hall, near the paper mill then, and it was ell in one room. There were about a hundred children, all ages and sizes, from six years up; some were almost grown, and Miss hellia myersx was the only teacher. She taught them all. Our studies then were spelling, arithmetic, and geography, and we learned our spelling from the old 'Blue Back' Speller. We sure had to study, but even at that we had lots of fun and good times in that old schoolhouse which in later years was made into a dwelling house and is, I believe, still standing.
"It was a great thing for the children to work at the paper mill after we were out of school. They were glad to have us there. Our job was 'sortering' (sorting) out the rags. We enjoyed this work and they paid us 50¢ a month; that was lots of money to us, but it wouldn't be much to kids these days. Many times we found nickles and sometimes dimes in tile bags of rags. They allowed us to keep the money we found that way, and we would buy candy and have a big time.
"One day - and I sure do remember that day, as I think that the pleasures and disappointments of our childhood days are better remembered than anything else - we found a large bag of clothes; they were nice ones too, dresses for women and children, and plenty of underwear, stockings, and some shirts. We just dressed ourselves up, and we put these things aside for we wanted to keep them, but the very next morning a woman from town was out there hunting her clothes. She said her maid had sold them and kept the money. As the old saying goes 'our feathers fell for we had to give up all our pretty dresses that we had put aside.
"About this time they put in a bag machine to make paper bags. That machine would cut a hundred bags at a time and it was a great curiosity to the folks back then. The bags had to be folded and put up in bundles, 200 bags to the bundle. This was another job we kids could do. It was fun to do this. We folded half of them one way and half the other way, and tied up the bundles.
"They also made paper out of jute that they bought in large bales. That was another job that children could do, for we could tear the jute up into small pieces to have it ready for the machines. One day we found lots of paper money in one of the bales of jute, but two of the grown-up women that worked there took this money, and said they would have to send it back. But folks said that they kept all the money and bought them a home with it. Of course, I don't know if that was right or not, but I do know that we didn't get any of it.
"Did you know that they made paper out of wood, even in those days? Well, they did. I don't remember what kind of wood it was but they ground small saplings into a pulp ready for the paper machines. The paper that was made from wood was a heavy brown paper such as they use for wrapping paper, and was called manila paper.
"People was paid once a month for their work then, and it was the usual thing for them to buy a month's supply of provisions at the company store on pay day. All the men liked their tobacco and this was one supply that was never forgotten when groceries were bought. Tobacco was something they felt, like they could not do without. And kids would slip tobacco out and chew it, the boys especially. One day some of the kids swiped some of their dad's tobacco and told me I would have to hide it for them. They said I'd better put it in some place where it wouldn't be found. I finally decided that on the sills in the top of the old well would be the best place. I had to climb to reach the sills, but I made it, and laid the tobacco along the sills. It started raining that a night and rained for a week. After the rain was over, the kids told me to get their tobacco for them. I went to the old well to get it. The rain had come through the holes in the roof and soaked the tobacco, and it had swelled until it was thick again as it should have been; it was ruined. I almost got a whipping from that crowd of kids, hut they chewed that tobacco, and of course they was sick, every blessed one of them. No, I didn't chew any, for I knew mama would sure ten my hide.
"I had some older sisters and our house was just a gathering place for the young folks. There was a crowd of them there most of the time and I could get the biggest thrills out of watching them and listening to them talk. One night two girls, mary Dent geraldina Bailey came to our house to set a dumb supper. I was just about seven then, and I cried because they put me to bed. They didn't have these suppers 'til midnight, just on the stroke of twelve. They started their supper and one of my sisters and Catherine Hardy put on pants and was going to scare them. I could hear them talking for I wasn't asleep, even if they had put me to bed, and I just slipped out, right easy, and told one of my uncles what they was doing. It was counted a disgrace in those days for girls to put on boys' clothes', do uncle said he would fix them, and when my sister and the other girl slipped outside to go around to the kitchen to scare the other girls, he got after them and did they holler? Any way it broke up the dumb supper and I was satisfied.
"Didn't you ever hear about them old time dumb suppers? They were very popular back in those days. That was the way girls tried to find out who their future husbands would be. I know it seems funny now to look back on times as they were then, but after all I think people really enjoyed life more then than they do now. There was not so many places to go, and people were closer together in every way.
"Maybe you would like for me to tell you more about the dumb suppers! Two girls did the cooking and set the table. Each one used their right hand only. Everything was done backwards, even to making the bread. They did everything together, although each one used only one hand, end they did not speak, not one word, from the time they started until it was over. If they did speak, the spell was broken, and no one would come. The table must be set for four, and on it, in addition to the food, must be placed a Bible end a pint bottle. Everything must be ready just at twelve. The wind was supposed to blow and the doors come open, and men were expected to walk in and eat. They were not expected to speak either, just eat and walk out. If they picked up the Bible, then they would make a good husband, but beware of the man that moved the bottle, for he would turn out bad and be a drunkard sure. If no one came in to eat then you was doomed to die an old maid. These suppers were lots of fun, for most rimes the girls would get scared and wake everybody in the house up. Oh, yes, they had to be the only two people up in the house if the charm was to work. My, but those were good old days.
"Now as it is most Christmas time, I’m going to tell you about one Christmas when I was still a very little girl. Christmas lasted a whole week then from Christmas Eve ’til New Year’s Eve on this Christmas mama was looking for her half-sister and family, from <text not clear> to spend Christmas with us. We children had never seen them and were looking forward to that visit and to the big supper and dance we were hawing for them on the night before Christmas. We kids were just on tip toes, so excited, just couldn’t wait. Of course, we were looking for Santa Claus too. Our tree was all ready for him. Mama had killed turkeys, and chickens, and had cooked cakes and pies enough to last two weeks. At lest they came. Now, child, I am going to tell you this just as I remember it, for we have had so many laughs since over this Christmas of many years ago. My aunt and uncle got here several days before the children came straggling in. They did not have enough money for the whole family to ride, so they started the children off days before they left. They were to ride with some of their friends most of the way and was to walk the rest of the way. The two girls end one boy got in Christmas Eve. If they wasn’t a sight! One of the girls weighed over two hundred pounds, and had walked the soles off her shoes.
"All of our folks and lots of our friends were there, and one of mama's nieces, who had married a man named speneer also one of our uncles and his daughter. They both played fiddles and they were to furnish music for the dance. Everything was cleared out of two rooms, and about three o'clock in the afternoon, the young folks started the dance. We kids were happy for we could watch them long as we wanted. We didn’t have to go to bed early during Christmas.
"The older women were busy cooking and getting the supper ready, and everybody was having a good time. The man calling the dances would holler, 'Swing your partner.' Oh, it was a grand time, and yet happy as we were, we kids were so interested in the fat girl from <text not clear> that we stayed pretty close around her. She never seemed to want to do any dancing and we couldn't understand that. One of the young men started toward her, and we just had to hear what they said. He asked her if she would dance the next set with him. 'We held our breeth for her answer, and this is what she said:' I'd just as life dance with you as anybody else, but I has walked all the way from <text not clear> to see Aunt Sis, and I'm too tired end galled-ed from so much walkin' to dance with anybody.'
"About five o'clock the supper started. There was eight tables full, besides the kids like me. No, no, no, don't get me wrong. Mama did not have eight tables set up and filled at one time. She had to spread our regular dinner table eight times before she could get all that crowd of grown folks fed and then allow the children to come to the table. How we did watch that table! The man, <text not clear> went to the first table, and, Honey, that man stayed there with all eight tables. I never have seen no one person eat as much in all my life. Of course, there was plenty to eat, but we was so afraid that he would eat it all, and as the last table finished eating, he reached over and took the last piece of turkey. I never wanted to say something as bad as I did then, but I knew better, and with all we had to eat, we couldn't enjoy it for thinking of that last piece of turkey.
"The dance lasted the night through. Of course, we kids had to give it up and go to bed soon after midnight, but we were up bright and early to see what Santa Claus brought us and to get our breakfast. When it came time for dinner, mama put some turkey away for us kids, and I guess it was a good thing for Mr. <text not clear> was still there. That was the way we spent Christmas then, eating and dancing, and parties all through the week. But after New Year's all that was over, and it -was back to school and work for us.
"I had just about finished school when the old paper mill closed down. We moved into Shenta then close to the old check mill on Broad Street where we had gotten work. <text not clear> remember that old mill very well. It had big posts all through it. One day my sister was leaning against one of these posts resting. One of the other women saw her, and thinking to have some fun, she yelled out to her to move quick. It scared sister and she jumped, catching her hair on a nail in the post. A whole handful of sister's hair was pulled out by that nail, and, of course, everybody laughed. It made me mad and I hit her so hard that she fell in the floor. We were new folks in that settlement, and were in for a lot of teasing, but after that day they did not tease u0073 any more. It wasn't long before we were having good times there just as we did in our old home community.
"I was off visiting my sister, and thinking I was just about grown when I met my present husband. He came driving to see my brother with the prettiest horse and buggy. He carried me to ride, but we just went down the road, not far enough to even get out of sight of the house but even at that mama heard about it. She didn't believe much in whipping, but she sure could find other ways of punishing, and just for that little short ride, I had to stay home for three long months. I mean, I was not even allowed to go to Sunday School and church.
"I had a girl friend that I used to spend the night with real often, and she would visit me also. One night when I was spending the night with her, we decided that after all the others got to sleep we would get up and set us a dumb supper. Her mother and father were off visiting their people end there was just the children at home, and she had brothers and sisters much older than we were. We had always wanted to have a dumb supper, but they would always tell us we were too little. Sure enough, after everybody was in bed we got up. Yes, we were scared, scared bad, but we was going to show them that we could do just as well as they did, so we went ahead and got the supper ready. We didn't even forget the Bible and the bottle. Two boys that knew us had been fishing and was on their way home; seeing the light in our kitchen they thought someone was sick and decided they had better stop and see if there was anything they could do. But When they saw us through the window they knew what we was up to, so they just pushed open the door, walked in, picked up the bottle and walked out. Well, we were scared stiff, couldn't move or speak for some time, but when we did get to where we could yell it wasn't long until everything in the house was up. That was my first and only time to try to set a dumb supper, but strange as it may seem, one of those boys is now my husbandand the girl who helped me that night is now married to the other boy.
"I met my first husband at a picnic when I was about sixteen. We used to have big picnics in those days, and everybody would go. We went in tallyhos filled with straw. Most times we had a ball game after dinner. Not long after I had met him, we went with a crowd of boys and girls to the old Beaverdam Church to one of their foot washings. After that was over we went to the Bill Hayerplace, and one of the guards showed us all around. There was so many prisoners there, and numbers of them were crippled up in different ways; some had one arm, others had one leg gone, but they all had to work. It was on this trip to the place that Bill Hayer place that jack proposed to me and in about three months we were married.
"We went to housekeeping and were very happy until he died in 1907 and then I went back home to stay with mama and daddy, but I was sad and discouraged. I decided that I would feel better, if I had something to do so I worked at the climax Hosiery Mill for several months.
"Sometime during 1908 I went to work in Mr. Smith tailor shop that he had started here. I had never done any of this sort of work before and I don't think any of the other helpers in his shop had either. He hired two Bohemians to learn us the tailor trade, and Smith that is how I came to be a tailor. I worked there with Mr. Smith five years and then I went into business with Mrs. katie Richmond.
"One day I was walking up Broad Street and who should I meet but the boy that had come to my dumb supper, years and years before. He had been married but had lost his wife not so long after my husband died, end that meeting was the renewal of a friendship that led to our marriage. He was then, and still is, a great teaser. He does enjoy playing jokes on me. One night he came down to our house and asked me and one of my sisters to go with him to the show. In those days shows didn’t cost but five or ten cents. When we was almost there he told us that we could go in and he would wait on the outside, as he did not have enough money for all three of us. I was embarrassed and said we would just go right back home. He insisted that we go on but I was mad and told him I was going to pay my own way. My sister just laughed at us. It seemed like she could tell he was just teasing. She told him to give her her dime and she would buy peanuts and candy. Oh, yes, we went on to the show, and he went too but I was so mad I couldn't enjoy it, and it was a long time after that before I would let him come to see me again. He and my sister still tease me about going to that picture show.
"One night when one of my sisters was fixing to get married he came walking in and told mama that it would be a double wedding for he was going to marry me that same night. I quarreled and I fussed. I told them it wasn’t so and that I never intended to marry him, but the more I fussed, the more he laughed. He had everybody there believing him until my sister’s wedding was over. But he finally won out and in 1913 we were married.
"He has his barber shop end I have my tailor shop. We have no children - no one but ourselves. When we married we bought our home on Nacoochee Avenue, and we are still living there. It is a nice little home and our flowers ere lovely. He does most of the work with them, for I don't have much time to work at anything around home.
Katie Richmond and I first went in business upstairs on Clayton Street, but in a short time we moved down here on Highland Street, and here we have been ever since. Since away last year Katie I have run the shop by myself, but it is mighty lonesome without her. We were together so long. I have three rooms here; this one is my work room, and the next one is the dressing room; there I have a large mirror, a table and comfortable chairs where people can wait if necessary while I fix their clothes. The last room is the pressing room, him looks after that for me. I just don't know how I would get along without him. in my tailor shop. He has been with me so long that he knows just how I want everything done.
"It does not seem to me that the things I have been able to tell you could be of very much interest to anyone but me and the others that they concern, but it does give me pleasure to talk about these old times end I hope you will come back again real soon."
