Mrs. Foster Ramsey.
Knoxville, Tennessee.
Interviewer: Della Yoe,
Revised by L. Agee,
L. Lipscomb, TN 45
and Aswell.
SOMETIMES I GET ASHAMED
Alitra leaned her elbow on the glass top of the showcase. "It's the basement for me," she sighed.
"I've been down all my life, and now it looks like I'm headed for the basement. I guess my next move from there will be out. The boss is mad at me."
She took a pair of sheer stockings from the counter and slid her hand inside, holding it up for approval. She glanced down the aisle at the floorwalker. "You've got to look busy in this place."
The floorwalker passed on.
"These chain stores are all alike," she said. "I get a job on trial for three months during a sale. At the end of three months I may be looking for another job.
"The boss is sweet on me. If I don't give in to him, out I go.
"He's mad at me now because I asked for a transfer to another department. But I'd rather be down there, bad as it is, than stay on here with his hawk eyes on me and hand-squeezing every morning when I come in. He don't have to shake hands with me, but he does, and he holds on when he does."
She bounced her pencil nervously on the edge of the counter. "The other girls notice it, too. Already they are beginning to turn a cold shoulder to me. I can't have girl friends just for that reason. They think I'm playing up to the boss. It's really not my nature to do that sort of thing. Honest! I don't care for men. You may not believe me, but I'm telling you the truth."
Alitra's face flushed. She bit her lip and made meaningless designs with her pencil. She took a deep breath. "You see, it's this way. My mother died when I was only three weeks old. My father was handsome, but a brute, and drank too often. He married and deserted four wives after mistreating and neglecting them. My brother drank too much, too, and like my father was cruel to women.
"My own sisters and aunts and other relatives and even my friends were envious and suspicious of me because they said I was too pretty to come to any good end. And you notice I don't use no rouge. Just a little lipstick. But it don't seem to make any difference. I can always get some kind of job because I am pretty. And then, at least so far, I soon lose the job for the same reason.
"I wasn't allowed to marry the man I love but forced to marry the man I did not love. I love Alfred."
She turned around, got her purse from the top shelf, and took out a cheap lipstick. Hurriedly she dabbed at her lips while the floor walker's back was turned.
"I ran away from my home in Middlesboro, Kentucky, and went to Miami, Florida, and got a job in the Royal Oaks Night club. It was here I met Alfred. He had a good job and was the best looking man I ever saw. We fell in love with each other and was going to get married on a Monday. But my father turned up on the Sunday before and made me come home. I couldn't help myself. I wasn't of age, only nineteen, and he had the law all on his side. Wasn't anything I could do but just leave. Don't know what he wanted with me. He never did care anything about me.
"Well, the first Sunday after I got back to Kentucky when I came home from church there was Foster Ramsey. He always had been in love with me, but he knew that I didn't care for him. Well there he stood holding the license, and there stood the preacher. I didn't know what was up until my father told me that Foster had everything ready to marry me. He said I had to marry because nobody wanted to take care of me. Now aren't men the most senseless things? If he had left me alone I'd been married and happy and off his hands too. But no sir! He was just stubborn and contrary and bullheaded. He wanted to have his own way.
"I knew I'd been sent from one aunt to another all my life because none of them would take me and give me a home. Well, when my pa said I had to marry Foster I nearly died. I didn't dare refuse because my father never had minded beating me something awful. He'd have done it then, too. So we were married then and there. I cried all that Sunday afternoon, but I soon found out that crying wasn't going to help. Just had to make the best of it. Foster didn't have a job, and I found out later that my father gave him the money to get married on, and gave him fifteen dollars extra just to marry me.
"But thats all behind me now. Foster's been good to me in his way. He's kind and a hard worker but he won't ever get anywhere. Never will make more than he does now. He's working twelve miles from here on a construction job. Makes eleven dollars a week and spends one dollar every Sunday to come to see me and the baby.
"Yes, I have a little girl. Foster's crazy about her. She's just four months old but the cutest little mite. I've got a mighty good woman to keep her. I tell everybody she's my aunt because they wouldn't understand if I told them a woman no kin to me is keeping my baby. But she's ten hundred times a better woman than anyone of my aunts.
"No, I ain't had but one letter from Florida from Alfred. That came just after my baby was born. I read two lines, but couldn't bear to read any more. He don't know I'm married and I couldn't go on reading about his love when I'm Foster's lawful wedded wife. I just have to bear it all and do the best I can for my baby. I don't want her to grow up like me, having nobody wanting her.
"Sometimes we buy the baby a cheap toy. I never had a toy or a Christmas present given me when I was a child. I'm going to see that my child don't go hungry for things like that as I did. I want her to go to school. I never had much schooling. I try to read newspspers and magazines and learn how to talk and act but sometimes I get ashamed.
"I am afraid to look too far ahead. Sometimes when I sit in my room at night, I plan how she will grow up to be a lady and educated. I never will be able to make more money than I do now. How can I do what I should for my child? I get nervous spells thinking about it. I can't sleep. Then, next morning, I feel the way I do now--sleepy and tired and wishing I wasn't cooped up in a cheap store, away from the sunshine and fresh air.
"The store opens at eight-thirty and closes at five-thirty. But we have to be in here at eight o'clock to get the goods in order and then stay half an hour after the store closes. I put in a ten-hour day most of the time and I get nine dollars a week. The commission on sales don't amount to anything--not worth mentioning. If we don't make a sale after spending too much time with a customer we get called down. And if that happens too often we get fired.
"The forelady is foxy. She'll stand around when a girl is trying to make a sale. She butts in, too, and flatters the customer. She tells them they are good-looking and smart and that sort of thing. I can't flatter customers by such lies. But she gets away with it. I was almost fired last week because she stepped up and closed a sale that she thought I would miss. I saved my neck by telling the manager that I turned the sale over to her on purpose. The old cat! And another thing--if your cash register is short you have to make it good. Maybe some other girl using the same register made a mistake. Maybe she punched my number on purpose. When they don't like you or are jealous of you they'll do that. No use to make a fuss, though. I just let 'em take it out of my week's wages."
Alitra looked over the display counter as though she were checking to see if any item was out of place.
"Sometimes Foster gives me five dollars out of his wages. He eats at the construction camp but I have to cook all my meals in my room. None of us have the clothes or the kind of food we need. I don't know what is to become of us. It can't go on like this much longer. If Foster's work is finished next month, and my boss fires me because I don't like him, it is up salt river for me. Why was I ever born?"
Alitra sharpened her pencil on a piece of sandpaper. When she looked up again, she was frowning and gnawing her under lip. "I spend lonely evenings in a cheerless room of a cheap boarding house just thinking of my past life and wondering if the future will bring something better. Now, remember, you promised me that you would never tell anybody about me. You are the first person I ever talked to like this. And honest, I have told you the truth. To the others I always lie. Just a bunch of lies, lies, all my life. I lied to get this job. They don't hire married women. They think I am divorced. I go by the name of Mrs. Hyde. They don't know about Foster and that my name now is Ramsey.
"Maybe it won't be long," she said. "If Foster don't do better than he has been doing, all that I can see to do is just take my baby and end it all for both of us.
"Maybe, after all my bad luck, after years of ups and downs, I may get on the ups for good. Then I will have my child with me and be all on my own. That is what I hope for."
She rested her face on the palm of her hand.
"And I don't want it to be too late to begin the new life," she said. "I just mustn't have no more children. It's a sin to have children when you can't do for them."