Life of	Dyersburg, Tennessee
A. J. Gourley	Finley Street
Edited by	November 10, 1938.
Jennette Edwards
TOMBSTONE MAKER
"Making tombstones is my main trade. I have a special mixture of my own to make them up, and the stones I turn out are harder than marble, last longer, too."
Gourley opened the iron door of the small wood heater, knocked his cob pipe clean of charred tobacco. A rush of warm air came out into the dingy one-room store as he stepped back from the stove and stored the pipe in his baggy coat pocket. He stooped for the slim strip of iron, headed by a home-made wooden knob, poked the fire free of ashes, threw on a stick of wood. He was a spare man, medium tall, clean shaven. Age was not in his clear gray-blue eyes; but the droop about his left shoulder gave him a saggy, old-man appearance even when he straightened to his full height. Gourley pulled the slat-back hickory chair a comfortable distance from the stove and settled. With parted fingers he combed back the silky, uneven gray hair that fixing the fire made fall to his forehead.
"You have to have a place to spread out good to make a decent tombstone. I just take my time and mix and mix and keep on testing. Mine don't look like that bunch out there in the lot when you come across them in a burying ground. Those out there are not finished yet. I polish them up till they look as fine as any marble ever. I do my own lettering too. I can sell them cheaper then, still make a nice profit. I never did have a mind to make the poor go hungry because they are set on remembering their dead. Tombstones and this store help me to manage out. It don't take a lot to keep two like us going, not now."
The straight chair--propped during the course of his talk against a table piled high with used clothes--came down to the floor with a thud. In the far corner of the room his wife looked up from sorting the last buy of second hand odds-ends. She was a small, dumpy woman. Her thin iron gray hair was parted in the middle, slicked severely from the part on either side, screwed finally to tight knot at the nape of her neck. Effort to breathe made her stop often in her work, but not for long. She had no thought of putting her words in her husband's talk. Her short plump arms, dress sleeves pushed above the elbows, were back at stacking pants on pants, coats on coats, before Gourley tilted the chair again to the table and continued, undisturbed.
"I peddled and street sold for twenty years. Liked it too. It comes in handy now with this store. I've tried my hand at selling about everything time past. I like to sit and study about it now. Yes, I'd get up at crack of dawn, fit as a fiddle, ready to step off a town a day and not giving a hoot whether the lady said, "Have a chair," or "I'll just look at what you have here at the door, I haven't the turn to let anyone who saddles a pack in my door." Before it was over I'd sell her--snap-tongue or soft-mouth. Tombstones and peddling tells you a lot about folks.
"I never was a mountain of strength. I never was a hand to do nothing, though. When I laid off of selling for a week or two, I'd write. No, I never had much education. I only stayed in school one week in my life. I didn't mind the teacher, liked her fine. I just took sick and stopped and didn't come back. I always did like to ramble better than stay in a spot, since I was a shaver. I've written a story of my life. Looks like people that make books are set on education. I doubt if they would take sight of mine. It's been a heap of pleasure to me telling it all down. Now, you ought to read it, you'd find out more about me than I could ever get told this morning."
Satisfaction that softened his lined face when he spoke of his book was gone. He rammed his hands deeper in pants pockets. He was braced to tell to the letter what had been years back.
"Yes, a lot more--a man can have things happen to him in sixty-seven years. I just count it sixty though. Seven of those years I never do count. I didn't live then,--not those "crazy" years in that asylum at Austin, Texas. I might have been a lunatic when they carted me there, but I had good sense enough to know before I got out that I'd short the human that ever tried to shove me back in such a hole as that.
"You see, she died, my first wife. The one back there is my second one. I nearly went crazy when that first one left me with those six little young ones of ours. We were both young. It seemed like I just couldn't shift for them without her. I was out there in Texas woodland swamps cutting cross ties when the Dengue fever struck me. I went clear out of my head. They put me in that asylum before I knew what had happened. Now don't you ever listen to tales they tell about the tender-hearted tribe that run thos places. Folks that tell them haven't ever been in one of those asylums.
"I can remember to this day how I was just burning up with that fever, about to die for a drink of water. Just asked the watchman through the bars. I wasn't too silly-sensed to crawl to the corner where he couldn't get at me. In less than a month the fever left me. My head got clear. I used to kneel down and pray to God to get me out and he finally did. Yes, he did, matter's not that those dirty guards used to kick me when I fell down on my knees to pray. They would always have a pretty tale to tell the inspector when he found us bloody from one of their drubbings. "They've been fighting each other again," they'd lie, straight-faced.
Gourley eased the chair back to floor level. He took his hands out of pants pockets, let them rest on the smooth top-knobs of the chair's front legs.
"Oh well, no sense in getting stirred up now. I manage right well and I don't know anybody got enough against me to try to put me in a bug-house again. Yes, we get on right well, she back there and I. That house you can see out yonder front window is mine. I packed the lumber on my back from the mill and built every room of it myself. It's not fine, but it's close-built and it looks like it's going to be there after we two are gone."
It was a neat frame house--shade trees in the yard--funny looking windows that an amateur carpenter had latticed outside with wooden strips.
"I never did have much worry of people hurting me--not since I got out of that asylum--I mean, burglars and such. I don't think there's a man in the world would care to kill me, even to steal his own tombstone. But I know youngsters. I've got twelve of mine living today--all six of those by my first wife and six of the seven by my last wife back there. I know a child is going to throw a rock at a window if it is just staring at him without any covering. That's why I stripped that house's windows.
"It is mighty easy to laugh about young ones' devilment when you think what they mean to you when you start on the down-hill side. Not a one of mine that haven't come to us when we were in a pinch. Now that youngest one, twelve years old now, did give me a little worry when he was mixed up in that stealing scrape and got sent to the reform school. Most of mine have done well. There are some good farmers amongst them, a radio star, a preacher--a good preacher, too. I could have been a preacher, I learned to know God when I was young, have stuck pretty close to him all my life. I never had much of a turn to tell the world about it though, just rather talk to Him myself.
"I talk to Him and He answers me right back. He tells me to go places lots of times that I never would have thought of going, less He'd told me. I always up and go. I went straight to the court house here in Dyersburg when He told me about Judge Fields. A young lady out there in the front part of his office tried to hinder me. I just said right off--"God sent me. "--and walked right in to the Judge. He looked sorter set back when I said "Judge Fields, you are going to die of a heart attack and that not shortly." He said, "I know we that live all have to die, but what in the Hell makes you think it's my time." "God told me so this morning." I answered right up." "He said you were doing the people wrong." Judge Fields looked like he wanted to know something else, but I just left him looking. I never do fiddle around arguing when I am doing God's business. Next time I saw Judge Fields he was plain marked for death with heart misery. His eyes straight began to get tear-watery at sight of me."
Gourley's hand went in his coat pocket and came out with his pipe. His wrinkled cheeks puffed out as he gave a good blow from stem through bowl, sank in as he drew the air back down his throat. The pipe--ready for refilling--returned to the coat pocket for a load of loose tobacco. He packed it down with the center of his rough hand, left his chair to hunt in the lard-can wood box for newspaper. With care he twisted the torn-off strip into a pipe lighter.
"I guess tombstone making sorter shifts your mind to your Maker--always seeing and hearing of sorrow. I guess God thinks I do pretty well making up those stones by my own special mixture, about as hard as any rock He could make and fine looking as any marble ever when I get them polished up."