Miss Johnnie Shearin
Castle Hayne
M. L. W.
LIFE AT CASTLE HAYNE
Miss Johnnie Shearin is Castle Hayne's first citizen. Many years before such an organization as the Carolina Trucking Development Company existed to offer "Fine Lands for Intensive Farming" nine miles north of Wilmington, little Johnnie Blossom played beneath the moss draped live-oaks surrounding her father's home on the Northeast River. There was no bridge across this branch of the Cape Fear at that time and all traffic from the North, bound for Wilmington, used the ferry run by Captain Blossom, chartered (it is said) by King George III.
Miss Johnnie's deep-set black eyes glow when she tells about Captain Blossom. "My father was a simply wonderful man and one of the smartest that has ever lived; I declare, I believe if he had had any education at all, he would have been one of the richest men in this country. As it was, he made a good living -- we always had plenty of everything. I never did know how much he made, but when he died the paper had that his estate was valued at $80,000. Course, his children never saw but $5.00 each of that money because that woman he married after my mother died got everything.
"He was pure bred Portugese and had been just about everywhere because he was a sailor before he settled here. He had been on those ships that went to Africa to get the slaves, and he used to tell us about it. He said they would take bright red cloth and hang it around in the trees to attract the niggers, then they'd round 'em up and drive them on to the boats. I can hear him yet saying in his deep voice, and he spoke with an accent to the day he died, 'No, child, niggers don' have souls -- I have seen them too many times herded into the ships. They are like animals.' During the war he ran through the Northern blockade and after that he settled here in Wilmington. He died not many years ago and nobody ever knew how old he was, but he was a perfectly wonderful man.
"Mr. Shearin and I bought this farm and built this house after we were married. He came from up near Warrenton. All his life he had known and gone with the very best people, well-off people too. I can say this for him; he was as fine a man as I ever saw. I was just sixteen when I married him and he was over forty, so he knew he could never live to see Edelweiss and Willa (William) grown. He was crazy about his children. Why he would say to me 'Johnnie, I want these two children to remember nothing but the best about me so don't ever ask me to punish them or cross them in any way.' Of course they simply worshipped their father and I was afraid they would hate me because someone had to make them learn what was right, but I'll tell you -- no woman ever had any nicer children and they think a heap of their mother. You know what Willa always says? He'll say it right in front of Dot, his wife, too. 'You can always get another wife, but a man never has but one mother.' Maybe I'm not the right kind of mother, but I would do anything in the world to make my children happy. I guess one reason I feel this way is because my own mother died when I was ten years old.
"I've worked as hard as I know how for my children, since I've had it to do. Don't think we've always lived like this. Why when Mr. Shearin was alive he made a big salary working in town; we didn't have to depend on the farm. He was a man who liked to live well and entertain his friends. He wouldn't think a thing about having eighteen people sit down, to dinner in this house; sometimes we'd have such a crowd that we'd put up tables under that big oak in the yard. Every Sunday that came there was a crowd here.
"Law in those days all I had to do was look after my house and children and be a hostess to our visitors. I didn't know what farm work was until after Mr. Shearin died. Then I just had to learn it, and I did. I've learned how to farm just by doing it. People have been mighty good about helping me out and telling me what to do -- Mr. Daly Futch from over in Pender especially. The main trouble is that so much of my land just isn't any good; it takes a sight of fertilizer to keep in any sort of shape. Then when I do get a little bit ahead, I have to get a new truck or a tractor or new bed covers, or something. There always something you've just got to have on a farm.
"I'm sixty-two years old, but let me tell you something. I'm not afraid to work. Why I brought this farm through the depression without once patting a mortgage on it. I couldn't have done that without hard work and plenty of it to. It would just about kill me to be in debt or dependent on anyone. When I get so I can't take care of myself. I'll be ready to leave this world. Edelweiss and Mishoe are always talking about building a house and fixing me a room in it. I tell 'em they don't even need to think about it because I'm not leaving this place until I'm carried through that front door in a box."
Edelweiss, Miss Johnnie's daughter, has a very busy life. She is postmistress of Castle Hayne, she keeps the sparsely stocked store which is in the post office building, she is Notary Public and unofficial consultant of the community. Everyone confides in "Miss Edelweiss."
She is thirty-fire, but doesn't look it. Magnificent black eyes and brows dominate her rather pale face; her blue-black hair is cut short and grows in a widow's peak on a well-proportioned brow. Unfortunately, she must keep this hair covered with a beret indoors and out to protect herself from sinus headaches. Miss Johnnie says Edelweiss has a nose just like Captain Blossom's, straight and finely cut.
Each morning Edelweiss must be at the post office by 7:30 to put the Castle Hayne mail on the Southbound train and get the mail that comes in from the North. This she opens and sorts, then goes back to the house for breakfast, leaving Mr. Meyer, the rural mail carrier, in the post office sorting his mail. She hurries back to work on her postal reports and to see the people who come in for their mail -- this way she hears the early morning news. After the 9:30 mail from Wilmington is sorted, Mr. Meyer's bundles are all arranged and he starts out in his car, Edelweiss locks the post office and the store, goes to the house.
Until 5:30 in the afternoon, when store and post office must be reopened, she is free to help Miss Johnnie with whatever is being done on the farm. Perhaps she puts in gladiolus bulbs, or grades lettuce plants, mends bed covers, goes to the fertilizer plant, cuts flowers, grades and bunches flowers, weeds the beds -- it all depends on the time of year. Usually in the afternoon Edelweiss tries to rest for a while, "But just as sure as anything, when I lie down or start to wash mgr face, a little nigger will come hollering under the window 'Mis' Edelweiss, can I git somp'un at the sto'?' I'll break my neck getting down the steps -- maybe my face will be about half washed or my hands will still he wet. I go end unlock the store and find that the child wants a nickel's worth of kerosene or a penny box of matches. It really kills me. Some of these little niggers are awful cute, though."
After the store-post office is opened in the late afternoon, Edelweiss sits on a keg in the dim little wooden building and Castle Hayne comes to her.
Negro laborers, both men and women, on their way home from the fields -- "Mis' Edelweiss, gimme a can of tripe," "I wants a dime's wu'th of rice," "Two can of them beans, Miss Edelweiss," "Miss Edelweiss will you trus' me for dis axe handle here 'til Sa'day – ye' ma'am, I sho' will be comin' right by here and I sho' will remember to pay you," "a can of snuff." Some pay cash, but most of them charge it and Edelweiss writes the amounts in a soiled little ledger. She does not have to ask their names.
Farmers, who did not have time to come for their mail in the morning, unload their boxes of flowers on the station platform, then drive across the tracks to the post office -- "Hello Edelweiss, did you finish getting your bulbs out today?" "Is Miss Johnnie going to cover tonight?" "No, we're not going to put in the lanterns -- the weather man said 38"; "Katherine and them went to the hospital to see Mr. Jones, he's no better." "No, we didn't quite finish up today, but we plan to tomorrow." "Mr. Ludeka has two hundred and eleven boxes to go off today and then didn't get all of them cut." There are many things to discuss with neighbors at the end of a day's work -- the weather, progress of work, the activities of all the community.
Negro children slip quietly through the door and stand in the middle of the floor until Edelweiss says in her kindest tone, "What can I do for you?" Shyly they answer -- "Qua't Ke' scene," "spool white thread -- na'm she didn' say no numba," "a nickel's wu'th grits." Many try their luck at the punch board. It costs a penny a punch and if they punch the right place, they win a nickel bar of candy. In any case they get a round, white chiclet.
A little girl with ratty hair and smudges of black on her pale freckled face comes in followed by two small boys wearing dirty overalls. She has on a pair of red high heeled sandals, much too large for her, and they clump as she walks across the uneven wooden floor. "Miss Edelweiss, Momma says will you call up Dr. Lewis, she's nearbout to die."
"You tell your mother I can't call Dr. Lewis, he's a surgeon at the hospital. What's the matter with your mother?"
"She wants you to call him and ast if hits all right for her to take another dost of nammomium.
"Yes, you tell her it'll be all right for her to take another dose." The three faces look at us numbly for a minute. The shoes clump on the floor; the door closes behind the smallest boy. Edelweiss turns to me.
"Talk about poor white. They live over behind the filling station. There's not a thing wrong with that woman but nerves, the doctor told her so. She lies there "dying" all the time and what a life those poor children have. Not but one of them has enough sense to get along; he's smart as can be, but that little girl won't even wash her face or comb her hair. Her mother's told me so. I've done everything I can for them, called the county doctor, stayed over there with the woman, given the children food and Santa Claus -- and I don't know what all. They're hopeless. No, they don't go to school except when they want to."
The seven o'clock train to Castle Hayne is important. It brings the mail from Wilmington, picks up the bound North mail and the boxes of flowers that are stacked on the platform to be shipped to Washington, New York and other cities. When the flower or vegetable season is at its height, a freight car is left on the siding and loaded during the day, but during slack times three or four little boys in the community are paid a nickel each for loading. They run excitedly from platform to freight car carrying the large, light pasteboard boxes while the engine puffs and the bell rings.
As soon as they are through, the boys come to the store to join the group which waits for Edelweiss to sort and hand out the mail. Plump, pretty Mary van Ness is there and her sister "Punkie" who can't talk clearly because infantile paralysis affected her vocal cords; Grandpa Blossom is there, showing a picture of his new grandbaby; Johnnie Lorek sits on a keg and wonders why his brother at the University hasn't written to their mother yet; Ralph Phipps leans on the counter and smokes a cigar; Mr. Daly Futch from Pender County listens to the talk. Some Dutchmen, who are on their way to a truckers' meeting gather around the stove and talk until time to go to the Community House. One of them nears a new topcoat.
"That's a nice coat you have, Peter."
"Ya, I got it in Holland this past summer."
They start comparing Holland and America.
Peter: "Believe me, my visit made me appreciate this country. I was glad to get back home. Even buying groceries over there is trouble -- you go to one place for meat, another for vegetables, another for eggs. Here you get everything in one place."
von Bavel: "The thing I couldn't get used to when I came to this country was having sawdust all over the floor in meat markets. That looked just plain dirty to me."
Herman: "Talk about something that is dirty -- what I could not bear when I went back was the milk in Holland, the way they carry it about in those buckets and pour it right out into your pail on the streets so that dust and dirt can fall into it."
von Bavel: "In Holland you don't find this kind of store -- the real old country store where everyone gathers and talks."
Peters "That's true. But neither do you find it in the North, in the cities anyway."
It is almost time for the 7:30 train from the North, Edelweiss fastens the mail bag and lights a lantern. "Here I'll take It, Miss Edelweiss," and one of the boys shoulders the bag while another reaches for the lantern. A group of three or four of them walk together to the arm where the bag is fastened, then they go up the tracks to the place where the Castle Hayne mail is thrown from the train. The whistle screams, lighted cars flash by, a boy picks up the sack of mail and carries it in. Again there is expectation while Edelweiss sorts the mail, occasionally handing out a letter or a paper. When she is all through, the group begins to say goodnight so that by closing time, eight o'clock, Edelweiss is alone. She calls her two dogs, locks both doors and walks across the yard to the big, square house. If she is spending the evening at home, she will sit in Miss Johnnie's room, reading the evening paper or a magazine, and talking. Perhaps there is a Home Demonstration Meeting or she is going into Wilmington with some of the neighbors to see a movie. There is one thing she is sure to do: if anyone in the community is sick or in the hospital in Wilmington she visits them or telephones to ask how they are. Castle Hayne people are good neighbors.
Edelweiss' husband, Wells Mishoe from Horry County, S. C., is a telegraph operator for Atlantic Coastline Railroad in Wilmington. Since he works from 3:30 to 11:30 P.M. he is at home for part of the day. He helps around the fans or maybe goes hunting. He and Edelweiss plant several of Miss Johnnie's fields for their own profit. They like farming and what they mostly want in this world is a house and farm of their awn in Castle Hayne. It is what they work for.
III
"Hannah is black," Miss Johnnie will tell you, "but I declare she's got the best heart you'll find anywhere. She's been with me eight years so she feels like she belongs to us. Why if anything gets wrong with any of us, it just looks like it'll kill her. Last summer when a hog ran into me and made water on my knee so that I had to stay in bed for a month, she'd come in my room looking so solemn and would say time after time 'Mis' Shear in I sho hates to see you lying up In the bed like that.' She's a good nigger."
To look at her yon would never think Hannah is a grandmother; her tall, thin figure has a quality of girlishness and she walks with a light, quick step in spite of her high lace shoes. But her eldest daughter is the mother of a baby boy who is the great joy of Hannah's life. Miss Johnnie thinks it's indecent because the girl isn't married. "But do you know," she says, "Hannah's just as crazy about that baby as if it had a daddy. Now her second girl looks to me like she's in the family way and she's not married either. Hannah's supporting all three of her daughters; I don't know what she'll do if they keep on this way. My daddy always said niggers were just varmints and when I see the way they act, I agree with him. It don't make any difference to them what they do -- whether they're married or not."
Varmint or not, Hannah manages to do a tremendous amount of work. Her day begins between five and six in the morning. She walks across the fields from her house, feeds and waters the chickens, the pigs, the cows; she milks; she brings in wood, makes a fire in the kitchen range and has breakfast ready before seven o' clock so people can get to work. After breakfast there are the dishes to be done and the kitchen to clean, then she's out in the fields. Part of the dinner cooks on the stove during the morning, but about 11:30 Hannah is in the house making hot biscuits, peeling the hot, baked sweet potatoes, and putting food on the table for dinner. She eats her dinner quickly and goes to the fields again until time to tend the stock and fix supper. Her daughter comes up to walk home with her and the two of them wash the dishes, set the table for breakfast and clean the kitchen. It's after seven when they're through. Hannah says, "When I gits through here, I'm ready fo' my bed."
Once or twice a week Hannah sweeps out the house and dusts, if there's nothing urgent to be done in the fields. On Monday she washes, and she helps with the ironing which is put off until a rainy day if possible. One of her duties is to wait on the table at supper. With the utmost care and walking as if she is frozen with the fear of dropping it she carries one cup of coffee at a time from the kitchen to the dining room. Indoors and out, whether she waits on the table, sets out lettuce or slops the hogs, Hannah wears the same cotton print dress (changed weekly), gray knit lumber jacket, and ancient black felt hat.
Miss Johnnie says Hannah doesn't like housework -- "If there's a blade of green showing, she's bound to get out of doors." Ask Hannah about this and she'll grin without opening her mouth (on account of the snuff in her lower lip) and say in her loud cheerful voice, "Ye-es ma'am, I like field work; 'co'se house work that all right too. Yes ma'am, bof of 'ems all right." But most of the time she is out of doors.
Instead of resenting the extra work which I must have given her, Hannah went out of her way to do little things for me. She learned that I liked two cups of coffee at meals, and she saw to it that I always had them. On cold mornings she would tip toe into my room, her arms full of light wood and pine and when I spoke to her she always apologized: "I sho' didn' mean to wake you up – jes' thought I'd buil' you a fiah so it wouldn' be so cold for you when you's ready to git up." Several times a day she would come to ask if I had plenty of wood.
One day I went to the field to help set out gladiolus bulbs. Edelweiss was there and Mishoe, Ralph, Luke -- Miss Johnnie's colored man, Hannah and another colored woman. Each person chose one of the long, straight ridges and planted along that particular one until it was finished. Of course, since I was the novice present, I got far behind the others. Then I noticed that Hannah had switched over to my row and was setting bulbs in It until I was caught up with the others, When I thanked her she said, "That all right; we always does help out anyone who get behind in their row. We likes to keep together, ye' ma'am."
Sunday after the dinner dishes are all washed and the table set for supper, Hannah, through for the day, is free to live whatever life she has away from the Shearin place.
Ralph Phipps and I arrived at Miss Johnnie Shearin's on the same day. He was the new hired boy and I was the new roomer-boarder (at $1.00 per day -- including everything). I met him just before supper In Miss Johnnie's bedroom which is used as a sitting room on winter evenings and during the day when anyone has time to sit in the house. On cold days a fire is kept in the tin drum stove all day, but usually it isn't lit until about supper time.
Miss Johnnie was crocheting; Ralph was just sitting in a rocker -- a tall, pudgy looking boy with a round face, thick lips, and sandy colored hair. He wore white seersucker trousers and a white shirt with the sleeves rolled up. While Miss Johnnie and I chatted he sat quietly watching us with round gray eyes.
Hannah called us to supper and the three of us went to the dining room where a long table, covered with a soiled white cloth, was laid for six people. Later I learned that the table was always set for six unless there were more than, that number in the house. Miss Johnnie sat at the head of the table and Ralph and I selected places after we were told to "just sit down anywhere." During supper Miss Johnnie and I kept a conversation going, but Ralph ate sparingly of the backbone, grits, gravy, sweet potatoes, potato salad and hot biscuits without making a remark except when he was spoken to.
After supper Ralph and I were part of the group waiting in the store-post office for the seven o'clock mail to come in. Edelweiss, Miss Johnnie's daughter, introduced me to all the people there, but she ignored him. He leaned against the counter, rolled a cigarette and smoked it with an air of aloofness while Mary van Ness, pretending not to notice him, flaunted her plump body by trucking up and down the floor. Suddenly she seemed to see him and pausing breathlessly she asked in her loud, careless voice,
"Where you from?"
"Up near Tabor City." And he continued to smoke in silence.
The next day Miss Johnnie confided to me that she thought that new boy was going to be all right. "Poor thing, I feel mighty sorry for him. Those white clothes he wears are all he's got to put on for work and his best clothes aren't much. He told me he was wanting to save up and order him a suit from Sears, Roebuck and I said I'd be glad to help him just as much as I could. Why a couple of years ago during the depression, a man came here and I just wish you could have seen him. He was the dirtiest, raggiest mortal I've ever laid my eyes on. He came to the back door and asked for something to eat and I had Hannah give him something. I'll never forget how that man ate; I believe he was half-starved. When he finished he asked me if I didn't want him to cut some wood and he went out to the woodpile. It was right early in the morning then, because I remember we had just finished breakfast. When we came in from the fields for dinner, he was still chopping wood so we gave him some dinner. About supper time I was over at the store and Hannah came over there. 'Miss Shearin, that man still there,' she said. 'We gonna feed him supper too?' I went up to the house. I'll never forget the way that man looked at me -- he was some kind of foreigner, a Swede I believe; he talked like one and had blue eyes and red hair. 'Ladee,' he said looking at me in that pitiful way, 'please let me stay. I chop wood. It so cold and dark on the road. I get so hongry. There nowhere for me to go to.' I couldn't send that man away that night. I told him to wash up, stay for supper and I had Hannah fix a bed for him in the little room behind the store. The next morning he was out early, chopping wood again. The pigs got out and he helped us run 'em back in again. From the way he looked at me, I knew I couldn't send him away that day either. I noticed he kind of limped when he walked; then I found out he didn't have any socks on so I got a pair of Willa's that were here and gave them to him to put on. He took off his shoes over in the store by the stove. You just can't imagine how his feet were, it hurt me too look at them. They had been frozen and the blood was oozing out of his toes, and he had been standing in the cold chopping wood for two days while his rough, worn-out shoes rubbed against the skin. I gave him a pan of warm water, he soaked his feet and put some salve on them. Then I bandaged them up with gauze before he put the socks on. When I finished he looked at me with tears in his eyes and said 'Ladee, you don't know how good they feel. I tank you.' Right then I felt repaid for everything I had done.
"He stayed on until the end of the week, working hard all the time. When Saturday came I sent to town and bought two pairs of socks, two suits of underwear and two shirts; I found a nice looking suit Willa had left here and an overcoat. Then I filled the tub full up with good, hot water and I called him. 'Peter,' I said, 'I want you to soak in that hot water and put on the clean clothes I've laid out for you, then I want to talk to you.' He came out looking like a different man; I declare he was real good-looking, I told him I would like for him to stay on with us but that I couldn't afford to pay him anything. I said maybe since he had some decent clothes and felt better he could find something to do somewhere else. Well, he just looked at me in that sorrowful way of his and said, 'Ladee, please let me stay with you, you been so good to me. A clean, warm bed, work to do and something to eat, that is all I want. You don't need to pay me any money if you just let me stay here and work for you.' He stayed.
"It turned out he was kind of crazy. He used to walk up and down in his room over at the store. He'd walk all night long and knock his head against the wall. Our colored man saw him doing it. He would talk to himself, and would say queer things to us sometimes. But he kept right on working hard and was such a help that I started paying him a little something every week although he didn't want to take it. People told me that I ought to send him away, that he might do something to us, but I wasn't scared. I said as long as he kept on working like he did and being as nice as he was, he had a home with us.
"He stayed with us six months. Then one morning he case in dressed in his hest clothes and he said to me, 'Mis' Shearin, I mus' leave you now. I have the feeling to go. When it come to me, I have to go.' You been to me like a mother, you been so good. Wherever I go I will remember you.' Well, you know, I kind of hated to see him go. I tried to make him take along his clothes, but he wouldn't take a thing except what he wore on his back. That's the last we ever saw of him.
"The way I feel is that he was some mother's boy. I was glad to help him. Maybe sometime my boy will need help and I will be mighty grateful if someone does for him the way I did for Peter. I'll help Ralph too, as much as I can."
Several days after he came Ralph started buying cigarettes from the store on credit and after that whether he was chopping wood, putting in gladiolus bulbs, covering beds or driving a team of mules out to a field, he would be smoking. Every night after supper he smoked one or two cigars. One evening when I went in Miss Johnnie's room I found him sitting in the most comfortable rocker, reading the paper, listening to a noisy radio sketch, and puffing away at his cigar. When Miss Johnnie came in he did not move. She looked at him in cold disapproval and left the room.
After this incident I was not surprised when she came in to dinner the next day in a discouraged mood and began talking about Ralph.
"I just don't feel like eating a thing," she sighed. "You know, I'm mighty disappointed in Ralph. This morning I had him to run the cultivator along my iris and I told him he'd have to be mighty careful so he wouldn't break any of the flowers. I stood there and watched him do several rows and he did them all right. But after I left him, he must have done just any old way because I don't know how many are broken. I told him I guess I couldn't let him work in the flowers any more, that I'd have to let Lee, my colored man, do all that work. But it hurts me not to be able to trust a person to do work right.
"Ralph's like all that class of people -- expects to have something without ever having to work for it. And if they ever do make anything they don't know how to take care of it. His bill at the store right now is over two dollars. Why do you think I'd go around here puffing at cigarettes and big cigars when I didn't so much as have a razor to shave my face with? Don't you think instead of going to town every Saturday evening until midnight and spending my money at the shows, I'd try to save what I made and get myself some decent clothes? That boy don't have a coat to wear to the fields. When it was so cold the other day, I couldn't bear to look at him in his shirt sleeves any longer so I lent him a jacket to put on. The only coat he has is the one he wears with those blue corduroy pants when he goes into town.
"Did you hear him the other day when I told about Mr. von Bavel? Mr. von Bavel had a job in Holland and he had to get up at four o'clock in the morning, walk five miles even in freezing weather then work all day, yet he was glad to have the job. Well, when I told this Ralph said 'that man must he crazy; I wouldn't work like that if I starved to death.' You've just got to be willing to work -- even as hard as that -- if you ever want to have anything in this world. These people here in Castle Hayne got what they have by working as hard as they could and taking care of what they made. I know, because I saw most of them come here with nothing and now look what they have. -- Law me, I've got to get back out and see if anything else of mine is being ruined. You can't trust anybody in this business unless you stand over 'em." She picked up her broad-brimmed straw hat and hurried out the back door.
While he was at work during the day, Ralph had little opportunity for conversation and the group which gathered at the post office in the evening ignored him -- after all he was just Miss Johnnie's hired boy. He must have felt the need for some social contacts because, after the first day or two, he became very talkative at meals, especially after the station agent and his assistant began having dinner and supper with us. He told stories about people in Whiteville to the indifferent group around the table; he frequently mentioned the names of places he had been -- Washington, D. C., Atlanta, Georgia, Florida.
"I don't care nothing for coffee," he would say beginning a typical story, "but I never will forget one cup I had. It was in Knoxville, Tennessee. Me and another fellow had been riding all night that night and we come into town jist about daylight. Boy, it was really cold, I mean; both of us was about froze. I said 'I believe a cup of coffee would help me out' and we went into the only place we could find open to get one. It was right acrost from the depot. That coffee was sure good and it sure did warm us all right. I always will remember that cup of coffee."
After such a story Miss Johnnie maintained a stony silence or immediately started talking about something else as if she hadn't heard anything that was said. Ralph seemed unaware of this and of the other ways in which he annoyed her. One night when company was expected, Miss Johnnie came into my room to change her dress. "Scuse me, she said, "I just have to come in here to do this because that boy's been sitting there in my room all evening. That's the trouble of having a white person in the house, they're always around you; a nigger stays out of your way,"
"Oh well," replied a neighbor girl who was visiting me, "you can't expect anything else from white people in that class, they're always trying to butt in where they aren't wanted. They don't know how to keep in their place."
It did not occur to either of them that it was a cold night, that there was no way of heating Ralph's room, and that he might not want to go to bed at eight o'clock in the evening.
It was a bright Saturday afternoon about two weeks after my arrival in Castle Hayne. Ralph, who had taken his weekly tub bath and dressed in his shabby blue serge coat and corduroy trousers, was ready to start to town as soon as his ride came. He looked very neat. I asked him how he liked it in Castle Hayne.
"Oh, it's all right, I reckon, when you're working, but when you get ready to frolic it's not so much. Course, when I get to know some of the people around here it might be better. Boy, I sure wisht I was in Whiteville this evening. I'd have me some time. My home is jist about sixteen miles from there, out on Route number twenty-one from Tabor City.
"Yes ma'am, my father owns his farm. Well, be mostly raises tobacco. I own a farm up in that part of the country too, but I'm not a'doing nothing with it right now. I don't care for no kind of farming. The only reason I'm down here now doing this work is because I want to get me some clothes. Last summer I had an abscess and malaria fever and had to go to the hospital in Whiteville so that took all the money I had. They had to send for me in the ambulance and it cost $7.50 to ride me jist sixteen miles in that. Boy, I was sure sick. I had a fever of one hundred and four degrees.
"I could have got a job at home -- ditching at $1.75 a day, but they work you too hard. Mis' Shearin's son up in Whiteville know'd I was on the lookout for some kind of job and he brought me down here to look over the prospects. It looked like it would be pretty easy and I figured there wouldn't be much work this time of year, but boy I was sure wrong. Mis' Shearin, she really works you. That bell for us to start rings at seven in the morning and it's most always after 5:30 when we quit in the evening. She's supposed to give us an hour for dinner, but I don't believe she ever gives us more than half an hour before she rings the bell again. You jist watch sometime to see if I'm not right. I don't get but $3.50 a week plus my keep and laundry -- it ought to be a buck more.
"I've done got my plans made. I'm going to stay here two months -- I reckon I'll have enough to get some clothes by then -- then I'm going to quit. I sure don't want to be here when they start cutting them gladiolus because I've heard you have to work every day then, Sunday too. I'm not a-going to kill myself working for nobody.
"When I git my clothes and leave here, what I want to do is to sell my real estate and go take an electrical course in Chicago. I figure it like this: if I sell my farm and learn to do something like that, then I'll always have some way of git ting along. You have to work too hard on a farm and then don't ever have nothing.
"N'm, I never did finish school -- jist went to the eighth grade -- but I know a feller who knows a place where they will bootleg any kind of diploma and ring for $10. I can git a high school diploma from them, and I know enough to do all right. Things always come easy to me in school. I could always git along without studying the way other folks did, and I guess I still can.
"I spect I would have finished school, but my mother died and after that my father didn't seem to care about nothing. I didn't have no one to iron my clothes and sech as that, so I quit. There's ten children in our family and I'm -- let's see. I'm the fifth to the oldest one. I have one brother and one sister that's married, one sister's up at Raleigh in training, but all the rest lives at home. I'd be at home right now if my mother was a-living, but me and that woman my father married jist don't git along together.
"I left home not long after she come there, and believe me I've done some traveling. I've been in seven different states. Part of the time I was bumming and part of the time I was selling magazines. That's some job! If you could get past the front door, you could generally sell them something, but plenty of times they'd slam the door in your face. Sure, I minded at first, then I got used to it and it was jist part of the job. I never did make much because I was selling that no-count stuff like "Good Stories" and "Gentlewoman," but sometimes we'd hit a good town and I wouldn't do so bad. When I done well, I eat well; when I didn't, I'd jist cut down on my rations.
What got me was the meeting the boss man of our gang would have every Wednesday night. We all had to go and he would tell us about how to sell and all such stuff that don't help you a bit. I sure did get tired of them second-hand meetings, so one Wednesday night I wanted to do something else and I didn't go. He got mad and I did too. I quit that job.
"I had a chanct to get in with another magazine company -- a better one. I know'd a girl that worked for it and one week she made $75 in one town; course she was selling magazines everybody likes like "True Story," "McCalls" and things like that. She could have got me in with that company, I guess, but I decided I would go to Florida and see my aunt.
"I never will forget that. I bummed all the way there and when I got to the place she was supposed to live I found out she had moved to another town. She had got married too and I didn't even know her name. There wasn't nothing for me to do but turn around and come back home, but I was glad I seen Florida anyway.
"Well, I won't hate to leave this place and in two more months I'll be gone. I bet Mis' Shearin will offer me $5.00 a week when I tell her I'm going."
Again Miss Johnnie was worried. "Do you know what? Ralph asked me for my truck so that he could ride around this afternoon. When I told him that I didn't think it was necessary and that wasn't what my truck was bought for, he went right down to the filling station and started, talking mighty big to the men there. He said he wasn't going to come back and help with the feeding on Sunday evening and that I didn't need to expect him to. Mr. Beck just told me about it. He heard Ralph down there talking.
"I think that sounded mighty bad, don't you? The reason I hired him was so there would be someone always around to help, especially on Sunday evening when Hannah's gone. Why from Saturday noon until Monday morning that boy don't expect to do a lick of work. I reckon you just can't depend on that class; the niggers are better."
The next morning Ralph was fired. He had worked eighteen days.
Miss Johnnie likes to talk while she sits on the back porch grading jonquils or crochets in her room in the evening, and her favorite subject for conversation is Castle Hayne, the people and their success. "I'll tell you what's the truth, I'm just as proud of this place as if I had started it Instead of Mr. MacRae. I've been here so long, I've seen every one of these people come here -- most of 'em without a thing to their names, and I've seen them grow wealthy. It's simply wonderful.
"How did they do it? By hard, work, that's how. Of course they're the finest people in the world, and they know how to farm too, but if they hadn't been able to work and scrimp along for a while, they wouldn't be where they are today. I think it's wonderful that all daring the depression not a single soul in Castle Hayne had to go on relief, and there're about fifty families here. Oh most of 'em are Dutch, I guess, but we have Americans and Polish people and Hungarians too. About everybody copies the way the Dutch people do things.
"Other people came before these people did. First there were some Greeks right over near here at a place called Marathon. I boarded some of them here at the house. They were single men, though, so they didn't stick. Then Mr. MacRae brought some farmers from the Middle West to look over Castle Hayne. The trouble with them was they listened to people in Wilmington talk who said there couldn't anything be grown on this land, so they went back home.
"About 1910 the Dutchmen who are here now started coming. Most of them came with hardly a thing but their bare hands. Mr. MacRae would let each one have ten acres of cleared land with a little house on it, a cow, some chickens, and he'd see that they had mules to plow with and fertilizer when they needed it. They were to pay him when they were able. Before many years everyone of those people owned their places and I never knew him to put anyone off on account of not paying.
"At first they just grew vegetables -- oh, lettuce and spinach, beans, peas, carrots, broccoli, cucumbers, radishes, collards, tomatoes, corn and things like that. They sold them in Wilmington and shipped them off too. I believe it was about 1925 that they started growing bulbs and shipping flowers. Well, just about everybody around here and even over in Pender County, grows flowers now. I don't have anything but gladiolus, daffodils and iris, some people grow peonies, tulips, sol d'ors, paper whites and Mr. Ludeka has a hot house full of those African Daises.
"Law me, but it takes work to grow flowers and it's the trickiest business in the world. You can work putting them in, spend a lot of money on fertilizer, work to keep them weeded and then lose everything in one night or day. Maybe it will get colder than the weather man says and you didn't put lanterns under the bed covers so the frost gets your buds; maybe a hard wind comes all of a sudden, and blows black dirt on the flowers that are out so they're no good; or maybe warm weather makes the flowers bloom so fast you can't begin to cut all of them and get 'em off -- I can't begin to tell all the things that can happen. It's such a nervous strain, I just feel like I'll go to pieces sometimes. The worst thing is when the market is crowded and you ship boxes and boxes to your wholesale florists on consignment, then you get a report that he couldn't use them and that you owe so much money for express.
"Yes, there's a truckers association and a flower growers association. I belong to 'em. I don't go to the meetings though, because they're not going to listen to what any woman has to say, but by belonging I can get all my plants and seeds and supplies at the association prices -- they're cheaper. We save on express when we go together and get a freight car in the busy season, and I guess the association helps us get fair treatment from those northern florists.
"With all the things that can happen, the people here made lots of money. They say that one man lost over $30,000 in cash when the Wilmington Bank failed in the depression. I know that most of these people were mighty hard hit when the hanks failed. You see, they had been putting their money back into land and into the bank; after they got enough, land -- most of 'em don't have but somewhere between twenty and fifty acres -- everything went into the bank. They were used to being saving, so they didn't spend much on enjoying life. Well, after the banks failed they changed. They decided they might as well spend some of the money they made. You never saw anything like the way they started building new houses, buying electric refrigerators, getting new cars, taking trips everywhere, and just getting anything they wanted. It pleases me so to see them have things and enjoy them; they've worked hard enough to deserve everything they get -- and they still work hard. There was a time when I had everything I wanted, they had nothing. Now it's just the other way around, but I don't begrudge them a thing. You know, I feel almost like they're my children -- it makes me happy to see them happy."
"I want you to be sure to meet the Ludekas," Miss Johnnie said, "They are the loveliest people and he's the biggest bulb grower in Castle Hayne. Nobody knows just how much he's worth, but he's a wealthy man. He has two assistants that live on his farm, several big hot houses with that special kind of glass in them (and it's awfully expensive), acres and acres of different kinds of bulbs, a nice house that they just remodeled inside not long ago, and goodness knows how many hands he hires. About every year he and Mrs. Ludeka pick up and go on a wonderful trip -- to Europe, South America, Canada or just anywhere they take a notion to go.
"I remember a day when he had to take his vegetables into town in a wagon and would get up at three o'clock in the morning so he would be back to start the hands to work at seven o'clock; when Mrs. Ludeka worked in the fields from morning until night; when they had so little to eat they couldn't ask anyone to sit down to a meal with them because there wouldn't be enough for an extra person. In the north, before they came to Castle Hayne, Mr. Ludeka had worked in a shirt factory, he had peddled vegetables on the streets, and at one time they had worked together as someone's servants -- he was the butler and she was a maid. I just want you to see them now."
I did, the next afternoon. I walked to their house along a tar road which cuts through the farm lands of Castle Hayne, and what a pleasure it was to look at the wide fields of rich, black sandy loam, the long, straight furrows, the neat drainage ditches, the patches of rye to provide winter grazing for cattle. Every foot of land seemed to be carefully tended.
I came to a cluster of buildings beneath some tall pine trees. A man with the build of Abe Lincoln came out of a hothouse. He had blue eyes and a pleasant smile.
"Yes," he answered, "Mrs. Ludeka is at home and I am sure she is not busy. She will be glad to see you." A rich Dutch accent gave dignity to his speech.
We walked across a trim lawn to the yellow bungalow and I was shown into an unusually pleasant living room. "Just sit down, please. I know she is here." Then he called up the stairs, "Nellie come here, there is company for you."
In a few minutes she was in the room, a small, blue-eyed, middle-aged woman, with a bright, quick way of speaking and smiling. She carried a print dress in her bands.
"You do not mind if I just keep on with this? I am fixing the hem and I should like to finish it."
Of course I wanted her to finish and I admired the dress.
"Yes, the colors are very nice, aren't they?" She said. "It's an old dress. I bought it two years ago when we were in Miami, but I think I can wear it some more yet."
Mr. Ludeka looked at me thoughtfully for a moment. "What is it you are going to write about Castle Hayne" he asked. "Is it to be published in a magazine?"
I told him that I did not think it would be published in a magazine.
He seemed skeptical. "Many writers come here and then write articles that exaggerate because they see only the results of what we have done. I do not think it is good to put anything in the papers or magazines about what we have done here at Castle Hayne. People read about the place and think that all they have to do is come here and settle in order to grow rich. That is not true. All of us have worked very hard for what we have and there are enough people here now; such a community should not have too many."
I mentioned that I was working in connection with a study of farm tenancy.
He was very much interested. "I am on the council to work on this problem of farm tenancy. It is, of course, a very bad system, one that is ruining the farming in the part of the country. Another trouble with the Southern farmer is that he does not seem to be willing to work the necessary amount, often he is not even partly self-sustaining. You remember. Nellie, the man from Onslow County who moved here several years ago? He was just like so many of the farmers I have seen. This man had five children but he did not have one cow or any chickens to help feed them. He was accustomed to grow cotton and could not understand this kind of faming where you have to work every month of the year. He wanted to work a few months and then sit on his porch -- just as he had always done. He went back to Onslow County before very long, because, he said, we were too fast for him in Castle Hayne."
"Yes, they worked too hard for him here," Mrs. Ludeka said laughing.
"How did you happen to come to Castle Hayne?" I asked Mr. Ludeka.
"I was selling vegetables in Paterson, New Jersey," he said, "and I decided that I would rather grow them than peddle them. Land was very high in New Jersey, also the climate is such that vegetables can be produced only when the market is crowded. In the South there is an advantage because they can be grown early in the season and therefore bring a better price. Some friends had told me of Castle Hayne, I came here to see it and I stayed."
There was a knock at the door. Mr. Ludeka went to answer it and came back to say that he was sorry but he would have to go. "Some more gladiolus bulbs have come in."
I was surprised that he had stayed indoors as long as he had, because when I came up I had noticed Negro men and women setting out bulbs in his fields and Negro men dipping sacks of bulbs in something which I learned was Corrosive Sublimate, a preparation which kills fungi. There would be daffodils, iris and African Daises standing in troughs of water in the pack house; these would have to be bunched and packed for shipment on the evening train. I had been in Castle Hayne long enough to realize that a good farmer keeps check on such activities.
Mrs. Ludeka finished the hem and folded the dress carefully over her arm. "Will you pardon me a moment while I get something else to sew?" When she came back she laughed and apologized. "I suppose it is because that is the way we were taught in Holland, but always when I sit down to talk I feel I must be doing some work with my hands. This is just a piece of curtain material I had left over, and I thought I would sew lace around it to make a dresser cover to match the curtains. I believe it will look all right. It is very pretty lace, I think, for only five cents a yard. When I was buying it in town this morning, I went into a store to get some sheets too. Do you know that they had sheets there, made in Japan, that were ten cents cheaper than the ones made in this country? I would not buy them. There were many women who did buy them, but you cannot blame them if they do not have much money and they can get them cheaper than the others.
"I guess I will never feel right about just sitting without having some work to do with my hands and it is no wonder. In Holland we had to stay in school until four o'clock in the afternoon. Then when we came home our mother made us work on our knitting. We could not play until we finished a certain number of rows --- she would pull a thread at the edge so she could be sure that we did the number we were supposed to do. Sometimes we played and knitted at the same time.
"I was twenty-four when my family moved to America. We went to Paterson, New Jersey because we had relatives there. There it was I married Ary. It is very queer, I think. We had lived only a half-hour's distance apart in Holland, but we did not know each other until we were in America. Ary sold vegetables. At that time they had big wagons -- very nice I think -- that were drawn by horses. The wagons had places for vegetables and were driven from door to door so the people could buy what they wanted. It was not always so good, because many people did not pay. I was glad that Ary gave it up in order to grow the vegetables himself. He and my father came to Castle Hayne together and after they were here a while I came with my family.
"I tell you, Castle Hayne was not what it is now! At first Ary and I lived in a very little house -- only a few rooms and so poorly built there were cracks where you could see right through the walls and the floor. It was what is called -- yes, a shack. The first winter there I was so cold. Sometimes I would wear two sweaters and a coat to keep warm while I did my work. And it was so dirty at first. Ary and I scrubbed all the walls and the floors of that house before we would sleep in it one night.
"Everything was very hard at the beginning. Ary would take carrots and spinach into the city to sell, but nobody would buy them because they didn't know what such vegetables were. After the doctors told how good spinach was, then of course many people bought it. They learned what carrots were too. The things we used to do. Always then we ate the little potatoes so the big ones would be left to sell. When prices were good and we made something extra, Ary would put all the money back into the land. I believe that was right. Everything we have made has been from the land.
"We have been to many places, but now I could not live anywhere but in Castle Hayne. I enjoy very much our trips. If anyone had told me when I was a girl that I would go to so many places, I would never have believed it could be true. Always I planned to have many children -- we wanted them badly, but we do not have any. I don't know why. Both of us went to see doctors; they could tell us nothing."
I glanced around the pleasant room with its fresh sprigged paper, comfortable chairs, book and magazines, Dutch pictures -- some of them original paintings. Beyond the sunlit dining room I could see a small glass enclosure and a brilliantly flowering plant. I admired it.
"Yes, it is very beautiful, I think. It is a plant we got in Florida," she said. "Come and look at it. Maybe you would like to see my orchid plants too. They are nothing but leaves now, but you should have seen the two blooms on them about Christmas. I was very proud because I really do not have the proper conditions for growing them. Judge Way in Southern Pines has been so nice about helping me and giving advice and I now have ordered from New York a book on orchid growing. It has not yet come because they are preparing a new edition."
After I had looked at her collection of rather strange plants, we went to the dining room and Mrs. Ludeka showed me some cups that a sea captain ancestor brought from Peking over a hundred years ago.
"At that time," she told me, "any stranger who entered the city was blind folded when he was taken in and out of the city gates so that he should not see how he had come."
Since I was much interested, she showed me a pitcher she had bought in London last summer, some little spoons collected from various European countries, a ginger jar from the Orient and a batik scarf from Java, The arrangement of her china closet wee unique. The closet was built into the wall with one door (of wood) opening from the dining room and the other from the kitchen so that dishes could be reached from either side or could be passed through from one room to the other. "It saves many steps in serving or clearing away the table. I saw one like it in a house and when we had our house fixed over, I had this put in," she explained after I admired it.
A musical clock chimed quarter past four. "I must put the kettle on to boil, Ary will be here soon for his tea." I followed Mrs. Ludeka into an immaculate, modernly equipped kitchen. While she got out the china and fixed a plate of home-made cookies, she chatted with me about her visit to Holland last summer.
Everything was ready and we were sitting in the living room when. Mr. Ludeka came in, "Here I am for my tea, Nellie," he said and turned to me. "The Dutch must have their tea in the afternoon and their coffee in the middle of the morning. It is very good when you are working hard."
In the course of a conversation on diet that followed, he remarked that he thought Southerners ate too many starches -- "they have grits, over North Carolina and this region. We've got to get these markets right here at home if we want to keep going as we have and expand any."
Another man rose. "I certainly agree with Mr. Sharp. We are going to have to do something. They sell so much stuff they can afford to ship it all the way across the country and still offer it for what we do. Of course, they've got railroad rates that we haven't, but we can use trucks."
A third man began excitedly. "Mr. Chairman, I think what we need to do is to advertise. Get the people in this region to ask for North Carolina produce, make them realize they can help build up this section by buying at home. Instead of going into a store and saying they want a head of lettuce, they ought to say 'Is this North Carolina lettuce?' The way it is now, I don't believe most of the State knows what is grown here.
"Now it seems to me something like this ought to be done: when the lettuce season starts, take trucks of our very best lettuce up to every big town in the State -- Raleigh, Charlotte, Greensboro, even as far as Asheville. Get permission from the city councils to park those trucks on main street, and then give out heads of lettuce to the people passing by. The truck ought to be hung with signs and each head wrapped in paper saying something like 'This lettuce was grown in Castle Hayne (or whatever place it is), North Carolina -- buy North Carolina lettuce;' we could get a couple of our best looking girls to hand it out -- that ought to attract some attention too; we could get the papers in the different towns to print pieces about North Carolina produce and the way it was being advertised.
"I think it would pay us to give away a couple of truckloads of lettuce, and I can't think of any better way to call attention to our produce. If it works with the lettuce, maybe we can try it on other things too."
He was applauded loudly. At the other end of the room a man with a marked Dutch accent began, talking.
"It is all very well to advertise, but other things must be done first -- more important things I believe. Last year we sold all our lettuce, It was a very good year for us because the California crop had been destroyed by the floods there. This year maybe we think we will be lucky again, we plant a great deal of lettuce, and we lose money. Because we know that we cannot do well if California has a good year.
"Why is it we cannot compete with the California vegetables? I will tell you why. Our vegetables are not properly graded and packed, their's are. The store manager knows when he gets a box of California lettuce every head will be of a certain quality and packed in crushed ice so that it will be preserved right. Go in a store and look at some of the broccoli that comes from California. It is packed in little baskets, covered with cellophane, and every piece is the same size. It looks attractive and fresh. Naturally people will buy it instead of loose, ungraded broccoli that is half-wilted.
"So I say before we talk of advertising, we must have some means of grading and packing properly. This means we will need a packing house, inspectors, and an ice plant. But if we hope to compete with the large producers, we must have these things."
The Dutchman sat down. I asked someone his name and was told it was von Bavel, The discussion about advertising continued, but Mr. von Bavel did not abandon his point. He was so insistent that before the meeting was over a committee was appointed to work on the matter and submit suggestions at the next meeting; also it was decided that at the next meeting of the Truckers' Association, Mr. Trask, a large independent trucker near Wilmington who owns his own ice plant and packing house, would be asked to speak on the matter of packing vegetables properly.
On the way home Katherine Greer, laughing about Mr. von Bavel's persistence, remarked, "That's a square-headed Dutchman for you. Once he gets anything in his head, he doesn't stop until something's done about it." It is a remark often heard in Castle Hayne. The Dutch seem to think it a great joke to call each other square-heads.
Several days later I met Mr. von Bavel and talked with him. He had come to Castle Hayne by a somewhat devious route. A native of the Netherlands, he worked for six years in Africa as a railroad boiler man. When he went back to Holland he applied for a position in the East Indies, but losing hopes of ever getting it, he made plans to come to America.
"Would you believe it," he asked vigorously, "after I had bought our tickets and made all arrangements, then I got a letter telling me I had received the position in the Indies. That was some fix for me to be in, but I refused the appointment. My wife, I was sure, would never be able to live in such a climate as they have in the Indies -- women just cannot stand it for long. Besides by that time I wanted to come to America, and we did. First we came to Cleveland, Ohio then to Paterson, New Jersey.
"I worked doing all kinds of things, but I thought I would like to try to farm maybe. You have heard of Fair Hope, the single tax colony in Alabama? Ya, it was a good place, I liked it all right. There was a discussion group that met every Sunday which was to me very interesting. At each meeting one person could pick a topic -- single tax, religion, race problems, anything he was interested in -- and make a speech on it. When the speaker was through, there would he questions and a discussion by everyone. There were some women in that group too.
"My wife died at Fair Hope, and after her death I went back to Clifton, New Jersey to put my three children in my mother's care. I wanted to go back to farming, but my mother did not wish to go so far as Alabama. When I heard about Castle Hayne, I came down to look over the place. I liked it, and brought my family here. That was in 1912. Since then my mother, my oldest son and my daughter have died.
"Once I sold everything I owned here and wandered all over this country, looking for a good place to live, working at many different things. Nowhere could I find any place as good as Castle Hayne, so I came back. I guess now I am here to stay because I know there is nothing better.
"The soil is good in Castle Hayne, it is what is called a Norfolk Sandy Loam, but also the people know how to farm. They use their intelligence. Too many North Carolina farmers cling to old methods, even when better ones are actually shown to them. They seem to be too lazy to try anything new -- or maybe they are just Ignorant. Mr. MacRae is a very smart man. He realized that a farmer needs to use his head, work hard but that he also needs sometimes advice. That is why when he first started Castle Hayne, he had an expert there to help the people on problems."
In the life of this man who explained the single tax system, discussed music, art and Dutch literature there is one unique incident which he did not mention. Several years ago he ordered a wife through a matrimonial bureau. She arrived on the train one evening, announced why she had come, and stayed in the community for six months on probation. At the end of that time Mr. von Bavel, finally deciding that she was satisfactory, married her, and the community thought everything was settled. In less than two years, however, the wife departed and that was the last Castle Hayne has seen of her.
Miss Johnnie does not entirely approve of Mr. von Bavel. "Do you know," she says, "I've seen that man stand up and curse the elements? He gets fighting mad if it rains too much, or there's a heavy frost or something that's bad for the flowers. That's the only thing I've got against these Dutch people here -- they're not religious. Finer people never lived than they are, but it certainly is a pity that they don't believe in going to church. It worries me a heap. They don't even send their little children to Sunday School. Now the Polish people are all Catholics and they're just as religious as they can be."
Mr. J. F. Meyer is R. F. D. carrier for the Castle Hayne post office. Every morning he fixes up his bundles of mail and drives forth into remote corners of the county -- a distance of some thirty miles round trip. He delivers mail and collects that to be taken to the post office, but his duties do not end there. He addresses packages or writes letters and cards for those who cannot write, and sometimes after he delivers mail, he is called upon to read it for the recipient. All of which amuses him very much. He is making a collection of unique material given to him in writing, and among those included will be one I found him laughing about when I went in the post office one day. It had been attached to a package which a Negro woman wanted him to mail for her, and it read, "der mister mal man plese sen this for me by spesh liver in a hury plese rite way."
If he had not gone skating on a certain afternoon in Amsterdam, Mr. Meyer would probably never have come to Castle Hayne.
"At that time," he said, "I was signed up to go to the East Indies and I was supposed to leave in several months. I had a brother in the service there.
"But I go skating in the park and when a young lady has trouble with one of the straps on her skate, of course I fix it. After that we have tea together; the next day we go to the country together, and so it went. That was the end of the East Indies for me. You see I knew women couldn't stand the climate there."
He looked at Mrs. Meyer, a plump, lively little woman, who giggled and made a saucy remark in English which sounded like Dutch. He beamed upon her in an isn't-she-wonderful way.
"Then the young lady came to America, I followed her," Mrs. Meyer giggled again, "and I married her. Some friends of ours in New Jersey, the Ludeka's, moved down here and wrote to us about it. It sounded like a good place, so we came too --- in 1912, wasn't it?" We managed to buy this ten acre farm from Mr. MacRae and make a living from it -- at least we always had something to eat."
Mrs. Meyer broke in. "Oh and we had such good times in the early days. That was before so many people came here. Every day, almost, we would get together and see each other, we had parties, and picnics. You remember, John, those picnics at the beach? Everyone in the community would go together, sometimes we stayed for a whole week-end. Such fun we had!"
"Yes, we had good times all right. The group here was much smaller than it is now, and all of us were close friends. After the community became prosperous in the early 20's more people moved in -- Polish and other nationalities -- so that made quite a difference. They are good people, but naturally the different nationalities do not mix together so much.
"We still have our good times in Castle Hayne. There are parties, we have cars now and can go to Wilmington to movies, many evenings we play bridge or chess and once a week we Dutchmen get together and play Pondoer. It is an old Dutch game, rather difficult I guess. They say no one can be a good player who didn't learn the game in childhood.
"No, since I have had the mail route I do not farm any longer. I still own my ten acres, but I rent them out. Mrs. Meyer says I am too lazy even to have a garden, but when I finish my work there are other things I wish to do and we can buy all the vegetables so cheaply."
Bobby Meyer, a dapper blond youth at the voice-changing, blushing stage, came in from a wiener roast given by his high school crowd. Bobby likes swing music, girls, and occasional cigarettes. He is the only child at home now. She Meyer's daughter, married to young Bruno von Bavel, has lived at Penderlea since it was first started. Mr. Meyer does not see how Penderlea can possibly be a success.
"They have no marketing facilities and no marketing association," he says. "Another thing, many people there have been living on cash made from working on the project -- ditching, tractoring, and the like -- what will they do after this work is finished? A silk mill is being built to give the people work, but they still aren't making their living farming.
"On the whole, I think the New Deal has done what it could -- it's made mistakes, but any administration would. It was necessary to give out relief, but I think the main trouble with the government is that it started spending too liberally and now doesn't dare to cut down."
Mrs. Meyer brought in home-made wine, cheese and crackers, and the conversation turned to less serious topics. Before we left, Mr. Meyer showed us his collection of swords from the East Indies and some interesting rocks he had found around Castle Hayne. We were especially interested in the numerous oil paintings which were hanging in the two living rooms.
"Some are done by ay brother in Holland," Mr. Meyer explained. "He is an artist by profession. The others I did myself. Maybe they are not so good, but I like to amuse myself that way."
Katherine Vogel Greer is the only "lady farmer" besides Miss Johnnie in Castle Hayne. "She's new at it," I was told, but she'll get along all right. Had a remarkable mother and is very much like her -- smart as a whip."
When I first called on her, Katherine was in the pack house bunching the jonquils to be shipped that evening. I wanted to stay there and talk to her. "Oh, that's all right," she insisted, "Arthur can finish this. Come on in the house and have a cigarette with me." I went.
People always like Katherine. There is a magnificence about her personality which is in keeping with her large build and deep, full voice; her blue eyes are alive with humor, she laughs frequently.
While we talked, she told me how she happened to become a farmer. "I was born in Holland. When I was three years old my parents came to Castle Hayne. My father tried farming and dairying, but I guess he didn't like it so much. Anyway he picked up and went back to Holland leaving my mother with four children and a mortgage.
"My mother was a city girl, she had never worked in her life and didn't know the first thing about farming; she had no idea what a mortgage was. She decided to stay here and try to support her children. Lord, how she must have worked to make a success of this place and pay off the mortgage! I don't see how she did it, but she did. The neighbors helped her a lot, but I don't believe she could have managed if it hadn't been for Mr. MacRae. He saw that she had mules for plowing, and fertilizer, and I think he helped her to sell off part of the farm --- I don't know enough about this sort of thing to know how it was done -- so that she was able to finish paying off the mortgage. Mother remarried, but not until she had made a success of this farm.
"After I finished high school In Wilmington, I took a business course and went to work in Whiteville. I sent $50 a month to mother. Then I married Charles (Greer) and we moved to New York where he worked for a lumber company. We lived there seven years, but I was crazy to get back on the farm. I've always loved farming although in the past year I've found out I don't know very much about it.
"You see, last year mother died. She left me the farm with the stipulation that it should be evaluated by three impartial parties and that I should pay my three brothers their share within four years after her death. The farm was evaluated at $8,000 -- it seemed like a lot for around twenty acres -- but each of my brothers waived a thousand dollars. I'm thirty-three now, and I'm looking forward to forty when I hope I can take it easy for a while.
"Yes, I'm managing the farm alone; Charles works at the WPA office in Wilmington. I believe I can make a go of it unless I have a stroke of bad luck. Mr. van Ness and Miss Johnnie certainly have been grand about helping me get started growing flowers. Most of these Dutchman around here are so secretive about every little detail, they won't give any advice. They're scared someone might get too successful, I guess."
Katherine's three year old son, wearing overalls and boots, came in the room to demand a sandwich. While she was fixing it for him, I sat admiring an elaborate chandelier made from blue china, some copies of Rembrandts, and a pair of lovely china vases. Katherine groaned when I mentioned them to her. "I've got to pack them up and send them to my brothers," she explained. "It's in mother's will. That chandelier is several hundred years old -- it was originally in a monastery – and I've got to ship it all the way to California. My only consolation is that it once survived the trip from Holland."
Sometime this summer Katherine is going to have another baby. She's hoping it won't arrive just at the height of the gladiolus season, because that's one of the busiest times of the year in Castle Hayne.
If you ask at Castle Hayne who started the flower growing business there, they will tell you Peter Buis, who now lives five miles away in Wrightsboro. Peter is a small man with brown eyes, a sharp nose, and a Dutch accent. At first he seems shy, but that is probably nothing more than his Dutch reticence.
"No, I was not the first to grow bulbs in Castle Hayne," he will tell you, "Mr. Boet had a few gladiolus then I believe. He took them into Wilmington to sell; I was the first to ship the flowers. I was working for Mr. Ludeka at that time, but I planted for myself three thousand gladiolus bulbs. They did very well that first year. I remember I went out in the mornings before it was time to go to work, and I cut them while the dew was yet upon them. In the evenings I packed and shipped them to New York. My, but they brought a good price that first year!
"The next year I had three long rows of them and just when three inches or more of green were showing above the earth, my neighbor's cows broke into the field. I couldn't blame the cows so much. The poor things had been shut up for the winter, eating only dry foods, and they just could not bear to look at that green without getting into it. It was bad for me. They ate every plant down so that you could not see one bit of green. After a bit the plants grew up again, and I began to feel better. When they were about half-grown, looking very healthy too -- what do you think? Those cows broke through the fence again and again ate my plants down to the earth. I was so mad this time I was ready to be tied -- and I really did curse that man! My flowers that summer were very small, inferior ones. What else could be expected after the plants had been twice eaten away?
"After I started -- it was in the early 20's -- Mr. Ludeka and others began putting in bulbs, gladiolus at first then iris and jonquils, some tulips too. Yes, sure, many people here had worked with flowers in Holland. I began when I was fourteen already and when I first came to Castle Hayne I worked with Mr. Tinga with his nursery."
We walked over Peter Buis' farm, which lies several miles east of his house in Wrightsboro. There is no danger now that neighbors' cows will get into the acres of jonquils and iris which already green the fields or that his numerous beds will be disturbed. There is no farm near him.
He pointed to a large, freshly plowed field surrounded by pine and underbrush. "That is for gladiolus which I am putting in a little later than the others. They will bloom later, when so many are not on the market and will bring a better price. This year I plant one hundred and fifty thousand bulbs."
After meeting the Glod family a visitor to Castle Hayne is reported to have said, "If a million dollars had been spent on this community, that one family would be worth it."
I had met Teddy Glod, a well dressed, good-looking blonde boy, at the celebration of old Christmas at St. Helena. He taught me to do the Polish polka and while we danced around and around the hall, he told me about his trip to Europe last summer. He acted as guide and interpreter for a group of people so that his trip cost him practically nothing and he had plenty of time to pursue his major hobby, photography. Teddy was not different from the average intelligent American youth, except that he was more spirited than most.
I was curious to meet his family because of comments Miss Johnnie made from time to time about "how fine some of our Polish families are; now they (the Glods) are people who came here without a thing and you just ought to see the nice brick house they've built."
So the next Saturday morning I walked down the road to that house. It was a bungalow made of new-looking red brick, trimmed with wood which was freshly painted. Although the fields stretched away in every direction, the house was surrounded by a yard, grassy and planted with shrubs. In the front yard was a lily pond with a fountain arrangement in the center.
I found Mrs. Glod in the back yard shining the car. She was a massively built woman with thick, strong arms. On her head was tied a kerchief and although the air was sharp, she wore a cotton print dress without a wrap.
"No, no," she protested when I suggested that she finish her work. "We go to house. Teddy can finish car. We go to town in afternoon -- he finish in time. We go to house; cannot talk here. Come with me to house." Her words came in staccato-like spurts as if she must struggle very hard to think of them, but what volume her voice possessed!
We went in the back door. In the kitchen there was an old lady wearing a pink boudoir cap, a red sweater, a brown skirt and high laced shoes. She looked at me, her eyes full of a vague wonder.
"This my mother," Mrs. Glod boomed, "She no speak English," and she said something in Polish to the old lady who gave me a shy, toothless smile. "Come we go in other room."
I followed her through the warn, comfortable dining room -- apparently a much used room -- to the chilly front room which was furnished with a new wicker suite and decorated with a huge basket of artifical leaves, a stuffed squirrel, photographs of wedding parties and individuals, and brightly colored pictures of saints. I sat under a fringed floor lamp and leaned against an orange satin Wake Forest pennant which was thrown over the back of the settee.
The old lady wandered back and forth from kitchen to dining room, sometimes peeping at us through the French doors. A little girl with her hair in curlers came in and sat beside me. Mrs. Glod smiled broadly.
"That Mary Ann. She my daughter -- eight year old. I got two boys, Mary Ann only girl. Teddy, my oldest boy, stay here now; sometime he live in New York and last summer he go to Europe. My other boy at Wake Fores' college; he learn to be doctor. Sere, I show you his picture. Ya, he nice looking boy.
"When Teddy go away again, I no have any boys home. He want to go back North, he have a good time down there. My children no like to stay in Castle Hayne. They come home for little while then they want to go where they get better time. My husband like Castle Hayne -- he make good living. I like it. It is good place for me, but I want my children be happy where they live. Yoking people want good time.
"I live in North when I first come to this country. I work in factory where there many Polish people, Everyone talk Polish, the overseer too. So I no learn English good. Here all the time I must speak Polish to my mother and father. That is bad for my English too.
"I stay in Utica two year then I marry my husband. My brother killed when war come. My mother she cry all the time and want someone to stay at house with her and my father. So I go to Poland and stay with them. I take my children with me, my husband he stay here and work. I no have citizen papers for United State and my husband no have them. I stay in Poland so long they say I cannot come to New York again unless my husband have citizen papers. His English not so good and he have to study very hard. Seven year he study before he can get citizen papers. I wait for him seven year in Poland, then he come and bring me back to United State, I tell you, it make me very glad.
"When we come back to New York we send for my mother and father because they get old. My sister (Mrs. Lorek) she come to Castle Hayne, she tell us to come too. My husband he is tired of factory -- always there you must do what someone else say -- so he think farm will be good. First he help on my sister farm, then we get this place. We build this house -- ya, It is nice house. We like."
I mentioned that it must be almost their dinner time.
"No, we not ready eat yet. First Teddy have to come from field and go to store for steak. Let me get you some wine. You must have wine before you go."
While she was gone Mary Ann showed me some of her Christmas presents -- a coat, cap and muff of white rabbit fur, a desk, a small vacuum cleaner, and a pair of pink silk pajamas. She explained that the stuffed squirrel had been bought for her once when she was in New York -- "and I like New York. There are so many things to see there all the time."
"Mary Ann get many presents on Christmas," said Mrs. Glod returning with a bottle of wine and some wine glasses. The old lady followed with a plate of cookies, put them on the table, then stood in the doorway looking at us. Mrs. Glod spoke to her in Polish and Mary Ann rattled off some Polish too. The old lady shook her head, smiling faintly, and went back to the kitchen. "She no want sit here," Mrs. Glod explained.
We drank the excellent home-made wine and Mary Ann. (who had some too) prattled about how she wanted to go to Poland. "So I can play in the snow and ride down the hills on skis," she explained. "And I want to go to see all my cousins in Poland."
Her mother beamed. "Someday you go, Mary Ann." She turned to me, "Ya, she know Polish. All the time she speak it to my mother and father. She no can read it."
At twelve thirty the men came in from the fields. I shook hands with Mrs. Clod's father, a strong looking man with a broad face and thick white mustache; I spoke to Mr. Glod, who is very shy. There were effusive goodbyes from Mrs. Glod. "You come see me again. I so glad you come. Thank you."
Teddy took me home in the car. He spoke longingly of New York. "These friends of mine there are planning the most wonderful time the night of the Birthday Ball. It just keeps me awake nights to think of what I'm missing. I can't wait to get back up there. Two weeks of this place are enough for me, then I'm ready for some excitement. Farming's all right, but I don't like it."
I first met the Brocks on a Monday afternoon. Mrs. Peter Brock, the elder, was walking patiently up and down the driveway behind her tiny granddaughter, Alice, who toddled uncertainly about in the sand. Mrs. Brock, a handsome woman with bright black eyes, a fresh, pink skin and very white teeth, lifted Alice in her plump arms so that I could better admire her.
"Ya, she's a nice baby, all right," she said in her rich hearty voice. She belong to my son, Peter. His wife is in my house ironing now, so I look after the baby while she work. Come in with me and we will have a nice visit."
On the enclosed back porch young Peter's wife, a sweet-faced girl named Dorothy, was sitting placidly running her laundry through an electric ironing machine.
"Not many people get their washing and their ironing done all in the same day, eh?" Mrs. Brock said while I watched a sheet emerge clean and smooth. "We got some system, haven't we Dorothy? Every Monday morning early Marie, that's my daughter, and Dorothy bring all their laundry here to my house where the electric washing machine is and all together we do our washing. One of us watches the baby and the other two mind the machine and start hanging the clothes out. By ten o'clock we are all through. Then in the afternoon one person can iron. It sure is easy to do work with such machines, eh Dorothy?"
Mrs. Brock took me to the living room at the front of the house, It was scrupulously neat and primly furnished with a sober over-stuffed suit and Dutch pictures. Little Alice is allowed to play with one article in this room -- a metal ash tray -- and Mrs. Brock gave it to her at once so that she would be amused while we chatted. "She is a good baby and she understands that she is not to bother with anything else in the room. That is the way we have taught her."
I remarked that I liked Castle Hayne very much, that the people were so pleasant and seemed to be very happy.
"Sure, Castle Hayne is a good place," Mrs. Brock answered. "I have been here seventeen years already, and now I would not want to live anywhere else. The people here, they make a very good living -- even the Negroes have always plenty of work to do, and they are much better off than when we crane first.
"We came to Castle Hayne because my husband's father and his sister -- you know Mrs. Ludeka, she is his sister -- they were here and they liked it. My husband was a carpenter in Holland. When ray daughter was just one year old, we come to this country. My mother and father were old then and it made them feel bad to see me go so far away -- they were afraid they would never see me again. I was sad too, but I had to go with my husband. When first we came to this country we live in New Jersey in the city.
"Always I have liked the country better, maybe because I live there when I was a child. Maybe you think it is funny -- sometimes when I tell people they laugh -- I was born in a windmill and that is where we lived. I remember how exciting it was when a strong wind would blow at night and we would lie in our beds listening to the creaking sounds up above. I guess my father didn't think it was so exciting, because he was the windmill keeper and sometimes he had to stay up all night. In 1935 I go back to Holland with my son. We went to see my brother who lives on the Zuider Zee. It is nice in Holland, but there are not so many windmills anymore."
Dorothy came to tell us that tea was ready, and we went to the dining room where the table was laid with blue willow ware china and tiny silver spoons from Europe. Mrs. Brock put a cosy on the fat teapot, produced a large walnut cake from the sideboard, and went to the china closet. She held up a little yellow cup while Alice watched, her black eyes shining with excitement.
"This is Alice's special cup and we always give her some tea in it, don't we Alice?" Mrs. Brock teased and Alice began running around the table as fast as she could. Then, her grandfather came in and swung her to his shoulder while she squealed with delight. All during tea he held her on his lap and fed her plain cookies. The rest of us ate slices of the delicious black walnut cake and had two cups of tea each. Blonde, amiable Mr. Brock commented on the cleanliness of the Dutch.
"They spend their lives working to keep things clean. Sometimes it is just funny; for instance my sister in New Jersey even scrubs her garage and she puts paper on the top of her kitchen table before she uses it."
"Ya, what would she think of my house," Mrs. Brock sighed.
After tea I went with Dorothy to see her new house. It is a simple gray cottage with green blinds, and stands picturesquely beneath a huge sycamore tree a stone's throw from the elder Brocks. Dorothy was quietly proud as she showed me the well-proportioned living room, the bedroom with two closets, the closet on the back porch for Peter's field shoes, the bathroom, and the upstairs which can be finished up when they need it.
"I like it," she said. "You know Peter and his father planned it and did lots of the work on it.
"No, we don't have a farm, but Peter works with his father which is just about the same thing. Oh yes, I'm crazy about it out here. I'm a Wilmington girl, was born there and lived there all my life. I worked in the drugstore in town and was used to having a crowd around me all the time. You know how drugstores are. When I said I was coming out here in the country to live, everyone I knew told me I'd never be able to stand it -- that I'd just die I'd get so lonesome. When I first came I did miss having people right around me all the time -- that was before Alice came and before I bad my own house. Now if I go into town to spend the day with Mama, I just can't wait to get back out here. I stay busy most of the time, but if you do want to see people here, there're plenty of them around and it seems like there's always something to go to at night -- if you can. Peter has two meetings every week, sometimes more, and I have one. Then we try to get into town together to see a show about one night a week. Since Alice came we don't want to leave so much at night even if Mother or Father Brock are glad to stay with her."
Young Peter took me home in the truck. We put the boxes of flowers which were to go off on the evening train on the station platform and then rode out in the country several miles to take four of the Negro laborers home. After the last Negro hopped off the truck and started up the lane to a dilapidated cabin, Peter commented rather bitterly, "Beautiful houses, aren't they? We try to do the best we can for these people, but I guess they don't have much of a chance. Most of them rent their houses, and if they could afford to fix them up, their rent would probably go up or maybe they would be put out. So what's the use? It's the same principle as farm tenancy, and that's bad business for everybody and everything concerned. You can't blame the tenant, you can't blame the landlord, but just the same the land gets poorer and the houses get worse every year. Something ought to be done about it, but I declare if I know what.
"Another trouble in the South is that laborers don't get paid enough, especially the Negroes. For instance, I was in South Carolina for a while and I know that the very best plow hands there didn't get but 60 a day when they worked -- their work's not steady either. Here we pay from $1.25 to $1.75 a day and there's work to be done almost all year round.
"I've been all over -- the South, the North, and the West but Castle Hayne is best. I want to spend the rest of my life here and I'm going to if I have anything to say about it."