Peter Jackson
2919 Jackson Ave
Interviewed 6/21/39
Submitted 6/30/39
THE VAMPIRE SUGER CANE CUTTER
If you should see a tall, black fellow with small, catlike eyes, cautiously walking along South Rampart Street strumming a guitar, and singing about his women you can bet your last dollar that the man is Peter "Vampiro" Jackson. For SAME strange reason, the Vampire doesn't sing about his troubles which aro many and varied.
The Vampire says he is six feet tall and weighs about one hundred and ninety pounds. He also says he is black, and seems to be very proud of it, stating, "I'm that lastin' color."
"When I was in White Castle I used to be such a vampire around the womens they starts callin' me vampire, says I vamp womens my stuff. Man, I can't play a lick on the guitar but I can sing and strum so damn good. Its a funny thing about White Castle womens, they Sho like music and whiskey," the Vampire said.
Of course, every Vampire has a woman he is crazy about, so, this one is no different. If you listen to him you would think he is without any peer in his line, especially in handling women. "My woman is sane. She knows I can got plenty womens, and when a woman knows that she strictly don't mess around," the Vampire feels.
But, when the Vampire was contacted at his house it was a far different story. Bare facts showed that the Vampire was as tame as a sheep around the house but is a bear-cat away from it.
The Vampire and his paramour live in two rooms in a flat on Jackson Ave neat S. Claiborne. The flat is brown, a dirty brown with bannisters and down. There are approximately eighty-nine persons living in this place and the Vampire is friendly with everyone of them, especially so with the women. "But, let me tell you sumpin'," states the Vampire, "you must never knock around another man's woman under his shade."
The Vampire was born in White Castle. can't remember his ago. "That aint what a man must remember. Its not as important as remembering that you reap what you sew," the Vampire confidentially contended, chuckling like he had something up his sleeves.
"My people is plantation people. We always did live on the Plantation or near it. We been corn pullers and sugar cane cutters all our lives, workin' on the Little Texas Farm. No, I don't know why they calls that place Little Texas but they sho do.
"When I was born my pa and ma was the happiest people in the world. They had done had five girls and sho wanted a boy. Ma prayed fo' one. Pa went to the hoodoo people, they tells. But, he won't let him touch him. Old Pa is a Christian too. Got on his knees and prayed all the time. I used to hear him talkin' to the Lawd at night. I says to myself old Pa must or been a bad sinner cause he sho does pray a lot. Man, I don't know whar pa went but I sho did come hyar a boy. They tells me that pa looked me over and over, and when they told him what I was and he had done seen he went out and got drunk.
"Why pa wanted a boy? Don't you know? Shucks, pa wanted somebody to work fo' him. He was gettin' and older every day. I guess pa was wprryin' about his social security, like they say. My sisters was hangin' around. Two of 'em was married and three of 'em was pullin' corn and helpin' ma around the house. Elviria did Miss Jacobson's clothes. Sho gave all of her seventy-five cents to ma. No, that gal didn't have accent. Ma charged Mer seventy-five cents a week fo' board and lodge.
"There was always some fusin' between ma and sister Emma. She was seventeen yars old and wanted to be a woman. Wanted to go around. Ma didn't want her to be a woman, was careful with her. Emma was a fine looking gal and all them fellows was shottin' at her. Every man in White Castle wanted Emma. She'd start fusin' wid ma all the time, raisin' hell I'd say. Ma used to say, 'Its bad enough with Peter goin' round actin' a fool. You sho aint goin' to come up like no fool. A woman fool is the worse fool of all. Ma was a good woman, didn't stand fo' no funny business. She went to church to serve Gawd. She didn't do like pa. He went there to see how much hell he could raise.
"I remember one time when they wanted to get rid of Reverend White who was at the Plymouth Rock Baptist Church. Well, all the brothers end sisters got together, One side wanted the Rev. and the other side wanted somebody else. Them niggers was fightin' and goin' on sumpin' awful. One woman got up in the center of my floor and called the preacher a dirty rat. Did she raise hell, says he propositioned Martha Wilson out of a whole backyard of chickens, two hogs and hen-house. My pa was the gavel beater. He did his utmost to keep 'em quiet, but he couldn't do it. Them, people was actin' like crazy people. I just laughed myself. No, I wasn't no Christian then. How in the world could I bo a Christian? Me and the Rev. was goin' wid the same woman and I was usin' his flips. We had a gal named Grace Lee. Man, she was a mess As solid as a brick buildin'.
"Things got on pretty bad fo' a while in my house. One woman wanted to fight another woman cause she kept sayin' that Rev. White was a raper. That other lady got up and said if he is a raper why aint you raped? Cause you been goin' wid him long enough. And what did she say that for? Them womens was like crazy people. Pa kept beatin' on the gavel but it aint done no good. Pa got mad and says, 'I don't care what nobody says I aint goin' to take a vote till the whole thing is purely understood. Thats whar they got to arguin' again.
"I went in the back and compose a little song about them niggers. It went like this:
The christians got got round a dinin' room table
To talk about the preacher with the Baptist label
They made up their mind that he was no good
Cause they beleive he stold chickens and wood
Now, I'll tell you sumpin' about a Rev. named White
He sleeps wid a yallar woman every Monday nite
Even got me on the outside lookin' in
Sometimes I feel like crackin' his chin.
"Then, one woman says she regrets that Rev. White must be mixed up with mess like this. Thats whar I sneaks in the back again. You see, I was peopin' at them from the kitchen door. We was livin' in four rooms. You could peep in the dinin' room from the kitchen. Across from the dinin' room was two bed rooms. Emma, Paulina, Agnes. Mildred, and Juanita slept on one of the rooms and my ma and pa, Pauline and Peter, slept in the other room. Ma and pa kept the dinin' room fo' when the church friends came by they had some place to stay. I didn't like that. Couldn't understand it fo' nothin'. till one day pa told me he didn't want anybody sleepin' on the couch in the dinin' room cause it was the only bed in the house that didn't have no chinces on it. That was the only thing wrong about our house. The people who lived there before us put bed bugs in then house and we could never get 'em out. Pa did everything in the world for a man to do to run bed bugs out of a house, even burned the mattress with kerosene. But them rascals came back and as strong as a beet sting'
"Ma used to ask pa to lot us chillin sleep on that cot but he wouldn't do it. 'No indeed,' he used to say, 'I'm goin' to have sumpin' fo' my friends to sleep on.
"Anyhow, the arguin' went on and on. My pa got mad and said he would fix everything. Everybody wanted to know what he was goin' to do but pa wouldn't say. Somebody asked to make a motion and pa got up and hit him right smack in the mouth. Then, there was a free-for-all. Everybody started mixin' it up. Man, some of them people went in our kitchen and got pots and pans, dishes, Rchairs, spoons, knives and forks. They was throwin' things around and fightin' sumpin' awful, broke up the house. The sheriff came and put everybody in jail. They stayed in jail too. Some white folks my pa knowed tried to get him out but the judge said he wasn't goin' to let 'em out till that religious thing over with. His cook was all mixed up in that thing. She had missed plenty work and told the judge that Rev. White was takin' the people's money and wasn't no good. He said his cook had been complainin' about Rev. White fo' the longest. Well, I was sorry pa was in jail but everybody was askin' me why didn't I make a song out of the whole mess so I gets my Self together and I makes up this song:
It aint my business to fool wid no preacher man
His business if preaching the book
And mine is messin' wid sugar cane
But sumpin' tells me he's got the members hooked.
Sometimes I figure its best to be dead
Than to beleive anything the Rev. done said.
They might tell you 'bout Moses and Pharoah
And when you gohe come knockin' on yo' door.
Preachers is like the dark of the night
You can't see 'em when they is messin' wid yo' wife.
Take this man Rev. White, he's no good
Been tryin' to mess wid every woman in his neighborhood
He likes the gal I like and wants to do the things I do
How can a man like that speak the real truth?
So, when all the sisters came to my house
I felt like tellin' em don't stick out yo' mouth
Cause you know the Rev what its all about!
I did my peepin' from the keyhole crack
Looked up one of them sisters back.
Sho aint had no spino, nothin' to brace her troubles
Ought to be diggin' with some kind of shovel.
What did they do? The fought and fussed
Tryin' to act like the rest of us. We aint no holy people or nothin' like that
But we don't go runnin' round the church like rats
And then get out and talk about the church
The thing we say we give our last shirt.
Thats why my pa hit the man on the jaw
Cause what ho was tryin' to do my had dono saw.
Now, all of nam is jail waitin' for the judge
To get 'em together in some kind of a morgo.
"I was at the trial. Man, it sho was crowded. One of them white folks was standin' around to keep them church people from makin' lots of noise. The clerk said, order in the court. The judge is hyar' Man, was them Christian people scared. They was troubling' All of 'em was sittin' up infront. They was only in jail two days, and hadn't had nothin' to cat cause the man said the jail aint had no money to feed all them niggers. One woman was so scared she kopt askin' to be excused. The clerk got mad and told her no. But the judge hyared about it and told him to let her out, cause he says, 'this is a court room. I don't nothin' else to take place hyar but this trial.'
"The furst one they calls up was Reverend White. No, he hadn't done been in jail. Old Rev. went b'fore the judge wid his Bible in his hand. He though he was pullin' on a fast one but tho judge told him to put the Bible down 'You aint been usin' it all this time so don't come up wid it now brother.' Man. thats whar you could or bought Rev. fo' a penny. That nigger is as black as cold and turned green. I guess he was too scared to turn white.
"The judge....think his name was Judge Paul...says, now Rev. I don't know much about you and I don't want to know much about you. All I wants to know is whats wrong at yo' church? People come hyer fusin' at the mouth, in jail and in the peneitentiary all over yo' church.'
"Thats whar old Rev. up and says, 'Well, yo' honor, I'm a Gawd sent man.' But the judge stopped that lie right away. He says, 'I don't know what you is but you need to be a Gawd man now, cause I'n goin' to run you out of town'.' Is you goin' to do that yo' 'honor?' says old Rev., tremblin' in his booths. As soona as the judge finished talkin' one of the sisters says, 'halleujah!' The clerk says, 'halleujah hell.' Thats whar everybody laughed, and the judge fine the court fifty cents a piece.
"Thats the truth, so help me. I done told that to many people but they don't beleive me. It was all in fun, and then Judge Paul wanted to do them people some good. If he hadn't stopped them there was goin' to be some hell in the church. I mean more hell. Them mens was against the Rev. and the womens was wid him. And you know a man will crack his old lady's skull if ho knows She is messin' around wid a preacher.
"Their trail was all over with that. judge told them darkies if 'they git another preacher and mess up and keep his cook from comin' to work he was goin' to send all of 'em to penetentiary.
"So, what do you think they did? They all got together and elected my pa preacher. And pa couldn't preach a lick in the world. I used to hyar him all the time on his kneses askin' the Lawd to give him the grace. I always did say that he ought im er had the grace. I don't know if the Lawd over gave my pa grace or not but he kept the church. I do know that he didn't mess around wid no womens cause my ma was right on his time. Then too, pa was safe. He couldn't move around or nothin' like that.
"Even though Pa was a preacher I didn't bother about church much them. I had my mind on womens. Had nine of them.
"This is how I picked up playin' the guitar: I made up a song once that went like this;
Love is a thing made like a lizzard
It flaps round your hart and tickles yo' gizzard.
Love blossoms liks sweet odors in the spring
It puts hairs on yo' chest and everything.
"I spent all my time singin' that song cause everybody liked it. A friend of mine had a guitar. He used to strum it all along the street. Harry was always sayin' he could strum all right but he couldn't sing. He was always tryin' to sing like me. So, one day I told him if he showed me how to strum a little I would give him some of my songs. No, I never did write 'em down, just sang 'em. composed 'em I reckon. "Here's one I calls SMART AND PLENTY SHARP.
You played hookey and didn't go to school,
Went to the hospital and acted like a fool.
I gave you money, gowns, and shoes,
And black gal, you have me the low down blues.
You is very smart mama, yo' trick is fine.
But I'll get you mama when yo' troubles is lak mine.
You done always played me for a shump,
When you let me fall I hit my bump:
Mister Taker, you think you is smart,
But, I'm goin' to tell you fore you start
That you aint got nothin' but an empty cart:
"My life is a song. I aint had no schoolin'. Yes indeed. My songs used to help me when I was outtin' cane. Man, I likes to out cane. Aint nothin' to it when you knows how, its jest lak anything else. If there was a little bit more money in it I'd be right back on the cane fields now. I was up there two yars ago when the government made everybody get off the W.P.A. and go up and cut cane.
"My people aint never of education I don'r reckon. We was all workin' people. No, we aint had no trouble with no white folks or nothin like that. The biggest year we ever had was the furst yoar pa was a preacher and everything wont good. We cleaned up, made about five hundred dollars that year.
"Hero's another song I composed:
Well, this was the furst of my knowledge three yars ago
When I was workin' on the press at Tally-Ho
I told Mr. Moss I was goin' to make a block
At this time it was about seven o'clock
So, I tipped around my house:
He was peepin' through a crack.
That was sumpin' I sho didn't lak.
I was tremblin, excited, and very cold,
I was thinking about my jolly roll.
The last time I hyared about her she had jumped a fence
Thats whar the story commences.
I was thinkin' how I bought my gal beautiful gowns
And when I got home her face was full of frowns.
I got mad and told her to go, I mean go
Cause I didn't want that black gal no mo'.
I got me a pretty mama from acrods the field
Her name was pretty, they called Cecile.
"People in the comntry used to lak me sing that song. Now I'm goin' to give you a big part of my history in a song I composed.
When you meet a woman don't be too fast
Everything he or She says, don't say "yes."
Be sincere and be sure you got the right one,
If you Don't be careful you'll be stung.
Some of us is a little too hasty through life.
We become complicated in pickin' yo' wife.
She may lock pretty, or she may look fine.
But she may cause you to lose yo' mind.
And if you don't get some self-controll She'll make you lose yo' soul.
You can't be too particular, and you can never tell
Cause one of them womens will send you straight to Hell.
I am very proud, I didn't get the dispondent
You know, I am a fisherman and might or got drown
Listen young people who seem to be in a baloon
Don't pick yo' wife too soon.
And old people jest lak myself, lots hang our goods on our shelf.
You know ehen we get old we try to bo young.
And the first thing you know you is stung.
All these words is about me poor little me.
Women done had me down, right on my knees.
I know Gawd went to Adams and gave him the laws
Here comes Eve with the Apple acting like Santa Claus.
Adam took a piece and it tasted all right,
And Eve had Adam flying just like a kite.
And there you go, no again
Right out hyar in the rain.
"I was born on the plantation I tell you. Couldn't be nothin' else but a cane cutter when I was almost born cuttin' it. Juest like I told you my pa had me hittin' it when I was big enough to think about work.
"I'll tell you how cane cuttin' go. It takes four mens to carry a set of rows.
The leader is the best and the fattest. He gets One dollar and sixty cents a day, the other people get one dollar and fifty cents. The leader keeps check on the other cans cutters. There aint got no special distance to go.
"A set of rows consist of two heap rows and two fky rows. There is a row in the middle for the derrick to go on. Two mens work an each side of the heap row to pile the cane for the derrick to pick it up. The derrick passes two fly rows. Yes, there is a foreman. His job is to see that they aint cuttin' the cane too high or too low.
"You is suppose to hold the cane with yo' left hand and then strip it of all the shucks, all the way down. The bottom of the cane is the sweetest part. Thats the part that is left to grow.
"The derrick puts it in the wagon where it is taken to be weighted.
"The season fo' cane is from October First to January. Women put long stockings on their arms to keep the cane from cuttin' <text not clear> 'em. All cane cutters work from six in the mornin' until six in the night. It aint hard work. not once you is used to it. Man, I done made a lot of money cuttin' cane, used to make enough to buy them shoe pick shoes. And I was studded down to a soft beat. Mellow man. Sharp as a tack. Had plenty gals. I used to beat the nails with my stuff. Man, one fifty was plenty fo' me, and then I had a dime or so over. I aint had to never buy a drink. The womens who wanted me to sing bought that.
"Never seen nothin' lak it in my life. After I finished work I'd have to go by some. Woman's house and lay up and play and sing fo' her. Womens sho lak that. They calls it muggins up a breeze. We mugged too.
"How you plant cane? You get two stubs and turn top and butt together and put int the ground. You cut it in September for the plant. In April you now it down and work it. I mean scrape it. Don't worry about water. The rain will take care of that.
"Say, when you out cane you is suppose to sing. One of my best songs was called, Shuokin' the Cane.
Hit the bucket with a little water
Cause I shuckin' on dam fo' my quarter
I figures its a quarter fo' my time
Fifty fo' my ma. and the rest fo' my shine
Let me shucks the cane on down
So I can get my flips and go to town
I'm shuckin' the cane, shuckin'
After a while I'll' be fuuckin'.
"I worked as a xane cutter fo' nineteen yars. Left it to come hyar, but I used to go back every summer. I'm workin' on the W.?P.A. now. I been on the W.P.A. ever since it started and before. I couldn't get nothin' else#. Every Summer my committe told me to go out cane. When I come back my job was waitin' fo' me.
"No, I don't reckon I'm much of a Christian now. Religion and me never was much good, I guess its because I had done had too many preachers wives. Oh yes, I take them kind. They is always easy, cause the preacher spends his time knockin' round somebody's else's old lady and leaves his undone. So, I steps in and do 'em, do 'em up I mean.
"I came to N'Awleens about fifteen yars ago. I'm about fifty-two. Me and my old lady aint married, but when I gets religion I'm goin' to marry her, cause she says she is tired livin' a common life, and I don't blame her. I'm her fourth old man, but she is still good. A woman lak her will make you hang around the house.
"My wife is workin'. We do all right. I'm thinkin' about goin' to pick cane right now. I says my money when I pick cane. In the country whar people like all kind of craziness I don't have to buy a lot of things. Hyar the people gets so much they aint got time to stop and really liesten about much. All these people down hyar wanst to do is drink. You can't stop 'em from drinkin'. sho can't!
"I finds the womens in New Awleens aint lak womens in the country. They don't lak to sit up lak them country womens. I done seen times when country womens sit up all nite to hyar a little musie, but not these womens.
"Live hyar with my old lady. We aint got much. Just two tables, a stove, a bed and a few clothes. We do allrigt. Can't spect to get rick, you know. My little and my old lady's little makes it go. I get thirty-eight fifty and she gets six fifty a week. We makes it on that. Things has done been tuff but they is clearin' out allright now. Thanks to Roosevelt. No indeed, no chillun fo' me, too much trouble and the depression is still on.
"Religion is allright. I aint got it yet, thats all. I thinks people ought to be religious. Its bound to get you somewhar. As soon as I need it I'll ask the Lawd fo' it. I guess when he gives it to me I'm goin' to get a lot. Thate what my pa did. Sho, he and ma is still in White Castle. Got his church too. Pa asked me not to stay at home cause I disgrace him, cause I went get religion. One time I told I'm goin' to pray fo' it. He laughed, membering he did the same thing. Now, he's got plenty religion cause he can't run after them skirts. But, I can run after them."
