Date of first writing	April 1, 1939
Person interviewed	Omar Darrow
Adress	Durham, N. U.
Occupation	WPA Worker
Writer	Omar Darrow
Revisers	Edwin Massengill
N. C. Browder
Number of words	About 6000.
(I LOVE MY HOME)
CHRONOLOGY
EVENTS	LUCY	LARRY
	(Age)	(Age)
Born	1893	1881
1st meeting	1903	(10)	(22)
Married	(Aug.)1907	(14)	(26)
1st child born	(May)	1908	(15)	(27)
2nd child born	(Feb.)1909	(15)	(27)
Sold home	1913	(20)	(32)
Father died	(May.)1916	(23)	(35)
Mother-In-Law died	1917	(23)	(35)
Larry died	1919	(26)	(38)
Lucy's 2nd marriage 1927	(34)	----
6th son born	1927	(34)
I Love my Home
"I was reared in the country and I am grateful that I was. I do not care for city life; I feel crowded. I really like to touch the earth -- I like to handle the soil with my hands; the flowers in summer offer me that opportunity. Although this little place belongs to my daughter, I have made it.
"When I was forced for financial reasons to break up housekeeping I came to live with my daughter, just about the time she and her husband bought the little house. It had just been finished, and there was nothing here but the house and garage. I planned and laid out the yard, collected the plants and put them in, built up the walkways, and made the driveway. I enjoyed doing it. If you could have seen it in the beginning, you would better appreciate what has been done.
"I have always tried to make myself contented with present conditions, and I have known all the while that I am the kind of person who could never find any sort of contentment without a home. That has always been my greatest desire.
"I was the 12th child in a family of twelve, and the seventh daughter. Only seven of the children lived to grow up.
"I do not remember my mother, for she died when I was a baby. She told my father that I would live and grow up to be a great woman some day, and asked him never to let anyone impose on me. I have wondered about her words. My father told me what she had said, about the time I was married, saying it was the most sacred promise he ever made and the only one he had failed to keep.
"The first incident of my life that I recall was a visit to the flower garden with Uncle Wes, the old colored man who in my mother's lifetime was her gardener and man-about-the-house. I had ridden on his back to the garden, and he was holding me over the balsam bushes, telling me to pick as many as I wished. I plucked a handful of red blossoms, and then the housekeeper came into the garden and tried to drag me from the old man's arms. There was an argument between the two, and I remember the housekeeper had some talk of whipping me for running off, and I also remember his telling her that he would whip her if she touched me.
"I shall never forget the day -- I was nearly four -- on which my father's second wife came to our home to live. I barely remember seeing her that day, but I was very unhappy for I realized I could never like her, I remember a sound whipping I received because I was rude to her, and it didn't help matters for either of us.
"I looked on my father as a great and busy man, and even in those days when I looked at him I had the feeling that he had a great trouble of some sort on his mind. I rarely ever saw him during the week; he was out at work mornings before I was awake, and I was in bed before he returned. On Sunday mornings I held his hand and walked to church with him. Many times I wished to talk to him, but I felt that he was too great a man to be bothered with a bad little girl, even though I were his own. When we returned from church I saw him at the dinner table, but his Sunday afternoons were filled with entertaining his friends or discusssing the Bible with church people who frequently called on him. Even when I grew older I could never talk with my father.
"My brothers and sisters were so much older than I that I had no one to play with, and the only companionship I had was with old Uncle Wes.
"When I was about four years old my first teacher came to see my stepmother and asked that I be allowed to sit on class at school. I didn't think my stepmother would allow me to do it, but she did. I continued right along in school -- I don't remember ever having but one poor lesson. I enjoyed learning.
"I had always been a sort of odd link in my family and had never played with other children until I went to school. But from the very first I liked the way the boys played. Their rough-and-tumble ways appealed to me. I noticed the boys didn't get angry over little things like the girls did, and it seemed that they treated each other as though all had equal rights. Soon I was playing altogether with the boys. I didn't care if my clothes got rumpled. The boys all liked to have me play with them, too. By the time I was six years old I raced the boys up trees. Usually I got to the top of mine first. All the girls began calling me 'Tomboy.' I guess I merited the nickname; anyway I didn't mind it.
"At home I continued to have differences with my stepmother. I remember one morning I was unable to find my history book. She let me stay there searching for it ten minutes after the bell rang, and then she went to a small closet, opened the door, and drew my history book from the topmost shelf.
She didn't give it to me, instead, she walked to the front door and threw it as far as she could. Then she told me that the next time I brought one of my books home with me I would never see it again.
"My father being a busy man with two farms and three stores to manage, did not know how she was treating me until a neighbor told him. Afterwards she treated me a little better, but she never permitted me to bring my books home."
"I have always liked books in my home, and I am proud of the selection I now have. I have never clung to one type of literature nor wanted to develop a dogmatic attitude toward any type of reading material. People think differently and act differently. I have always tried to adapt myself so that I could understand other people's point of view.
"One Sunday afternoon, when I was about ten years old, I was sitting on the front doorstep 'making pictures in the clouds'-- which I liked to do. I was startled out of my childish reveries by a young man asking for a drink of water. I ran in the house and brought him a dipperful. Then he made inquiries about the people who lived on the next farm. I don't remember much of the conversation. I remember only that I felt free. In a few minutes the man started off, and then he came back and told me he was going to wait for me. In one way I did-not understand what he meant.
"My life ran on in pretty nearly the same channel and with the same existing conditions for the next three years. I was rapidly advancing in my school work and was so advanced that I was in classes with really grown-up boys and girls. The system of grading children in schools was a little different in those days; promotions were more often made on the basis of achievement. There was one boy in my classes who began walking home with me after school. He was a nice boy, but my sisters didn't think so. To avoid comment, I began seeing him on his way before we came in sight of my home. One sister would stroll down the road so that she could watch to see if he did walk part of the way with me. I was severely scolded and made to think I had almost committed the unpardonable sin. I often asked him not to come with me. Finally he quit even starting along my way; instead, he began asking me what I was doing on week ends, until I found myself planning to get some place to be with him. Thirteen years old, and I fancied myself in love. Then my father found out.
"I had a greater desire to please my father than for any one thing in the world. My father asked me to quit seeing the boy, which I did. There were two letters that I returned unopened. Although I was only a kid I had a mind almost as mature as that of a grown-up person.
"I met Larry through my father. When he first came to our home I didn't recognize him, but he told me he was the same person who had asked me for a drink three years before. My father knew his father and that made everything all right. He was soon taking me places with my father's consent.
"Larry Gray was a great lover of horses and dogs. He had at this time the most beautiful and expensive saddle horse around. He was very handsome in his riding clothes, with his white shirt and derby hat. I felt flattered, and since my father did not object, I was pleased that he took an interest in me.
"I was fourteen then and had just finished high school, and was beginning to take piano lessons. My father had not wanted me to study music. He had spent a lot of money on lessons for my sisters, and none of them ever played very much, or cared very much for studying music. When I told him a year or so before that I wanted to take lessons, he very frankly said 'No.' I suppose he considered me too young to be given a reason. He probably didn't realize how earnest my desire was to become a pianist. He gave me a joking answer, saying that he was afraid my studying might ruin my playing. I did not ask him again. I had not yet recovered from my childish fear of him. But I was determined to learn to play the piano, and without his help.
"The wife of one of my father's tenants had been getting tobacco bags from the factory to 'string.’ I persuaded her to have her husband get some for me. At first I tried to keep the matter secret from my older sisters, but they soon found out, and the whole family, including Larry, joked me about stringing bags. They did not find out why until I had twelve dollars, and had seen the music teacher and arranged for lessons.
"I might have paid for my lessons out of my allowance, but I felt that I should not use my father’s money since he had not wanted me to take lessons. My father was not rich, but he gave each of his children a stated sum of money each month. He had us to deposit it in the bank and pay our own bills. I remember he taught me to make my own checks when I was nine years old.
"I felt so happy to be having piano lessons, but it also brought its sorrows too. My stepmother immediately began complaining about the 'tunk, tunk, tunking of that old piano.' I never tried to practice more than two thirty-minute periods each day. Presently my stepmother allowed me only fifteen minutes each day for practice. I did not have any girl friends in whose homes I might have practiced. Much as I liked my home, I often wished I were somewhere else. More than ever I though about having a home of my own.
"The first time Larry asked me to marry him I did not agree. I did not particularly love him. I suppose I felt all the thrills any young woman feels over her first man, but more than that I wanted to make a name for myself, somehow. When I was playing on the piano, I felt less like a person -- I felt free. It is a place in my life I could never fully understand or analyze. As I look back now, it was a period of wavering desires and sinking hopes. I did not think of Larry as a means of escape from the storm in my life, yet that is what he must have meant to me. In spite of the confusion of conflicting emotions, that period of my life had -- and still has -- a peculiar dream quality which I can not explain. I remember long hours I spent perched in my favorite apple tree. I can still bring back memories of the bees and the hornets with their buzzing sounds while they busied themselves with the ripe apples under the tree. I knew that I had a well developed sense of music, and I had been strengthened in that belief by my music teacher. I was, I think, a little above the average in size for a girl fourteen years old, but in my thinking I probably was not above the average. Larry and I were married in August. I remember the heat, and my sense of being intensely lonely. I think I missed Uncle Wes more than anything else "I have ocasionally wondered since why my father permitted it. I don't believe he knew my age. I think he more or less looked on me as one of his big girls around the house, even after I was the only one left unmarried. If my stepmother had any objections she never voiced them in my hearing.
“A few weeks after we were married we took a house. I liked my new furniture, and I was more contented than I had ever been. I had some difficulty learning to cook. I suppose Larry in his eagerness to be married had forgotten to find out if I could cook. A very fine neighbor next door made my inexperience much less trying; she gave me recipes and advised me, and I soon learned, a little of cooking.
"Even the first winter I had flowers blooming in my home. I knew how to grow all kinds, for when I was still a small girl I had had my own flower beds. Larry though me a marvel with plants. He soon noticed that I enjoyed my home so much he just left me with it and went and came as he wished. I think he treated me too much as though I were a small child playing with my toys. I felt very proud of him in a way, for I had had many rivals. However, he had been a bachelor so long he could not get used to me, it seemed. Often I would express an opinion to Larry about something, and he would give me no answer, only an enigmatic smile.
"Larry was not a bad fellow, but he was certainly going to have his way regardless of whom it affected -- unless it were his brothers. He had no objection to my doing as I liked, as long as what I did brought him no inconvenience. He was genuinely pleased when my father gave me a new piano that I might continue studying. I think I spoiled Larry more about that than anything else, for I got more tobacco bags and did them to pay for my lessons. I began going to the Conservatory of Music, which cost a lot more than private lessons. But I managed to pay my own way. However, I had to give up my music study the following year, because in May my first baby was born.
"My father gave us a new home near his own. The city had grown out to his farm by now. I loved my home, and it was to the house and to the garden and yard that I looked for all my pleasure, aside from our baby. I remember that I scarcely let our little girl sleep until she was about six months old -- I bathed and dressed her so often. Almost every time before I gave her the bottle I gave her a bath. I finally learned better when people began telling me that she was not growing. She became sickly, and our family physician had to take her in hand. Of course, the child became well and husky after I had followed the doctor's instructions for a while.
"My second child was born in February of the following year. She was only four weeks old when my stepmother began taking the older child to her house for the night. At this time my stepmother had become different in her attitude toward me. She seemed to really want to help me as much as she could. The older child finally went to live with my father and stepmother, where she continued for the next five years.
"When my new baby was two months old I went back to the Conservatory again to music classes. I had no time now for stringing tobacco bags, but Larry had a responsible place in a large clothing establishment. One of my kind neighbors who lived just across the way had a nursemaid with her children, and she care for my baby while I was away from home.
"Larry was seldom ever at home unless it was for a short while on Sunday. He came in regularly about eleven at night. He enjoyed a show or a game of pool around at the hotel, and he seldom came home for dinner. I went on with my music study, when I was not interrupted by having children. I loved my children but by the time I had four I had lost any active desire to fondle or pet them as some mothers do.
"When I was nineteen I organized my first class of beginners in music and did very well with it. I enjoyed the work, and the money I made enabled me to continue my study. During those years I had little spare time. But in spite of my teaching, and study, and the care of my home and the three children, I still managed to find time to grow flowers.
"Shortly after the fifth child was born Larry came home one day and asked me if I wanted to sell our home. Such a thought had never occurred to me. It was an idea like selling one's child or one's sister, or something else that God or one's father had given. He did not wait for me to answer. He said he had already made a deal. I did not know what to do. I cried, but I did not quarrel or argue with Larry.
"The deed had been made out jointly to Larry and me. The neighbor who had been so kind during the first years of my married life advised me not to sign the deed which would have to be made out for the purchaser. She thought it was foolish of Larry to sell our home. She told me that if she was me she would divorce him first. But twenty-five years ago divorce brought scandal, it was unthinkable. I told Larry how reluctant I was to sign the deed; he told me I could sign it or he would leave me. I was not very articulate, and I probably did not think any too clearly. I might have explained to Larry that he did not have the right to dispose of our home. He had really contributed too little to the making of it. My father had sent us much of the food that we had eaten. He had almost wholly supplied us with meat. With the proceeds from my teaching I was buying clothes for the children.
"I asked Larry why it was necessary, and he told me that one of his brothers had gotten himself in a scrape with a woman, and that he did not want the rest of his family to find out about it. I did not at that time know which brother it was, but since all his brothers were married, I surmised it was a pretty serious affair. When I discovered that one of Larry’s brothers bought the house, I could not help wondering why Larry did not borrow the money from him, because he surely did not need the house as much as I did. It had become a vital part of me.
"Larry seemed to think it good fortune that we had four weeks to stay in our home after it was sold. I count them the most miserable days of all my life. Something seemed to break in me. I have not cared for things as deeply since. I learned that everything we love will eventually be taken from us.
"It seemed there was no place to go. No houses to rent. Larry finally found a small four-room house almost in the Negro section of town. The house was in a state of ill-repair. There was not a door that could be locked. The house was really so small that I could not keep all my furniture. Several pieces that I especially liked went to a second-hand dealer for a few dollars. For the first time I was ashamed for my acquaintances to know where I lived. Larry told me that he had gotten permission for me to move some of my flowers and shrubs, but I could not bring myself to do it.
"Larry stayed even less at home. I think he neglected his business; at least he took more days off for hunting and fishing. I suppose hunting and fishing meant to him what home and my music meant to me. Although he contributed little to my welfare or comfort I did not begrudge him his sports.
"When Larry and I were first married, my father had given us a Jersey cow, and when she went dry he had swapped us another. He continued to swap with us so that we might always have a fresh cow. I do not think I really thought much of cows until we sold our home. I grew to love ours; she was like a mother that fed us. I managed to keep most of my music students, so that I still had ten or twelve. And I still had my chickens.
"One afternoon in my father's office I was introduced to one of my father's acquaintances from out of town who, when he heard of my interest in music, suggested that I take advanced courses by correspondence. My father inquired as to the cost. The man did not know, but he said he thought the cost would not be exorbitant. My father instructed me to make the arrangements and he would pay the fees. I think my father was secretly pleased that I had made some money through the knowledge I already had of music. For my part I was still haunted with the idea of being a concert pianist. Very shortly afterwards arrangements were made and I began my correspondence work with a northern university. It took me almost two years to get my diploma, and then I taught in public schools.
"A few months after we sold our home, Larry lost his place in the clothing shop. There followed eight months during which he did nothing but hunt and fish and play pool. The war had started and times were getting better. At least they were for my father. Larry was finally offered the kind of job he liked, but he was having so much trouble with his health that he worked only a few months. He was constantly in the hospital. After his confinements in the hospital, Larry spent more time at home. He seemed to have more interest in his children. Then there was a period when he went into the automobile business with several of his brothers. They had secured the agency for the Ford car which had just been put on the market. Larry had no money, but his popularity was an asset to the company.
"My father was stricken with pneumonia about the first of May, 1916. My stepmother, who was herself in poor health, sent for me. In the lucid intervals that my father had during his illness I was nearer to him in spirit than I have been to any other human being. Few words passed between us. I could meet his look without drawing away. Ours was a wordless comment on all that was past. In the three weeks that I spent at his bedside before he died, I came to the full realization for the first time that I was the mother of children. The knowledge came to me of what it means to take an interest in one's children. A child is like one of my flowers, it needs care and attention; slower may bloom without love, but it needs cultivation and sun and rain. I kept a vase in my father's room, filled with blooming apple spray from the tree that had been my perch in childhood. With the going of the father who had been a stranger to me went also all my personal ambition. I had five children to rear.
"I stand on at my father's house. All my family, including Larry, had been living there since the first few days of my father's illness. My stepmother Insisted that we stay. For several years she had been suffering from cancerous growths. Shortly after we took up residence with her she was confined to bed. Her fianl illness lasted nine months, during which time she was constantly in the bed or one the wheel chair.
“No division of my father's property was made so long as his wife lived. The administrators of the estate gave us, as it seemed to me, more than an ample allowance. It was generally believed and felt that my stepmother could not live long, and to avoid confusion the settlement of property was deferred. I gave up wholly my teaching, and devoted myself to the care of the patient.
"I rather grew to like my stepmother, possibly because I greatly pitied her condition. She had the old piano moved into her room. It had been so long in disuse it needed tuning very badly. She never asked me to play during the day; but late at night when the drug the doctors gave her to ease the pain did not bring sleep, she would make me play. I had thought she hated music. I realize that she had simply been annoyed by my music practice, when I was a student. Practicing chords and running the scales is usually very annoying to any of us, if we are not the one doing it. I doubt seriously if she even remembered ever complaining about my practice play.
"Shortly after my stepmother's death the estate of my father was settled. I had lost so much through Larry's family that I had boasted to my self that what I received from this estate would be mine for the children. Larry's brother had never repaid us the money for our home. I knew now which one of the brothers Larry had helped. It was his youngest brother, and the only brother that never had any children; I suppose that accounts in a way for his affair with another woman. He was one of the first to join the array when we entered the war, and among the first to be killed. After we received the notice of his death, Larry told me that we need never expect repayment, and it was then that he told me which brother he had befriended.
"But Larry wrote the checks and paid the bills, and it was only occasionally that I checked up on costs. I began by going over the checks, and the first thing I noticed were a number of them made out to Larry's brother. Each time I said anything there was a storm of protest from Larry. If I said anything he did not wish to hear, he always grabbed his hat, jammed it on his head and walked out. I let Larry handle the money.
“Even after my father's estate was divided among the seven children, there was a comfortable portion for each. Larry increased his business dealings, and we decided to build us a new home. Under the influence of Larry's enthusiasm I felt that we were almost rich. We lived very well, even during the days when there were government restrictions on food stuffs. Larry always said 'He'd be damned if he was going with out sugar just because a lot of damned fools wanted to break each others heads over in Europe.' Our new twelve room house had every modern convenience of that time. I even had a gardener for a short while.
"Then Larry began having more trouble with his health. His confinements in the hospital became more frequent. He worked when he was able; in fact, he seemed to have grown to like work. I think he really hurt himself in his efforts to keep at his business. In December, 1919, Larry and his brothers in the automobile business went bankrupt. I did not have time to worry about that, because Larry was taken seriously Ill. I was with him constantly during the seven weeks he lived, after the business failed. I do not know exactly how I felt about Larry's death, for immediately afterwards I was confronted with the horrible news that we had no money and were heavily in debt. Again I was without a home, and I had my children to care for. Larry had carried insurance on the children of me, but none our himself.
"I drove myself through the period that followed, that my children might escape the orphanage. It was no longer a matter of seeing that they got a mother's loving care, they needed food and shelter. It had been several years since I had taught in the public schools, and I could not get a placement. I had not kept up my piano classes, and I had difficulty getting pupils. But I did fially manage to get a small class organized. Still, I could not make enough to support my family. Larry's living brothers did not offer to help me, and I would not ask them for aid until I had exhausted all possibilities. Finally, I managed to get a part time job on a daily newspaper. I kept my children in school. I made most of my children's clothes. I sent my my laundry out to be damp washed, and the two girls were large enough to do the ironing on Saturdays. My oldest girl was eleven when her father died, and she has always been good about helping me. All my children have been good.
"On Sundays I was too worn out to go to church. I was a member of the Baptist church. Soon after I went to work the church members began complaining of my non-attendance. One good old soul came to me and begged me to quit work -- after all, I had kept to myself the fact that I was reduced to poverty. Then I heard of things that were whispered about me. I have given up my membership in any church, but ocasionally I like to attend church to hear the musical part of the service.
"There followed eight years of more or less bare existence. I learned what it means to be tired, to be tired of life itself But I simply could not stop. I did not always have the same job. Several times I tried clerking in shops. One manager of a dry-goods shop told me when he let me go that I did not have a cheerful enough disposition for that sort of work. The fact that I did not go to church hurt me socially too. Increasing emphasis on music in the public schools affected me as a private teacher. I found it increasingly difficult to get pupils. Those I did get could not afford to pay very much, I made up my mind to make a final effort to better my condition. In 1927 I began making applications for teaching positions out of the state. At last I was accepted for a position in a small school in the extreme Southwest, as a music instructor. The pastor of my church and several of the members that I knew well had written me some excellent letters of reference.
"Strangely enough, my children did not want to leave the town where we lived, and yet they gave in, when they saw how joyful I was for the oportunity. The thoughts of going made me feel like a new person -- I felt free. I sold the only piece of property I owned, a small city lot, and converted my own endowment policy into cash. We bought a new car and had several hundred dollars besides. We shipped the luggage and started for the Southwest. I had not gone very far until I discovered one of my girls was crying, when she thought no one was looking. She wanted to come back. Again the other children sided with her. In the end I agreed, but I was determined to turn our venture to some use. I felt that the trip would be educational, so we turned it into a sight-seeing tour.
"We went on down into the interior of Mexico, where we saw a volcano, the cliff dwellings of the ancient Aztecs, and other interesting sights. My two boys picked up a few Spanish words, and the girls each <text not clear> Mexican shawl. Afterwards we drove on through the west, to California. We returned by way of Salt Lake City. The children were always eager to get back.
"On our return, I rented a very large house and rented rooms and kept boarders. I did most of the work, and with the children to help, we got along very well. The oldest boy was working after school, delivering groceries for a nearby store.
"Shortly after I started the boarding-house, I met a man I liked very much. We seemed to be equally attracted to each other. I had not known him very long until I realized that I was only thirty-four. He was a college graduate, and had once been a great foot-ball player. He had practiced law for a while but had given it up for professional music. He was touring with his own orchestra when I met him. His bookings were to take him up north, but he would not leave until we were married. Then I went with him for a short, secret honeymoon. In the meantime my oldest girl ran the boarding house with the aid of her sisters. After the honey-moon, I returned home and Martin continued with the rest of his bookings, which were to occupy him several months.
"There was no keeping the matter from my family, so when Martin came back we openly announced our marriage. We lived together at first one place another for two months. He wanted to establish himself in the South, but he was forced to return North. I had not thought seriously about his wanting to stay down here until I was faced with the problem of the other woman. I knew then. He told me he had known her for years, and that he had tried to keep out of her reach, but that she found him. We both agreed that divorce was the best thing under the circumstances. But it never was done legally. For Martin disappeared, and I read several years later that he was shot and killed in a dance-hall in Norfolk. He never knew he had a son.
"My children by this time had begun getting married -- I suppose I set them the example -- and thinking of going to themselves; I was both sorry and glad to lose them, but I wanted then to have homes. Generally speaking, they have all done well in their marriages, and I can sometimes feel that my efforts have not been in vain. I think each of us has a deep desire for at least one thing, and the more it is denied some of us, the deeper the craving grows. My desire has always been to have a home, and I think my children share that feeling.
<text not clear>
