THE GREEKS IN ROWAN COUNTY
There are nine Greeks in Rowan County, North Carolina, all men. Of these eight reside in Salisbury and one lives in Spencer.
In addition to these is one (Haber), a tailor by trade, who claims to be Greek, although born in Bayreuth, Syria, but other members of the colony claim that he is a Syrian and that he cannot even speak the language very well. As there Seems to be some secrecy as to his entry into this country, he will talk very little relative to his nationality or past. He speaks French fairly well and seems to make himself understood in Syrian, Greek and even in Italian. His physical, moral and social characteristics, however, seem to place him more in the Syrian or Armenian group. As the evidence weighs against his Greek antecedents, he will not be further considered herein.
Of the nine true Greeks, only one is married. This member of the colony, the outstanding leader, (Yancios) a few years ago married an American girl of an old and well-to-do family. They now have one son who takes his physical appearance altogether from his mother's side. Of the other Greeks one is a widower, the others bachelors.
They are fairly well distributed as to place of birth in Greece: one is from Salonika (Nicholas Yancios); one (Nicholas Felias) from Sparta; two are from Cyprus (George and Jack Kaniklidis) and are therefore British citizens; one is from Athens (Theodore Xenikos); two are from "The Islands" (Michael and Joseph Bakelbasis); and two from Samos (Mac and Joe Barnskilas).
In this connection it is rather interesting to the student of ethnology to note that there is a wide difference in the physical appearances of those from the mainland and those of the islands. The former are all stocky with swarthy complexions and black hair, while the latter are much lighter in complexion and have blonde, curly hair and blue or grey eyes. One of the islanders has red hair.
When questioned as to the probable cause of this difference, Yancios, the best educated, states that the difference holds good in the Old Country as well. He says that it is thought to be caused by the migration and infiltration of a darker people from the Northern Balkan States many centuries ago, thought by some to be the ancient Sythians or Huns, and later by Turkish and other Levantine blood being mixed with the old Greek strain. It seems that these migrations of darker people into Greece effected the islands but little and that the purest Greek blood today is found off the mainland. Those of Cyprus pride themselves that they are the last remnants of the ancient, great Greek race of the Golden Age of Pericles.
All of the Greeks in Rowan County were born in the Old Country; however, due to the fact that Turkey formerly owned and ruled the northern part of the present Greece, two were raised as Turkish citizens and two, as heretofore stated, reared in Cyprus are British citizens. Each and all of them learned the Greek language as their mother tongue in spite of their legal citizenship and those who went to school prior to migrating to America received their education in parochial schools and were taught by the priests of the Greek Orthodox Church. The Turkish influence, they say, was felt only in the cities and the larger, towns and no effort was ever made to establish Turkish schools or inculcate into the young the Turkish language or culture. They all speak English very well and three of them are polylingual.
All members of the Greek colony are communicants of the Greek Orthodox Church and belong to the Winston-Salem diocese, there being no local church of their faith. The county was formerly in the Charlotte See but was changed about two years ago. None of them attend church regularly; however, a wedding or a christening, especially the latter, brings them all to Winston-Salem, as a feast and entertainment always conclude these ceremonies.
It is the custom in the Orthodox Church for the parents not to be present when their child is christened, the priest and the godmother standing "in loco parentis" during this ceremony. Due to the fact that there are no local Greek women, godmothers for local Greek progeny are furnished by Winston-Salem or Charlotte congregations.
The American mother of the young Yancios, recently christened, objected rather strenuously to this absence from her child's baptism and to the stranger godmother, but both priest and congregation were adamant and it was pointed out to her that kings and czars had respected the custom and the rite for many centuries.
All of the Greeks are naturalized with the exception of the two from Cyprus, who retain their British citizenship. It is interesting to note that, upon receiving their American citizenship, they, almost without exception, adopt either an Anglicized form of their former Greek name or assume some pure Anglo-Saxon or Norman name. Thus James Raptoulous, now moved away, became James Ramsay and Michael Bakalbasis is now Mack Evans Mitchell. It is entirely speculative as to whether, after a generation or two, Raptoulous' grandchildren will don the Ramsay tartan and sing to the piping of "Casteal Fulis Na Theine", the pibroch of the Clan!
The colony has been greatly reduced in numbers in the last few years. Many of the elders have returned to a free Greece with no Turkish overlord. They are sadly missed. They were, as are the present Greeks among us, popular, honest and industrious citizens. No present member of the colony has ever been indicted in the local courts and, though most of them prefer to do business upon a cash basis, the credit rating of each is good.
Two of them gamble to some extent and all drink alcoholic beverages occasionally, however, none indulge in either to excess. They compose unquestionably the best class of our Levantine population in the county.
They all came to America after maturity and, with the exception of the two from Cyprus, none knew English prior to his arrival in this country.
Two migrated because they had relatives in Salisbury who sent for them and offered work. These came together and, though cousins, came originally from different parts of Greece. One came to avoid persecution from the Turk and one to avoid military conscription; however, the latter was among the first in the county to enlist in military service in the World War and has since held several offices in the American Legion. With the exception of the two who came over to join relatives, all landed in New York and worked there for a while before coming south. Each says that he has materially bettered his circumstances since his arrival. The one factor which seems to impress one and all is the freedom and liberty which they enjoy in America, as compared even to the mild monarchy and republic under is which they were raised. This is particularly true of the older ones who grew up under the Turkish regime. They state that one of the strangest things to which they eventually became accustomed was the knowledge after arrival in this country, that they had absolute freedom of speech, religion and opinion and that there was no confiscation of property or arrest without probable cause.
Several years ago there was an organization, of the Ahepa to which all belonged but due to the fact that so many have moved away to other parts of this country and a few have returned to the Old Country, the organization has been disbanded.
With the exception of one, who operates a shoe shine parlor and hat cleaning establishment, all other Greeks are engaged in one form or another of the purveying of food. Two operate fruit stores, two own sandwich and hot-dog stands and four own or are employed in cafes. One is retired and lives with his son.
They take little part in the social, fraternal or political life of the community and seem to have little social intercourse among themselves. Yancios, heretofore referred to, is an exception to this. Both he and his wife are socially inclined. His associates are mostly among Americans and he is a member of one of the country clubs and belongs to numerous fraternal, civic and social organizations. He states that, while he has retained his membership in the Greek Church and had his son christened therein to please his mother back in Greece, he will educate his child in the public schools, bring him up in all ways as an American and that it is immaterial with him whether or not the child ever learns the Greek language.
In their business and social contacts with one another the local Greeks almost invariably use the mother tongue; however, Yancios will not use it unless it is absolutely necessary and forbids his two- kinsmen who work in his cafe to speak it while there. This cafe happens to be the oldest, largest and best in the city.
When asked if there is anything in Greece better than they have found in America they give a variety of answers: the American girls are "too skinny"; the climate is too changeable; the wine is too sweet; the music is not so good; and the liquor (they here compare Southern corn whisky with their native white cognac) "too mean".


