Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
REBECCA V. WOODWARD
(white)
35 YEARS OLD.
Rebecca. Valentine Woodward, widow of the late Senator Thomas W. Woodward of Fairfield County, lives in a ten-room, two-story frame house on the northwest corner of Liberty- and Vanderhorst Streets in the town of Winnsboro. She is one of the wealthiest woman of the county. Mrs. Woodward is tall and slender, enjoys good health, and may be seen frequently on Winnsboro's streets, accompanied by her lady friend and companion. She is a liberal contributor to the Red Cross and other charitable organisations, and is the main support of the First Baptist Church of Winnsboro.
"I am a descendant of the first white child born in Fairfield County, Aramanos Lyles (Sec Hills Statistics). I was born April 12, 1853, in the old family house that my ancestor, Ephrain Lyles, inherited by the law of primogoniture. The old homestead next descended to my grandfather, Thomas Lyles, who was Captain of the Buckhead troop at the time our State passed the Nullification Ordinance.
"My grandfather married Mary Woodward, a daughter of old Congressman William Woodward. They had two children, Thomas Ms, and William S. Lyles. The former was my father. He married Elisa Peay, youngest daughter of Colonel Austin Peay. They had seven sons and six daughters. I tag one of the daughters.
"My brother, Boykin, married Georgia Dantsler of Orangeburg. He was Captain of a company in the 6th Reg. S.C.V.I., and was killed at the battle of Seven Pines, May 31, 1862. I had five other brothers in the Confederate army - Thomas, Nicholas, Austin, John, and Belton. Austin was killed at Petersburg, Virginia, in June 1864, at the age of twenty-two. The four remaining returned unharned.
"Nicholas married a Miss Poellnitz of Alabama. He moved there and became Sheriff of Marengo County. He died at Lindon in 1889 and was buried out there. Thomas enlisted from Mississippi and, afterward, lived there. John W. was Clerk of Court of Fairfield for 26 years. Belton was a farmer. He married, lived, and died near Monticello, in this county. James, the youngest son, married Cora Irby. My sister, Sallie, married Lieut. E. A. Poellnitz of Alabama. Sister Carrie married J. Feaster Lyles of Buckhend, this county. And Sister Mattie married Amos E. Davis of Monticello. I, tho only living one, married Major Thomas W. Woodward.
"We had somewhat of a colony of slaves. Most of them lived in the quarter, but four or five families of slaves were housed near the homestead. These lived in better houses and worked in our home, doing the nursing, cooking, and milking. The stablemen, coachman, and lackeys lived near the dwelling house.
"The outhouses were the smokehouse, kitchen, two dairies, the cribs, cotton houses, storeroom, ginhouse, barn, and cattle sheds. Under the barn were stalls for mules and horses.
"The house servants and their children were fed from the Master's kitchen. All other slaves were rationed every Saturday at noon from the smokehouse and storeroom. They received weekly allowances of corn meal, grits, shorts (a low grade of wheat flour), bacon, molasses, salt, and potatoes. The gardener of the place, under direction of Father or one of my brothers, carried Vegetables to the houses in the quarter for their daily use. Father and mother tried to give the slaves what we now call a balanced diet.
"As to clothing the slaves, I have known father to buy wagon loads of cloth in Columbia, and bring them home from Columbia, after selling his cotton there. The Negro women would make the cloth into winter clothes for the slaves.
"He would purchase coarse blankets to keep the slaves warm in the winter. They were furnished cheap shoes, with heavy wooden bottoms and the uppers made of untanned raw cowhide. They were housed well, fed well, slothed warmly in winter, and never punished severely. They seemed always happy and anxious to please our family. None ever ran away. They could get a written pass to visit other plantations, when the requests were reasonable and not inconsistent with their safety and welfare.
"What religious instruction did we give them? A special catechism was prepared and published in Charleston - maybe I should say printed - in 1845, and edited by the Rev. Jones. This little book was used for our slaves. The older ones were taken to Rock Creek Baptist Church. They were seated apart from the white people. They were encouraged to sing and to listen. My mother often quizzed them after returning home, and was gratified to learn in this way of their progress in religious thought.
"Some of our Negroes had wives off the plantation. These were given written passes to visit their wives every Wednesday night, Saturday night, and Sunday night. Our family physician, Dr. David Means, attended them in illness just as faithfully as he did the members of our family.
"On Christmas Eve night, like our own family, all slave children hung up their stockings; and, on Christmas morning, they found in them an apple, an orange, a stick of candy, and some kind of toy (depending upon the sex of the child). It was a happy day for them. A dance took place among the slaves on Chirstmas night. It was looked forward to and participated in by all the slaves of our place and some from neighboring plantations.
"Yes, we permitted them a preacher among themselves. In the summertime, after the crops were laid by, they would contrive a brush arbor on the place and hold services. They called it 'De Annal Rebible.' Many would join. It closed with "Sunday Immersion Day.' Many white people attended this service.
"We had a governess in our home in the ante bellum years. Our primary schooling was obtained in this way. It took me two years to learn to write the blue back speller, before going into a series of McGuffy Readers. These governesses taught us needlework and crocheting, music, and painting. They always went horseback riding with us. I still have my old sidesaddle upstairs. When I look at it, all the voices and scenes of the past overwhelm me. That kind of civilization can never exist again, as the trend of the times and democracy are to bring all people to one common level. Outstanding, impressive, individual characters in a community no longer challenge our admiration, curiosty, and speculation. Our public school system and our demagogic politicians have done much to rob society of its attractiveness and soft conventionalities, which mean nothing to the masses but are the zest of life to the individuals. The government cannot make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, but it can kill all the silk worms by creating the conditions under which they must live.
"One day while we were seated at the dinner table with a number of Confederate soldiers in one home, a slave ran in and exclaimed, 'The Yankees are coming!' Not knowing how many had come, we begged the Confederates to flee, which they did. Five Yankees rode up on horseback. One of the Confederates dropped his knapsack. I picked it up and ran after him to return it. The delay caused him to be seen by the Yankees. They pursued him a short distance, fired at him, but missed, and returned to our home. My grandfather, Thomas Lyles, an old man then, was living with us. He was lying in bed with a dislocatad hip. One of the Yankeesraiders, thinking that grandfathar was foigning disability, approachad with a lighted torch, saying, 'Unless you give me your silver and gold, I'll burn you alive.' The old hereoreplied, 'I have not many years to live, no burn and be dammed!' The Yankee, surprised at this characteristic speech, ordered a Negro to remove the torch from under the bed, remarking, 'You are the bravest man I have seen in South Carolina.' The old grandfathar lived till 1874, and died at his home at Buckhead at the advanced age of eighty-seven years. I learned later that my brothers who survived the war were members of the Ku Klux Klan, but, for reasons of not wishing to give us anxiety, they never told us anything about it until years after the Klan had been disbanded.
"During the Civil War, and a long time thereafter, there was a scarcity of coffee, sugar, salt, cloth, matches, rice, tea, and dye. Parched okra seed, corn meal, and peach peelings were used for coffee; sorghum, for sugar; and boiled smokehouse dirt drippings, for salt. We were old clothes as long as we could. Then we remade them, changing the outside to the inside. We used yellow clay, Walnut stain, and poke berries for colors. Yes, I remember the hoop skirts. But when I become a full-fledged young lady and put on long dresses, the hoop was going out of style and the bustle was coming in vogue.
"I completed my literary course at Limestone College, Gaffney, S. C. Dr. William Curtis was president of the college while I was there. I have a certified copy of a letter that the venerable Petar Cooper wrote to Governor Hampton, offering to buy the college and a hundred acres of land.
"I want to tell you something about my husband, Major Thomas W. Woodward. We were cousins, and both of us are descendants of Capt. Thomas Woodward, the Regulator, who is mentioned in all South Carolina histories. My husband was born on a tract of land that was the original grant to Captain Woodward. Embraced within the boundaries of the grant are the properties of the present Winnsboro granite quarries. My husband attended Mt. Zion Institute. He entered the South Carolina College in 1848. Here he headed a rebellion known as the 'Mess Hall Rebellion,' for which he and half the student body ware expelled. Nest, we find him at Prinotton. He was a roommate of John L. M. Irby, who was afterwards United states Senator from this state.
"On leaving Princeton, Mr. Woodward came home and be cane a candidate for the legislature in Fairfield County. Here is an incident of his canvass: He stopped overnight with a friend near the 'Dark Corner,' above Feasterville, and enquired the names of those living around. He was told to call on old man Wright. The friend said to the Major, 'Old Uriah Wright is a fox hunter, and I am sure you can talk your way into his heart, if you'll talk about dogs, and secure his vote and influence. 'Well, give me some points about his pack,' said the Major. 'Ring Smith is his beat strike; Jolly Wright is his cold trailler; and Mollie Clowny in his swiftest runner.' said the friend. The Major, having obtained a description of the dogs, made it convenient to call on the old man the next day just about dinner time. Old Uriah had just come in from ploughing, as the Major rode up to the gate and said, 'This is Doctor Wright I believe?' 'Yes, sir,' Wright replied, 'that's whut the boys 'round here calls me.' The Major said, 'My name is Woodward. I am a candidate for the legislature, and, being on my first political legs, I am going around to see and be seen, if not by everybody, certainly by the most prominent and influential citizens of each section. 'Git down,' said Dr. Wright, 'you are a monstrous likely fellow. I'll take you in to see Pinkey, my wife, and we'll see what she has to say about it.' On the way to the house the major paused, and turning in the direction of some hounds lying around in the shade, said, 'Dr. Wright, I'm a peculiar man. I hope you will pardon my weakness, but I think a fine hound dog comes nearer to perfection in my eye than any other earthly creature.' 'And what do you know about hounds?' asked Uriah Wright. The major was petting the dogs, and had no difficulty in selecting the dogs of note from the description given him the night before. Patting Ring Smith on the head, he said, 'If there is any truth in signs, this ought to be a mighty good strike dog, Doctor.' 'He always opens way ahead of the pack, and you can go before a magistrate and swear it is a fact,' said Uriah. Taking hold of Holly Clowny, the major said, 'This bitch ought to be the apple of your eye. If I know anything at all about dogs, this is the fleetest footed animal I ever laid my eyes on: Tell me truthfully, can't site outrun anything in these parts?' Dr. Wright replied, 'Run did you say? No, she can't run a bit: But there ain't a crow nor a turkey buzzard that ever crossed this country that can hold a candle to her flying. Dinner is about ready, and I want Pinkey to see you.' After dinner, the Major, having promised to introduce a bill of some kind for the benefit of hound dogs, and to prohibit rail fences being over five rails high, to accommodate fox hunters, was in the act of leaving, when the old man called to Pinkey to bring his fiddle, saying, 'Hold on till I play The Devil's Dream for you.' When he had finished, the major took the violin and played Hell Broke Loose in Georgia with such spirit that old Uriah grabbed Pinkey and cut the Pigeon Wing all over the room in wild delight. It is needless to say that my husband carried the Dark Corner!
"The war came on. He volunteered as a private, and was wounded at the battle of Dranesville. He was promoted to Major of the 6th Regiment. After the way, he was prominent in the Hampton Campaign and served twelve years in the State Senate.
"My husband was the first to realize the great possibilities of the granite industry in Fairfield. He interested Col. J. H. Rion of Winnsboro, Col. A. C. Haskell of Columbia, and several gentlemen in Charleston, and developed what is now known as the Winnsboro Granite Company, of Rion, S. C.
"An oil painting of the Major hangs in the hall of the State Senate of South Carolina. As the morning sunlight comes through the east windows of the stately chamber, it brings into light the face of a brave soldier, a patriotic man, a go-all-the-may friend, and a provident, loving husband."