----------------------
Approximately 1950 Words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
CHARLESTON, S. C.
LIFE HISTORY.
TITLE
REGISTERED NURSE.
Date of First Writing Jan. 20, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed  Mrs. John W. Conder
Fictitious Name Mrs. Remington
Street Address
Place
Fairwold, S. C. (Telegraph Station- Home of J. W. Conder Stockyards-five miles north of Columbia, S. C.
Occupation  Former Registered Nurse - Housewife.
Name of Writer  F. Donald Atwell
Name of Reviser State Office
Project #-1655
F. Donald Atwell
Charleston, S. C.
January 31, 1939
LIFE HISTORY.
REGISTERED NURSE.
"Speaking of life histories," Mrs. Remington, an intelligent, pleasant mannered woman of middle-age said, "I've just returned from an automobile trip from my birthplace in Virginia Where I checked court records for my family history.
"I have also had a genealogical record compiled - covering both the Harris and Morton families. Harris on my father's side, and Morton on my mother's. I did this primarily for the cake of my daughter Elizabeth, eleven, whom I am sure will cherish such a record in years to come.
"My own life is really a most drab and uninteresting story. I was born fifty years ago in Lynchburg Virginia. My father, Edward Mason was a railroad engineer and his life was one round of hard work and little pay. In those days, engines burned wood and the cars were coupled with hand pins. There were no railroad brotherhoods, or laws governing working hours, and the salaries of employees were pitifully small. On his death, we were left absolutely destitute. That is the only word to describe our situation. There was only Mamma and myself, and she had to get out and try to make a living for us both. Women didn't go out and get jobs as they do today. It was a pathetic situation. Of course, relatives helped us, but most of our relatives were like ourselves - very poor.
"About this time, Mrs. Charles Stuart, my cousin whose husband had formerly worked on the road with my father, came up from c________ South Carolina where her husband had secured a good job as passenger conductor on the Southern Railway. Seeing how things were, she took us back to live with her. They had no children, and Mr. Stuart was making what was then an excellent salary for a railroad man.
"I attended school until I was sixteen, and Mrs. Stuart succeeded in getting me in the Old K_______ Hospital (Now the Baptist Hospital) in C_______ as a student nurse. Requirements for entrance were not strict, no high school diploma was necessary as it is today. Of course, I have supplemented my meager education with additional reading - I should say constant reading and study.
I could vouch for this as I glanced at row after row of bookcases filled with classic. On the mahogany table near my chair was Scribners, Time, Readers Digest, National Geographic, and even Fortune. Magazines were stacked on another table in the far corner of the room.
"Student nurses in those days had it so much harder than they do to-day." Mrs. Remington continued, "Like railroading, there were no laws governing the number of hours a nurse stayed on duty. I have been for 62 hours without taking off my shoes.
"Medicine and surgery in those days were painfully crude in comparison with to-day. In fact, the greatest progress in these two fields have been made in the last twenty-five years. The operating room of a quarter-centurs ago seems primitive when compared to the modernly equipped surgery. Where we had only two ordinary electric bulbs over a plain operating table, to-day, the modern surgeon has a battery of shadowless floodlights illuminating an operating table that personifies the epitome of modern mechanical genius. We administered anaesthetics by simply pouring the ether from the can on a gauze and applying it to the patients' nose. To-day there are high pressure tanks, gauges, and complicated equipment requiring skilled operators. Oxygen tanks, iron lungs, and all attendant paraphanalia of the present requires specialized knowledge. Yesterday we had only a can of other and a fervent hope that a life would be saved.
"Somehow, we really did save lives. Dr. King was one physician far in advance of his time. He stressed sanitation and surgical cleanliness at all times, and his hospital enjoyed phenominal growth. He had the reputation of having leas deaths by gangrene and childbed fever than any other hospital in the state. He was a remarkable man, good to his nurses, although he made them toe the mark, and they swore by him. He contributed much towards the efficiency and effectiveness of modern medicine by his example and precepts. In attribute my excellent training to his kindly discipline and exacting thoroughness.
"After graduation, I wanted to get an apartment and have Mamma with me. But in the meantime my cousin and her husband had moved to Batesburg, S. C., where her husband was conductor on the Short run to Parry. They carried Mamma with them. She wanted to wait until I had earned enough for us to live comfortably.
"She continued to live on with them however, not so much because she wanted to - she did most of the housework and earned what she got but because I wasn't making much nursing. Salaries of nurses in those days were very small. It was not until thirteen years ago when I was married to Mr. Remington, that Mamma came to live with me. She died three years ago, after having lived with us the last ten years of her life. I am so glad that she could spend her few remaining years in peace, contented in the knowledge that I was settled and happy. Too, she had the pleasure of her grandchild of whom she was very proud.
As a registered nurse, I handled all kinds of cases. I have served in wealthy homes, and in country shacks - I rendered my best in both places. I have often refused large sums of money to keep down scandals. I could have had many more dollars had I taken advantage of my position as a nurse.
"I recall, in particular, a case I had of this kind. The girl was of high school age, daughter of one of C________'s most prominent couples. The mother apparently was too obsessed with her innumerable social obligations to give her daughter the attention she needed. The father, a prominent broker, provided the one thing that most father's provide - money. But the companionship and guidance so sorely needed was absent. The girl became involved with a college boy of very undesirable character with the usual tragic results. The girl attempted to hide her condition from her teachers and her parents, finally resorting to drugs in a last frantic attempt to remedy her mistake. It wasn't until she was forced to bed, deathly ill and bleeding profusely, that the whole sordid story was revealed.
I had nursed her mother, on a former occasion, and she called me again. The physician and myself worked fast. We were particularly anxious to correct the girl's trouble without resorting to hospitalization. We succeeded. I refused a comfortable sum from her father, "to please keep this quiet"- explaining that my salary covered that feature. To-day that girl is married, with a splendid husband, and two lovely children. The secret rests with me, the physician and the parties concerned. It will never be known. No nurse who values her professional reputation will violate a confidence. Its sure death to a nursing career. A nurse sees all, hears all, knows all - and keeps a tight lip. Such nurses are never idle.
"One ease in particular I shall never forget. It was a young man, about 28 years old. I had been called in the night by Dr. Morton Who said! "Harris (All doctors called me Harris, and still do) "There's a young fellow in that shack beyond the mill,- You know, you nursed a case near there. He needs the best nurse he can got, and you're it. I'll tell you before you go - he's broke."
I was startled to find the young can not only highly intelligent but well-educated as well. But I was too busy to do much wondering about him. He grew steadily worse. Both the Doctor and myself did everything humanly possible but in vain. I was alone with him the night he died. It seemed an eternity. Outside it was storming, and I had to go out and cut wood for the fire. I found I could wield an axe with the beat of them. That was the most harrowing case I ever undertook. I was only twenty- five, and I guess I made a nurse's fatal mistake of-caring. I wanted so desperately for that man to live. Efforts to locate his relatives proved fruitless. The town buried him, but I have always wondered what dread secret he carried to the grave with him. 'He came of excellent family - no doubt of that. And his education must have been acquired abroad. He had something to conceal and he succeeded admirably.
Thirteen years ago (I was 37 and still single) I accepted a case in Bishopville, S. C.--The Blakes were prominent farm folk. I was called to nurse Mrs. Blake's mother - a cear old lady. I enjoyed the country life--- the excellent meals - the big white house under the ancient caks. They were extremely nice to me. It was there that I met Mr. Remington. A dignified man of middle age with a distinguished bearing that carried conviction. I learned from the Blakes' that he had lost his wife some four or five years before. Also, he had immense stockyard interests here at F------ ---, and that he was probably the most outstanding man in the state in his particular field.
His visits became more frequent, and I learned to admire him tremendously. Here I was, thirty-seven years old, having put the idea of marriage entirely out ot my head, falling in love with a man thirteen years my senior.
To make a long story short, the first thing I did after we were married was to exercise my perogative as a nurse. I made him go to the dentist - have all his teeth extracted after finding that they were poisoning his entire system. Then came his appendix. I instituted rules requiring him to rest an hour after dinner, business or no business. To regulate his diet and to get a full night's rest, every night. To-day he is sound as a dollar, and ha still obeys the rules set down for him in the beginning.
Mr. Remington's three sons by his first wife are all actively engaged in business with their father. Of his two daughters by his first wife, one is married and living in Blackville. The other is attending Winthrop College in Rock Hill.
Mr. Remington and I have only the one child, Elizabeth, who la now in the 8th grade. I really started her off right - kindergarten and Sunday School. I chose Trinity Church, not only because it la the wealthiest Church in the city, but also because it is the largest. I realized that aha would make valuable contacts, and would meet and associate with those beat fitted to assist her socially, spiritually, and morally. By attending this church she has superior religious and moral advantages that would be lacking in a smaller church. I'm afraid I'm practical minded even with my moral and spiritual life as well as my material life.
I take an active interest in farm women's activities, and serve occasionally as county chairman or in some other capacity so as to put the farm women's problem before the legislature and other political bodies. I have spoken on numerous occasions in both the legislature and senate.
As regards my methods of household management, I have my own drawing account which never exceeds one hundred dollars a month for all household expenses. Employees about the stock barns do all outside work in conjunction with their regular duties, so I have only the expanse of a cook and maid.
"I have every modern convenience and enjoy the social and material advantages that money can buy, But I still remember those former years - how can I forget - when I stood on my feet for countless hours by the bedside of some patient.
"Now, I can afford the best medical attention obtainable day nurses, night nurses, and specialists, should the need for them arise. When we do require such attention, as we occasionally do, I treat the nurse as an honored guest. Its hard on her at best, and the best for her is none too good.
"I ought to know - I used to be one."
