WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION
F. C. Harrington, Administrator
Florence S. Kerr, Assistant Administrator
Henry S. Alsberg, Director of the Federal Writers’ Project
Date of first writing	April 25, 1939
Name of person interviewed	Mrs. W. L Keenan
Address	306 Bond Street
Place	Macon, Georgia
Occupation	Saleslady
Race	White
Name of writer	Annie A. Rose
Address	356 Cherry Street
Place	Macon, Georgia
“You mean you want me to tell you the story of my life? Just like I was somebody like Madame Curie or Mrs. Roosevelt? And it may be printed? Well, will wonders never cease?? I never dreamed that anyone would ever come and ask me what you have." Mrs. Reuben laughed merrily. We had accidentally been seated next each other in the huge auditorium at a public showing of spring fashions. After having made several comments on the different models and costumes on exhibit we had begun talking during the abort intermission between the two parts of the show. "I'll tell you what let's do", the little lady continued. "Come up to my house Friday night -- the boys won’t have to study then; they'll be out playing and we'll have the place to ourselves. Perhaps you won't want to write my story after I’ve finished telling you, but come on, anyhow, it'll be fun."
Friday night found me at the appointed time at the address given sae by my chance acquaintance. “Come on upstairs,” called bar cheerful voice in answer to my ring. So up the long flight of stairs in the old-fashioned house in which the Reubens make their home I trudged. My hostess waited in the hall at the top of the staire with her welcome. Wearing a light blue house coat, she was a short little woman with a plump little figure and a sweet, maternal manner. "We'll sit in my bedroom to talk," she said, "because it's cozier but first I want you to see our apartment. We’ve been living here since February a year ago; the rent is more than we should pay -- $25,00 but I looked this town over when we had to move and it's the best I could find that had enough space. You see, I’ve got three boys, so I have to have two bedrooms. And that extra bedroom costs."
The apartment consists of four rooms and bath - the entire upper floor of the house. A large living room in which a dining table and buffet had been placed occupies the space on one side of the hall. An overstuffed couch and two large chaire covered in a worn, taupe mohair material were placed near the gas heater. By the couch stood a table with a small, battered radio and lamp. “I know you think my house is mighty shabby,” Mrs. Reuben remarked. “I‘ve been trying for a long time to have slip covers made for this terrible looking furniture but I’m getting discouraged. Every spring I think I’ll surely be able to have them in the fall. Then fall comes and I have to put them off till the following spring -- looks like I’ll never get the place fixed up. The rugs and furniture are awful.” She called my attention to a beautiful coffee table placed before the couch. After my remarks on its beauty, she said: “I’m so glad you like it. John, my oldest son, gave it to me on my last birthday. He bought it from a lady who was moving to Miami. It was a bargain at ten dollars but he shouldn’t have gotten it. But he knew how much I had been wanting one ever since people started using them and he got it for me. He’s so sweet and I do appreciate it so much.”
A general air of friendliness and comfort pervades the simple little home. At the front of the apartment is a small room used as a kitchen and in this room the family have their rooms except on the few occasions when company is present. Adjoining the kitchen is the mothers room. "You see how convenient this arrangement is," she exclaimed. "I cook breakfast every morning and it's so easy to hop out of bed and run in here to start the meal. With the door open I dress while I keep my eyes on the stove, running back and forth between the kitchen cabinet and my dressing table. Goodness, but there's a rush on then! You know how soundly boys a sleep - it generally takes two or three cells and a couple of shakes to get them up. After breakfast we all light out. John and I walk to work; Bob sad Alfred leave for school." Mrs. Reuben employs a negro maid who cleans the apartment and cooks the noon day meal for the family. For this she pays $2.50 per week. Her laundry is done at the house by another negress two days a week for $1.25. The laundry is too expensive for her and she says that to have a woman come two days week is the best solution to the problem of keeping three boys and herself in clean, fresh apparel.
The boys' bedroom adjoins their mother’s and next to it is the bath. One would know without being told that the second bedroom is occupied by boys for it is cluttered with radio tubas, tool boxes, cans of oil, a broken clock sad other tressures of adolescent boys’ hearts. A mounted snake skin hangs over the mantel, a German helmet surmounts the skin, while a large painted baord on which are mounted many varieties of moths and butterflies almost completely fills one wall. “I don't bother the boys’ room," the mother remarked. "It’s theirs and they can put whatever they want to in it. Of course, occasionally I make them rake out the drawers but I leave them alone as much as possible. They don't criticize the way I keep my room and I think they're entitiled to the same respect they show me.”
Mrs. Reuben's room is as feminine as the boys' is masculine. Jars of cosmetics line the dressing table, thin ruffled curtains adorn the windows. Though the furniture is simple and shows amny years of use her woom is cheerful, inviting and comfortable. After a score of years of married life, she was left a widow with three children to feed and clothe end barcky enough money to pay her husband's funeral expenses. "Those ware black days," she remarked, "I didn't know how in the world we'd manage, but so far we haven't missed a meal. I didn't know what to do, share to turn, but I just made myself Keep thinking of how many blessings I had instead of the trouble that had come upon us. I'm fairly young and healthy, my boys are good, they never cause me any trouble and I've got lots to be thankful for. If things don't get worse I won't complain."
Mrs. Reuben is employed as saleslady in a small ready-to wear shop. She is paid $15.00 a week; her son makes $12 and on this amount they manage to live, dress neatly and present "a good front" to the world.
Seated in a comfortable rocker facing the fire, she began to speak of her early life. "I was born in a little Georgia town over forty years ago. My mother and father had five daughters, three older than myself. All the children are still living, though my father died in 1910 and my mother about eight years ago. I don't remember such about my father except that he was a short, stout, blond man, quiet in his manner. I was his favorite child. He used to all me "talking eyes" and was always very proud of my excellent record at school. I'm grateful for the fact that he was so good to me for my mother criticized and punished me for almost everything, it seemed. Though I adored my mother and would sacrifice and deny myself in order to give her presents, there was never any understanding between us. She irritated me and I guess I had the same effect on her. Since I have gotten grown I have realized that our dispositions were a great deal alike and we just could not get along together. I was impudent, hot-headed and rebellious but I really don't think that any of the numerous whippings she gave me ever did me any good. They only served to stir up resentment and anger. She loved my younger sister, Clare, so much that I was insanely jealous. I would scream and fight and behave like a little savage and all I really wanted was a little and attention from her. Wasn't I dumb? It took me years to learn that you've got to be seet and considerate to make people love you. Don't think I'm blaming my mother - she was a hard-working woman, very conscientious and I am sure that her way of forcing me to behave was the right and only way. But it wasn't -- I craved love and affection and after my father's death I starved for it until my marriage.
"My husband loved me; he told me repeatedly that I was the prettiest one of my mother's children (I had always been considered the 'ugly duckling'); that I was the samrtest, the sweetest. His love and praise ware as meat and drink to me. I literally 'Lapped it up' and I was really happy for the first time in my life. He's gone now, and I miss him so much but he gave me something that no one can take away –confidence in my appearance and ability. So often people speak of my pleasing personality and I know it was his love that developed it, if I have it."
Mrs. Reuben sat quietly a few moments, a tender smile playing around her sensitive lips. Then, with a little laugh, she reworked: "Goodness, but I've wandered form the childhood era but after telling you what a little demon I was and seeing the puzzled expression on your face I felt that I should explain how the change in my disposition occured. Well, let’s go back to the ‘dark ages’ again -- my father's health was bed several years before his death. I know now that he must have had high blood pressure because he died from a stroke of apoplexy but people didn’t Know much about such things then. Anyhow, he lost his business to an unscrupulous cousin who was his partner in business. Our home was mortaged, also a small residence that my father had had built on an adjoining hot. My father was whipped but my mother was undaunted. She took charge of our affairs, opened our home as a boarding house, and how she worked! With five daughters and a sick husband she had to. She made a success of it, educated hor children and accumulated more money and property than any of us have ever been able to get together.
"But how I hated those boarders -- she would take in anybody that could pay ha price -- telephone linemen, business school students, ratty traveling salesmen, carnival men and women --just anybody at all, and I despised having those people in our home.
‘We children worked, too. Clare, my younger sister and I had to clean the bedrooms. It makes me sick now after all these years have passed to think of those dirty sheets and towels, cleaning those smoky lamp chimneys and emptying those awful, smelly slop jure. It seed to take as forever to do out work because clare and I would go spatelre, close the doors and play set back or sasine until same would scram up the staire from kitchen to hurry up and get through as that we could met the coble for dinner. As I grew larger, it was one of my jobe to milx the sow in the afternoons and make rolls for supper -- I made rolls every single day through one summer’s vacation and if I do say so, they were light and good.
“By this time my three older sisters were married and clare and I were the only ones loft at home to help mama. Clare, as I have said was mama’s favorite and I don’t remember her doing much, but I guess she did. I else had to take the money to the boss ever day. I liked that, I felt very important and I enjoyed freeboning us, she aging my dross and going up town to the bank, though I always had to rush been to wait on the table at dinner and help with the dishes afterwards. I was a busy little sup of two but I can use not that all that work she been a great help to as through life.”
“Tell me about year pleasures and recreation,” was my next suggestion as my hostess paused in the recital of her girlhood life. “o, sure, I had pleasures but not as many as goet girls in the little town, I imagine. But I had a good college education and that’s more important and parties and such. About the pleasures,” she continued after pausing to pass a pleto of delicious, home-made comedy, “there were two sister about clare’s and my base who lived just two doors from us. We played with them at every opportunity and many were the good times we all and in their back yard and barn. We loved to play paper dolls too, would cut hundreds of pictures from all the fashion magazines and keep who is families of dolls. Margaret and I were the ‘tom boys’. There wasn't a tree too tall for us climb, and we'd slip off and go wading, catch tadpoles and crawfish in a little stream near our homes. I had lots of fun. Margaret and natio, our friends, were motherless; an old maid aunt lived with them. It was our delight to pester this old aunt and I am sure we succeeded in making her life a burden.
“Nearly every pretty Sunday afternoon their father would take the four of us on a long walk through the woods. In the spring we'd gather wild flowers; in the fall we'd come home loaded down with black walnuts and hickory nuts. Those trips were great.
“A little boy lived next door to us. He was a very bed little boy and we wars not allowed to play with him but he was the envy of the neighborhood for he was the proud possessor of a billy-goat and wagon. It was thrilling to go riding down the sidewalk in such wonderful style. But if Mama, happened to see me the trips were suddenly out short.
"I’m sure my chilhood could have been much happier if I had only had sense enough to not worry about being poor. But, you see, we were nice people and I simply hated having my mother work, having to do without pretty clothes and good times. I was full of false pride. Times were different then, too; very few women worked. But all my false pride is one now. I feel that say work that is honest is honorable. I’m grateful for my job and I am date mined to make a success of it. I hope my boys have the same attitude; I think they have. While they will go with no one but the best they're all thrilled when they get a chance to make a little money.
“Would you like for me to tell you about how I made my first money?" Mrs. Heuben inquired. When I was about thirteen I wanted so much to have some money for my own. Mama felt that she couldn't addord to give us maney to spend so she bought a quarter’s worth of sugar sad made it up into taffy candy. She could make the best that I ever tasted. We put it into little seeks to sell at 5¢ a sack. Then we went up to the college and offered it to the girls. I was dreadfully emborrased and hated to try to sell it but those girls just clamored for the candy and we sold out in a few minutes. With some of the profit we bought more sugar and mama would find time some way every morning while Clare and I were at school to make the candy and have it ready to sell in the afternoons. I soon got over my timidity and embarrassment and we made what seemed to us a good bit of money, though I have forgotten how much it was. We bought tennis rackets and balls with some of our money and we’d play tennis after we finished with our sales.
"I don't remember why we stopped selling the candy; maybe mama got too busy to make it -- I just don't know but the business was fine while it lasted. Lots of times I’ve thought about that little experience; it might be a good thing for the small boys to try but I guess I’m lazier than my mother was. Then, too, times are different now; children go to stores for candy and drinks and I really don't think they'd make anything at it. There doesn't seem to be much for young boys to do now. No body can hire them till they are sixteen. But I’m not worried about them -- they're smart and ambitious and they will get work as soon as possible.
"My oldest son hates so badly for me to have to work.
He feels that he should be taking care of all of us. He has made me promise to stop working just as soon as he makes enough to provide for us. I will, too, though I love to work and know itis the best thing for me. But I’ll quit when he wants me to because it will mean a lot to him to be able to make care of his mother. Those boys of mine are swell; I couldn't get along without them. When my husband died people seemed to feel so sorry for me because I was left with three children to support but they are my inspiration for everything in life."
In spite of trouble and heart ache, Mrs. Reuben has kept her children and their home life happy and contented. Her attitude is so optimistic that one can't help but feeling that her difficulties will be solved. After being asked about her girlhood sweethearts she laughed and said: "You know, that's a funny thing about me. I like men; like to talk with thorn and be with them but until after I finished school I didn't care two cents about any of them. You see, there were only girls in our family and Mama always spoke of boys as being so awful that I had no desire to be with them. Then, too, the collage I attended was for girls only, we were not allowed to have boy friends. My time was so taken up with my work at home, my studies and sports that there was nothing left for boys. The college I attended was a normal school; I was trained to be a teacher. I didn't especially want to be a teacher and I was not a good one but after I graduated I taught until married. While I was teaching I had plenty of beaus. You know how men and boys in little towns hang around a school teacher, a young one, I mean. I enjoyed that part of it, having someone to take me riding, to parties and to church but the teaching part was a bore. I wouldn't try to teach again, I’d rather plow.
“I was engaged to one of be men who was attentive to me and I guess I would have married him, lived on a farm and raised chickens and 'chillen’ if I hadn't met the one man. As soon as I saw him I fell for his. He was a good bit older than I was, tall, distingued in appearance, with gray hair and eyes and I thought if he didn't love me I’d die. He did love me, though end we were married just one year after we met. He was just as good and sweet to me as he could be; newer got out of patience with me, and I know I was enough to try the patience of an angel at times. Whenever I’d lose my temper and try to quarrel with him he wouldn't say a word. Then I'd feel like a dog and have to apologize. He bad a temper - would fly off at the children but I never saw him angry with me, though lots of times I'd say things that would cut him to the quick.
"My husband was smart and ambitious; he made a good living for us. He used to make $300.00 and all his expenses a month. We should have saved money but we didn't. Sometimes when I see how I manage now I wonder what in the world we used to do with all that money. Of course, we put some in a house we bought and ha had lots of insurance. But during the depression he was out to $135.00 a month; ha had to drop most of his insurance and then just a few months before he died we lost our home.
"I didn't mind giving up our home as much as you might think. We didn’t have the money to keep it in good condition, things were getting pretty shabby. He had worried so much and his health was so bad that I thought if we just gave it up he would be better off mentally. It didn't help, though. I wish I had held on to it. But I was so worried over his mental condition and I was trying to do what was best.
"He got to drinking pretty badly a few years before his death. His sales kept falling off and finally he lost his job. He was over fifty years old, had no job, no money, a wife and three children to support. No wonder he was desperate. The morning he lost his job I walked into the bathroom and found him with a bottle of poison in his hand, just ready to swallow it. I begged him not to, told him that he meant more than anything in the world to me, and tried to restore his self-confidence. He threw the bottle away and in a week or so had another job. But you know, that idea of suicide stuck in his mind. I’ve heard sinece that it is always that way, when a person becomes obseesed with such an idea that he can’t get rid of it. He used to take about dying till I nearly lost my mind. I kept as much of it all from the children as I could because I saw no point in distressing them and I tried to console myself with the point that talking about death was a relief to him; I thought that most people who talked about suicide didn't commit it.
"His new job was sailing on commission and with his bed health and his drinking his sales were very small. My oldest son had a paper route then; he made about four dollars a week and some weeks his money was all ea had for groceries. I tried to get work but I couldn't; I know people didn't realize the condition we were in. We have always kept things to ourselves. I finally got a temporary job, getting subscriptions for some magazines during a campaign here that lasted about two months. I made about twelve dollars a week, but the job didn't last.
"By the time that little job folded up, though, my husband seemed to feel better and I don't think he was drinking so heavily; I was beginning to feel that the worse was over. All summer I had been so worried every time he went off because I didn't know whether he'd come home or not. Lots of times H’d be late coming home and I would have the litters no end till he not there. But as time passed and he seeded to feeling better and his business was better my mind grew a little easier and I felt that he had over come the idea of suicide and that our troubles were being solved.
"But one night he didn't come home. I guess I’m not a bit psychic for I was not worried. He had told me that he was going out of town and I just thought he had been delayed. We went ahead and had supper, then about nine o'clock I undressed and thought I would read until he came in.
"Alfred came in from scout meeting about 9.30. He asked if his daddy had come home. “No,’ I answered, ‘but he’ll be here is a little while; you run on to bed.’ A queer expression came over his face and he said is a frightened little voice; ‘Mama, I’m seared; Daddy's car is parked down in the next block.' ‘o, surely not, honey, you must be mistaken,' I cried. But I jumped up, sit into an old bathrobe and he and I ran down the street; every step we ran I prayed that we would find him o.k.
“As we reached the ear I looked in and there he was slumped down on the driver's seat. I put my hand on his arm, it was warm. Such a wave of relief and thanksgiving came over me and I said: ‘o, thank goodness, he’s allright. He’s had a drink or two and gone to sleep. Hop in the back, darling, and we’ll get him home.' I don’t think I had ever been so happy as that monent when I felt his warm hand.
"I said to him ‘move over, honey, and let me drive.’ But he didn’t move, and I crowded in the seat and started the engine. His legs were right by the gears and I could not move them to change gears so I told my little boy we would have to wake him up so I could drive. I got out of the ear, went around to the other side, opened the door and said; “Honey, wake up, wake up.’ I shook his shoulder, then patted his cheek. His check was warm and sticky; my head was covered with blood.”
The little woman stopped speaking. Her large brown eyes looked as these of a wounded dear. She sat motionless except for the nervous twitching of her hands as she gazed into space. Finally, in a low voice she spoke; “You’ll have to use your imagination for the rest of the story, my dear. My mind is practically a blank about the remainder of the night’s experiences. I do remember a crowd -- lots of questions -- people in the house after we got home. Friends were so kind, sympathetic. I never realized how good people could be as they were in those days preceding the funeral and in the weeks that followed it. But if I live to be a thousand years old I shall never forget the feeling of joy and relief that overwhelmed me when I touched his wars hand in the car, followed only a few minutes later by the realization that he had put a bullet in his brain.
"No, I haven't grieved very much,” she continued in her sweet, sad voice. "I was sick from shook but I've never boon conscious of much grief. It seems that when he killed himself he also killed something in ma -- my ability to grieve and suffer, probably.
"There was a letter in his pocket in which he begged me to understand why he was taking his life but I’ve given up trying to understand. I don't know why he did it for if I told him once I did at least a hundred times that all my life I had had a horror of someone I loved taking his life. I knew that I would feel that I had failed in my love and understanding. Do you remember that passage in the Bible from Job – 'the things that I feared have come upon me?’ Well, that has been my case.”
With a brave smile she continued: "I’m not going to fear anything again. We’ve got lots to be thankful for, Nothing to fear; I’m glad that my husband is at peace, free from his suffering end worry.
“We'll get along somehow, I know and we'll be happy doing it, too. The ability to be happy it within each of us and we are going to get all we can of genuine enjoyment from life. The boys are strong and well, crowing and developing in mind and body. We like plain, simple food and it’s good for us; my boys are healthier now than they were when our grocery bill was about three times what it is now. We go to church and Sunday school regularly and to a picture show occasionally. The boys have their friends; I play bridge about one night a week and sometimes on Sunday afternoons. I hope we'll be able to manage a college education for Alfred; he's very bright and talented. John is going to business school at night now, three times a week. He had planned to go to college following his graduation from high school and was fortunate enough to be given a scholarship, but the scholarship was not for all his expenses and so he gave it up find got him a job to help me with the responsibilities. I'm sorry he felt that he couldn't go but he's filled with ambition and determination and he'll make his way. The people for whom he works are well pleased with him and I think he'll get a small raise in salary soon.
"We had one piece of bad luck about two months ago. Alfred fell from an iron barrel and broke his left arm. Poor little fellow, he was so worried about the expense that it broke my heart. I just told aim to stop worrying and be thankful it wasn't his neck that broke. His arm is about well now but I haven't gotten the bill from the doctor yet. I don't know how much it will be, but we'll get it paid someway, sometime. The accident could have been much worse.”
The hour was growing late. Sometime before her three handsome sons had come in and gone on to bed for the night. So, with a glance at the clock, I suggested leaving so that we both might get our rest to be reaby for the next day's work. “Yes, I guess you are right,” she agreed. "The store has a sale on to-morrow of dresses for $2.98 and I guest there'll be a rush. I've got to take my bath, smear cream all over my face, trying to look as young as possible, and then turn in for my beauty sleep. It's been so pleasant having you to-night. I don't talk much about my experiences but I think that doing so to-night has really helped me. If you can't get a story out of what I've told you, let me know and maybe I can help again. Good-night and good-luck.”
