Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C
JOHN MEANS HARDEN
(white)
77 YEARS OLD
John Means Harden, one of the outstanding citizens of Winnsboro, lives with his wife and unmarried son, Heyward Harden, in a large, two-story, frame building on the northeast corner of Liberty and Vanderhorst Streets. A year ago, the 26th of August, he suffered a paralytic stroke. Since that date, he has retired from active business. His condition has improved recently, and his family is encouraged as to the longevity of his life.
"Coming out of the melting pot of American citizenship, I find that I am of English and Scotch-Irish descent. My father, Timothy Harden, married Isabella Boggs Gilbert. She was a descendant of Sir Humphrey Gilbert, who was a brother to Sir Walter Raleigh. You must take this last statement with a grain of salt. I never heard anything about it until one of my children figured out a genealogy tree.
"In ante-bellum days, my father owned a plantation and slaves. The plantation, which is about twelve miles treat of Winnsboro, in the Lebanon section of Fairfield County, is now in my possession. I rent it out, year by year. On the acres still stands the old house, a tribute to the hardihood of the pine timber grown in this section, and a fine testimonial to the character and skill of the carpenters and masons of this period of our history.
"I was born in this old home, on August 13, 1861. My parents reared three sons: Henry, William, and myself. Henry became a citizen of Alabama. He married, lived, and died out there. Brother William is a citizen of Newberry County. He has been a frequent visitor during the past year.
"I started to school in 1867, to a Miss White, who taught a private school. It was a very small school, due to the fact that few parents had money to pay tuition fees. Under new conditions of labor, the change from slave labor to hired servants, many parents needed their children to work on the farm. I was one of the fortunate ones who received Miss White's primary instruction. As the school was small, and we had long hours, 8 till 4, each pupil got the benefit of much individual attention and the personal touch of this forceful little lady. She was but a few days in teaching me the alphabet, and it wasn't long till I was spelling and reading out of the pages of Webster's Blue Back Speller. I could recite the multiplication table as glibly as my grandson, John Means 3rd, can today.
"We played tag, spy, roily holey, mumble peg, and old witch at the recess hour, 12 till 1 o'clock. You want to know how old witch was played? Well, one pupil was dubbed 'Old Witch,' and she acted the part. Another pupil acted the part of 'Mother Hen.' The remainder of the children were chickens, and they lined out in single file behind 'Mother Hen.' The old witch approached and said, 'I want a chicken.' The reply was, 'You shan't have a chickens!' Then began the efforts of the old witch to catch a chicken, and the efforts of the mother to prevent her. There were many shouts of the old witch, 'I shall have a chicken!' In reply, the mother shouted, 'You shan't have a chicken!' Much screaming and laughter went on during the contest, and the old witch had a time getting the chickens. It looks like foolishness to old people, but children got a great deal of fun out of the play in those old school days.
"My next schooling was under Miss Mag Blain, in the Presbyterian Woods, a body of woods adjoining the Presbyterian graveyard. Miss Blain taught in the old building still standing in the western part of this town, on Moultrie Street. She, also, was a good teacher. One of her instructions I have never forgotten, and I subconsciously find myself following it after 60 years have passed. She instructed her pupils to place the hand or hands over the mouth and nose when they sneezed. I have followed her instruction all my life. I often wonder if she knew then that colds could be contracted from others that had colds. I rode horseback from our home, which was twelve miles in the country, to this school. Later, I rode to Mt. Zion Institute. When I first attended Mt. Zion, it was in charge of Professor Adolphus Woodward. He was assisted by Captain Moultrie Dwight, Colonel Farrow, and M. C. Robertson. I finished school at Mt. Zion under Professor R. Means Davis.
"Our family moved to town in 1878. I clerked a few months for J. L. Mimnaugh, who was a merchant in Winnsboro before establishing himself in Columbia. I next got a job clerking at the Ganson Dry Goods Company, in the tom of Lancaster, and it was while here that I got into the Red Shirt movement and politics, in the fall of 1878.
"Both of my uncles and my father had served in the Confederate Army, directly under Hampton. Colonel John D. Wylie directed the Red Shirt movement in Lancaster County for the campaigns of 1873 and 1878. I still have two Smith and Wesson pistols that I carried in those days. No, I never killed a Negro, but I was put on duty to patrol a street in the town of Lancaster, one or two nights, with instructions to shoot any suspicious persons. This was the year of the Negro insurrection in that town and county. I can't fix it exactly, but I think the year was 1878.
"I came back to Winnsboro in 1880 and opened up a livery stable. I kept a number of fine buggy horses and saddle horses. I made my fortune in this business, between 1883 and 1903. An important phase of my work was the transportation of traveling men to and from the surrounding points. With the advent of the automobile, all this business was knocked into a cooked hat, so to speak. Keeping a livery stable ceased to be remunerative. Part of the time, I was the distributing agent for the Standard Oil Company, using my teams to carry oil to the retail stores throughout this section. In passing, will say that the automobile industry signed the death knell for livery stables.
"I returned to Winnsboro, in 1880, to clerk for A. Williford and son, who were doing a general merchandise business. The junior member was Quay D. Williford. Quay made friends everywhere, with all kinds of people, old and young, black and white, rich and poor. He drank good liquor and bad liquor, but he was free hearted, a sponder, and the best advertiser of his line that I have overseen, We went to parties and dances at night, anywhere within twenty miles of Winnsboro. Quay's father, the senior member, owned and managed the livery stable, so we could always carry a crowd with us in a gig, van, or carryall.
"I hear a great deal about the younger set of today being worse than in the old days. I don't believe it. Each one of us carried a pint of whiskey in his pocket, when attending those frolics or dances. We were sly about it, however, and ato mint candy and checked cloves and cinnamon bark to take away the odor of the whiskey.
"The country lads got to watching for our arrival at these parties. They watched closely to soo where we put our bottles before we went into the house. When we would return for a drink, the bottles couldn't be found. I caught on to the racket and began thereafter to put my bottle under my saddle.
"We had lots of fun at these dances, made many friends, and increased Williford's business connections. But that was not the only advertisement. On Sunday, we got out the finest pair of horses and the finest vehicle at the stable and went to some country church, taking candy for the children, watermelons for the old folks, and a 'quart' for the boys. They drank this quart outside of the church, in the adjacent bushes of the churchyard.
"There were nineteen barrooms in Winnsboro. Boys frequented then and drank behind the green blinds. Yes, I believe the youth of those days were just about as bad as the youth of today!
"I had done a little courting when I was a clerk for the Gansen Dry Goods Company, in Lancaster, and I went back to that town, in 1883, to spend Christmas. On December 27, of that week, I married Ella Hood. She is the mother of my children and the mistress of my home today. Our life together has been a very happy one. We had five children. John Means Harden, Jr., is an undertaker in Winnsboro. He married Kathleen Caldwell. Dr. Timothy Harden, a dentist of Macon, Georgia, married Elizabeth Stubb. Hazel married S. P. Jordan, of Nashville, Tennessee. W. R. Harden, the assistant principal of Lee High Scool, Jacksonville, Florida, married Johnella Comp, of Newman, Georgia. Heyward Harden is unmarried.
"When I married, I took the vows seriously, and they became more serious when children came. My wife and I joined the Presbyterian Church. We believed the church could help us to bring these children up to be good citizens. We sent our boys to Clemson and our girl to Chicora. When the boys were off at school, they had the privilege of checking on my bank account. They did so, and never abused that privilege. When they were away from home, we always begged them to go to church. We also told them if they could not find good associates, to go with none. We have had no heartaches about our children. We are proud and happy in every one of them.
"The great pastime of my life has been playing cards. I got into the habit by meeting drummers at the hotel at night and taking part in the games. You liked the sport yourself. In 1904, you, myself, ex-Sheriff John D. McCarley, Sheriff A. D. Hood, Judge John J. Neil, Dr. C. S. Pixley, Jack Williams, of the News & Herald, and Ed Mellett, cotton buyer, organized the Winnsboro Car Club. We rented a room over Charlie Chandler's jewllery store, bought furniture and fixtures, and commenced the game. The club has been in existence since that date, and everyday, except Sunday, games have been played between 12:30 p. m. and 10 p. m. Its membership reached a peak in 1934. At that time, it had 52 members, and not a dime has ever been wagered on any game. In the summer of 1934, this club sponsored and held a camp for underprivileged children, accommodating fifty-five boys and fifty-two girls. I have been president of the club for the past four years. All of the original members, except you and me, are dead. The furniture we used has worn out and passed into the attic. The witticisms, puns, and humor engendered by the games have enlivened many hours for me in the past thirty-four years, and I am sorry that I can no longer indulge in the innocent diversion.
"In conclusion, I have a word or two to say about the future welfare of the county and state: The curse of this State has been politics and provincialism. Take Calhoun and secession; look at all the bloodshed in that war of his brewing. We are now facing another crisis in our economic affairs. Foreign corporations continue to sell us automobiles and accessories, gasoline, tobaccos, cigarets, and manufactured products. Money for these commodities flows out of the State, out of local circulation. We produce nothing that can bring the stream of money back and keep a normal amount of money here in circulation; yet, the most of our politicians ride into office on the abuse of corporations and the shredded and patched preachment of States' rights. We should pray for political leaders who can allay all this feeling. We should teach the people to see that legislation should be directed toward inducing corporations to come to this State to build and maintain industries that will throw into local circulation a weekly pay roll of money to take the place of the volume that goes out to buy the gasoline, automobiles, and other necessities that we are obliged to have in this new era. I have thought much along this line since my confinement to the home.
" The radio has done much to enlighten the pass of the population who works and hasn't time to read. About 1888, our people in general were very ignorant as to current events and state and local issues in politics. A statesman and patriot had no chance against a slick talker and demagogue.
I'm getting tired and weary; however, I'll throw in this bit of humor in conclusion. Osmond W. Buchanan, of Winnsboro, was once running for the legislature in this county. The candidates had spoken at many points in the county, and the final speaking was held in Fortune park woods, at Winnsboro. In his exordium, Buchanan began with a quotation from Walter Scott's Novel, Rob Roy:
'I have been hunted all over the hills and through the glens, but today my foot is on my native heath, and my name is McGreggor.' Expectorating a stream of tobacco spittle at a tree, a bystander remarked, 'Why I thought his name was Buchanan!'
