Mollohon Mill
Newberry, S. C.
Dec 20, 1938
GLSummer
THE CLARYS
An old dilapidated store building, which has never been painted, stands near the railroad crossing and on the side road that runs from the mill village. It is not a part of the mill property, and is owned by a man named Kinard. The Clary family occupies the building as a home, have been there about five years. They are a family that have had, in the years past, to ask charity from the public, and many times their little ones would go from house to house and ask for something to wear or even something to eat. Even though the front steps are about to fall away, and on the front porch are some large holes, where the planks have been busted through, they seem to be satisfied in their hut.
If you go inside the front door, the room apears dark, except that the knot holes in the splintered and unpainted floor give some semblance of light which comes from under the house. Then, too, a large hole in the back door, where a panel has been broken out, in the absence of windows, gives some light for the rear end of the room. Thus, too, a continous flow of air is available. The room is used as a living room, company room, bed room, dining room and kitchen.
The-caller is asked to sit down on an old dusty chair, the legs of which have been repaired by nailing rough boards across them, which keeps the chair from falling down. Lillian Mauldin, a young girlish looking woman, says that she is a daughter of the Clarys, her mother, Bessie Clary being out visiting a neighbor, and her father away at work, working on a construction jot for the Works Progress Administration. She says that her father is deaf and dumb, that he has been that way all of his life; though he works every day ditching, and sometime he hauls mortal for the masons. His wages are $15.60 each two weeks, or half month. He is 55 or 56 years old and her mother is 53 years old. She says that she has had a hard time; is 27 years old, and has two children, which lives there with them. That her husband who is somewhere in North Carloina-- she does not <text not clear> where-- never helps her any; he left her and the two babies, but they never have got a divorce. When they were in North Carolina, she says, she was so sick in Hendersonville, she was about to die. He mother came up there to be with her, and finally she pulled through. Then she came back home with her two little ones, and are now living with her parents. She says that her mother has seven children, the oldest girl being married a and living in Marion, S. C., where her husband works as a laborer and sometimes preaches at the holiness church. "no sir, I ain got a divorce," and seems to be reconciled to the situation, even though she gets no help from her husband and does not knwo where he is at this time.
She says that her mother was born and reared in Saluda County, South Carolina, a daughter of a Holt family; that they were all farmers, and she is a brother of Jack and Butler Holt who lived at Whitmire, S. C. Her father's people lived in Newberry County, on farms, that some of them were good farmers; that he has a better education than her mother, having two diplomas, one from the Cedar Springs Institute, near Spartanburg, S. C. But, she says, he always had a hard time "gittin along," because he is deaf and dumb, and people don't undetsand him. He moved to the Newberry Cotton Mills and worked about 15 years, in the spinning room, or card room, Later on, she says, he moved back to the farm, after he had tried to work at Ware Shoals mill one year; stayed a year on his brother's farm, in a little house on the place. Getting dissatisfied, he moved to the Oakland Mill and worked two years; then quit, worked first one job and then aother, at times, she says. Since the W.P.A. has been going on he has been with them, has been working regular when they would give him regular work. The wages are mighty little, she says, but it helps". She says that her two brothers, young boys, have been able to get on the N. Y. A., and they each draw $5.95 wages each half month or two weeks. She says that she and her mother do all the work around the place, cooking, washing, ironing, splitting wood, and a little work in garden. "We get water from one of the enighbors," she says, and several houses around there get water from the same place; because they are not connected with the town water supply, don't have a well on their place. She says that they don't have any electric lights, either, and use only a small oil lamp.
The home-made toy wagons, and other dusty and soiled toys that are scattered around in every corner of the room and under the bed, with an old black checkered quilt, dusty and soiled, thrown over an unkemp bed, one wonders how they keep healthy. A red oil cloth covers the eating table which sets between the stove and the bed, another table with an oil cloth is near the front door, while an old slanted desk (she says it belongs to the owner of the building who allowed it stay there when they came in), is over aginst the wall about half way of the room. The bareness of the walls is off-set by a large galvanized and rusted or broken wash pan and a pair overalls hanging on nails on the walls of one side, and on the other side hangs a few old clothes, and above the wall, adjoining the side rooms can be seen the ends of a rake and hoe as they rest on the rafters of the adjoining ceiling of the next room.
As she talks, a five year old baby comes into the room, sniffling with a cold. The daughter says to an older child, "dont you see she got a cold, leave her alone, and dont let her go out doors". The older child then fgoes back and gets a drink of water, with a dipper, from a wooden water-bucket which sets on a small shelf against the wall near the rear door. Presently, a young boy comes in, having on a pair of overalls, and gets a drnk of water, then he goes out.
She says that the hole in the back door, Mr Kinard promised to fix. He sent a little lumber to have it fixed--papa promised to fix it-- but someway it' ain't ever got fixed--bobody ain't got time to do it". Then, she says, they pay $2.00 a month rent for the place.
She says that the children don't go to school in town, as they dont like it up there; but a teacher comes by for them every morning and takes them to her school, which is about two miles or three miles out in the country. She brings them back home after school is out, in her automobile. (Inquiry discloses that the rural community could not get enough pupils to allow it to open for the session, and they went over into the mill section and get enoug additional pupils so the school could start- GLS)... She says that her mother always said that she wanted the children to go to school as she didnt get much chance to go. They have three children in school, at Johnstone School, two brothers and a sister.
They go to Sunday school, too, to the Holy Roly Church which is donw the road a piece from there, called the Pentecost Holiness Church, which is their mothers church and it is near to them. She says her papa goes sometimes to the Smyrna Presbyterian Church, which is about eight miles above town. That is his home section. Then, one of the little girls, who lingering nearby, exclaims, "I go to Sunday School"...
She says that none of them go in for any kind of amusements. They have a park over in the mill village, but none of them go there. The boys dont care about base-ball, but they sometimes go to a picture show.
Sickness has not been bad in the family, she says, except the baby had measles last Spring. About this time a grey and white spotted cat comes into the room, which looks as if it had not had a bath anytime. In the front door stands a large black dog which had come in to see what was interesting; but with a sedate look it bowed it's head and sat down near the door on the front porch. Again the daughter hollers at her younger sister to keep quiet, as the younger one had complained that M.... had put water on her head. Then Lillian, the oldest, says, "go get me switch, a good, hickory switch."
They find it hard, sometimes, to get along with what her father and the two boys make, but get by. They buy their groceries uptown at one of the chain stores, but they have no auto and lug it home; but sometimes the store will deliver them.
