February 8, 1939
Willard and Cornelia Mitchell (white)
Commerce Street
Sebring, Florida
Citrus grove laborer, chiefly a
duster and pruner. Woman: Citrus
canner.
Barbara Berry Darsey, writer
Veronica E.Huss, reviser.
FRANK AND ELLA MERRYVALE
"Come in, why do you stand there knockin ?" exclaimed a pleasant voice as I knocked on the first of three doors of the small apartment. Then, as I hesitated, the door was flung open and a flustered young woman apologized.
"My goodness! Please do excuse me, I thought you were my little boy Jamie, and I wondered why he was a-knockin on the door. Do come in. This is my kitchen, but we'll go right through to the other room."
This small stout, pleasant faced woman proved to be Mrs Herryvale. She was neat and clean though her clothes were rather worn and faded. As we passed through the kitchen where she had been shelling peas, I noticed that the place was sparking clean. Two chairs stood near a large window where a number ef flowering plants grew. On one chair was a large pan of fresh English peas, a basket beside the other chair held the empty hulls.
Mrs. Merryvale was so concerned over the manner of her first greeting that she became quite effusive.
"Take this chair right hero by the Window, it's cool and comfortable here. I declare I am sorry if you thought me rude. I reckon you were surprised the way I yelled at you to come in."
I hastened to assure her that it was all right and that she hadn't hurt feelings. with this she became more at ease.
As I had obviously interrupted the shelling of the peas I suggested that I help her. She accepted my offer and hurried, into the kitchen to obtain than, when she returned she placed them on a small table near at hand. Her friendliness had increased with my offer. As we worked she explained that this was being done for a neighbor, and that it must be completed by a certain time, therefore she was glad of my help.
"Frank isn't working today for he's on the grove dustin crew tonight. When he works at night he rests most of the day. He just want downtown a few minutes ago, but he'll be back soon for he likes his supper early. He will want to rest a little more before he at start his work. He doesn't mind the night work as it pays five cents an hour more than day la bor. We are mighty glad to get it. We are a-tryin to get our farm, land fixed up so we can move down there and be real farmers like our daddies are."
Ella arose and went to a map tacked to the far wall it was the kind distributed by the oil companies. Here she pointed with pride to a location in the lower and of the county near lake Istakpoga.
"Right here is our farm and it sure is good land."
When She had resumed her seat she launched into the relation of her life story.
"I am a real Florida Cracker and all my people are Floridians," she said. "I was born in Lakeland 26 years ago, but I was just a little girl when my father moved to Avon Park where I was raised on a farm.
"My daddy was born over in Polk County, and my mother, who was a Dale, was born in Lake County near Umatilla. My daddy is Ben Wilkins. All our family has lived in Florida for a long time. My great-great-grandfather Wilkins is said to have come to Virginia from England, but he soon come to Florida after that and here we have been ever since. My mother's folks is all of English stock, too, and we have heard that they come from a place call Birmingham.
She sighed deeply and sifted the bright green peas through her fingers.
"I sure wish we had a record of the families it would be so interesting. I've always wondered so much about us all, but don't none of us know anything definite. All we know is what others tells us. If we had the money arm the ability, I would have a family history made up for us, but I hear they cost a let of money and take a lot of time.
"Frank's people are all Georgians. He was born up near Oakland, but he has been raised here in Florida. His family now lives near Stonewood, Georgia, where his daddy is superintendant of a peach crchard. He also has half interest in a large farm. Frank says that he's thinking of taking us up there for a while, so he can help his daddy with the work, but I don't want to go. We have plenty to do here, and we have our own farm to work.
"Frank's mother was a Delly, they use to be real rich and prominent folks up there in Georgia. Several of her uncles had one of the largest stock farms in the state years age."
As the peas were shelled by this time, she excused herself for a few minutes and went into the kitchen with them. As my eyes followed her I was again impressed with the spotless order of her house the kitchen and dining room were combined. An alcove in this long narrow room held the sink, some abelves, a cabinet, and a three-burner oil stove.
A large square table covered with a white cloth stood near the back door. The bare floors were nicaly painted end had recently been polished. There were flowers growing in the large window, and a bouquet placed on the table lent a cheery aspect to the room.
Mrs. Merryvale returned and continued her conversation "I often get little odd jobs like shelling peas, and though they don't pay much I'm always mighty glad to get the work It sure helps a lot. Not long age I made a let of artificial flowers for the Girl Scout Minstrel. At christmas I helped a florist make a lot of tiny pine wreaths. That's the first work of that kind that I have ever done. But I have always been with my fingers, so it wasn't a bit hard to learn. The florist said I did. well right from the start and that's something, because most folks found it mighty difficult at first."
Rising once more she went into the bedroom. This room was long and narrow like the kitchen and committed too beds, a large bed and a single bed; the latter was placed cross-wise at the foot of the large bed. The fleer was painted and there were a number of bright rag rugs soattered <text not clear> about. A small tall table at the end of the ream had several books and magasines em it, while a set of shelves on one wall held a large collection of Federal and State Agricultural bulletins. Drawing a box from beneath the double bed she exclaimed;
"Just see this here little quilt I finished for a baby!" She carefully unfielded and. shock out the small bundle for me to see. "A neighbor put the top together, then ask me to finish it for her. I been a-workin on it for two weeks now. I heve to de it off and on, for I don't have much time to spend with these spare jobs."
The quilt prove to be a daiaty plece of work with a top of figured lawn in pastel shados and lined in blue. It was quilted with blue and pink threads. Taking note of my interest, She reached further unier the bed and dragged out a larger box opening this she scooped up an armful of full size quilts and placed them on the bed. She carefully unfelded each until there were six on display. All were of intricate but attractive designs and bespake fine workmanship.
One consisted of large squares constructed of tiny pieces no wider than a little finger. In mummy ways it reminded me of thin sticks of striped candy. At my exclamation of surprise and pleasure she explained.
"You see it's pieced out of the tiny scraps that I have left ever from the larger patterns. It's called a string quilt."
I expressed my admiration for her quilting, and she continued.
"I reckon must all country people learn to make quilts, and I was raised in the country, you know. That is often our chief and only recreation. It is a rest and real pleasure to sit down and piece tops, after you've been doing real hard work. And of course it's more pleasure when you have a real pretty pattern to work out, or even if you make one up yourself.
"Look at this; it's called Robin Redbreast. When it's made up in the celers of red, brown, green and yellow, it sure is pretty. I reckon it will be a long time before I can finish it because I don't have the Material." She sighed deeply at this, then resumed:"But ever time I get a chance for a new pattern I always take it."
Her next move was to shake out several unfinished tops.
"I am always starting new tops. Seam like some of the sera don't always fit the work I'm on, so I stop aml start another. I just can't wait to finish the first one."
The kitchen door flaw viclently open and a tousled little boy stood there unmbashed <text not clear> at the sight of a stranger.
"Mama says is the peas ready? She has to get them to market eat and wait Here's the 25$ she promised you. I hope you got then all ready, cause she's in a hurry." This rush of words came all in one breath.
Mrs Maerryvale accepted the 25$ the boy held out to her and in return handled him two large paper packs contining she peas. she admished him to be careful and not spill and closed the door as he left.
She returned laughing and continued:
"Like I said before I get a few odd Jobs this way, and I don't never refuse nothing I'm able to do, even if it only pays a dime.
"I use to work is the orange and grapefruit canning factory, but lately then hasn't been much work like that. Besides I would have to go so far away from home as Frank don't like that, he also don't want me to take it up again anyway.
"I quit school in the sixth grade to take up the canning plant work. My daddy's health failed and he lost what money he had, so my eldest brother and me started to work.
"The canning plant work im't so bad once you get use to it, but at first it took all the skin off my fingers. You know, the acid is so bad. Then I get to wearing finger stalls of rubber; somehow I never could get use to rubber gleves like some of the worker use. For some reason I couldn't never explain I jest felt I had to have my palms bare so that's the reason I just used the stalls.
"I made around a dollar a day when I first started, but I worked hard and did my best to learn just right, se it wasn't long before I was making $2 a day. It takes a right fast worker to make more than that, cause I reckon $1.50 is the limit, but I was making that much before I was done.
"The juieers and peelers get paid by the hour, mostly it's about 25$ per hour, but I sectionised and that's piece work."
Once more the kitchen door opened, but quietly this time and a timid little fellow entered and hurried toward his mother. Filled with the importance of his news he forget his shyness as he advanced.
"Just look here, Mother," he burst, "but I didn't get to finish it yet!"
He placed a red and white paper valentine in his Mother's lap.
"See! I get all but the legs done. Look at the arms, they is made of little hearts tee, just like his face. It's for you, only teacher said we must finish it at home and bring them back for her to see."
He looked eagerly around the room.
"You get any white paper Mother?" His inquiry was serious. "Teacher gived me the red paper to make the hearts for his legs."
On being assured that the white paper was available he immediately retired to the kitchen, obtained a cold biscuit and went out on the back steps be eat it.
"That's my Jamie," said Mrs. Merryvale with pride. "He's just six, but he's going to school. I try to help him all I can for I want him to get a good education. I want to keap him interested tes, so that he'll be anger for learning. I realize se often what I missed by not being able to finish school." She sighed wistfully.
"Well I started to tell you about my work in the canning plant, didn't If I will try and explain about the seetienizing, it's gonna be hard, but I'll try and make it so you own understand. In sectionizing you have to out cut the pulp of the fruit without getting any skin, membrane, <text not clear> or seeds in it. It sounds hard to de but it really is easy when you get the knock of it.
"When doing piece work we get paid according to trays. There are four different can sizes. One size is the number O can, these is the tiny cans, and come 24 on a tray. This size only holds a whole section, and two half ones on either side. Number I cans run 12 on a tray and brings 9$ per tray. Then there are the number 2 cans with 12 on a tray. Then there are the number 2 cans with 12 on a tray, and which brings us 12 1/2$ per tray. The gallon cans run to four on a tray and they bring us 18$.
She paused to reminisce, then resumed the detailed account of her life in the canning factory.
"We had to be real careful and pack the cans according to a schedule or plan, and we never know when the for em coman <text not clear> would come around and test our packing. If it wasn't done just right, it was marked against us, and we had to do it all over.
"In all but the number O cans, we had to use only whole sections. In every can we had to be mighty careful and not let any seeds slip by. We were allowed one can for broken sections on every tray of perfect packs. These cans were marked with a broad black stripe. As I just mentioned we was allowed one black stripe can to a tray, but of course the fewer black stripes we had, the better our standing.
In reply to my questions concerning the packing of the sections, she said:
"The sections as I told you before, must be whole and perfect. These are placed in the can with the grain of the plug toward the can side, all must be evenly packed. There is always a little syrup already in the can when the tray comes to us. We don't put no juice in, only the plugs.
"Just let me get my sectionizer knife and show you what I mean." She hurried out to her kitchen and returned as quickly with an odd locking knife. It had a broad short handle and a thick blade of medium length with sharp edges.
"When we get work in the canning plant we are charged 75$ for these knives When we leave if we want to keep them it's all right, but if we turn them in we gets our money back I wanted to keep mine so I paid the 75$.
Again she paused and sighed pensively, then she reached out absently and pinched a withered leaf from one of her window plants.
"They had mighty striot orders in the cannery too. No one was allowed starched uniforms every day. The uniform was blue with white head bands and cost us $1 each. We couldn't return them when we finished work. Usually they was worm pretty bad anyway, from acid spattering on them.
"Sometimes the girls cut the sleeves out far coolness, and Just as soon as the ferewoman <text not clear> caught them, they had to stop and buy a new uniform and put it em, or be discharged Over the fronts of our uniforms we usually were rubber aprens with a smaller cloth one over it. This was done because the juice is so bad.
"We also were low heel shoes, and socks or stockings I used white socks, and I had a clean pair every day. I alse had uniforms which I kept neat and clean, although I could usually wear one two days."
She leaned forward and there was a twinkle in her big blue eyes.
"I never did work in the bull pen," she half whispered.
I ask her what this was and she smiled.
"Well you see, the sectionizing room is usually divided into three parts. Six large tables are placed down the room, and at the end of each two, large conveyor belts run. This makes an enclosure where some of the women have to stand in order to work at the tables. They work on both sides of the tables, but the part inside with the belts is called the bull pen In order to get in there, they have to walk up six steps and over the belts, them down six steps again to the floor. Of course there ain't much difference working in there than elsewhere, except it gets warmer in there and in case of an accident or fire, it would be harder to get out. I was always glad cause I got to work on the outside of the belts."
In regard to working conditions, Mrs. Merryvale continued.
"We went to work at seven in the morning and worked until six that is if we had a full run of fruit.
"The forewoman are strict, but they were kind, so we hardly ever had any trouble. We always had an hour off for lunch, and a comfortable wash room to rest and clean up in."
"Mother," yelled Jamie, "can I go down to the corner and watch for daddy. Please mam, can I?"
"Will you be real careful and not get in the street if I let you go?" His mother asked hesitantly.
"Yes, I'll stay right on the sidewalk. Please can I go?"
"Alright, but don't you stay long if daddy doesn't come. Alse, you stay near where mother can call you."
Jamie departed with a bang of the door.
His mother looked after him with reluctance.
"That Child and this upstairs apartment make quite a problem. He doesn't like to stay up here all the time, and I can't always be going down with him. I don't want to make a sissy out of him by making him stay near me all the time, so I let him go out, but I always worry while he's gone."
With Jamie gone his mother reverted to the discussion of living conditions.
"The rent hare in this little place is only $8 a month, and though it's up steep stairs and is pretty hot in summer, we have made the best of it. We're trying to save all we can for our farm. We do have a nice big bathroom here though, and you can't usually get that with cheap rent."
As she talked she walked restlessly around the room, casting an occasional glance through the open window, to see if she could see Jamie.
"I have lost three babies since he came, they all died at birth. sometimes I'm afraid I ain't agonna have no more. It's been a little ever a year since the last one come. When I was a real young girl a fortune teller at a carnival said I would have nine children, and I had sure hoped it would some true. But I'm afraid it won't. I love children so, and Jamie is such a comfort to me.
"Of course children are a responsibility and sometimes lots of trouble, but life is made up of responsibilities and troubles," she added philosophically.
A heavy but firm step was heard ascending the stairs, intermingled with childish prattle, then Frank came in with Jamie clinging to his hand.
"See Mother!" the little fellow shouted gloefully,"I found him."
Frank was short and had blue eyes and fair hair, and was as thin as his wife was stout. His manner was pleasant but diffident. After extending his greeting by shaking hands, he sat down in a chair near a table and listened to our conversation. Jamie climbed up into his lap and the newness of his grimy little overalls and blue shirt made a sharp contrast against the worn and patched ones of his father's.
As our conversation continued he grew more alert and joined in to tell as of his work.
"I am off today," he said, "for I'm gonna work tonight in the dew-dustin. I am just a common grove laborer, but I been a-workin at it for most five years now."
"It ain't ever laborer that can dust like Frank can!" exclaimed Ella with pride. "So they always send far him when it comes to that. It does take some skill and the foreman says Frank is a real specialist in it."
"How, now Ella, I wouldn't say that, but it is a different work from most labor.
"I like it better too far It's cooler in the groves at night and some how the work is easier. Workin on moonlight nights specially, seems like there is kind of a charm to it," he added softly.
"The night work pays 25¢ an hour and the day labor only 20¢. So that's another reaeon I like dustin better, for that extra five cents sure mounts up. We need it too bein we're tryin to get our farm ready to move to. I guess Ella's done told you about that, though, she's usually so proud she has to talk." He cast a fond glance toward his wife.
"We have 40 acres of good farmin land down south, of here in this county. We also love some lumber toward buildin our house. I'd like to have a big stock farm like one of my uncles use to have up in Georgia one time, but I can't do that as no start. I aim to raise vegetables and hogs, we already get three fine hogs to get us goin. We sure is aimin to make some money one of these days!" he exclaimed.
He paused to roll a cigarette and after lighting it resumed.
"I have been with this Caretaker Company and the Sebring Exchange from the time I started citrus work. I reckon they are the best company there is to work for. When they's workin us as day labor, they give us 20$ an hour for a ten hour day, but only works us nine hours. That means we get one hour for lunch on company time. Most of the companies don't do that, neithert and. the man don't like it so well.
"We meet at the office every morning and company trucks carries us to the groves. 'When we get there our work begins at seven and ends at five. We ain't paid for the time we are being carried to the grove, but if we finish one grove and they send us to another, they pay us for the time it takes to transport us.
"The night work is a little different and the hours ain't so regular. When we're pruning it's the same ways we get so interested in it that we won't take a full hour for dinner."
He stopped again for Jamie had fallen asleep. He shifted the child gently and rising, stepped into the adjoining room and deposited the lad on the smaller bed. When he returned ho admonished his wife.
"Ellen look at that pink geranium! What makes it so withered up? It looks like you ain't put no water on it lately."
Ella rose hurriedly and went to her flowers, only to discover that the saucer had slipped from the bottom and let the moisture drain away. She excused herself while she remedied the matter, and Frank and I continued our discourse.
"She sure does think a lot of her flowers," he said, "and I think they're right pretty, too, but I never could mess around with them like she does.
"But gettin back to my work. When it rains the company always sends for as in their big truks covered with tarpaulins, but of course we're cut then as our time stops.
"We got a mighty good foreman too, he is considerate and doesn't drive us all the time like some men do. But you know, there ain't no money in workin for the other guy?. I found that out a long time ago, so that's the run son I'm se anxious to get out on my own place.
"When I first went to work I was just a boy; I ain't but 24 now. I useter make one dollar a day heeing grass, and I usually worked three days a week. Gee, was I proud! I never was on the relief but once and that was for one day. I made $1.50. Later I did go to CCC camp, but they sent me way out to western Louisiana and I got homesick, so I quit and come back after six weeks. I've been married so long now that the homesickness don't bother me no more. My folks are up in Georgia now. My Pa, he's a supervisor of a peach orchard.
The homesick statement brought a note of derision from Ella.
"You'd think he was a real old married man, from the way he talks, now wouldn't you?"
She laughed heartily, while Frank answered.
"Well, we been married seven years now, and ain't that a long time, especially when I was only 17 to start with. But really," he added earnestly, "I'm mighty glad I married so young because I'd already started to be a mighty bad fellow Even when I wasn't much bigger than my little fellow, I started to smokin and chewin, and it wasn't long before I was drinking too. I was alse bad at fightin and carousin.
"Sometimes I tease Ella about bein a little elder than me, but I sure am glad I get her, for it wasn't long after we married that I quit all my bad habits. She didn't never fuss at me, but was just good and kind to me, and when I seen it went agin her I quit.
"I ain't a church member, but she's a Baptist and a good woker too. All I believe is to live the best I know how. Anyway I wanta be real sure I know how to behave before I join a church. I see so many folks in church who don't seem to be livin right in most ways, and I Just ain't get no to be like them. I expect I'll Join in time to come through, and of course I'll go with Ella.
Getting up he tiptead toward the bedroom.
"I got somethin I wanta show you."
He returned in a few minutes his arms filled with agricultural bulletins.
"Just look at all these Gover'ment bulletins that Ella gets. They tel her how to raise flowers and how to cook right and what to cook. She's always sending for them and she reads every one what comes too. She ain't had much education in school, and I haven't naither but she's always improvein herself by readin. I don't take to readin though, seems like I can't never get my mind to it.
"Ella has even fixed out a budget. It's a thing that lets you live on so much so you can save the rest, of course we don't stick to it much, but it seems we can't cause there ain't never enough money to go around. Then things is gottin me costly all the time. But it helps some and Ella has sure tried hard to make it work for she's like me, she's aimin to get that farm as sean as she can."
Frank beamed with pride at his wife. She seemed pleased but a trifle embarrassed.
"In my work I average around $15 a weak sometimes though when the citrus is slack I haul wood and sell it. That don't bring much neither, cause I have to hire a feller, what has a truck, to help me. I have a small car I use in my work sometimes, especially when I'm sent out on a job alone sad the company sin't get time to take me, but it ain't no good to me in haulin west.
"I don't know just how much it would take fer us to have a good livin. of course our food don't cost us much, then our daddies sends stuff from their farms ever now and them."
At this Ella went in to the kitchen and returned with a pan of smooth you wish her father had sent her. Then she brought out a palatable looking section of white bacon to show me this came from one of Frank's uncles in Georgia.
"I have figured out expenses a lot," Ella said, "and if we consider the improvements we want to make on the farm so that we could live there it would take around $150 a month for some time. After that we might be independent.
"I sure hope we can get out on that farm before long, even if we can't build nothin but a little shack. Farm life seems so much better than here in term. Believe me I'd sure never want to live in no city on the title that frank makes and us not havin no more education than we get.
"But I'd sure love to be in the city when they have those big political meetings. Gee it must be a lot of excitement and fun!. Her eyes sparkled with the idea.
"Now there you go gettin yourself in politics again," her husband laughed.
"I don't take much stuck in those things," Frank continued "But I wouldn't mind goin to a big meetin myself. We have one at Oak Grove near yams on the 4th of July, and it's always the smart of the Domearatis campaign. But Ella, she really wants to attend a honest-to-goodness big meetin I tell her she sughta try and get herself elected to the state and national countries, if she wants to see that sort of thing in a big way.
"We are both Departments but I don't usually vote. Ella always does, she says it's a great privilege but it seems like a responsibility to me. Anyway, how do we know that the people we help elect will do the right thing by us? Then if they go wrong, all we can do is blame curselves and it just don't suit me."
"New Frank," Ella seclded, "you know it ain't right to look at it in that way. We all have to vote in order to be good American citizens. Suppose we lived in one of them there countries where they have diotators, and you were made to vote a certain way. Wouldn't that be awful? Here in our good, free country things are so different, and we gotta do all we can to keep it that way.
"Of course we all make mistakes in that just like we make them in other things, but I still think we should try. It ain't always that the folks we vote fer, does us wrong. Suppose everybody hadda felt like that in the last national election. Where would we be now? Well, there ain't no tellin. I think folks did a mighty wise thing when they elected president Roesevalt to office again. Ant I hope have the privilege of votein for him to get a third term. Yes, I sure do!" Her eyes gleaned with the vehemence of her argument.
Frank laughed henrtily and arese.
"Well, it ain;t exactly polite to fight before company, so I reckon I better got out. I've got to find Bill anyway and see if he wants to help me go for wood tomorrow."
After bidding me good day, he turned to Ella and kissed her, then he tipted in to the little one and ran his fingers through the tousled ourly head.
When the sound of his footsteps died away as he went down the stairs, Ella resumed her discussion of politics and the country is general.
"Now, what other country has ever showed so much help for its poor folks? And it's ealy been since Mr. Roosevelt went in to office. I often wonder what will happen if he doesn't go on with the work, but surely some end else will take it up and go on. It would be all right to stop it if the poor folks could help themselves. But they can't and they ain't poor through no fault of their's.
"Now you take this here examination that Jamie and me took the ether day for taberoulesis, we never could have done it if it hadn't been for the state Board of Health and the Gover'ment, I reckon. We went to the schoolhouse and had the tests made. Jamie showed negative, and that surprised me for a doctor once told me that he had mighty weak lungs. I have always worried about him, and I was sure glad to get the chance to find out for sure.
"My test showed positive, but the man said that didn't mean an active case. I might have had it years age and get over it, but the test would show the sear wouldn't it? I wasn't surprised when they told me I had it, for my grandpa, my father's daddy, lived with us when I was a little girl and for ten years before he died he was sick with slow consumption. So I reckon I got it from him.
"I'm fat I know, in fact I'm a lot overweight for my height, but the nurse maid that didn't mean anything, because you can have tuberculosis just the same."
As she talked, she kept glancing in a mirrow trying to reassure herself.
"They come back this weak and took X-rays of me but said it would be two months before I heard from them. If I have assumptions they'll give me free treatment, that is if I ain't able to pay for it myself."
She went in the bedroom and returned with a packet of snapshots, sorting then she handled one to me.
"I don't look like I ever had tuberculosis in that picture, do I? Here's another one that was taken just before I was married. My: I was full of life than and could dance steadily all night. I haven't been to a dance or a party for so long now, that I wouldn't know to act I reckon.
"Frank don't like things like that. We did go to the movies some, but Jamie nearly always goes to sleep and then wakes up and cries, so we quit that too. I reckon it's just as well, cause we can save that money for the farm."
As I rese to leave, Ella too companied me to the door, and again commented on her method of greeting as on my arrival, but added.
"Please come again soon, I've enjoyed this so much. I'll be more careful next time how I yell for you to come in, so please come back."