Life History.	4500 words
(Date of gathering of material) - 27 April, 1939.
(Name of writer) - Jeanne deLavigne Scott, 532 St. Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Name and address of person written about) –Mrs. Bessie Conite, 1017 St.Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Profession of person written about) - WPA worker.
A RED COMB IN HER HAIR
This is the story of Bessie Conite --- five feet, four inches tall, and weighing one hundred and ten pounds, Her eyes are gray-brown, and her glasses seem to bother her a bit. Her hair is short and curled, well grayed, and she wears a port little red comb in it. She has on a red flowered cotton house-dress this day. Her room is on a narrow, wisteria-hung gallery, leafy and cool. You reach it by way of the flagged courtyard --- past the canaries and the mocking bird, and the family of cats and sprawling kittens; and then up a winding, outside stairway. The courtyard is thick with vines and shrubs and borders of spicy flowers.
Bessie’s room is small, and every wall is crowded with furniture. It is a plain, common room, but clean and easy to live in. There are pale green ruffled curtains at the windows and glass doors, and a linoleum rug on the floor. A studio couch with a cretonno cover, some cushions, a cupboard, on armoire, cedar chest, stand, dresser, a rocker and another chair, a two-burner gas-plate on a table --- these make up the furnishings. A little window high above the bed opens like the doors of a dove-cote --- this is where the rain spatters in when it storms.
Bessie turns out the gas under a small saucepan, and settles herself on the couch.
“Yes” she nods, "I've had plenty happen to me --- oh my! I'm a widow --- been a widow for twenty years. I was born May sixth, 1866, two miles from Springfield, Tennessee --- down through the woods, on a little hill, in a log cabin.
"Well, when I was born, I only weighed five pounds and they didn't know who would die first --- my mother or me. They said if I lived to be twelve years old, I'd probably grow up. My mother's name was Sarah Grymes --- full-blooded Irish. She was born in Springfield, Tennessee, too. My father's name was William Henry Hall. He was Irish and English, but he was born in England. I don't know anything about his people at all. He died sudden, when I was two years old.
“Well, after my father died, we lived with my grandparents, the Grymeses. I know that's why I've been lucky --- I was named before I was born. If I'd been a boy, I'd have been Jesse, after my grandfather. But I was a girl, so it was Bessie, after my grandmother. My grandparents had a family burying-ground on the place. I used to call them Old Ma and Old Pa. She always wanted to die when he did. She'd had heart trouble for thirty years, and never had laid in a bed with it. Old Pa died in January, of pneumonia. And Old Ma died just two weeks after, to the day, and was buried in Springfield. And we took him up and put him and her in the same grave. He was ninety-two and she was ninety-one. I was six years old at the time.
"Then my aunt in Hopkinsville, Kentucky, who lived three miles out on the Clarksville Pike, came and got me and my mother. She was Mrs. Nannie Shepherd, my mother's sister. Aunt Nannie lived with her sister. About a month before Mother's Day, in 1934, on a Monday night, I heard a voice say, 'Your Aunt Nannie ain't goin’ to be in this world but a very short while.' I begun to cry. But that Friday she did die, and she had been writing me a letter at just that time on Monday. After that I quit writin' to all my relations---all they want is what they kin git out of you.
“Mammy died the following October, when we went home on a visit to her brother in Springfield --- my uncle, Neil Grymes. I had a half-brother and two half-sisters ---my father's children by a first wife. But I didn't know anything about them. My mother died at forty-three, from change of life.
"After that I lived with my Aunt Nannie and Uncle Shep, until he died in 1911 --- the eleventh of October, it was. Then she and I left Hopkinsville and went to Springfield, Tennessee. She had a little twenty-six-acre place, but she sold it and moved in with her sister. I went back to Hopkinsville and got me a job in the Cumberland Telephone office. I was there about six months, and I got so nervous the doctor said I'd die if I didn't quit. I menstruated all the time I was there.
"Then, after I quit working there, a Doctor Barker's brother-in-law, Gordon Rieves, lost his wife at childbirth, and she left a little boy baby. I had always wanted to be a nurse. Doctor Barker told me if I would come there, he would learn me to be a nurse. I stopped school in the Fifth Grade in Hopkinsville, at the Van Clive schoolhouse, 'cause I've had to work all my life. I stayed in the Rieves’ house about four months ------ thirty dollars a month, room and board and washing, and one day off a week --- to take care of the baby. I quit because I got nervous and all.
"After I left there, I went in to Hopkinsville and got me a job at Kress', and I was there three or four years. Two doctor friends of mine, Doctor Arnett and Doctor Sanback, had several patients that were too poor to hire a nurse. Kress' store would let me off and I'd go and nurse them. They'd give me whatever they could, and I was gettin' trainin’.
"The store manager said me and Katie Redd was the best salesgirls in the store, but he couldn't keep us out of mischief. One Saturday night just before Christmas, just before we went to close, he called me aside. He was only kidding with me, but he says, 'Will you please tell me how you managed to steal that thirty dollars from the woman who claims she lost thirty dollars out of her purse --- ‘cause your cash register had thirty dollars more than anybody else's.’ I used to lead that man a dog's life.
"You see, we had to be there at ten minutes before eight --- had to register. I went in, and by the clock in the office it was ten minutes after eight one morning. The manager asked me if I couldn't see the clock --- 'you know the rules,' he says, 'and you'll lose half a day.’ So I told him that I came in late on purpose, so Icould have half a day off --- but I wanted a whole day off, and could I have it? He told me to shut my mouth and git on the floor. His name was Rainey. Later on he went out; and when he come in he called me on the side and asked me why I didn't tell him our clock was fast. I told him, Because he didn't ask me. I'd know it was fast.
"When I'd been there about a year, we had a special sale on men's silk socks, twenty-five cents a pair, and the manager wanted to know why I hadn't sold more than I had. It was Saturday, and we'd stayed open till nine o'clock. I asked him why he didn't buy half a dozen, and he said he wouldn't wear those things. And I said if he wouldn't, my friends wouldn't, either. So I told him if he didn't like the way I sold socks, I'd quit. He said to wait till Monday night ---- that was pay night. So I did, and I quit. I was only getting three dollars and a half. I roomed with my cousin, and she give me my room and washing for two dollars a week, and I had a dollar and a half left over.
"When I left Kress’ I went to Kline's, a little clothing store … they had everything. I worked in there for two weeks --- I believe I got five dollars a week --- and every time I'd go into Kress’ the manager would ask me if I'd learned to sell socks. I was around twenty-three then. So on Saturday night I quit, and went into Kress’. The manager was out to supper and the girls was all standin’ round talkin’, and I got behind the counter. The customers was all walkin' out, so I served ‘em. Just before he came in, I got on the floor, to keep him from seein’ me servin' the customers. But the cashier told him what I'd did, and the girls all stand in' around talkin' instead of servin’ the customers.
"So Monday I went down and he thanked me for what I did Saturday night. I asked him if he didn't need some help, and he said not regular; but if I'd work steady on Saturdays and Mondays, he'd take me. I told him if I couldn’t have a steady job I didn't want any. That was Monday. He said if he ever did have a steady job, he'd let me know* So on Tuesday he sends Kate Redd after me, to get me to come Wednesday mornin’ because they was havin’ a big lace sale. So when I went in Wednesday he was up in the office; and I went up and asked him if it was a steady Job, because if it wasn't I didn't want it. He told me to shut my mouth and get down on the floor and behind the counter, and when he didn't want me he'd tell me so. I stayed there about three years --- three and a half a week, and it was all they ever paid there.
"He and I had a run-in one night. The big manager from Nashville, Tennessee, was over one night. It was time to git off. The manager had give Kate Redd and I five counters between us, to keep us out of mischief. Our counters wasn't filled with stock yet for the next morning --- we had crockery, glassware, enamel ware, hardware and tin ware, right under his office where he could watch us. When the stock boy brought a basket of plates, I dropped them and broke 'em --- it had made me mad because he had asked me to stay late, just with him and the stock boy. I knew he had other reasons for wantin' me to stay. Of course he bawled me out for breakin' the plates; I told him I'd break the rest of 'em on his head if he didn't shut up. I told him how dirty he was, and that no respectable person wouldn't go out with him. My pal Katie waited in the dressing-room for me. Some of the other girls went into the drugstore and told the drug clerk what I'd been telling the manager. When I came, the clerk give me a five-pound box of candy, 'cause he said I was the first person who ever had the nerve to talk up to that man.
"The next morning I went down after my pay. Him and Mr. Tew was up in the office. Mr. Tew wanted to know why I was quitting, and wanted me to stay. I told him No, I wouldn't give him my reasons, but I was quitting. About six years after that, the Kress manager came into the Nashville Woolworth's, where I was working as floor lady; and he told me if I was still a good worker and still had my temper, he had a store in Chicago and I could have a job with him any time I wanted it. I'd been there in Woolworth's three years. But I didn't go.
“I was married on June tenth, 1915, to George Conite, in Nashville, Tennessee. He was a Captain of the Volunteers of America, and I traveled for quite a while with him after we were married, till my baby died and all. The baby was a girl, and weighed five pounds. She died the day she was six months old. We lived a few months in Cincinnati and in Chattanooga. My husband was good to me, but he had very peculiar ways. He'd go off for months and I didn't know where he was nor nothin'. He's been dead since 1919.
"I came to New Orleans that year --- 1919. I had a letter from the Nashville manager in Woolworth's. I went to Kress' mail order store on Baronne street, upstairs, at twelve dollars a week. I had charge of the return goods. I left there when they closed up the saloons and opened up more restaurants. I decided I could make more working in a restaurant. I guess I was about thirty-five then, and I asked Mr. Rosen if I could work in his restaurant that had been open two or three days. I went to work there at ten dollars a weak, my meals and my tips. Tips were from two to four dollars a day. He sold out to his sister about six months later, and I left. Nobody liked her.
"I'd saved up a little. I went down on Howard avenue at a restaurant, and worked there about two weeks at a dollar a day and tips, and no Sundays off. Seven days a week. Then I was most killed in a streetcar accident. Three stitches in my upper lip and seven in my chest, my knee was cut in two places, and my spine was hurt by the back of the seat. I was flat on my back six months with that. The streetcar Company compromised for fifteen hundred dollars, but my lawyer got five hundred of it. For two years I wasn't able to work, after that.
"The first time I went out of the house after that … let me see. My landlady's husband, on Tulane avenue, worked at the United Fruit Company, and she and I and a couple of friends went in an auto to meet him on the boat. I forgot that my knee was weak, and when I went to get out of the car I fell out --- into a puddle of greasy mud and water. A couple of days after that (we lived upstairs), I went down to the grocery store after a bottle of milk. I fell on the grocery steps, and twisted my foot and broke the ligaments. I spent three weeks in a chair for that.
"Then I got a job in a little restaurant, and I worked there for three years. Seven dollars a week, meals and tips, seven days a week. Then I got a job in Holmes’ restaurant, and I was there three years. In winter, we got eight dollars a week and tips and uniforms. In the summer, one week I'd make about six dollars in tips, and the next -week about five dollars in tips. One day I had only six customers and I made three dollars in tips. But I usually made from three to seven dollars a day in tips.
"I left there and took a month's rest. I went into Maison Blanche one Saturday at one o'clock. I got a Job in the restaurant that day. I was fitted up with a uniform, and I was there three years. I had went from a hundred and forty-five pounds down to eighty-fire, and I was a nervous wreck and had begun to lose my voice. At first I’d got twelve dollars a week, and we furnished our own uniforms and got our meals half-price. No night work and no Sunday work. I only lost one day's work in all the three years, and that was because my foot was swollen. When I left, the only excuse they could give for laying off four of us on Christmas Eve was on account of our age.
"I had a little money saved up, but I was sick. I spent all I had and pawned all my jewelry. I couldn't pay my rent, and the old lady put me out. I went over to Mr. Warrington --- I think that was in 1933. I was there in the Warrington Women's Home in Ursuline street four years --- and I sure worked good and hard there. I got so sick of the food that when I'd come to the table I'd turn away without wanting to eat.
"Well, I managed to get a job uptown --- a housekeeping job. But I was too weak to hold it. I stayed on Rampart street with the same old lady that had put me out, until she put me out again. Then I applied to the Welfare. I wanted work instead of relief. I went to the Social Service --- I was willing to do anything. They put me to work with the Bedding Project, and I'm still there and glad to be. I never have voted, but I have my poll tax now and I'm going to. I think Roosevelt is wonderful --- he's done more than anybody else could. I hope he gets in again.
“Yes, I was christened when I was a baby, in the Methodist church. But that was only because they thought I was going to die. Nobody else in our family was baptized. Now, I love the Catholic Church ---I have ever since was a kid. My husband was a Catholic, but we were married by a Methodist preacher. I loved the Catholic pictures; but my uncle was a strict Protestant and tore up every holy picture he got hold of. When Sunday comes now, I have to sleep. But I sure believe in St. Anthony. I promised him if I got a job I'd give a quarter a period, and I did. When I got a raise, and I'd been asking him to let me get one, I promised I'd give him a dollar a month, and I do. A friend of mine (she's dead now) was a strong Catholic. Every Tuesday I burn a candle to St. Martha for work, and she'll keep my way bright.
"I like to go to a picture show when I can. I have friends uptown, and sometimes I go to spend a Sunday with them. That's about all the entertainment I have, But I found out when I was down and out that your friend was your dollar --- if you haven't a dollar, you haven't a friend.
"There's something else… had a love affair. That was the first sweet-heart I ever had in my life. I was eighteen years old when it happened. I guess I'd have been better off if I'd married him. That was in Hopkinsville, Kentucky. The Holy Rollers, or something like them, had a hall and had these meetings in it Sunday nights. My uncle didn't believe in it, but we all went for curiosity. So, one Sunday night my Uncle Shep carried my aunt and me and two neighbor girls to this meeting. The two girls and myself set in the back, next to the back seat, when we got there. There was three fellows that got to flirt in' with us. The two girls would flirt, but I wouldn't. One of them was a red-headed fellow. His name was Tom Cavanaugh, and he was twenty years old. Every time he'd say something to me, I'd bawl him out. But all the time I was so full of laugh I couldn't keep my face straight. He'd say, 'Doesn't she look sweet when she's mad! If I had her, I'd keep her mad all the time, she looks so sweet!’
"About two weeks after that, I spent the night with my cousin's intended wife, Beuna, and she and I went to the meeting. Tom was there with another girl. But he carried the girl home before the meeting was over, and was to come back to carry Beuna and me home. Before he got back, the meeting closed, and I and Beuna were taken home by another man friend ------ and we met Tom on the way. He just slowed down, and then went on. The next day she went home with me to the country. My cousin wanted us to go to a dance that night out north of town. The father told us we could go if his son could carry us --- but the son, John, was going with another girl. He didn't want to carry us, and said if we was bound to go, he'd drive a mule. He did drive a mule, and we wrapped our heads in heavy old brown cotton veils and went.
"Tom said he know I'd be at the dance (it was a pound party), and he was, and had a pound of candy. When they went to dance, they all got up but he and I. He says, 'Well, that leaves you and I, and nobody never did tell us who each other was. But we'll dance anyhow!' That night we brought him home--- with the mule. Then we went together for about two years and a half; we were engaged for about a year and a half. My uncle didn't want me to marry Tom, although he didn't have nothin' against him. So we thought we'd wait till I was twenty-one. Then he got to keepin' company that I didn't like, and we had a few words because I wouldn't run array and get married. My uncle had told me I couldn't ever come in the house again if I run away, and I wouldn't do that.
"Then a girl from Indiana came down there, and she wasn't what she should be. Tom called me on the 'phone and told me he and this girl was goin' to get married, thinkin' I'd make up with him. I told him I could stand it if he could, and to go to it. And he married her. Not two months after he was married, he sent a friend to ask if I wouldn't make up with him. He said if I would, he'd get a divorce and marry me. I sent back word that he'd cut off his nose to spite his face, and he could stick to it. He told his wife I was the only one he loved, and that any day I said so he'd get a divorce and marry me. He was drinkin', too.
"After my husband died, I was in Nashville, Tennessee. Tom had a gentleman friend come and tell me he was dying with the TB, and wouldn't I like to see him before he died. I told him to tell Tom I wanted to remember him as he used to be --- he was a changed fellow since he'd been married. I guess we spent about twelve years apart; and then I wrote to Beuna and asked her if Tom had ever died with the TB. He happened to be in Hopkinsville, Kentucky, at the time, and he told her to tell me No, that he was very much alive. And that's the last I ever heard of him. He didn't have the TB at all. His brother Pratt used to always say to me, ‘Aw, Bessie, why don't you take me? One of the name is as good as the same.' He's still an old bachelor.
"There's been one puzzle to me in my life. What the doctors said. Why is it, I've been so near death so many times, and yet I'm still here. They must be leavin' me here for some good cause in my old age.
"Now I've got carbuncles, and one eye is bad, and I broke my false teeth, and I’ve got red blotches on my hands and behind one ear. I think it's eggs--- I ate an awful lot of eggs for a while, and I thought they'd be good for me; but I guess I ate too many.
"Well, I've always been full of the devil --- I was born full of the devil. I'd rather be here in this room by myself, than with anybody, and the landlady's awful good to me. I used to be with Mrs. Clerk and her two kids. But she cooked things that weren't good for me to eat, and treated me lots wores than I treated her. This is a big old house, and it's quiet and nice, and my room's like home to me. I guess that's what we all want most of anything, when we begin to get older … home. Work and home. And if I make out that this room's home, I've got them both."

