FOUR BALL IN THE SIDE POCKET
"Well, I changed my name myself, 'bout two years ago, see. The one I had, my mother's name, was Jackson. I guess it's all right, for her anyway, but for Chrissakes, wouldn't nobody notice a fellow had a name like that, so I changed mine. The boys all called me "Jack," and I didn't like that neither. And then sometimes I'd go out and look for a job, during the depression, 'bout four-five years ago, see, and the boss'd always ast me my name; when I told 'em it was Jackson they'd look at me like they thought I was running a gull on 'em, and I never did get a job. There wasn't much work anyway, see, and I had a helluva time what with that name and all.
"Well, I guess I wouldn't of thought of changing my name for a while, but it kinda started off when I met a dame at a dance one time. She was all for me, see, twitching her bottom at me and looking kinda sick-like over her partner's shoulder while she was dancing. I liked her looks all right, but I'd known lots of 'em like her, and I didn't want her hanging 'round when I got through with her. Women are kinda crasy, I guess; you tell 'em you like 'em, you know, tell 'em something to kinda get the job done and all; well, most of 'em think you mean it and won't let a man alone.
"So I told this dame another same, and she believed it. And then I couldn't hardly get rid of her after while, and I was plenty glad she didn't know my real name. She called up 'bout a dozen times here at the pool hall, and I got so I didn't even talk to her. She wanted me to meet her when she got off work, see, and I did sometimes, but after a shile she damned near wore me out. I didn't like her very well anyhow, but she was always giving me money and buying me shirts and ties and things like that, so I kinda strung along for a while. She was built good and was a good dancer, but she was kinda crazy; I mean 'bout her calling me all the time and everything.
"I went to Dallas one time, too, and I met a girl there and told her my name was Roger Murrell. I liked that name: I got the Murrell part from a movie actor, and I liked Roger anyway. Sounded like it had something, see? Well, this dame said that was 'bout the prettiest name she ever heard for a man, and so I kinda used it off and on for a long time. I went on down south that trip, New Orleans, Atlanta, Miami, and down 'round there; you know, just seeing the country. I stayed 'bout five-six months I guess, and when I come back I went on calling myself Roger Murrell. I used it all the time I was gone and everybody, the girls I mean, liked it so much I kinda got used to it myself.
"Mom, she didn't like it at all, me changing my name, but she got used to it, I guess. Well, and the bulls all knew my old name anyway, so I went on using Roger Murrell most of the time, but I wasn't mad at the cops then. A lot of 'em knew me; pretty near all of 'em come in here before they go to work or mebbe after they get off work, and shoot a game of scratch pool or Missouri or something. I always played 'em a game or two, but they never would bet. I didn't care much; I figger it knda pays to have a stand with the cops. Well, they all called me Jack; damn near all of 'em knew me, and called me Jack and I didn't tell 'em I was using Roger Murrell. And after me'n Jimmie pulled the job they got tipped off it was me, Jack, that done it, and they come in the pool hall here and waited for us. I guess they had a pretty good time waiting for us all right; they all like to play pool and watch the baseball ticker and mebbe make a bet with Art, the manager here, and when I was in jail they all told me they wisht I'd stayed away a couple more days so's they could of caught up with their practice.
"Well, I guess we done it "because we needed money. I'd been needing some a long time; when I'd walk a lot or hustle a lot of pool, I'd get kernels --- from the old mad dog, you know, whatche-call it, venereal disease --- but I didn't have the dough to go to a doctor and get cured. It never give me much trouble, I mean I could step out or get drunk and all without hurting anything, but I didn't like it and wanted to get fixed up. And then I was dating a blonde that worked over there in the Ritz Beauty parlor--- she was a good sport and made her own money and everything; I heard she run off with a shoe salesman a while back --- well, I never did have any money to take her out or buy whisky or anything. 'Course I picked up some change hustling pool here in the Petroleum and sometimes I'd make a little on a baseball parlay, but I never had any real dough to sluff off if I wanted to.
"Well, Jimmie blew in from L.A. one Thursday night, I think it was, and come on out to the house and stayed with Mom and me. We didn't have much for breakfast next morning, what with Mom not getting paid for another week, and me'n Jimmie dusted down to the pool hall and set around kinda waiting for noon and hoping somebody'd blow in who'd give us a chance to pick up a little change. Just before noon, must've been, a fellow I'd played some scratch with, just for fun sometimes, come in and I stemmed him for fifteen cents. I told him I wanted some cigarettes, but I didn't; I wanted bean money. I most generally smoke makins; it kind of steadies my nerves when I've got a big game on to stop and roll me a cigarette, and if I'm hitting it tough I can get back on my game sometimes. And most guys get hot if a man stops the game to roll him a cigarette, and if they do get mad they blow up, and you can take 'em. There's lots of tricks like that a good hustler's got to learn.
"Well, I got the fifteen cents all right, and then after this fellow had got him a beer and gone out, me'n Jimmie kept on setting there figgering what to do. I had a date with this blende Satiddy night, and I needed some dough. I was hungry too, and Mom wouldn't get off till six o'clock and then she'd have to walk home and fix supper, and mebbe go to the store and get the groceries and all, and I didn't want to wait. That'd be too long, and then too, she never did like Jimmie to come 'round the house and for me to go 'round with him, and I was afraid she might skimp the meal if he went with me again. That is, less I could shake him, and that was pretty hard to do. So I told Jimmie mebbe we oughta buy a bowl of beans or something and split 'em. Jimmie was hungry as me, mebbe hungrier 'cause he didn't eat much on the way back from California, but he didn't want to spend any money to eat on. He was tight that way. He said we could get something to eat in a town easy where we knew people and all, and then mebbe the dame he knew before he went to L.A. was still working in the Reno joint and would fix him up with a meal if the boss wasn't there.
"I didn't tell him she'd left the bean joint and gone to work in a hotel, working for Baxter, a guy me'n Jimmie'd both known a long time, see, and who already had 'bout six-eight women working for him. I didn't say nothing to him 'bout that; Jimmie's pretty hot, and if he went to tip up this Baxter he'd probably wisht to hell he hadn't. So we set there on the sweater' bench, you know, where all the guys sit to watch the games. I was getting hungrier all the time, and kept thinking 'bout the pan of beans I'd seen the cook take out of the oven that morning. They serve pretty good lunches here, see, but you can get damned near the same stuff down on Reno St. for ten-fifteen cents. But the cook here in the Petroleum can sure cook beans. They get kinda soggy and just barely warm after they set on the steam table all the time, but they taste good to me even if they're cold. Lots of time I been on the road and thought of them beans.
"Well anyway, while me'n Jimmie was setting there a fellow I knew come in. I didn't know him good, see, but I'd played snooker with him some and could beat him, though he always thought he could beat me. He was a roustabout out in the oil field and had to work most of the time, and 'course he didn't get in enough practice to beat me. A man's gotta play ever day if he wants to shoot a good steady game, and that's why most chumps get took --- they don't practice enough. I was in pretty good shape 'cause I'd been hanging around the Petroleum here for three-four years, and Art, the manager, had been letting me shoot the house cue for him. This fellow'd been drinking beer or whisky or something and was talking a damned good game, but I knew he couldn't settle down and shoot for hell the way he was, or any other time either. Sometimes, most times I guess, I can shoot as good or even a little bit better if I've had a drink, but most people ain't that way. They think they can shoot when they're drinking, better'n when they're sober, and that's when they're easy pickins for me or most anybody else. But I won't play with a guy that's real drunk, hell no. If they've had too many they argue and wanta fight and all, and they usually spent all their dough for whisky and can't pay off anyway.
"Well, but here was this guy just begging somebody to take him, and when he seen me he grabbed the bottle of beer he'd bought up in front there and come on back to the bench where me'n jimmie was setting. ¦"You wanta play a game of snooker," he says. I shook my head, no. I didn't say anything 'cause I didn't want him to see how bad I did wanta play. I knew if I acted like I didn't want to, he'd want to more'n he did at first, and pretty soon, if I kept still, he might even get up a little bet. He always carried a roll, too. Well, he looked at me and I could see he was getting hot. "Caintcha talk," he said, "or do you think you're so damned good you won't play with me? Huh? You think you're too good for me? Get a cue, by God, and I'll show you!"
"I kinda laughed to myself I seen right then I had him 'cause he was getting mad, and when a man's mad and drunk too it's like playing a kid. I says, no, I didn't think nothing at all, but I would play him a game of snooker to pass the time. He drunk his beer and bellered at the nigger to rack the balls tight. He grabbed a cue off the rack, without seeing if it was straight or whether it had a good tip on it or not, which shows you what a chump he was, and yelled at me to come on. I went on up behind the counter and got my special cue Art keeps for me there, and come on back. He argued with me about a spot and I finally give him twenty points. That wasn't much for me at all, and I knew I could beat him anyway unless he'd got in a helluva lot practice the last few days. Well, he wanted to play me for a half. And 'course I didn't have nothing but the fifteen cents I'd stemmed off that fellow. I looked at Jimmie and he nodded, and I knew I could beat this guy anyway, so I said okay. I made him break 'cause I was spotting him the twenty points, see.
"Well, I won that game so easy it was like taking a drink. I kinda led him on, see, not shooting my best but just good enough to make him think he was going to win. The sweaters begin kidding him, and he got so mad he couldn't do nothing but cuss my luck, he called it, and kept saying he oughta won. He didn't gimme my half, and I didn't want to say anything till he got quiet. And when he did, he said he'd play me for five dollars. Five dollars! Jesus Christ, I hadn't seen that much for a year, and I damned near keeled over. I rolled me a makins, and my hands was trembling all over. Jimmie shoved through the crowd of sweaters and kept whispering, "Take 'im.' Take 'im! You kin do it!" So finally I said all right, I'd play him, but I didn't know where the hell I'd ever raise that much. He was so mad he didn't say anything 'bout it at first, and then we got to arguing 'bout the spot. He come down from fifty points, and finally I said I'd give him thirty points. I said it quick, 'cause I didn't want him to remember I hadn't put up my five spots, see.
"Well, I was so damned excited 'bout that five I couldn't do anything like I wanted to. I couldn't even get good position, and he was so damned lucky he snookered me every time he shot. But he wasn't half as drunk as he acted like he was, and he must've thought if he acted drunk he could get a big enough spot outa me to win. That's the kind of a thing we gotta put up with, see, but I didn't let it bother me none. I give it all I had, and when he saw me shooting damned if he didn't begin marking up his score! That was the only way he could win, see? Every time he made a few points he'd put down something extra on his score! I told him about it a coupla times. He said I was a damned liar, and what was I going to do 'bout it? Well, he was 'bout twict my size, even if I'm six feet, "but he was heavier and he'd been doing hard work, so I didn't say nothing else. I figgered I was going to win anyway, and if t didn't, arguing with him 'bout marking up was going to be just a little argument!
"But damned if he didn't beat me! Not shooting, see, but by marking up his score! The four, five, six, and seven were the game balls; I mean they oughta been the game balls, but he'd marked up so much I'd had a helluva time winning if all the balls'd been on the table. Jimmie was keeping score for me, and when this guy shot at the four I give him the wink and he put down an extry four, but that wasn't going to help much less he could mark up some more. Well, this guy scratched on the four ball his cue ball scratched, I mean, leaving the four sitting over near the hole in position so that if I made it I could get some good position on the five and maybe run out and win the game. And if Jimmie got to makr me up some more that'd saw up the game, see.
"So I said, "Four ball in the side pocket!" and begin chalking up my cue. And then this guy seen Jimmie had marked up on him for me! He started cussing and shouting, and of course the fellows sweating the game begin hollering and talking all at onct, and Art come running back and wanted to know what the hell was going on, and this guy told him, and he was a pay customer and Art begin cussing me.
"Well hell, I didn't know what to do. This guy was cussing me and getting set to warp his cue over my head, and Art bellering at me and all, and I didn't see no way to get out of it. I got a good hold on my cue and walked 'round the other end of the table from Art and this guy, acting like everything was lined out even and that there wasn't anything to this ruckus. Everybody kind a stepped back for me; you know, like they're just waiting for this guy to pass at me so's they can get a good gander at the fight before the cops come in.
"So when I got around the end of the table I hit out for the back door, and just did make it. The screen was locked and I had to stop and undo it, and this guy damned near caught me, and the whole bunch a-yelling and hollering at me till I thought they'd wake up every cop in the station right actost the alley from the back of the pool hall. This guy lammed his cue at me and hit me in the back with it, but I didn't know I was even hit till I got outside and got away. The whole crowd, specially this guy and the little old man that helps Art run me clean down the alley and out onto Grand Avenue, but I was longer-legged and got away. Jimmie had taken a powder when he first seen what was going to happen, and I didn't see him lam it or for a while after.
"Well, I outrun those bastards, so I slowed down when I got on California Street and begin walking around, wondering what I was going to do and wishing to hell I had something to soak so I could get some money and go out and get drunk. All my clothes was already in and I had Mom's diamond in too, but 'course she didn't know it. I didn't mean to leave it in, see; I just borrowed it a while. I only got three dollars on it 'cause it was just a little diamond anyway that Pa had give her when they were married, a hell of a long time ago when Pa was making the money. He was a electrical contractor, see; and I guess he made pretty good dough, but he didn't buy very big rocks with any of it and he didn't leave a damned thing for Mom and me when he died. If Mom hadn't been able to get that job running the elevator in the office building we'd of starved plenty of times.
"Anyway, I didn't mean to leave her ring in 'cause she thinks so much of it. I had a helluva time getting even three for it, but I did, and went out and got drunk and spent all of it 'cause I didn't have a damned penny when I woke up next morning in a hotel down on Reno where somebody put me to bed. So there the ring was and most of my clothes already in, and didn't look like a chance to get any of 'em back, and 'specially since Art wouldn't let me come back in the pool hall any more prob'ly. I couldn't go back there for a helluva long time. I was just plain gloomed up with hard luck.
"Well, I went on down to the Good Luck Bar where Iknew Jimmie'd he, and he was, and we set around there awhile figgering out what to do and not getting any place at all. So finally I told him to come on and we'd go over to the building and wait for Mom to get off work and then we'd go home with her and eat. He didn't want to and I didn't much want him to either, but we went. Well, we hung around and talked to Mom some but she was pretty busy, it being a little after five and most of the people in the building going home, and she kept running the elevator up and down getting the people. I kinda wisht I hadn't got drunk that time and got fired so I'd still be working there running the elevator and making my seven a week. I would have too if that old punk up on eight that turned me in to the building manager for being drunk hadn't still been in the building. Well anyway, me'n Jimmie stood around awhile just wishing to hell we had some money, and me thinking ah out the five bucks I'd almost won and wondering how I was ever going to get another chanct like I had over at the Petroleum Snooker Parlor.
"It takes a man quite a while to work up to playing the house cue, and I didn't want to have to go out and hunt up another pool hall to work in, and besides there was always such a hell of a lot of competition 'round these joints, what with all the hustlers wanting to play for the house. A lot of high school kids and tramps hang around 'em and gum the works for a man that's trying to earn his living at it. If a stranger comes in a pool hall that can shoot pretty good and he acts like he's aiming to make that particular joint his hang-out, well then, the sonsuvbitches that hand around there all the time'll hang him higher'n a kite, see?
"Well, while we're standing there by the door, and I was wondering what Mom would have for supper, a fellow come down on the elevator and got out and stopped at the cigar stand there right next to the elevator shaft and ordered some cigars. Me'n Jimmie watched him pretty close. We needed money so damned bad we'd of followed him to Tulsey to get hold of what he had if we could, and if it was a big enough stake. Well, he didn't have much, see; but the fat dame that runs the stand, the one with the mustache on her lip they run in a while back for peddling snow, well, she had a stack of folding money that'd paper a house. Me'n Jimmie acted like we hadn't seen her pull it, but our eyes popped like pool balls. The old girl noticed us giving her the slant, and soon as she made change for this fellow, he'd pulled a five on her, she tucked the dough away in a safe kind of thing under the counter at the back of the stand.
"Mom had run her cage back up to the top of the building after she let this guy off and when this fellow bought his cigars and went out Jimmie nudged me and give me the eye. I dogged him out in the alley behind the hotel next the office building where Mom works, and we went into the hotel pool hall. We sweated a game of rocks, you know, dominoes, and after a while when most of the sweaters had moved off behind another table, me'n Jimmie stayed behind the guys we was sweating, and he handed me the line out of the corner of his mouth. "That's the game," he said. I acted like I was on, but I wasn't, not for a minute or two. He thumbed back at the office building, and I got him." 'Bout our size, wasn't it," he ast me. I nodded, but I couldn't say anything; it kinda took me by surprise. "Okay," he said, "let's make it a date --- tonight! I kind of shook my head, yes, like I was in for it, but I was too knocked out to even give him the nod on it. Well, we sweated eight-nine games of rocks till the house man give us the frost and we left. I didn't want to go home then 'cause I knew Mom would say something that would mebbe hold me out on the deal, and I didn't want Jimmie to think I wasn't as much on the go as he was. So we went down to a dog stand where they sell dogs and coffee for a nickel for both, only I got a piece of pie. After we ate I bought us a sack of makins with the nickel left outa the fifteen cents I'd stemmed, and we smoked up. Then we made the rounds of the pool halls, all of 'em except the Petroleum, just pushing the clock till it got good and dark.
"I was shaking all over every time I thought about the job, like a hayburner, a marijuana smoker, see; I felt 'bout like they do when they've been busting clouds and been knocked off one. But I didn't say nothing to Jimmie 'bout how I was feeling, I just grunted when he said anything. He was all edged up too, and kinda burned because I wouldn't talk or go 'round to the places he wanted to. I was feeling kind of lonesome, see; like it is when you go into a town you never been in before and you don't know anybody and you're kinda wondering where you're going to eat and sleep, and how the bulls are there, and kinda wishing you'd got there at daylight, and wondering if you can stem the joints and pick up anything. That was just about the way I felt, and I was hatting it too 'cause I couldn't go back to the Petroleum and sit down and sweat the snooker and dominoes. I'd of like to play the house hand in rocks, see; there ain't many who can see me palm the money rocks and hold them during the shuffle for my hand, and then throw 'em down and mark me up a score. A man playing the house hand don't have to pay his nickel for the game, see; so he can use his nickels to bet with, and win a dance or a pint of whisky or something like that pretty easy, if he's good, see. But now Art wouldn't let me back In, there wasn't any chanct I'd get to play for the house anywhere, see; not till I set myself up with somebody in another pool hall.
"I felt kind of knocked out too because I wanted to be 'round the Petroleum in case E.G. Slim come in. He's supposed to be just about the best in the whole country; he run sixteen racks in a Kelly game one time and had his cue ball in position to run the seventeenth when he hung up his cue. The money boys couldn't get any bets on him running twenty-five racks, so they made him quit. I'm pretty good myself, see, as far's Oklahoma City's concerned; there ain't a helluva lot can beat me, and anybody'll tell you that, see. I'm not as well known as some of the boys, and that's cause I don't hoist myself into a game but I just let somebody ast me to play. And then if they got any money or wanta play for a drink or something, I take 'em on, and I mean take 'em, see. I always kind of like to lead a man on, but I don't think ti does a man any good to have to throw a game to get a chump to dig. It ruins a man's game, and sometimes it ruins a chump so he gets to thinking he oughta win more'n he does. I keep just far enough ahead to win by a little bit; that way the C. will come along gradual, getting hot and digging his roll harder, till finally he wants to play for something big, and then I'm right up on top, right in the groove. But I like to play somebody that can shoot too, see; somebody that makes a man stretch out and kinda keep him up on his game. That's when I really like to play! I get to feeling kind of warm all over, knowing the sweaters are crowded 'round on the benches and shuffling their feet and watching every shot and not taking their eyes off the table, and --- well hell, you know what I mean; it's just something a man gets a helluva bang out of.
"Well, I thought mebbe Art might let me shoot the house cue if I was there when this K.C. Slim come in the Petroleum, 'cause he knew and I knew I was the only one could give him a game. I'm twenty-one see, but I tell most of 'em, the girls I mean, I'm twenty-seven or even twenty-eight 'cause they always like to be out with older men. But I've had a lot of shooting in my time, I guess; I could make a game with almost anybody 'round Oklahoma City or Tulsey, but they tell me they've got a lot of hustlers over there that can make the balls walk. But I sure would of liked to've been in the Petroleum when K.C. Slim did come in, and I hated it like hell I couldn't go back any more. There wasn't any use thinking about it till Art cooled off some, or till somebody done something else to make him forget about me.
"Well, so there we were walking the streets. We hustled the leather till amost midnight, just fogging it from one place to another, and neither of us saying anything because we didn't want the other'n to think we was worried. I wanted to go see this blonde at the beauty parlor before it closed but Jimmie wouldn't let me; he said if I saw her I wouldn't let go and would gum it all up. I got pretty hot, but I didn't say anything 'cause I knew Jimmie was all high and he's crazy as a snow-bird when he's up on an idea. About midnight he give me the finger and we hit it off for the office building.
"The kid that was running the elevator on the night shift, the job I had once till that sonuvabitch reported me for being drunk only I wasn't drunk, I just stole his whisky outa the toilet where'd he hid it to keep his old woman from finding it. Well, we waited till this kid was up on top and then we sneaked up the stairs and opened the window that led into the private office of the building manager on the fifth floor, and we set down there and waited till midnight when the elevator boy got off.
"Twelve o'clock he run the cage down on the main floor and locked the controls. Then we could hear him getting his books outa the closet back under the stairs; he was going to college, see, and he studied while there wasn't any people using the elevator. Then he turned out all the lights except the little bitty one just back of the elevator. Well, me'n Jimmie sneaked down onto the stairway and watched him lock the main doors and then we set there after he'd gone and waited till the night watchman come by and tried the doors. We had to do that so's when we went down to the stand and broke in he'd already be by. He only come by every three hours to shake the doors and see if they're locked. Jimmie said he might come back sooner; he was kinda shivering all over till it scared me to look at him. But I knew the old man wouldn't come by for three hours after he made it once; I knew because the office of the watchman's company was in the same building and I'd found out about the old man's hours when I worked there in the building. You don't ever know when something'll come in handy, like that did that night.
"Well, pretty soon the old man come by just like he always did, and after he'd tried the door and gone on we sunk down and Jimmie took the screwdriver he'd pinched in the hotel pool hall and broke the lock on the door of the cigar stand. It wasn't any time till we was both in that little stand, and I showed him where the old lady kept her money and he set down on his knees and begin working on the door. He worked and worked and kept cussing all the time, but pretty soon, right after he'd made so much noise I thought he'd wake all the people in the hotel next door, he broke the lock off and got out the old lady's roll and all the change there was. I knew the money'd he there, but Jimmie had argued with me damn near all night it wouldn't. I knew it would because the old lady, she was about forty I guess, that run the stand had a boy friend that was as worthless a step-ant as I ever seen. He'd steal from anybody, even her, and I knew she wouldn't take a roll home with her where he could cotton it.
"Well, we glommed on it, and then we come outa there like bats outa hell and run upstairs. It was a good thing we had that part figgered out; we was pretty excited, what with getting the money and all. I was scared right then worse'n I was when we'd been walking the streets thinking about it and seeing all the cops, but I didn't let Jimmie know anything about it. We run up to the third floor where I knew there'd be a fire door open; it was in a toilet and the building manager keeps most of the toilets locked up all the time to keep the bums out during the day and you have to have an office there to get a key to go in. But this was a fire door and it has to stay open all the time, nights too, I guess, because they never told me to shut it when I worked there.
"We went through the toilet and opened the window, and then swung out through the window onto the fire escape, which is a little ways away from the window itself, and I guess I wouldn't ever have done it but I was pretty scared up and I wanted to get away. Jimmie was too, and he was the first one out the window. Well, we climbed down the fire escape and had to jump about the last ten feet, you know how those ladder things are, always about ten-fifteen feet off the ground, and I damned near broke my leg too. We gunned it outa the alley and hit out for the railroad tracks. We went under a culvert down near the overpass and made a little fire outa newspapers and boxes that was laying around, and then after we'd jiggered a few minutes to be sure there wasn't anybody followed us, we counted what we had. It amounted to more'n a hundred dollars, $126 and a few cents, I forget how much. Jimmie had scooped up everything in sight, and we had one helluva good time dividing it. Well sire, there wasn't nothing would do then but we'd celebrate. There was some ones and fives and tens, with a few twenties thrown in, so we wouldn't have to worry about getting change, so we hit out for town and on the way we decided to go out to the Flower Garden, a night club. It's closed now I guess; I haven't been out that way in a long time, mostly on account I've kinda settled down now and I'd have to take the old lady if I went anyway.
"There was about three girls to every boy out there, so that's where we went. We got a cab and lit out. We bought some whisky out there, the best we could buy too, see; and we had us one helluva time! I tied up with a little brown-head I met there; she worked for some oil man here in town and had a night off. She wasn't any hustler, see, but she didn't mind putting out to somebody she liked, and me'n her got along fine. Along 'bout two o'clock we got us a cab and went to town; I don't know where Jimmie was, but I didn't much care. I was drunker'n a country fiddler, and this skirt got drunk too and said she was going to take the next day off. So we come to town and spent the rest of the night.
"Well, next day we went down and ate breakfast, about noon, and then I ditched her and went out and bought some clothes. I guess I shoulda taken my stuff outa hock, especially Mom's ring, but I thought I'd wait till later and git 'em. I got me a suit and some shoes and a shirt and tie and socks and everything, and then I dusted the streets to give everybody a flash of me in my new stuff. I didn't run on to Jimmie till that evening. He was sitting in a beer joint drunk again, or mebbe he was still drunk I don't know, and he still had six-eight drinks left in a quart. I hadn't even thought of a drink all day till I seen him, and I was damned sure glad to get one.
"So I had a drink and Jimmie had one, and we talked about what we'd done the night before and what we'd do that night. We got to feeling pretty good by the time we finished the quart, and by then we decided to try the Wee Willie Winkle that night. It was another night club and beer joint, something about like the Flower Garden only not as big but with lots of women. Jimmie had got him some last night too, but he was ready to go again and I was too, so we bought a couple more pints of whisky and ate a sandwich and set out. Well, he had on some new clothes too, and so did I and we laid 'em kicking down at the Willie Winkle. We picked us out a couple of girls that was dancing together, and made 'em come to us. They acted like they didn't want to, see, you know like them kind always do, but they come a-hustling when we begin giving two more the quiz. We all had some beers and sandwiches and drunk up all the whisky and then we got a cab and hit out for the other Joints. We must've made 'em all that night; when I woke up the next morning I didn't have a helluva lot of paper money left.
"I went in the toilet and counted it. All told, I only had $31 and about 50 cents. That wasn't enough to do anything on like I'd planned to do, so I washed my face and put on my clothes and went out. I left the dame there. She was still asleep; drunk, I guess, or she'd of been up and gone through my pockets before that. I slugged the street a while after I eat, looking for Jimmie but I didn't find him. That afternoon I went over to the beauty parlor to see this blonde but she give me the chill; she was going out with a customer and she thought I was still broke so she put the frost on me. I got a haircut and let her clean up my fingernails, and when she got through I slipped her a two-hit tip and it liked to have knocked her puss out. She was so damned surprised at me laying out the McCoy like that she didn't know what to say. I said, "Well sugar, I gotta go; I'll look you up sometime or other."And I let it out the door.
"Well, I talked to her like I didn't give a damn about her or anything else, see, but I was dragging my own tracks. I had a two-day head, and then this dame turns me down for some old punk that she don't even know except to give him a manicure. I can't find Jimmie either, and I got to feeling kinda low. I thought mebbe I'd better go down to the Petroleum and kinda make things right so's that when my money was gone I could go back and hustle the games there and all and make my living again. Well, leased down there and cased the place but I didn't see anything out of the way. I walked in and ordered me a beer, and throwed a five on the counter. Doughboy, Art's helper, bugged his eyes till they looked like cockroaches, but he changed the five. I said, "How's pickings, Doughboy?" He didn't say a damned thing, just kind of nodded his head like he was saving his words. So I thought, to hell with you, you chinchy bastard, and took my beer and went back and sweated a snooker game.
"Well, I seen the two bulls playing scratch on the first pool table, the one right there next to the snooker table, but I knew 'em and didn't think anything 'bout them being there, and I kinda wared my hand and went on sweating the snooker game. I didn't see the fellow who beat me out of the fin either, but I was ready for him; I might even have give him the five if he'd been there and ast me for it. So I leaned up against the bench and drank my beer and wisht the snooker game was over so I could get in. While I was standing there Roy, you know, Roy Bridges, the cop, he come over and leaned right up next to me.
"Well, Jack," he says, "I been waiting a helluva long time for you." I glimmed him outa the corner of my eyes, and he was looking straight at me. "You have, huh?" I said, and waited for him to tell me some more. And by God, you know that was the first time I even thought of that job we pulled since the night we done it; I hadn't thought about it till this here cop leans up next me. I'd 'been so busy getting drunk and diddling 'round the beer joints and all I hadn't even thought about it, and now here was this cop rubbing up to me and looking tougher'n I'd ever seen him. I wondered if he knowed anything about me'n Jimmie, but I didn't crack anything.
"Yessir," he says, "me'n Harry have been waitin' for you quite a while, ain't we, Harry? Harry, he laid his cue down on the table and come over and stood on the other side of me. Doughboy and the sweaters begin picking on up to us to see what was going to happen; they all knew who Harry and Roy was even if they didn't have on their uniforms, and they'd been wondering what was going to happen and who they was after. Well, I didn't say anything, see, but even keeping my whistle to myself like that didn't do me no good. Roy and Harry, they got holt of my arms and led me out, not even letting me finish my beer, and led me acrost the alley to the police station and turned me over to the sergeant to book. Hell, they knew and I knew they did what I was in for, but I still didn't open to 'em, and so they put me down on the book for investigation to hold me, see. But all the time they knew they had the stuff on me. They run me in the tank and left' me. It was after feeding time, they usually feed about four in the afternoon in jail, and I hadn't had a damned thing to eat since I got up that morning, 'round noon, but I didn't think about it right off.
"They took all my money away from me at the desk, everything I had, except my smokes. Well, the guys in the tank they waited till the iron-man, the jailer, had got around the bend in the runway, and then they come over and hauled me. They took everything I had left, my pack of cigarettes, and my shirt and my handkerchief, and I even had to trade shoes with one of 'em. They had a kangaroo court, see, and I couldn't do nothing or say it or I'd of got my head beat in, and the cops wouldn't have nothing about it. Funny thing about jails anyway; these punks and grifters get in and they stay thirty-sixty days or mebbe longer and they set theirselves up to run the place and the cops don't care at all. Anybody don't like the way they do it gets his conk mashed.
"Next morning the iron-man hauled me out and they put me up in front of the judge. He ast Harry and Roy about me and they got up and told him what they knew about me. Well, I'll be damned if they hadn't gone over to the building and ast the old lady in the cigar stand about the hist and she said I done it, but she didn't know for hell whether I did or not; she just didn't like me. They ast Mom and 'course she told 'em I hadn't "been home for two nights, and that fixed me up for sure. Well, Roy and Harry, they knew where I gang out and they went over to the Petroleum and hung around and played each other scratch pool till I come in. They knew I'd come in sometime or other. The judge told 'em to sink me in the tank again till they found Jimmie. I hadn't seen him since the night we went to the beer joint, and of course I didn't know where he was. I told the old judge that, hut he didn't believe me. And they said they was going to hold me till they got Jimmie, and then send both of us over the road.
"Well, they "brought Jimmie in Sunday afternoon kinda late, and throwed him in the tank too. He must've put up a scrap with 'em, cause he had a black eye and a helluva big bruise on his head. He was still pretty drunk and mad as hell, and he thought I'd snitched on him. We got into an argument and he got me down and begin kicking hell outa me. He got me down on the floor and was kneeing me in the crotch; the grifters didn't bother him. I yelled so lud the iron-man come in and slugged Jimmie with ring of keys and knocked him cold. Then he dragged him off and put him in solitary. Jimmie hollered all day and most of that night; he said he was going to give me the heat when he got out. I didn't pay much attention to him; I was worrying about myself.
"That afternoon, Sunday, Mom come to see me and brought me ac cherry pie. Saturday had been payday and she spent a quarter for the pie. She told me it wasn't no more'n I deserved, me getting throwed in jail and all, and said she didn't have money to pay a lawyer. I told her how it all come about; how Jimmie led me on and all, and she said she'd be in court and help me all she could but she didn't have any money. The punks took my pie away from me when she left, and I didn't get more'n two-three bites that I took while she was there. Trial day Mom was there all right, but she didn't bring a lawyer with her. I was about half-way sore, but I didn't say anything; if she wanted me to go over the read there wasn't anything I could do about it, but seems like a guy's own mother ought a help him.
"Well, they tried Jimmie fir at and then me. The old lady we'd got the dough from wanted to get us both sent up for life, and she kept hollering at us till the judge had to tell her to shut up. Mom told 'em that Jimmie was a punk but I was a good boy and all, and how it was Jimmie that led me into robbing the old girl. But she didn't help me much, 'cause I could see the judge had already made up his mind to throw the book at me. But it come out that Jimmie had already done two stretches in Missouri for robbery, and 'course he had to take most of the rap for both of us. The judge give him fifteen years, since it was his third time, and he let me off with eighteen months. If Mom had got me a lawyer and he'd put up a good spiel for me, I could have got off with a suspended sentence, but Mom wouldn't do it. So they sent me off next morning for eighteen months, or eleven months if I went on good behavior.
"I learned things down there in Granite you never learn in school, see, but I was so damned glad when I got out I'd of done anything to keep from being sent back there again. I got time off for good behavior, see, and I made that eleven months on my hands. When I come back all the cops was watching me, like they always do with a con, and I couldn't get anything to do, not even to earn a nickel. It'd been hard enough to try to get a job before, but it was extry tough after doing time in stir. So I thought goddamn it all anyway, I won't even look for a job any more. When I seen how things were I come back here to the Petroleum and set down and stayed there. Art couldn't do nothing about it either. He squawked one day to some bulls I knew that was playing Missouri, and when they ast me about it I said I couldn't get a job or anything and I was only trying to keep off the streets so I wouldn't get run in again. They laughed like hell, and told Art to shut up or they'd run some of his customers in for vag. The cops liked me, see; that is, they wanted me to get along because I showed 'em how to shoot and all. So Art kept his beef to hisself.
"I couldn't earn any money at all so Mom had to give me change to buy makins and all and pretty soon I got a little stake together and went to hustling again just like I'd been doing. But this time I give everything I had when I played. I quit didling 'round with the boys; I knew damned good'n well it was the dough that counted, no matter how I got it, and I made up my mind I was going to get hold of some. So I hustled everything and everybody I could, and I got along pretty damned good too, a sight better'n I had before I got sent up. I wasn't bothered with Jimmie either; I didn't have to split with him anymore like I did before he went to L.A. The judge had sent him to McAlester, on account of it being his third time, and he was in for 18-19 more years. So what I made was just mine, and I hung onto it better'n I did before too. I didn't call myself anything but Roger Murrell now; that's the name I got married with.
"I wasn't supposed to get drunk or gamble or anything like that, but 'course I went out on a little band now and then, and that's how I met the old lady, one time when I was drunk. I met her down in a beer joint, and I thought she looked all right; she didn't look like a battle-axe, see, so I made up to her and her to me. Well, when we woke up next morning she begin putting on the water and all 'cout she hadn't ever done anything like that and how I got her drunk and so on. She kept calling me at the pool hall and hounding me till I got kinda worked up thinking mebbe the cops would hear about it and run me in again, so I married her. She had a job and was making enough to pay the rent and buy most of the groceries, and I usually eat here at the Petroleum anyway, so we get along all right for money most of the time. I didn't mind being married so much, but it kind of got on my nerves for a while and I couldn't shoot worth a damn. I lost my pile several times because of it, but I got some money from her and got back on my feet. But knowing I was tied down sure played hell with my game for a while though.
"I don't guess she's so bad, and I learned her to let me alone if I wanted to do something by myself, see. She goes to church and all but I don't, and she don't ever ast me to go anymore. She did ast me lots of times when we were first married, but she quit. I went twict, see; but first, I went out and got me a pint of whisky and when I come back and she ast me why I told her I had to have something to keep me going. After that she didn't bother me any more about church and things like that. Now I just rest on Sunday and then after she comes home and fixes us something to eat, I eat dinner and then read the paper and go down to the pool hall and kinda take it easy. It being Sunday and all.
"She didn't like it at first, me being a pool hustler, but I guess she's like most people that way. They don't think it's much to it, but if they had to do it a while they'd damned sure learn it ain't no cinch. A man's gotta be in top condition all the time, see, or he'll lose his wad when some hustler comes to town and tries to break in on his own house. I get in all the practice I can, every day. Right now there ain't but very few men 'round this part of the country can beat me, in anything from scratch pool to Kelly or one-ball or snooker or call your own game. I like to play, see, and course that helps me keep going in condition all the time. I don't take any hand in most other things, see, but I do get out elections and help round up votes in the cot-houses and dime flops. I usually make about four or five dollars a day that way, but of course it ain't regular work. I wouldn't want a steady job anyway; I make a pretty good living hustling pool and I wouldn't change with anybody. Someday I'll find a chump with a big roll and I'll clean him, and then mebbe I'll quit hustling for a stake, but I won't ever quit playing pool, see."
