Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
SAMUEL T. CLOWNEY
(white)
75 YEARS OLD.
Samuel T. Clowney, an old gentleman, resides with his son, George M. Clowney, in the Winnsboro Mill Village on the southern outskirts of the town of Winnsboro, South Carolina. He is six feet two inches tall and weighs one hundred eighty-six pounds. He is a lively and interesting conversationalist.
"I certainly am not a scholar, and if a gentleman has to be a gentle man, my best friends would not call me a gentleman. I am rough, have always been rough, and am willing at all times to give a Roland for an Oliver, that is, cuff for cuff. Guess I was born that way; took it from my Scotch-Irish ancestry.
"The Reverend Mr. Mays, a Presbyterian preacher, has a book mentioning my great-great-grandfather. The book is entitled, 'History of the Presbyterian Church in South Carolina,' and it was gotten up by a minister named Howe. He says in that book that Samuel Clowney, an Irishman, (that's my ancestor) was a most determined Whig and was out on a scout with one of his Negro slaves. This slave loved his master and was remarkable for his fidelity to him. As my ancestor was approaching a stream, he heard a party of horsemen coming to the opposite bank. It was dark. He conjectured they must be Tories, and he determined to try his hand with the whole party. He gave the Negro an idea of his plan to capture the whole party and instructed him just how he, the Negro, was to act. They remained quiet at the brink of the creek till the Tories were within the banks of the creek and were crossing the water. He then demanded in a loud voice, 'Who are you?' They answered, 'Friends to the King.' He gave a furious order, 'Come out instantly and surrender your arms or be shot and cut to pieces!' They obeyed. He directed his imaginary men (as though he had a whole company) to gather up the arms and surround the prisoners. He then gave the order, 'Forward March!' And he marched the prisoners safely to his band of Whigs, two miles distant. The prisoners were much surprised and much ashamed when they learned that their captors were only two in number and one of them an African slave.
"My father was Moses Clowney; my mother, Susanna Milling Clowney. I want you to put in that her father was Robert Yongue - some pumpkin in his day and generation. His father, A. W. Yongue, was a sheriff.
"I was born at Buckhead, on March 6, 1862. It used to be a post office before the Civil War. The name was changed to Hope after the war, but that name sank out of existence with the coming of the rural mail delivery system.
"My oldest brother, James R. Clowney was a Confederate soldier. He died during that war. The next in the family was John Simonton, who married Alice Brice. Brother Robert was a policeman in Columbia for many years. Sister Mary Elizabeth married Charles Cathcart of Winnsboro. Her children live here. But all of my brothers and sisters are dead.
"Buckhead was the Means' settlement in the early days of Fairfield. Here lived the gentry! Doctor Furman, Governor Means, and other well-to-do families. Preston S. Brooks came a courting and married one of the Means girls. Congressman Trotti likewise married one of the Means girls. The Lyles family was among the 'big bugs' here, as were Chancellor Harper's family and the McMahons, of which John J. McMahon was a descendant. I grew up in this neighborhood and was a little disgruntled that the Lord or economic conditions had arranged it so that our family couldn't hold a candle to such fine people.
"My father had only a few slaves and a place containing 318 acres of land, but he had native qualities that were bringing him upward and along to an independent position in the society of three people, when secession took the State by a storm of crasiness, led, you might say, or ably abetted by these families I am talking about.
"My first schooling was in 1868, in a one-teacher, old field school, taught by Miss Josephine Ladd. We called her 'Miss Joe' for she liked that appellation better than 'Miss Josephine.' Everybody loved and admired her. Under her supervision, I soon mastered the alphabet and the multiplication tables. I got as far as 'Baker' in the blue-backed spelling book and learned to work long division in arithmetic. Three months was the length of a school term in those early years after the war. I think I went to Miss Ladd four years.
"My next teacher was Miss Chanie Coleman. I went to her three years. The last school I attended was the Feasterville Boarding House School, taught by a Mr. Busbee. Professor Busbee married Charlie Faucette's sister, and they carried on a large school in the famous Boarding House, which stands today as a memorial to old John Feastor, who gave the grounds to the community for a school and the Universalist Church. The church building is there today, and the congregation has continued alive and active since 1844.
"When I reached the age of eighteen, my father gave me fifty acres of land and a horse and said, 'See what you can do for yourself, Sam.' At that time, I was six feet two inches in height and weighed two hundred pounds. I was considered the beat wrestler in the county of Fairfield. I made good as a one-horse dirt farmer before I was twenty-one years old, in spite of lien law prices, which were 20 percent higher than cash prices. I made some money in buying lean cattle in the winter and fattening them for the Winnsboro and Chester beef markets in the summer. This brought me out of the slavery of the lien law, and I increased the number of my plows and farm acreage. I bought 178 acres of land and became independent of my father's help.
"My success went to my head, but this head of mine, as you see, is shaped like a doubel-yolked egg. It could hold a good deal of foolishness in one side and a whole lot of wisdom and mother wit in the other side. Catch the point? Looking at me todyy you wouldn't think I was once one of the dandies of the county. Roach, a Taylor of Winnsboro, made my clothes. Old man Bob Dunbar, an Irishman, made my $16.00, calfskin boots. And I wore a Cleveland white beaver hat the year Grover Cleveland was elected President. I sported an Alan G. Thrumond red bandanna handkerchief in token of my admiration of the Vice President on the ticket with Cleveland. I kept a fine pair of driving horses, and, to cap the climax, I drove up to Honorable John G. Wolling's one day, kidnaped one of his girls, Emma Louise, and got married, much to the amasement of everybody, myself in particular.
"The result of that elopment are my eight children. I have two boys and five girls living. One of my boys, Russell, died two years ago.
"I was sitting pretty in 1910. I had been able to acquire over 1,000 acres of land, and it was in a fine state of farming condition. I had a lot full of mules, brood mares, and a stallion. I had fenced-off pastures for cattle, cotton ginning equipment, money in the bank, and my children were in college, Clemson and Winthrop. But the fool part of my head got to working. I bought a Swiss cottage in Winnsboro and moved my family to town, so that I could give my smaller children the advantages that they could not receive in the country.
"A family newly come to town is ignorant and goes to much useless expense to get in 'the swim.' My farm was neglected. 'And idle brain is the devil's workshop.' I fell into idle ways and spent more than my income. I might have gotten straight, but the political bee bussed around my long head and I was elected to the legislature. Being in public life didn't have a tendency to decrease my expenses. I endorsed accommodation papers to the amount of $40,000. Everything I had was swept away, fifty thousand dollars or more, and I am left with the job of bailiff.
"I succeeded you in the legislature as a representative from Fairfield in 1916. If you are bent on telling that truth on as that happened in Union, South Carolina, in 1899, I want you to also tell how Albert Todd of Charleston put one over on you in 1911, in the House of Representatives. As the Union incident is first in time, here goes. Once Albert Clayton, Charlie Faucette, and myself were summoned as witnesses in a case against the Southern Railway Company at the Union Court of Common Pleas. We put up at the Union Hotel. At the conclusion of the case, we went to the hotel and paid our bills, including the dinner we were about to receive. Albert Clayton and Charlie Faucette were fond of pranks and devilment at my expense. It was cold, and I ate dinner with my overcoat on. During the course of the meal - I was seated between the two - they stealthily filled my pockets with knives, forks, spoons, and table doilies. When I finished my dinner, I got up, stating that I would wait for then in the lobby. As I was going out, I saw then gesticulating to the Negro waiter, but had no idea what it was about. It seems they were telling him I was a kleptomaniac and to go out and stop me. Imagine my surprise end indignation, when the Negro care rushing out into the lobby, which was filled with people, and accused me of trying to get away with the hotel property. The first thing I did was to knock the waiter down. And I gave vent to such a frenzy of words that the police were called. I was overpowered and taken to jail before Albert and Charlie could get through the crowd to give a proper explanation. (N.B. I was a young lawyer in Union, South Carolina, at the time this occurred and vouch for its authenticity. W. W. Dixon. F.W.).
"We will conclude this interview by relating a conversation I had with Representative A. W. Todd of Charleston, while we were in the House of Representatives at Columbia. After I had been sworn in for Fairfield, a very likely gentleman from Charleston came to me and said: 'You must go by my room after adjournment and meet some friends of mine.' I accepted the invitation gladly. When I got there, there were a half dozen or more members of the house present, enjoying Todd's hospitality. All the old members became talkative and told of past sessions and of the struggles each one had in order to be reelected.
"The unanimous opinion was that it was easy for a fellow to be elected to the house the first time but a h--l of a job to get back the second time. Todd agreed in this opinion and said, 'Sam, when Wood Dixon was down hero we roomed together and had a kind of David and Jonathan, Damon and Pythias friendship. I felt like I had done nothing to distinguish myself while a member, nor did I merit a return at the next election. I sat gloomy before that fireplace one night, and my friend, Dixon, asked me what was the matter? I rejoined with a question, 'Are we friends enough for you to do something for me without asking any questions?' And Dixon said, 'Shoot, Todd!' I said, 'I want you to go into the engrossing department in the morning and bring out and intro dice a bill in the house prohibiting all freight trains from running in the state on Sundays.' Dixon came back with, 'In short, you want me to show that I am a poor lawyer, a fool, and a sissy hypocrite, just for some silly purpose or joke you have in mind. I can't do it!' 'But you promised me,' I said, 'and my political life depends on it. Please do it, and in twenty-four hours you'll see the reason for it.'
" 'Such was our friendship, Sam, that Dixon introduced the bill. That next night it was read out from the desk, and it was referred to the Committee on Railroads, of which I was a member. It was published in the News & Courier of Charleston the next morning.
" 'The next night I came into our sleeping room and said, 'Dixon, see this sheaf of telegrams? They come from Charleston County truck farmers, who think that your Sunday railroad freight till will destroy their business. They have asked me to arrange a hearing before the committee and they are coming to Columbia, a hundred or more strong, to protest against the passage of the bill. They say that your bill puts them at a serious disadvantage in competition with the Georgia and Florida truck farmers and in getting their track to Baltimore and Northern markets. They have asked me to do everything I can possibly to do kill your iniquitous bill!
" 'Well sir, Sam, it seemed as if all the Low Country truck farmers came to Columbia, headed by old man Geretty, Dorscher, and a number from James Island. Before the committee, I made the speech of my life. I secured an unfavorable report, which was read out the next day. I asked for an immediate consideration of the unfavorable report, which motion of mine was adopted. My activities in regard to this bill carried me sky high at the next primary election, in popularity amongst the farm voters, and I had no difficulty in coming back. Next time, I am going to run for the State senate. '
"Todd was a great old fellow. I didn't run again after my term expired, but Todd ran for State senator and was elected from Charleston.
"How much land did I ever own at one time? Let's see, the tracts were as follows: 295, 215, 318, 178, 138, 11, 120 and 3. That makes it 1,278 acres."