July 10, 1939
Merton Rhodes, Farmer
Startown, N. C.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Original Names	Changed Names
Merton Rhodes	Melvin Thorp
Startown	Stumptown
Lincolnton	Linwood
Mrs. Lentz	Miss Line
Hickory	Hadden
Brookford	Brooklyn
Oscar	Elmer
“My name is Melvin Throp. I live over at Stumptown. I stopped down stairs and asked if there was anybody here who wants to buy some wood. A man told me you might buy some. I need money bad. It's a long way to haul it, about eight miles.
“"What kind of wood do you have, Mr. Thorp", I asked.
"Well, ain't so good, just some laps I cut in the new ground. There used to be a saw mill on the place"
"I need some wood," I replied," if you'll sell it reasonable"
“Well, about how much would you pay? While I was considering what to do he stood twisting his frayed straw hat around in his hands. He wore a pair of dirty overalls. His shirt at one time had been blue; the color at present was uncertain. With him was a little boy about two years old, carrying a large piece of fat back wrapped in brown paper.
"I been to the welfare office”, Melvin said and told the boy to sit down and rest his arm. "It’s been raining; the ground is too wet for me to work in my crop. I thought a little extra money might come in handy. School has started at Stumptown and the children can't go yet. I just ain't got the money to get them clothes and shoes to start.
"Sit down Mr. Thorp and tell me all about it", I invited.
"Guess I might as well". Seating himself on the edge of a chair, he continued to twist his old straw hat round and round. "Do you think maybe you can take that wood today?
"Yes, I'll take for a dollar and a half?
"That's good," he said, "now I can get me some flour. I wish I could sell a load every day, maybe I'd get straightened out.”
"The place I live on belongs to mammy. It’s so poor it won't hardly sprout peas. I have to give my folks a third of the cotton, corn and wheat. I've got eight acres of cotton, five of corn and a garden. My part of the wheat this year was just sixteen bushels. Last year I made four bales of cotton. After giving a third I don't have much left. Maybe I ain't much of a manager, but I do the best I can. I got four girls and six boys, that takes a lot of provisions. I tell you a hundred pounds of flour don't go far. Them kids sure is buscuit eaters. I tell my wife, I'm awful glad the younguns is healthy, but I'd like for the to eat a little less. She says they're growing into money.
"I uster live up at Hadden and work in the wagon shop. I made three dollars a day. That's four years ago, we only had seven children then, now we have ten. I don't like town much, it's too noisy. I ruther live in the country where it's still and quiet. The boys and I hunt rabbits all winter, they come in handy for the family to eat. Sometimes we sell some when we get real hard up. My wife makes rabbit pie, threes nothing better on a cold day. She takes three or four rabbits, puts them in a pot and boils them with a piece of fat back. When the rabbits are done she pulls the meat off the bones and makes it into pies. It takes six pies for us to have a mess though. There’s nothing much better unless it’s hog jowl and turnips. I always try to get in a turnip patch that helps a lot. My motto is: 'A stitch in time saves nine?
"When I was two years old, my folks moved to the mill down at Linwood. I don't remember much about it but my mammy didn't like it, She said living in town, where you had to wear shoes and stockings all the time, won't what it was cracked up to be. As for myself, I ain't hankering to be tied down to no cotton mill. I like open places.
"My folks moved one time to the Brooklyn mill. I wart up there on a visit. Pa wanted me to go to the mill one night to see how I liked it. I tell you the truth, there was such a buzzing and roaring in my head I couldn't make head or tail to it. Ho sir, no cotton mill for me. The farm is the place to raise a family. Pa worked in the card room, he made right good money. What's the use though? He got his money every Saturday. Soon as he got it he had to pay it out to somebody else. He paid house rent, lights and water. Me, I get my house free, plenty of wood to burn and all the water I want to drink. As for lights, we use lamps, kerosene is cheap. One gallon will last a month. Me and the boys go to the woods and pick up pine knots. They make as good a light as any lamp and don't cost anything. Many a night when we had no oil, the boys put on pine knots and get their lessons. I went to the seventh grade in school. Pa said that was enough education for anybody. He didn't have a chance like that. Ma always said that we can't all make Presidents."
Melvin looked fondly at the little boy sitting beside him.
"I'd like for my children to have a chance. I can't do nothing about it though. Miss Lina gives us commodities, that helps a lot. I'd like to own a farm so I could get all the crop.
“I never did have a car, I never expect to own one. The old buggy is good enough for me. All these wrecks; people getting killed skeers me. I don't hanker to be took up in pieces.
"My folks are all Republicans, we vote every time. We belong to the Reform Church. Ain't many Sundays we get to go. Seems like if we ain't out of one thing we are out of another. About the time I get them all shoes around, they're out of clothes. Poor people has poor ways. I better be going. I'll take the wood out to your house.”
The little boy rose with the piece of fat back. The evening was hot and the meat had soaked through the paper. Melvin looked at his old hat and his speech was slow and halting, "Do you mind to pay for the wood 'fore I take it to your house?
"Why no," I said, "I think I can pay you now?
"I've heard tell of people who wouldn't pay for the wood after it was off the wagon? I laughed, it was the first time I had ever had my honesty questioned.
"Melvin', I said, "It seems to be a question of one of us having to trust the other. I'll have to pay you before you take it to my house. Suppose you don't take it after I pay you, what then"
"I will, you can trust me? Melvin talked earnestly.
“I'm sure of that? I replied, "Here's your money? He took it and counted it carefully.
"I thank you for taking the wood. Now for this story business, are you certain there is no red tape to it. I wouldn't want it printed and cause the welfare to stop giving me things to eat. I need them too bad."
I assured him that nothing like that would happen.
"I'll go then and take your wood to your house. I'll try to chop another load and have it ready by the time you need some more. Come on, Elmer don't leave the meat. I want to get home by dark. It's going on three o'clock now? he said, looking at the big clock on the wall. "The old lady always gets uneasy if we stay too long. We left home early this morning to keep from being on the road after the traffic got heavy?
