Up Through Handicaps
Original names:Changed to:
Edith Rance Harris	Nannette Chandler
Washington	Capton
Howard	Howell
Milford	Montford
Ranceville	Wardlowville
Rudy Chavis	Rudolph Chandler
Randolph	Wardlow
It Is not clear Early <text not clear> that they came from Janiaica <text not clear>
Date of first writing:	5/8/1939
Person interviewed:	Edith Rance Harris (Negro)
Address:	Raleigh, N. C.
Occupation:	Student
Name of writer:	Nancy T. Robinson
No. of words:	About 4,000
UP THROUGH HANDICAPS
"No wonder Americans are smart and thrifty," said Nannette Chandler, "everyone here has to work if they wish to survive. There's no struggle for existence for the better class of people at my old home in Jamaica It's only the natives from the interior there that do laborious work. Their labor is cheap enough for anyone to have servants. They work for only sixteen shillings a month, which amounts to about $2.50 a month. Women there are truly ladies of leisure. They hire their laundry and cleaning done and one seldom thinks of cooking. Very few people even have stoves in their homes and if they do, they're small affairs. Ready prepared food is peddled on the streets there just as vegetables are sold here. We buy our bread like that too--- you know our bread is made of banana flour; wheat bread is rare there. Each meal is bought as it's needed.
"Washdays there are festive affairs. All of the washerwomen meet down at the ocean with their clothes, lunches and babies. There they spend the day discussing the week's gossip and working. They beat their clothes Clean upon the rocks---this old custom is still in use; Washboards are seldom used.
"My people are a superstitious lot. Before we sailed for America my grandmother told my mother many things. Among them, she told her to beware of any strangers who tried to hastily make friends with her; and not to drink any water handed to her without first stirring it with a silver spoon.
"When we arrived in America we first went to Capton to live. We stayed there one year while Dad studied dentistry at Howell. It was during this time that he had the first of many love affairs that were to follow. A woman there fell in love with him, and set out immediately to take him from his family. She figured that the best way to get him was to get rid of Mother. She laid her plans cleverly; and told Dad to bring Mother up to see her--- that she wanted to meet her, and make it pleasant for her since she was new in the city. At the beginning, Mother was reluctant to go but Dad persuaded her. They went on the suggested date. After talking for a while she insisted upon serving them. When she served the salad, she passed the tray, allowing each person to take their own dish, but when she served the drinks, Mother noticed that she handed the glasses to them. Mother also noticed that she did not select the glass nearest her hand to give to her. Before drinking it, Mother stirred the liquid with a spoon and upon doing so, the solution turned green. Mother threw it in the face of the hostess. There was so much poison present that it ate holes in her face and gown. The flesh was burned to the bone. The woman was rushed to the hospital, but she died from the wounds.
"The next year my father moved to Montford to settle down and open an office. It turned out that he was the only colored dentist in that end of the state and he had a large trade and prospered. He even had sub-offices in some other little villages, where he'd go to work on certain days. As he made his money he invested it in real estate.
"We didn't have many friends in town because our customs were peculiar and our English was poor. People didn't like us because we were a little different and they didn't understand us. It was especially hard for us children who had to attend the public schools and had to come in daily contact with other children. They laughed at the way Mother dressed us and of course they wouldn't play with us. They'd just stand off and point at us calling us all kinds of names. We were very unhappy at school. We didn't feel it as much at home because there was so many of us to play, and there'd be no others around to jeer.
"Our first trouble came in 1924 when a schoolboy called my brother a monkey chaser. My brother began fighting. During the fight the boy crushed my brother's hips. He was taken to the hospital but couldn't be saved.
"By 1925, Dad was making good and had saved some too, so he built a beautiful fourteen-room house in a surburb. We were happy again, but only for a short time. The two years following, 1926 and 1927, my two baby brothers died.
"The Negroes didn't like us as much now because they misunderstood us and the white folk disliked us because we were making too much progress and Dad was competing with them for Negro trade. You know white people don't like to see colored folk get ahead. That is, most of them don't. By this time Dad had our home, a house in town that he rented, an apartment house for rent, and two cars.
"While we were still grief-stricken from my brothers' deaths, trouble descended upon us again. This time it was a threatening letter that Dad received in the spring from the Ku Klux Klan. It said: 'this town isn't the place for biggety niggers. Get out in twenty-four hours.' Of course he didn't go. Several months passed and nothing happened, only different people tried to get him to sell the house. So Dad concluded that it was only a practical joke.
"In June Mother took as all to the beach for our summer vacation. She took us every summer for the hot months. Just after we left another threatening not came ordering Dad to get out of town and get out quick. Still he ignored the note and refused to give up all that he had slaved for. Instead he stayed right there and carried his work on. On July the second, three white man came to his office and asked his if he wouldn't like to move to Chehaw, a very small place, and open an office. They told his that his health would be better there. Dad thanked these for their interest and told them that he liked his present location fine.
"At two o'clock the following morning, the Alux Klan appeared all hooded and marched around our house silently with their torches. Some of them were on foot and others were on horseback. I learned since that time that the demonstration is their warning that something more drastic is the follow. At the same hour on July the fourth, they returned again and set fire to our home. My father was in their sleep. He awoke just in time to barely escape, burning his feet severely as he did so. The fire department wouldn't come because the house was out of the city limits.
"We came home immediately. Mother was anxious to leave not only the town but the country as well; but not Dad. He preferred to remain. We moved into the house we owned in town, which was much too, small to adequately accommodate a family of nine. This house was typical of what they prefer for Negroes, so they spared us that.
"Peace was granted us for almost two months--then they struck again. This time it was the office. The office was one of several in a building of offices rented to doctors, insurance agents and other agencies. Of all the offices in the building, his caught fire mysteriously, leaving the smell of oil or gas. The fire department answered the alarm in time to save the other part of the building, but to see Dad's office completely demolished.
"Shortly after Dad remodeled the office and moved back into it, Wardlowville, the apartment house, so beautiful with it's 1,600-acre grounds burned. He made no effort to rebuild that. The most peculiar thing about it all was that they wouldn't pay the insurance money on any of the property that was burned, even though it was all insured. He lost most of his property in these fires and most of his savings in an effort to remodel and replace some of the damages.
"Still the Ku Klux Klan was not through. They would not surrender, neither would Dad---you know, my people do not like to be outdone----Dad's business continued to thrive. One night as he was driving home from Brightville after a day's work there, a car pulled up beside his car and ran him off the road into a ditch. Just as this happened, someone in the other car fired a shot. The bullet entered his shoulder and traveled downward to his ribs and stopped. Dad lay there unconscious from early night until around four o'clock in the morning when a milk truck came by. Upon searching the wrecked car, the milkman found my father and brought him home. He made a slow comeback; but he did get apparently well.
"Over a year passed quietly. The reign of terror, from all indications was over! We were allowed to live in peace. But this, too, was only temporary.
Since they could not subdue Dad by burning everything that he had or by attempting to kill him, they decided on another approach. One night a man broke in our house, not to rob because he entered the room that I shared with my sister. He came to the day bed where I lay asleep and awakened me. I could only see the outline of his body because it was dark, but I could feel the cold steel of a large knife at my throat-----I still seem to feel it!" said Nannette with tears standing in her eyes as she spoke.
"'Don't scream, or I'll kill you now,' he roared.
"I was too frightened to scream. I don't think that I could have anyway, with the blade of a knife pressing at my throat.
"'Gimme some,' he continued. 'Yes, you'll gimme some. Git up and come with me.
"I was scared to death! I was so afraid to go and much more afraid not to go.
"I said, git up!' he growled.
"Just at that moment it seems that God came to my rescue. Every one in the house was fast asleep; even my sister who slept on another bed in the same room. The shade flew up, making a rustling noise. It frightened us both. I screamed and as I did so, he ran out the door, down the back stairs and into an alley. Mother and Dad came running in, excited by my screams. I told them of the dreadful incident and Dad began to search the house. There was no trace to be found except the back door downstairs was standing open.
"Shortly after that, my sister and I passed two men, a Chinaman and a Jew; as we were walking down the street, one remarked that there go those damn Wardlow girls, and began whispering. The following day Dad received a letter asking, 'What are your girls worth to you?' There was no signature. Mother was thoroughly frightened, so she decided to send us away to school at once. She got us ready and away that same week. We entered a normal school in one of the Southern states a whole month ahead of time.
"Those years that we spent at school were our happiest ones. The students were kind and friendly. It was a small school and the group there was just like one large family. We played tennis, basketball, and of course we had parties and social hours. Both sister and I finished the normal school course with honors.
"Mother had promised to take us to the West Indies to visit grandmother the summer following our graduation. But when the time came and she attempted to book passage she was held up by the United States Customs Laws because we had never been naturalized, nor had we ever taken out naturalization papers. She was told that we'd either have to become naturalized or be deported. Then we could not return. While she was waiting to be naturalized, a letter came from Jamaica saying that grandmother was dead. She had been buried for two weeks when the letter arrived. There was no further need or desire for our trip. Mother decided not to go. If she wasn't going, she reasoned, she didn't need to be naturalized. So neither she nor Dad were ever citizens of this country. Still, it was home to them. They had adopted it and they loved it as they would their native home.
"Mother had been ailing for years. She suffered with a cancer of the womb. Worrying over our struggle for existence and grandmother's death added to her bad health was more than even she, who never complained, could endure. She died in that same year.
"After Mother passed Father drank very heavily and there were lots of women in his life even before Mother died, but he never allowed them to inconvenience his home in any way. I remember one affair that he had with a very beautiful Cuban girl. She became pregnant and had a boy. Father never let it touch him as being his, but folks said that it looked just like my brothers.
"Mother heard about it too, but she never believed it, or at least she never allowed us to know that she did. Anyway my father gave the girl a lovely home, a nice car, and sent her to a good college in Alabama. She finished there in June of 1936. Soon after she came back home, she married another man. Dad nearly went crazy. He drank even heavier than before. A few months after she married, Dad took very sick. His best friend, our family physician examined him and told him that he had an ulcerated stomach and gave him treatments for that. By fall Dad had grown much worse. We rushed him to a nearby hospital in a city. Upon having him examined there, we found that he didn't have an ulcerated stomach at all, but kidney trouble. However it was too late then. Whiskey had eaten both kidneys completely up, and the poison had spread over his entire system. He died in the hospital two days later.
"The seven of us children disposed of the business and sold the little property that we had left. The boys went North to work and sister and I began teaching in the South. Now I don't know where all of the boys are. One is somewhere in the North, passing as a Spaniard----his Spanish is perfect, and he looks the part, so he can get by easily. We can't go to see him because his family doesn't know us or know what we look like. When we are in that section, he comes to see us alone.
"I taught in a very small town in North Carolina. There was no social outlet there, nothing to do, nowhere to go and no desirable men. This was terrible punishment for me, because I am very active. I like to go places and do something all the time. I had been there for three years and nothing happened. Yet I saw no chance of escape. The salary was small and with summer school and other expenses, I had been unable to save; and with father dead, I had no help. It seemed that I was to be buried in this little country village. Wearily I attended summer school and returned hopelessly to work in the fall.
"Upon arriving, my landlady greeted me saying, 'Have you seen the new teacher? They've got a man this time. They tell me his name is Mr. Chandler, Mr. Rudolph Chandler.'
"'Well, that's news,' said I; 'I hope he looks like something.'
"When school opened I found that Rudy and I had adjoining classrooms. He was tall, friendly and only a few years my senior; and very nice looking. In a very short time we were good friends; and due to the scarcity of men, I devoted most of my spare time to him. He was a good companion and by June, we were considered seriously in love by the other town people. I did like him a lot and when he asked me to marry him, I considered it well. Here was a means of escape from this God-forsaken place. Here was something to break the monotony of work. Here was a chance to go back to school and do something different. I had never been married, so I decided to marry him.
"We were married in August of 1937. Rudy sent me back to school. I will finish college in June. Next year I shall teach with him. He is principal of a lovely school not very far from a city. Someday I hope to be a social worker. Rudolph is so nice to me--- I wish that I could return his love. I thought that love would come in time. Now I know it won't. I like him and always shall, because he is so devoted and kind to me; and we are sexually mated too. I saw to that before we were married. I think every girl should; not with just anyone, but when she finds a man that she plans to marry, I think that she should. I think that sex is three-fourths of marriage life. If two people can't find satisfaction in being together, there is really nothing else to hold them together. Nothing else can hold them peacefully.
"There's another reason why I like Rudolph. He's the most considerate person that you've ever seen. He's not the least bit jealous. He says that he doesn't expect me to be by myself when he's not around. I had boy friends before I married him and I still do. Right now I have two pictures on my dresser--- his and another boy's. He has never said one thing about it.
"We have no children. We aren't going to have any if I have anything to do with it. At least it won't be any time soon. We aren't able now.
"Of course I'm in favor of children--that is, among the better class of people. I think that they're able to support them; and their children would be the desirable type for citizens. But it's tragic for the poor folk. They only have a lot of ill-fed offspring coming into the world spreading insanity, illiteracy and disease. They should be taught birth control precautions and be made to use them. Why, they're having most all of the children now and those who can afford them have almost stopped. Disease is increasing each year and the government is having to take care of many of them. Then there are as many needy ones that the government is unable to help. Why I don't know what the poor would have done had it not been for our President. I am definitely in favor of the New Deal. Mr. Roosevelt is a great politician.
"Politics have most certainly helped the Negro, but I do feel that the Negro has been somewhat exploited. However I feel that the heads of the government are not as much to blame as the cheap politicians. They are attempting to rise themselves, and trying to crush the Negro with their prejudices. Now some of them are justifiable, but many of them are greatly exaggerated.
"The Ku Klux Klan, and other terrorizing organizations are bad and a reflection on society, but not only do they operate in the South, they exist in the North as well.
"Of all the dirty things that the white people have done, particularly to my family, I do not hate them as a group, but I do hate the ones who act like crackers. I guess I should go to church and beg forgiveness for hating even them, but I really don't like to go to church anymore. I am an Episcopalian but I much rather sit at home and listen to a sermon over the radio and worship in my little room alone. I really get more out of it that way. The church is no longer a holy place where people go to worship; it's more like an office where folks go to bill their dues. They have gone completely commercial. As long as you keep your pledges paid, you are a Christian regardless of who you are or what you are doing. There is entirely too much corruption in the churches. Most of the members are hypocrites and a large number of the preachers. You can't enjoy a sermon when you know the leader is crooked himself. If the church isn't right, I feel that it does me no good to go.
"Since I live in this country, I shall struggle and try to accumulate as did my father, with the hope that God will spare me the same fate that befell my father."
LAR
