Approximately 2,700 words.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: MIDWIFERY NOT WHAT IT USED TO BE
Date of First Writing	Jan. 27, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Lavinia McKee
Fictitious Name	Susie Blake
Street Address	None
Place	Beaufort County, near Burton
Occupation	Midwife
Name of Writer	Chlotilde R. Martin
Name of Reviser	State Office
The profession of midwifery is an ancient and honorable one among the sea-island Negroes of South Carolina. Time was when it was generally conceded among the dusky race that these old "mammas" had magic charms over the mysteries of birth and life. They were charms handed down from one generation of midwives to another and it is likely that some of them could be traced back to Africa.
To begin or hasten labor, for instance, the old midwife gave the patient a tea which was made by boiling tansy and a dirt-dauber's nest together in water. When the pains became too severe, they would be eased by a drink of the same tea, from which the tansy was left out. If a dirt-dauber's nest was not handy, however, the pains could be cut by placing a knife, hoe, spade, axe or any other sharp instrument under the bed without the patient's knowledge. Or the patient could be given a bottle to blow into, or rubbed with a mixture of sulphur and lard.
The after-birth pains could also be stopped by turning a pair of old shoes upside down beneath the patient's bed. Futhermore, if these old shoes were later hidden so well that they could never be found, it was a guarantee that as long as that particular patient lived, she would never again suffer after-birth pains during confinement.
The midwife's magic extended even to the new-born child. If the child was placed immediately beneath the mother's bed, it would insure his always being a good child. If strings were tied around the baby's wrists and ankles they would make him strong. A child born with a caul over its head would be gifted with second sight and have the ability to see strange things and wield curious powers for good or evil. But to be born with second sight is not always conducive to happiness, for it is to be plagued by spirits. The midwife's magic could counteract this, if it was desired, by drying the caul and feeding it to the child in bread when it was older.
Among the midwife's bag of tricks was one which assured her her fee promptly, too, for if she was not paid as quickly as possible her eyes and even her mind might become affected. No one wished to bring this calamity upon a person so important as a midwife, so she seldom was deprived of her fee for long.
All of these magic charms cost very little and were earnestly believed by all concerned to be effective. But the medical profession was extremely skeptical. Especially didn't the medical profession like the conditions under which these charms were exercised. Cleanliness, it appears, was not one of the factors involved in the working of charms, and the resultant mortality rate was very high - for old midwives, it seems, had no magic over death.
The medical profession, therefore, brought certain laws to pass and now the profession of midwifery among the coastal Negroes is vastly different from what it was in the old days. Since midwives are obliged to obtain licenses, they are required to attend regular classes conducted by the public health nurse and the magic of medical science has supplanted their old beliefs in actual practice, however stubbornly they still cling to them privately.
Modern midwives scorn such beliefs, at least so says Susie Blake, a Negro midwife who lives on Port Royal Island. I visited Susie in company with the county public health nurse recently to see for myself what a midwife was like- Susie lives on a farm with her husband and I was pleasantly surprised as we stopped in front of the two-story, comfortable looking house, set in the midst of fields of green vegetables. The house needed a coat of paint, but it was far above the average Negro home in this section and many a white farm family would be glad to call it home. The house had a new tin roof and crisp, frilled curtains framed the windows. The front yard was enclosed by a hedge and in the back yard I had a glimpse of a truck and several expensive looking farm implements. It had all the appearance of a prosperous farm.
Nobody seemed to be at home, so the nurse sounded her automobile horn. There was a halloo from a distant field and presently Susie came into sight. She and her husband had been setting out romaine plants, she explained, in apology for her appearance, although she looked clean and neat with her hair confined in a mesh cap to keep it in order.
Susie was a tall, well-built, friendly woman with laughter bubbling over on her lips. She invited us into the house. As we crossed the hall into the living room, I had a brief view of the dining room at the back of the hall with its round table spread with a red and white checked cloth. Susie offered us chairs in her cheerful living room, furnished far above the taste and means of the average Negro family. There were pretty curtains and draperies at the windows, a large davenport, an organ, comfortable chairs, a radio and a phonograph. A rug patterned with colorful flowers covered the floor and a small square table in the center of the room held a bowl of bright red and yellow artificial roses. The walls were hung with a collection of enlarged photographs, which Susie said were those of her parents, grandparents, children, uncles, aunts and cousins, including one of herself and her husband.
Our visit was progressing very nicely until I began, as I thought, subtly, to ask leading questions. Susie knew the county nurse well and trusted her, but she had never seen me before, and at my questioning, she underwent a curious change. Her eyes, which had been warm and friendly, took on an opaque look, and she was immediately on guard. Even after I had explained what I had come for and assured her, with the nurse's recommendation, that I had no ulterior motives, she was definitely evasive.
But I was neither offended nor surprised, for Susie, like all of the island Negroes, is wary of the questions of strange people. All of them are suspicious of anyone who smacks of "de law" or any government investigation, however innocent, and when they feel that they are so justified, they will tell down-right lies or, at best, half-truths without the slightest compunction.
So, at first, Susie ran true to form. The nurse was all right, she knew, and although the nurse had vouched for me, how did she know that I had not fooled the nurse? How did she know that I had not come "prying around" to see what she had for the purpose of causing her taxes to be raised? No, Susie was taking no chances, even though the half-truths she was telling were to catch up with her in the end.
When I asked her how old she was, for instance, she was deliberately indefinite with her "about fifty". When I asked how many acres of land she owned, she informed me politely but evasively that she didn't know exactly, but that her husband would know - her husband being some distance safely away. But I pinned her down: "But, Susie, don't you really have an idea of how much land you own - ten, twenty or thirty acres?"
Susie hesitated, then decided to temporize. " 'Bout twenty-five, I guess," she said. And when it afterward developed that she was nearer sixty than fifty, and the twenty-five acres had grown into sixty-six, Susie attempted no apology or explanation. By that time she had exonerated me of any evil intentions and no apology or explanation was necessary. For, between these island Negroes and their white neighbors there is a tacit understanding. If I had actually been a representative of "de law", or for any reason had failed to win her confidence, Susie would have persisted in owning only twenty-five acres of land and nothing could have shaken her from this contention. And I would have known better than to even try to do so.
However, she grew responsive in exact ratio as I proved myself trustworthy and her story was told bit by bit. Susie is a native of this county and her father worked as a "trunk minder" on one of the rice plantations on the Savannah river. Her parents had two children and when Susie was six months old, her father "quit" her mother. He later took Susie to live with him and although she preferred to return to her mother, he continued to support her until she was able to earn her own living, even though her mother had taken another "husband" and had three other children. This in itself was unusual, for Negro fathers rarely support their children after they have deserted their mothers, and is an indication of Susie's superior inheritance.
At the age of nineteen, Susie married Julius Blake. They had three children, a girl and two boys, and it was when these children had reached the marriageable age that Susie decided to become a midwife in order to save them the expense of employing some one else. But Susie has had only one grandchild, so her services in this capacity, so far as her own children were concerned, was unnecessary. She has had this grandchild, now a boy of fourteen, since he was born. He is the child of one of her sons and "he was on the way," Susie explained, before the son and the child's mother decided to marry. This fact, which a white woman would consider too embarrassing to mention, Susie and the rest of her race regard as merely one of the bald facts of life. Most Negro girls of this section are mothers before they are brides. Indeed, many of them are mothers before parents consider them old enough even to be married!
"Then when they found the boy," Susie continued the story of her son's belated marriage, "they wanted to leave and go North, so I kept the baby." All of her three children are now in the North, married, holding good jobs and prospering. The daughter, who is thirty-eight, is working in New York, while the two boys, thirty-four and thirty-one, are working in New Jersey. In revealing the children's ages, Susie unconsciously let the cat out of the bag in regard to her own age, for a hasty calculation proved one of two things: That she is either seven or eight years older than she says, or else she became a mother at the age of twelve.
Susie, who is above the average of her race in intelligence, has been a midwife for more than twenty years. Although she says she had a definite purpose in taking up the work, midwifery might be said to be in her blood, for her mother, grandmother and aunt were midwives before her and handed down their knowledge to her. She got her first actual experience in the work by accompanying her aunt on her visits and later working for a number of years under the older woman's supervision. When the midwifery classes were started, she began to attend them and says she has learned more from these classes than she ever knew before.
She has a partner in her work, since she feels that things run more smoothly when two are working together. They charge $10.00 a case, each taking $5.00. They have an agreement with their patients that they get the first five dollars as soon as they start in on the case and the rest when they leave. Sometimes their patients are slow in paying, which makes Susie impatient. "I don't work just for the money," she explained, "but after I have worked hard, I do like to get paid for it. Anyway, Susie has the satisfaction of knowing that the payments are rarely delayed longer than the event of the second baby, for when a repeat-call is made, she tells her patient frankly: "If you can't pay for the first one, how you gonna pay for dis one?" When she puts the situation up to them like that, they usually come across with the money, she says.
There is also an agreement that she and her partner must be furnished transportation to and from cases, but, too often, she complains, the messenger comes "on mule-back in the middle of the night. Then I tell 'em, 'you come on mule back, but how I gonna git there?'" She laughed. "It makes me have to stay on the good side of my husband all the time, so he'll get up and take me in the truck." They bought the truck, she explained, several years ago when her husband had a contract for transporting children to and from school.
"When your patients suffer a great deal of pain, what do you do to ease them?" I asked.
Susie cut her eyes mischievously in the direction of the nurse. "Nuttin"', she said, "can't give 'em nuttin' at all."
"But didn't your grandmother, and your mother and aunt know about certain kinds of teas and oinments?" I persisted, hoping to make Susie forget the presence of the nurse.
"But it was no use. Susie was too shrewd to be caught in such a trap. She laughed. "We don't believe in them things no more. Ain't no tea, neither no rubbin' gonna do no good."
"You must feel very sorry for them, though - not to be able to help them at all --"
"Sorry! Susie bristled. "Sorry don't do no good. If I'm weak and you're weak, how I gonna help you? One of us got to be strong - and I got to be dat one."
Midwifery, however, is just a side-line with Susie, for her main interest is the farm which she and her husband own. Nevertheless, she has a high sense of obligation and when a call comes, she puts down whatever work she is doing on the farm and goes. "That's my duty," she said.
She also feels that it is her duty to hire someone to take her place on the farm if it is during the busy season, for she considers that she is her husband's partner. She and Julius make a good living on the farm, planting, in addition to the foodstuffs for their own use and that of their two mules, cows, hogs and chickens, a number of truck crops for cash money. These they ship or sell to vegetable trucks which come through the country.
Not only has Susie raised and educated her own three children and her grandson, but she adopted six other children and done as well by them as she did for her own children. All of these adopted children are now grown and married with the exception of the last, a girl of six. She had been wanting a little girl, she said, for it was somewhat lonesome on the farm with just her husband, herself and her grandson, so when the little girl was born and her mother wished to give her away, Susie took advantage of the opportunity offered. She sends both of the children to school and looks after them carefully.
Susie's propensity for adopting children is compounded of two motives, it developed upon questioning. One is her natural kindliness of heart, for she loves children, and the other is in the nature of an investment. The children needed a home and someone to love and care for them when they were small and when Susie is old, she also may need a home and someone to care for her. She is comfortable enough now, true - but who knows, Susie reasons, what the vicissitudes of life may bring?
"They'll look after me, if I need 'em," she observed with perfect confidence, "'cause I looked after them."
My eyes fell upon the small radio and I inquired as to Suaie's favorite programs. She chuckled. "Radio is for people that don't have much to do - now, me, I don't have much time to listen to it. But at night, if I'm not too tired, and on Sundays, I like to listen to the news and preaching. There' a quartet I like to listen to, too - I like singing over the radio."
As we were leaving, Susie asked us if we would like to have "a mess of turnips." We certainly would, we said, and she led us around the house to the large turnip patch in back. The turnips were unuaually large and fine and next to them was a field of green cabbage waiting to be cut.
It was during the short walk to the turnip patch that Susie revealed, without batting an eye, that the twenty-five acre farm was actually composed of forty-five acres and that she owned another twenty-one acre tract which she had inherited from her mother and which she rented out. There was a large pecan grove behind the house and Susie told us that she had sold eighty dollars worth of nuts from it this year.
CRM
MPJ.