Covington Hall
Editorial Department
Alabama
SAM CASH, FARMER--MINER.
“No, Arthur, hit haint so. That haint true. He does some moonshinin’ an’ bootleggin’ an’ gets drunk now an’ then, but he’s a fine man. He works hard and takes care of his family,” said Sam Cash, answering a query as to a neighbor whose conduct was under fire in the community.
In making these statements, Sam spoke earnestly, judging Ms friend, not by his personal prejudices, but by the ethical standards generally accepted by the mountain people. Sam is one of them. He was “bawn an’ raised” near where he now lives. He left home only once, when he worked for a year or so in the coal mines of Harlan county, Kentucky, and West Virginia. Almost from the hour in which he crawled out of the cradle he has toiled in the fields and mines, being at present employed in a small coal mine about four miles to the east of Mentone when not tilling his land. “I have been farmin’ an’ minin’ ever sence I can remember,” he says, “an’ I still don’t know which one is the worse to make a livin’ at.” He is still doing so, though today he is nearing the three score and ten limit.
When times are hard, as they often are, he may do some moonshining and bootlegging as a side line, excusing himself, if he ever bothers to, by quoting the bibical admonition to the effect that: “A man who does not care for his family is worse than an infidel.” And Sam is “a good family man,” a kind and indulgent husband and father. He is also very religious, being a member of the Church of God, or “Holy Roller,” persuasion. In union territory, he is a stanch union man, holding firmly to the belief that John L. Lewis is, or will be, the saviour of the coal diggers, “who,” he avers, “have as tough a time diggin’ a livin’ out of the ground as do the farmers.
“Everybody else,” he swears, “lives offen us farmers an’ miners an’ all we gits for our labor is a grubstake, an’ a po’ one.” But he keeps to his diggin’s, trusting to God and President Lewis to remedy conditions; how, he doesn’t know. Only of this he said he is certain; that “things can’t go on much longer like they is goin’, ‘cause they is too onjust in the sight of God.”
Sam Cash is typical of those who have been trapped in the southern mountains, where, when their forebears came, getting a living was comparatively easy, the abundance of game in the forests and fish in the streams, plus the “gyardin’ ‘tater an’ co’n patches,” assuring a plentiful food supply. Their log or weatherboard cabins never lacked warmth, for all one had to do “in the good old days” to keep the fire glowing was step into the woods with his axe. His fuel supply was free, costing only what labor he and his sons chose to devote to the task.
Gradually, however, the old life changed. The game disappeared from the forests and an important source of cash income vanished, that derived from the sale of furs. The streams were fished out. The fields widened. The summer people came, bought homes and became residents and, with them, the stock laws preventing the use of the woods as common pastures. The large herds of sheep and goats were lost, still further limiting the free meat supply and cutting off another cash crop, wool. The trees were hewn into crossties for the railroads, or logged off to sawmills in the valley or turned into rough lumber by portable mills on the spot. The game, the fish, the goats and sheep and timber being “et up,” the people lost their economic independence. So Sam and his neighbors turned to farming for a living.
Having no agricultural experience beyond scratching a cornfield and “plantin’ by the moon,” unused to planning far ahead, unable to secure financing except at interest rates ranging from ten to fifteen percent per annum, they found farming, as Sam insists, “mainly a heap o’ work for nothin’.” All the majority have been able to eke out of it is a bare subsistence. Even when they can add to their meager cash income by working in small nearby mines or mills, or on WPA, or on whatever temporary jobs they find, their standard of living is unbelievably low. Few of Sam’s kind, though they have now begun to raise cotton, possess decent bedding or comfortable clothing. All this deprivation, however, they look upon as “the will of God.” This, “Hit’s God’s work and will,” is the attitude of Sam and his generation toward the big families with which they are “blest.”
Sam’s opinion of birth control is that “Hit’s ag’inst the law set down in The Book. God sont ‘em,” he says, “an’ hit ain’t for man to meddle with God’s doin’s.” And that settles it as far as he is concerned. If he and his ever heard of Margaret Sanger, and quite a few have, they speak of her ideas with horror, since the ministers of all their sects denounce her in unmeasured terms as a modern “Jezebel come to corrupt our women folks to disobey our Lord’s commandment to ‘go forth, multiply and replenish the earth’.” Sam and his generation heed this warning, but many of the young people, they regretfully admit, “is strayin’ away from the strict an’ narrow path.”
This “failin’ away” by the young men and women worries their elders considerably; but “believing,” as their forefathers and mothers did., that babies “is sont of God,” and that “God he’ps them as what he’ps themselves an’ others,” Sam and his frail little wife have stuck to it, “raisin’ somehow, we don’t know how,” five sons and a daughter. Two sons and the girl have married, settled down in the community and are giving Sam and his wife many grandchildren of whom they are proud.
Most of the old folks on “The Mountain,” as its inhabitants affectionately call Lookout have little book knowledge. The education of few of them went beyond simple “readin’, ritin’ an’ ‘rithmetic.” Many are illiterate. But elders take great interest in the schools. The great majority say, “a boy or girl without eddicatlon haint got no chance in the worl’ today.”
The children emulate their parents in this. They will work and scrape and deny themselves to save a few pennies with which to purchase books and other necessaries and then trudge through sleet and snow six or seven miles rather than miss a day in classes. But when they receive their high school diplomas, as many do, and though they love their mountain home, they are unlike their parents in that the majority are not satisfied to “settle down” there. They hear the call of the mills and factories in the restless world below and, the blood of pioneers being in their veins, more and more of them answer it every year. When the Textile Code was promulgated with its promise of steady jobs and good wages, they poured into the mill town, returning bitterly disappointed when they found they were not wanted.
When Sam was asked what he thought of so many young folks leaving the mountain, he said.
“I don’t like hit,” he said. “Of course, the youngsters haint to be blamed. There haint nothin’ for them to do here no more. So most of them is onsatisfied, ‘specially them as has some eddication. Course most of the cabins we folks hereabouts lives in haint much as a home, as fur as homes go but they is ourn, which is more’n most town an’ city people can say. But the younguns don’t see that. They hears all about the high wages, short hours an’ good times in town, an’ so heads for hit. Most of them will be disapp’inted. Most of us is wherever we be. We all got to take our chance. I don’t blame them an’ nobody else cam. Farmin’ an’ minin’ is both hard lives, an’ hit’s gittin’ harder every year for a man to dig a livin’ out of either for hisself an’ family. No, I don’ like hit an’ I don’ blame the young folks; but I wush we could keep ‘em all here at home,” he ended wistfully.
The last time I saw him he was looking peaky. I asked him if he was ill.
“No,” he said, “I’m all right, only I nearly got kilt last week,”
“How? What happened?” I asked.
“A fall of rock in the mine hit me an’ busted my collarbone an’ bruised me up. But I’m all right now. Goin’ back to the mine Monday.”
“Better lay off and take it easy a few days more,” I suggested.
“Kain’t afford to,” he said, a smile wrinkling his strong, gaunt face. “Me an’ the old woman an’ what kids is lef at home has got to eat. An’ eatin’ costs money. You know that. Kain’t ‘ford to lose the wages I’ve already missed, collarbone or no collarbone. So long. Hope I’ll be seein’ you ag’in soon.”
Sam, contrary to general belief, does not seem shiftless. Neither does his wife. Both are up before the sun, Sam on his way to the field or mine and Mrs. Cash busy about her endless house, which include matching over and taking care the chickens, cows, babies and dogs, not to mention washing, scrubbing and, now and then, helping out with a hoe.
Their cabin home sits on the edge of their field, close to the woods. It is made of plain plank, roofed with shingles. It has no front porch or gallery. It is entered from two rickety steps. It is only partly ceiled. The flooring is fairly good, but the sun shines through the roof and cracks in the walls let in more than sufficiency of fresh air. There are no partitions between the rooms, no pictures on the walls. A stone chimney rises in the center of the house. Its wide, deep fireplace, filled with ash, oak or hickory logs, gives them all the heat they seem to need and lends a cheerful aspect to the almost furnitureless Interior. The kitchen is a long, narrow room built on the rear of the cabin. Nearby a rickety barn, sheltering one cow, one mule and a few chickens. The hog pen is close by the Cashes, like all their neighbours, being fond of and heavy consumers of pork. The dwelling has a few oaks in front of it and is bordered by an orchard containing a few peach and apple trees. Few townfolk would envy them their home, but they were heartbroken when the mortgage was foreclosed, the place sold to another “hardscrabbler” and they had to move into a rented house.
Losing their home was a tragedy to them, but it is not the only tragedy they have known. Their oldest son was shot and killed in the early 1930’s by a neighbor who charged him with seducing and then refusing to marry (a “mortal crime” on the mountain) his fifteen-year-old daughter. The wronged girl committed suicide and this, with the fact that all said, “the boy was a bad ‘un an’ got what he deserved,” hurt them greatly. Next, their daughter’s first husband, a boy who was noted far and wide for his “glorious singing voice,” got mixed up in the whiskey business and was killed in a fight with a revenue officer.
Yes, the Cashes have known tragedy, more than their fair share. But they rarely talk of it. They “bear the burdens the Lord has sent” with stoicism. Their hospitality is unfailing. If an invitation to come in and sit awhile is accepted, they will insist on the caller having”a bite to eat with us,” bringing out cakes and honey, or other homemade luxury, to tempt the palate. They do not keep bees. The honey comes from bee trees Sam found and robbed, he being one of the famed “bee trailers” of DeKalb county.
Like all mountain people, once they learn to know a person, the members of the Cash family are sociable and friendly. With a friend they will share their last peck of meal, or go even further and loan their prize coon dog or fox hound. They will minister to the sick and reverently bury the dead. But provoke their enemity and the feudist boils up. Then there is nothing they will not do to “git even.” In this, as in nearly all other matters, they proceed according to their own law, judging right and wrong with primitive directness. Beyond this code and the Ten Commandments, the only other laws they respect are those of the Federal Government, and then only the statutes relating to the illicit distilling of whiskey. These laws they fear but, at the same time, resent as an infringement of their individual liberty. They “kain’t see where hit is any of the Gov’ments business what I do with my c’on, whether I make hit into cow-feed, or likker. Hit’s mine, hain’t hit?” they growl.
The argument is convincing to all save the internal revenue officers who have all but destroyed the once flourishing “white mule” traffic, thus cutting off an important source of cash income.
Whether it is due to this and all the other woes that have harried him and his throughout their lives, I do not know; but Sam has got religion. He has “j’ined the Holy Rollers,” and, as the making, selling and using of whiskey, tobacco and like “vile stuff” is anathema to the Church of God, Sam has repented and reformed. The church has done for him what the state through force and fear of prison could not do. An, so, Sam “keeps the faith,” courageously striving he says, to “make the sperrit triumphant over the flesh.”
Washington Copy
12/7/38
L.H.
