Music lost in the <Text Not Clear>
Date of first writing:	Jan. 27, 1939
Name of person or family interviewed:	J E Foster (Ed Foster) (White).
Address:	
Place:	Ferguson, N.C.
Occupation or other status of subject:	Rural mail carrier
Name of Writer:	James Larkin Pearson
Name of Revisor:	Claude V. Dunnagan
THE STORY OF CARL STOKES AND FAMILY
On my rounds in search of the interesting and unusual, I came upon Carl Stokes, rural mail carrier. He had just got in from his daily trip of some 40 or 45 miles over roads that are none too good in the winter time. He was wearing brown pants and a leather coat that had seen a good deal of service, and was tinkering around his new Ford V-8 getting ready to wash off the day's accumulation of mud and put the car in readiness for tomorrow's trip. There was a car shed and a tool house near the barn, and everything looked pretty convenient about the place. The residence was a few yards away, facing the street. There was a well-kept lawn and shade trees, and the place gave every evidence of being a home.
"Well, old man, how goes the world with you?" I asked as I approached. With pipe in mouth, Carl turned and studied me for a full minute before he seemed to recognize me. Then:
"Doggon your old hide, mister, I came very near not knowing you. But...well, you do look a good deal like your old boyhood self. What can I do for you, old neighbor?"
"Give me an interview," I said. I want you to tell me what all you've been doing these many years, and how you've made out with those streaks of genius that you used to have."
"What, f'rinstance?"
"Music, we'll say, to start with. Don't you remember how you used to play the fiddle, the banjo, the mouth organ, and nearly everything else?"
Carl leaned himself back against the front fender of his car, made a broad gesture with his right hand, and said:
"Boy don't I remember? Why, man, I've made more fiddles than Carter had oats, and played 'em at every country dance for miles around. An' banjos, too. I wasn't no bad hand with a banjo, if you remember. I mean both makin' 'em an' playin' 'em. Lordy, but they was beauties. Whittled out of rough lumber with my pocket-knife an' worked down to a smooth surface with an old wood-rasp an' sandpaper. Then glued together an' varnished. Honestly, they wasn't so bad. If I had kep' on in that line of work I might have outdone Mr. Straddy Various hisself."
My thoughts ware going back to the old pasture hill and the Old-field school. "But", I suggested, "wasn't the French harp your special pet instrument? Remember how you entertained the gang so many times with French harp renditions of "Lindy", "Johnson Boys", Sourwood Mountain" and "Old Molly Hair?" We all sat around and patted our feet in a frenzy of musical rapture while you blowed the very insides out of that old mouth-organ".
Carl cupped his hands to his mouth and began to make jerky sounds imitating the tones of the mouth-organ. "Yes, them was the days", he ruminated. "It does seem strange, but I reckon I must have been a sort of leader of the boys. They used to gather around me and listen to my playin' an' my fool talk, an' sometimes I just tried myself to see how much of a clown I could be. The boys them days were sorter like the boys are now...... they didn't want to learn nothin'. They just wanted to be amused an' entertained."
Another picture had been forming in my mind as he talked....the picture of a little school-girl.
"What ever became of that little eight-year-old girl that you were so crazy about one time in school? She was a cute little thing, I remember, but she wasn't much more than a baby. What was her name?"
School days were so far away and so many things had happened since, I thought it likely that Carl had forgotten his little girl sweetheart. A sort of reminiscent smile came over Carl's face and he was silent for a minute.
"Edna Hoover," he said finally. "Yes, I must have been pretty much in love with little Edna. I was a great big thrown man, too....nearly eighteen years old....and she was only eight or nine. But there was something about her that got hole of my heart-strings. I never knew what particular thing it was that got me. Maybe it was her eyes, or maybe it was that funny little lisp in her voice. Anyhow, I was in love with her and didn't care who knew it."
I thought he would go on and tell me more about his love affair with little Edna, but he hesitated again and looked out across the hill toward where the old schoolhouse had stood.
"But what became of Edna?" I insisted. "Surely you must have kept track of her. Did she marry?"
"Yes, she did, after she got up a little older. Married a very common sort of a cuss. Had a bunch of babies, and probably lost some of her beauty. Ah, me:" And he heaved another long reminiscent sigh.
I had to lead him on.
"And you married, too, and raised a family."
"Yes, of course I got a good woman, and she has borne me four splendid children.....three boys and a girl. We educated them the best we could, and they are all married off now, but some of them have settled near us. We never prospered much, but on an average we've been reasonably happy. It could have been worse."
"Are your children musical?" I hardly needed to ask the question.
"Every one of them. They can play anything. When they were all living here at home they had a regular band. They keep it up yet, getting together every little while to play."
"But you didn't follow up your own musical bent? You let all that talent go to waste and took up some other line for your life work?
Carl Stokes, you ought to be ashamed of yourself."
"Gosh-a-mighty, old neighbor, I couldn't make a livin' with such music as I turned out. Nobody would pay much for such fiddlin' an' twangin' as I could do. An' after the family started to come I didn't have any more time for music."
"What line did you take up?"
"Sellin' goods. Merchandisin'. I was in the store business for six or eight years, an' might have been in it longer, but I credited out everything I had an' went busted. Then I had to go right back to the beginnin' an' start from scratch a second time. Then's when I jined up with the postal service an' went to carryin' the mail for Uncle Sam. For several years I carried it in a buggy. I had a faith- full old horse that I drove more than fifty thousand miles. He was so good and knew every inch of the route so well that he could almost carry the mail without me. But the time came when I had to turn the old horse out to grass and get an automobile. The times were speeding up, an' I had to speed up or get left. I have worn out two or three cars and started on another one. Incidentally, I have about worn my-self out. Look at these gray hairs. And these old glasses I have to wear. And these stooped shoulders. It would take a mighty good back-bone to keep its original shape after being hunched up in a buggy or a gasoline chug-wagon for thirty-odd years. It's a hard life, takin' the weather as it comes, summer an' winter, hot an' cold, wet an' dry, sick or well. I've gone out with the mail many a cold winter mornin' when I ought to have stayed at home in bed. But that was my job an' I had to go it. The old woman has been mostly a widow in the day time. She an' the children had to run the home the best they could....tend the garden, feed the chickens an' milk the cow. Now that the children are all married the old woman has to stay by herself a heap of the time. She says it's time for me to quit the mail service, but I can't quit. I ain't got any other trade or profession that I could make a livin' at. Guess I'll go on at this as long as I can hold a steerin' wheel an' step on the gas."
"What other interests have you had?" I asked. "That is, besides your home and your work. The schools? The churches? Have you taken an interest in them?"
"Yes, in the schools especially. I have done what little I could for the schools, not only around here, but in the county and State. I have taken part in some pretty hard fights in the interest of the schools, About the churches, now Well, per-haps I ain't been as religious as I should have been. I've had the reputation of bein' sorter worldly in my ways of livin' an' talkin'. I cuss a little sometimes, I'm sorry to say, an' maybe I don't pray enough. I ain't never done much hobnobbin' with the preachers, an' maybe they think I'm a bad egg. But the old woman is right plum religious, and I reckon that sorter evens things up. When we get up to the Golden Gate I reckon Saint Peter will let me in along with the rest of the family. I've always thought he was a good fellow."
My time was up......time for me to say good-bye and be on my way.
"Oh, you mustn't go yet," pleaded Carl with eager sincerity in his voice. "Why can't you stay all night? Anyway, you gotta go up to the house an' meet the old woman. She's in the kitchen gettin' supper, I.guess. We'll go up the back way." I followed him up the walk to the kitchen door. As we entered, a rather stout woman of about fifty turned from the kitchen sink to greet us.
Carl indicated me and said, "Edna: Here is an old school friend of ours....he's just been asking about you."
