February 6, 1939.
Mrs. Isabel Barnwell, (85)
2116 pearl Place,
Jacksonville,
Florida,
(Correct name)
(Early school-teacher
Nassau County).
Rose Shepherd writer.
MRS ISABEL BARNWELL, SCHOOL TEACHER.
We had an appointment at 2:30, and as I rang the bell I peered through the latched screen door and saw Mrs. Barnwell at the writing desk in the plain, but comfortably furnished living room. It is unusual for any door to be locked in the bungalow, and as she welcomed me, after unlatching the door, I said:
"Afraid somebody will carry you off?"
"Oh, no. I learned not to ho afraid years ago. It's just that the wind is blowing rather strong today, and the screen stood half open all the time, so I latched it.
"Well, it has been a long time since you were here, and I have thought of so many things about the old place." (She referred to her old family home, a Spanish grant in Nassau County, the deed for which has been in the hands of her family since 1793).
She seated herself in a comfortable position on the wicker lounge, arranging the cushinns about her back and shoulders, with her left leg half on the lounge. Mrs. Barnwell is a cripple. An accident to her left knee resulted in a stiff joint, so that the does. not bond when she sits down. This corner is her favorits resting place when she reads or gives an interview. "
"You take the old black rocker so you can write, and we'll have a good old time, "she said, laughing.
"Why all the new cushions?"
"I had an old feather-bed - my folks don't like feathers to sleep on, they would rather have inner - sprongs-so I took the feathers, got some red spangled cretonne and made new cushions all round See in the dining room?"
Sure enough, all the rockers, and there were three of them in front of the wide fire-place, had fat feather cushions in both the seats and backs. The family has grown smaller by one in the a beloved son, woodward, a Government aviation instructor, having lost his life in a glider accident on Fernandina Beach in May, 1937. The dining table is shoved against the wall. Three places are indicated - for mother, daughter (a stenographer in public work at the Windsor Hotel), and the daughter-in-law, Bells, who makes her home here since being widowed.
"Yes, Belle is with us now, and we are glad to have her, it is not so lonesome. she is a receptionist - what a new-fangled name for office work!- in Dr. Spencer's private hospital. The Government pays her Woodward's pension of $10.00 a month, and she makes $15.00 a week at the doctor's. Of course, she cannot contribute much to me, but we manage.
I remarked how well Mrs. Barnwell was looking, her eyes bright, and lighting up so readily.
"Yes, I have much to be thankful for. (We one has ever heard her complain about her stiff knee, al though when she goes out she has to lean heavily on a cane). My health is good for one of my age, and I feel fine. My son in California just sent me a bottle of a thousand yeast pills and I have been taking them for a month or so. They <text not clear> sure do pep you up. Vitamines - everybody had gone vitamin-crazy, you know. My son said they helped him, too, he is an old man now, fifty-five."
<text not clear> Barnwell
<text not clear> concealed a smile by sneezing, and she went on:
"Can you drive a car?"
I came near strangling at this remark, as I told her, I was very sorry; that I had never had the ambition to own or drive an automobile, hence had never learned to operate one.
"I cannot understand how I have reached the age I have and not learned. An automobile is a handy thing. I had the opportunity to buy one at a bargain - you know Woodward left me a little insurance. It's a V-8, right out here in the garage in good condition, and if you could drive it, we'd go over to New Hope (name of her plantation in Nassau County) right now. It's early, and we would have plenty of time. My girls do not drive, although they are learning, but are afraid in heavy traffic or on long carneys, so when we do go out in it, I have to run all over the neighborhood to ferret out a driver."
I explained I wanted some information on about her early experiences as a school-teacher, as a comperison with present-day edu- cational matters.
"My mother and her people, the Gunbys, were educated in St. Marys, Georgia. There wasn't any Fernandina then - that section was only a plantation, belonging to Don Domingo Fernandez. Later Mr. Fernandez set aside a portion of Land for a town. It was laid out and called 'Fernandina' for his family. (Stephen Fernandez married my mother's a sister, Eliza Gunby. They had four cnildred - all dead now). Mother wont to school to Mr. church, in St Marys. Aunt Eliza died and Uncle Stephen gave his children to my father and mother to raise, and there were eleven of us.
"Mother was the best speller in Mr. Church's school. She and my father were married November 8, 1830, in St. Marys. They Mrs. Barnwell come to Fernandina to live. When the children began to be of an that they needed instruction other than my mother could give, a miss Matilda Seton, daughter of an early settler of Old Town, was secured as our teacher.
"My father built a house of logs - two rooms - near the big house, as it was called, and this was our family school.
"When the boys became larger, my father thought best to place then under a man teacher. So he wrote Lord and Taylor, in New York City, with whom he did a great deal of business, to secure a tutor for his sons. In course of time, they sent down a Mr. Lincoln, a cousin of Abraham Lincoln. He staid until along in the late 1850's, becoming homesick he returned to New York. than father hired a Mr. Boise. He staid a little over two years, but When it seemed War was imminent, he, too, returned to New York, where he expected to join the troops. He was my first teacher.
"When Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Boise were teaching us children, some of the neighbors' boys came to school also: Col. Cooper's son, Walter Coachman, General Finagan's boy, the sons of the Ogilvie's (the family kept the drawbridge at Amelia River).
"When my brother, James, was sufficiently advanced through instruction from Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Boise, he went to Harvard. My brother John, went to a College in Schenectady, N.Y., my sister, Tudy, (Mrs. Bacon), went to a girls' school at Milledgeville, Georgia; my sister, Mary, went to Athens, Georgia to a college there, and my sister, Florence, attended Troy Female sominary in Troy, New York. Miss Frances Willard was then the Principal. She later became famous in the Women's' Christian Temperance Union. She was a brilliant woman, and her school was considered the finest girls' school in the united States. There is no doubt she was in advance of her time, and, later became a model as an example of women's rights. My sister was a graduate of this school.
"When the war came on, John was at school in Schecnectady, Florence in Troy, Mary,(Dr. Daniel's wife) and Tudy (Mrs. Bacon) were married.
"John and Florence were terribly alarmed, as lines were closed and they were fearful of getting back to Fernandina safely, and it was necessary for them to make arrangements for their return hurriedly. They got in touch some way with Mr. Lincoln, their carly teacher, and he provided a way through the west, a long tedious route, by which they finally reached home in safety.
"When matters became unsettled in Fernandina, with Federal gunboats in the harbor, my father took us and all the slaves to middle Florida, Hamilton county, near white sulphur springs, where we lived in plenty, unmolested all during that terrible period.
"I just remember, Col. Cooper's son was named John: the coashman boy was young walter, Gen. Finegan's son was Ford, and the Ogilvie's son Dave.
"A funny incident about Dave, which gave him a nickname he always bora, was when Mr. Boise asked him one day to write a composition. He asked, "About What?' Mr. Boise said, 'About something you know about. Don't try to write about something away off that you have never seen.' well Dave, who was about fifteen, brought in his essay of the 'cow'. He told all he could think of, and wound up with -'one of Daddy's cows is on the lift. Mr. Boise ask him what he meant, and he answered, and can't got up, even if she would.' Everybody, laughed, and after that Dave was dubbed 'Woudn't if he could, and couldn't if he would.'
"All of these boys boarded with us, and we also took care of the teacher The boys came from across the river, some as far miles, they stayed with us until each week end.
"As my father had his eleven children, the Fernandez' four children, and the four extra boys, and tutor, it made a school of nearly twenty. I was young, just learning my ABC's. I still have four picture cards given me as Reward of Merit' for good scholarship and deportment.
"As I said, in April, 1861, we refugeed to Hamilton County. my Sister, Florence, taught us. She was a most wonderful young woman - well educated, good looking, poised, intelligent and accomplished. As there were no schools in Hamilton County during that period and she felt sorry for other youngsters in that section, she to lot her have one of the negro houses which she had cleaned up, white-washed and made into a very presentable schoolroom.
"My brother, John O'Neill, was a Colonel in the confederate Army; James acted as a Commissariat; Isador was in the artillery took part in the Batttle of Olustee, and my brother, Dunbar, Daniel, with the Army of Virginia, Lee's troops in Virginia. Dr. R.P. Daniel, who married my first cousin, Evelyn Fernandez, and Dr. and Dr. Henry Bacon, my sister Tudy's husband, were also with the Confederate troops. Their children were with us and had to be educated, so eventually, sister Florence had quite a SCHOOL, 32 pupils in all.
"One of the girls, a Miss Mary Mosely, came from quite a distance away, and she boarded at my father's house. She had a piano, and brought it along, too, so that Florence could give her music lessons, for which service those who wished could have the privilege of also practicing on the piano. You see, we had a lovely grand piano in the old home at Fernandina, but we had to <text not clear> for our lives, gathering what few personal belongings we could, father and the slaves taking<text not clear> of the farming machinery, and sad to say, when we returned after the War, not a piece of furniture was in the house - piano and all were gone. So we were glad to have Miss Mosely's piano in our new home. Music was a delight to all of us, and we four sisters used to sing a great deal. My older sister, Mary, had a voice like Galli Curci. It was wonderful to hear her in solos.
"We kept up with the music of the times, having quite a stock of shoet music on hand, all of which had been sent from the music Department of Lord & Taylor's in New York.
"My mother took particular care of our music, as it was expensive, and when she had sufficient quantities to make a bound volume, this was shipped to New York to the same firm, and returned to us, so that it could be better taken care of. I have several of these old volumes now, one composed entirely of Jenny Lind's repertoire when she made her long remembered American appearance.
"But to get back to school: Florence would gather' the children in the neighborhood each morning and bring them in for the day, returning them to their homes at night. She kept this up for the four-year period of the War, and not a cent was charged any of the parents.
"Yes, we had the old blue-back speller, and she taught us to read and write well, and of course, we had spelling and arithmetic. When we got older, we also learned algebra, chemistry, she taught the girls music and French. she tried to teach me Latin, but it didn't take' for some reason, but I learned to speak french readily. We had philosophy, and all the higher branches, as we reached the age to learn such studies. we did <text not clear> have any black boards, but each pupil had a big slate on which we wrote with slate-pancils. These seem to have gone out in the last few years, being classed as unsanitary' and children nowa-days write altogether with pencils and poils.
"After the war, when we returned to Fernandina, my sister, Mrs. Bacon and my sister, Florence O'Neill, opened a school for young ladies in General Finegan's old home, and taught quite successfully for one year. Then Bishop Young, the Episcopal Bishop of this Diocese, realizing the possibilities of a well established girls school in this section, came to Fernandina and equipped this same old house, the Finegan home, as a select boarding-school for young ladies. It was right where the school hose is today, on the very same site.
"I was about fourteen then. My sister went to Beaufort, S.C after she married a cousin of my future husband B.W. Barnwell-and Iwent with her and studied two years at Beaufort. They had three children, all of whom are living in New York city.
"Later she and Mr. Barnwell moved to Abbeville, S.C., and then to Suwannee, Tennessee, where she still taught- coaching the young men at the Suwannee university. She educated three boys, by getting scholarships there. One was son, James O'Neill Barnwell, who now lives in Beverly Hills, California.
"She also educated her own children at Suwannee. When she and Mrs. Bacon had the girls' school in Fernandina, it was full of young ladies of other families, who were glad to avail them-solves of high class tuition.
"Did we ever try to teach the Negroes on the plantation? Yes, we did. If they were interested, we taught them to read, <text not clear> and spell, but it had to be done surreptitiously. I do not know whether there was a State law, or if it was just not considered the proper thing to do, but it is a fact, we taught them on the sly, for fear of being criticized.
"Mr. Barnwell, in South Carolina, used to teach his Negroes when he had any who would study.
"The young people of that time were raised under strict discipline. I remember one day John Cooper, and his sister, son and daughter of General Cooper, now grown, came over on horseback. They were dressed in riding clothes, blouse and knickerbockers, and were lounging on the stops of the wide porch, when my father who had been riding around the plantation on his favorite mount - "Adelaide' - rode up, and them. He said 'How is this? John, you and your sister mount your horses, go home and got properly dressed, and when you come back we will be very happy to see you, and have you stay to dinner.'
"This is quite a contrast to the way in which young people get away with manners and deportment now, running around in bathing suits, shorts, and what-not, nobody to our heathenish drossing!
"I forgot to say that when my father settled in the early <text not clear> at St. Marys with his mother and two sisters, Mrs. Shaw, who was the daughter of Nathaniel Greene, lived at' Dungeness' twelve miles from Fernandina, an old plantation, the land having been granted to General Greene for distinguished service in the <text not clear>- lutionary war. Mrs. Shaw had a nephew, James nightingale, who was not inclined to study. she came to St. Marys and bogged my grandmother to let her have my father, James O'Neill, as a companion to young Nightingale, thinking it might cause him to take more interest in his studies. She had a tutor brought from my father studied under him at 'Dungeness' for eight years, so he was well educated, and he saw that all of his children had a good education. The school-house was at 'Dungeness' for several years after the war, so was our old school-room at New Hope. But they are all gone now.
"Bishop Young's Seminary at Fernandina prospered. He had the very best teachers he could secure - one was a Miss Fuller, and another, a miss Stoney. He also asked my sister, Florence, to become a member of his staff, but she married shortly afterwards and went to live in Beaufort, S. C. it was more of a finishing school, although he took a select class of younger girls, intermediates.
"This was about 1870. The school became well known,' with a splendid refutation for scholarship and high class objectives in learning and Christian influence. The school was located, as I. said before, on old Center Street, now Atlantic Avenue. on the same site now is a public school.
"When my husband and I moved back to Farnandina from Savannah<text not clear> in 1888, after my mother's death, a Mrs. Ellis came to me and said we could get a public school at O'Neill, the Railroad station named for our family, if I would agree to teach. so a man came from Tallahassoc, connected With the department of Education, and conducted a sort institute for a month. I qualified, and was granted a certificate to teach the school. in the course of the seven years I taught here, the school grew in attendance so that it <text not clear> to be anlarged twice -new rooms being added on to the original room in the form of a 'T'. some children walked walked four miles twice a day to attend. Everybody brought lunch from home. There were no fancy lunch baskets, thermos jugs, or waxed paper. Just plain bread and meat, with cookies, and sometimes cake and pie. No, we had no hot drinks. I always carried a jug of water from New Hops, as it is the best water in the world. We did not have a 10 a.m. rocess - just the hour for lunch. And in the afternoon, we left as soon as I could finish my twenty classes - you see I had all grades from the primer to the advanced, and it was <text not clear> about three o'clock when the, last class was over. It was most interesting work, and I was known as 'the great teacher of Nassau county.'
"I wanted my son, woodward, to bo well education. so when he was far enough advanced, I taught him and two young ladies, so when he was far enough advanced studuies like philosophy, English History, French, and other of the higher branches. The girls carrie Church and Bessie Davis, had only one book between them in the physiology class, studying together. One day carrie said: "Do you believe all the lies in that book?' and Bessie answered: 'Shucks! Course I do.' So I was surprised one day when Carrie church said: 'Mrs. Barnwell, there is a training class for nurses in Jacksonville. Do you think I could qualify?'I told her to put in most of her time on Physiology, she did, and later became one of the first nurses in the old St. Luke's Hospital. She Tarried a Mr. Dodge and I never Heard of her after she left packsnoville.
"The Country Suprinted don't of schools Mr. L. I. Owens and he used to come and given the examinations. They Were oral, as'written examinations did not come in until several years later.
I remember one time Mr. Owens said, If you keep up an average of 80% attendance, we will give you two months extra. I would go two or three miles out of my way on on rainy mornings to pick up the children and get them to school, so as to maintain the required average. The school-house was 50 yards from the station. I would leave home about 8:15 a.m. with Woodward, in a one-seated buggy, and my horse - Lady, would trot me to the school-house in seven minutes. She was high spirited, and so <text not clear> it seemed to me, in getting me to school on time, that sometimes she would, jump straight up! One time she ran away- but that's another story.
"On leaving the schoolhouse after a hard day's work, I would go back to the old plantation and do another day's work in the latter afternoon and evening - cooking supper, getting realy for the next day, and next day, and on Saturday I would go to town with better, eggs, vegetables, etc., to sell.
"After the war, my father hired hands to hired hands to work the fields - paying the Negro men 60 cents per day and the women, 50. For twelve years he cultivated truck, selling quantities of vegetables - carrots, cabbage, tomatoes, sweet potatoes, white potatoes, green corn <text not clear>cucumbers. The land would grow anything, it was so fertile.
"We had a large packing house hear the had wharf on Amelia is- land where the vegetables were stored. A freighter called once a week and the truck was loaded onto two flats (flatboats) and <text not clear>alongside the ship where they were unloaded into the hold.
"Did I have any trouble disciplining pupils? well, yes, I had one experience I will never forget. As a rule the children were anxious to learn and were very tractable, but there was a<text not clear> family moved into that section, they were styled Jumpers' a fanatical sect - and the father said so much learning was dangerous and sinful. One of his sons tried to choke me one day, and in our struggle pulled out a handful of my hair, but I finally conquered him, and told him he could not come back, or I would expel him. It did not matter much, however, as there was only one more week of school. some of the country people' did not <text not clear> an education. The children would say - My father and mother do not know how -to read and write, and they make a good living.
"I used to talk to my pupils about the value of an education and would tell them y-If you write a letter and it is properly written and the words spelled correctly, people will say - That is an educated person.' And 'If you can figure, you can make yourself valuable in business, and. similar talks.
"Not long ago I met a man now living in Atlanta who went to my school at O' Neill Station, and he said: Mrs. Barnwell, if I had only heeacd all the talks you gave me, I would have been a great man.'
"What salary did I receiver At first, $20.00 per month, which aiter four years was increased to $45.00. I furnished my own horse and buggy and drove the 3 and one-half miles to O'Neveill."