Approximately 5,850 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: LIVING ON THE RICHARDS' FARM
Date of First "Writing	February 7, 1959
Name of Person Interviewed	Carrie B.R. Dunlap (white)
Fictitious Name	Caroline B. Richards
Street Address	Four miles south of Winnsboro S. C., on Winnsboro and Co- lumbia Highway
Place	Rockton, S. C.
Occupation	Farner (small truck) chickens eggs, etc for sale
Name of Writer	Lucile Clarke Ford
Name of Reviser	State Office
Just outside the gate of the Richards' home is a bush of "breath of spring" in full bloom. A hedge of the same plant extends along the front of the wired-in plot called the front yard, which is a garden for all kinds of flowers. The walk, diagonal across the yard from the gate to front steps, is bordered inside with rooks and on the outside with a line of bulbs, including "butter and eggs", Jonquils, daffodils, and narcissi. Further out in the yard is a carpet of violets in bloom.
Such were the evidences of Carolina Richards' lore of beauty. And with the artistic setting her skill and energy had created about her home, she was little affected by the gloom of a cloudy, threatening February day.
The front door was looked. This meant that Caroline was probably In the back of the small white cottage, grayed with weathering, and busy with the duties of asking a home for her family, duties that usually filled her day. A trip down the side of the yard and a knock on the window pane brought Caroline to the window, smiling. "Come on in the back. I'm just finishing up the dinner dishes."
We walked through a back porch into the back hall and entered the bedroom. "Have a seat here," said Caroline. "I'll light the fire. I always let it go down when I'm busy in the back. I'm afraid of fire, and I save on the wood. Dan and the boys keep so busy with farm work, and the general up-keep of the place, there's no time to keep stacks of wood in the wood pile."
While Caroline got the box of dry pine and fat lightwood, so plentiful in the woods of the Richards' farm, to kindle a fire, I sat in a small, oak rocking chair before the fireplace, which was cater-cornered in the west and of the room. The smooth cemented facing and hearth was clean, and wrought-iron tongs and andirons were in their place, with a pewter pitcher convenient for warm water at all times. The neat, hand-made, oak-stained mantel is the hand work of Mr. Richards, who, with Bill, the eldest son, did most of the carpenter's work on the farm. Above the mantel hung a framed copy of "A Morning Prayer." A green crockery pot, with wandering jew gracefully falling over the edge of the mantel, sat just under the morning prayer. At one end of the mantel hung a picture of a colorful mountain scene. At the other end of the mantel, a well-polished mirror added cheer to the pine-ceiled, unpainted room, with clean white pine floors. Bright rag rugs, the hand work of Caroline and her daughters, were well placed in front of fireplace, beds, and dressers. The pine logs, with chips thrown on, soon crackled and gave the necessary warmth for a semi-warn afternoon In February.
"Now, if you'll excuse me, I'll change my dress before I sit down. I always rest and enjoy myself more when I can get out of my work clothes. And since Dr. Buckner makes me rest every afternoon, I might as well tidy-up and get all the fun I can out of being lazy. Dr. Buckner says I'm just run-down from overwork and need to eat a lot and rest in daytime as well as nighttime."
With quick, alert movements, Caroline changed into a neat, new, soft shade of blue cotton print, with heavy tatting around the roll collar which she continued to fasten as she went to the dresser to brush up the straying looks of gray hair which were already pinned in a braid coiled on the back of her head. Her erect shoulders and agile step showed no deep soars as a result of childhood hardships forced by the War Between the States, causing Caroline to grow up in poverty and to marry, while still young, a man seventeen years her senior. She has given birth to eight children, seven of which are living.
As she seated herself on the opposite side of the fireplace in a rocking chair, she said! "Last night I was reading my mother's old Bible. When I re-read the family record as Mother wrote it, I was reminded of the visits Aunt Lula made to us and how She and Mother would talk about old times. Yes, Mother had three sisters and four brothers. Aunt Lula died young with consumption. There wasn't any cure for it back in those days. Just as with my brother James, who was crippled. He couldn't get out and play the games the rest of us played. James, we called him Jim for short, was crippled when he was ten years old. He fell off of old Charlie, the horse. He always rode Charlie for the call once or twice a week. Oh, I remember how tired Jim would get sitting by the window and watching us play town-ball and baseball, we needed him to fill out the games, as it took the girls and boys both to make up a game. Jim worried Ma ft lot of the time, wanting something to road. She used to say, 'Why, you have your Bible and Pilgrim's Progress, that's plenty for you to read.' We had the Hews and Herald, Godey's Lady Book, and the Home and Farm paper. The Home and Farm paper same from Louisville, Kentucky. It had ft section for men and one for women. The women's section had cooking receipts, styles, and stories in it. We all were awfully excited the day the magazines would come. Ma had to divide them out to keep us from fighting and getting in a disagreement about them. Bloom's Almanac was good to read, too. Jim knew all about the weather and signs in that. The neighbors lent him what books they had. Ma taught all of us, when it was so we couldn't go to school.
"The roads were so muddy and the weather so cold, it was hard to get to school. No didn't have school but four months in the year. The schoolhouse was Just an old office that Dr. Hill had used. There was a long home-made table down the middle of the room, with high benches at the sides and at each end. My feet used to go to sleep when I sat there with my legs handing off, and in my home-made stockings. Ma always knit all summer long, and Aunt Lula, helped her knit socks and stockings for all our crowd. I wore heavy leather shoes, with brass toes, and shoes were good "hand-me-downs" when they hadn't worn out.
"I had to wear Sister Lizzie's old shoes, and clothes, too, sometime. That old office of Dr. Hill's had shelves all on one wall he used to keep medicines in, but we could use them for books and our dinner buckets."
"What did we carry to school to eat? Why, we had plenty of hogs so we had sausage or sparerib or backbone and some kind of bread, cither corn bread or biscuits, and baked sweet potatoes. Sometimes we just carried fried pies. Ma always dried up peaches and apples-through the summer.
"We had to start soon in the morning. It was about three miles from our house to the schoolhouse, and those old red clay hills froze up and were so muddy and cold. The sun would rise while we were on the way. It was nearly dark when we got home at night. But we would have a good time playing on the way home We had to bring in wood, chips, kindling, and the water from the spring, in the evenings when we got home. The spring was down a big hill.
"Yes, ma'am, my ma end all of her sisters had a said to wait on them. Her brothers had a Negro man, too. But they didn't have anything after the war but a lot of land, and taxes was high on that. I can't tell you nothing about the war only just what Ma told us. Pa was severely wounded. Two of Pa's brothers was killed in the seven days around Richmond. Uncle Abram and Uncle Jerry was fighting side by side. When Uncle Abram was shot down, Uncle Jerry bent down to lift him up, and he was shot right through the back. my pa was sent out foraging for rations to feed the men in the Confederate Army. He had to go to all the homes he could get to. Mrs. Woodruff, old Major Woodruff's mother, gave and gave, 'til, finally, my pa said she was about out of rations herself, and she gave him a whole peck of dried cowpeas.
"After the war, was they ashamed they had to work?" "Lewd, no'm! My ma said they saw so much trouble they got used to anything. Work wan't nothing! They learned to do the things they had been having Negroes to do. My father was a wheelwright.
"He didn't have time to tend much land. Yes'm, he had plenty of land, but no hands to work on it. He could do the blacksmith work without so many hands. Old Uncle Cab Watkins, he was black and greasy looking, but he could do all sorts of work. He helped Pa to run the shop, and they could make buggies, wagons, plowstocks and every kind of farm tools. Uncle Cab out out and smoothed the wood and did the iron work. What kind of iron? They just had to pick up scraps of old worn-out things wherever they could find it and make it over In the shop. Pa, he did painting and upholstering and fixing cushions. They used old hair from trimming up horses. Sometimes they had to use sheep's wool or cotton to stuff the cushions with. They made wire tasks themselves. My pa was real proud of all he could do, and he turned out good jobs. Some of my boys can work just like Pa did. I'm going to show you what Bill has just finished for me."
We went through the front hall into the front roan kept for a sitting room when company came. Caroline said, "Look at this!" It was a small, octagon-shaped, walnut table, with four round-shaped legs grooved with small circles near the top of the table. It was highly polished and a rich walnut color. A far-away look came over her face as she added, "Bill can do anything. He worked his way on through schools, 'til now he's called doctor. He went off to the University of Iowa and got a degree. It's in science and chemistry. He worked up there in the Aluminum works of America. He got big pay and sent home some to help Maggie and Jane. Then he married while he was up there. This is a picture of the girls she was real pretty, but she didn't live long. No, there war't no children. When the depression came. Bill was laid off, and he couldn't get work anywhere. He was so lonely, he game on home. He fixed up things around the place a lot and helped his Pa on the farm. Then after he had been home about a month or two, the C.W.A. started up, and he asked the heads of that for work. They first made him timekeeper on one of the jobs. Then they had him to pay off the workers. That was particular work. He never did get back in the work like he had with the aluminum company.
"He's in charge of the Fire Department in town. And he's married again. His wife is pretty and smart, too. She's been working in the post office for years, and makes a big salary. Her mother is living in the house with them and takes care of the baby, a fine, pretty, little girl. She'll be a year old come March. They've bought a house In Winnsboro and rent a room upstairs to a county nurse. Both working, they can soon pay for it.
"They said that's the only way they could get a home of their very own. Dan and I always said we hoped all of our children could have a home. We never wanted then to live in a rented house.
"Yes, me and Dan always thought it'd be nice to live in town just so's we could have the electric lights and a bathroom like ay brother has in Columbia. But we'd never thought about such a thing as we'd live to have lights and a bathroom out here in the country four miles from Winnsbore. Two years ago the rural electric people told Dan they were running lines all about up the highways Our place being right on the highway, it didn't cost us much. Yes, all the neighbors around has lights now.
"You've been sitting so steady-like in that chair, don't you want to go to the bathroom? Yes'm, we's that proud of all them fixtures, I likes to show them off."
The afternoon was nearly gone, approaching five o'clock, the time on the Richard? a farm to "look after the night work" milking, feeding stock, and laying in a supply of night wood before dark. When, returned, with hands washed in Caroline's clean, porcelain lavatory, which she took such pride in keeping white, Caroline came back from the kitchen with a tray of milk, crisp cookies, some sliced caramel cake, with a lucious filling, which melted in my mouth, and glasses of fruit juice.
"Since I have to live by Dr. Duckner's directions, I eat something this time of day. Won't you have something?"
"Yes, indeed! I can never resist cake and milk, such as this, and I get fruit juices often," I answered. Knowing the clean, sanitary methods used in handling food in the Richards' home, I did not hesitate to drink sweet milk there.
Caroline added I "Ma always had something she could serve the neighbors when they came in and, even when I was a little girl, I can recellect her sending me down to Pa's shop to take him and old Uncle Cab buttermilk and corn bread. Pa said he worked better when he had them extra victuals.
"But I never finished tolling you about how Dan and me got all of our children through school We wanted them to have more schooling than we got. kate, my oldest, didn't go to school until she was eleven years old. I taught her all I could about reading, writing, spelling, and arithmetic. Then she wont to the little country school throe miles from us. She studied hard and learnt all she could get there in about six years, along with reading and studying at at home, too. Back then, when you was old enough and could stand the State Teacher's Examination and got a certificate, you could get a school and teach. Kate took the examination and got a country school. That paid her $40.00 a month and ran about four months in the year. Then she decided she'd take the business course at Draughon's. When she got through there, she got a job in the Associated Charities in Columbia. She worked there about two years. One day she said to me, 'Ma I don't get satisfaction out of making out the reports, writing letters, and keeping office for the Associated Charities, I just believe I'll go in training and learn to be a nurse.' She'd been a good girl helping with expanses here at home.
"So I thought, 'Now if Kate ain't happy a-working in that office, and She wants to study to be a nurse. I'll do all I can to get bar through.' It did not cost us anything. She went up to Baltimore at St. Joseph's and got through there. Then she studied some more at Johns Hopkins. They got her to come back over to St. Joseph's and be superintendent of the operating room.
"When she'd done that for three years, she volunteared to be a foreign missionary to China. They sent her on as a medical missionary to a place called Nanking, to learn the Chinese language before she was sent out to work. After that, she was sent to SutSien Hospital to work in a mission hospital. She carried on a Chinese nurses' training school, and many's the Chinese girl she's trained to 'minister to the needs of their poor people that's in need of being taken care of. She was then sent on to a hospital in Hohin-king in Ku Province. She is still there.
"Kato writes me that sho ain't never worried nor afraid of the dangers.
She feels like she will be taken care of Yes, ma'cm, there's plenty of fighting around her, Why, she said even the grown men go to pieces in some of the fighting. Where she is, the Chinese lovo hen. So, when the fighting started there and they told her she just must get out, some Chinese men carried her in a chair covered with a raincoat. She couldn't take everything she had, just carried her account books; She had to leave her clothes. The men ran through the nob of fighting people. Her friends that saw it told her they expected to see her killed any minute. After they got through, a big cheer went up, they were so happy that they could save her. She's gone on back to the save place, where she is currying on her work with the nurses.
"Yes, we bought our place soon after we were married, and Dan made money in fuming then. We havn't made much since the boll weevil struck us, but we always had come livestock.
"The children helped each other through school. Then, when ay girls went to Winthrop, they didn't spend so such money. They wore uniforms, and tuition was given then. The other three, Maggie, Jane, and Lilly, all went to Winthrop four years. Lilly took the domestic science and housekeeping. She bad a county as home demonstration agents When she had worked there about two years, she got married. Her husband is a farmer. He's a lot older than she is. She teachers in the school there at Hartsville, where she lives.
"Jane has taught all of twelve years; ten of then at the same place, Graham, North Carolina. She went up to New York and studied in the summers. She said she looks just one more summer to got her M. A. degree.
"Maggie is next to Jane. She taught some, but she didn't like teaching school. So she got some office work in Washington. She took one of these Civil Service examinations and got the job. While she was in Washington, she studied at night in a school callad Strayer's. When so many was without work, they out her off. She come home and went to Columbia and finished her course in business at Draughon's. Now she has a good job in Spartanburg with the Department of Agriculture. She makes good and likes it.
"The car? Yes, since they are all working now, Maggie and Jane bought us the car. They leave it here for us, and they use it when they are home. Dan nor me drive; so we don't use it much. We go to Winnsboro and to Columbia when we have business. Once in a great while we go to a picture show. Dan keeps a horse and buggy, and that's the way he does our selling vegetables, milk, fruits, chickens, and eggs. That gives us plenty money to spend. Then, we just about raise everything we have on the table. My girls say they like what we have here better than when they are boarding la towns. We always have milk and butter and all the chickens and eggs we can eat. Dan has a good garden, summer and winter. In winter we have collards, cabbage, turnips, and greens, some kalo, and spinach, carrots, onions, and sweet potatoes. It won't be so long 'til we can plant our spring garden. I believe our strawberries are going to be a failure. They don't look like they are going to bear any hardly. We have a lot to sell la good years. Bill has already been spraying and pruning our fruit trees. We don't keep hogs now. We don't eat much neat, and Dan does not plant any more grain than we need for the table. We've found out we are bet-tor off with othor neats than pork. I always sell enough chickens, eggs, and butter to buy the meats we need.
"Didn't I tell you about Joe, my boy that works with the railroad? He's been, in that railroad office about ever since he's been through school. I reckon about fifteen years.
"Jim and Bob, they just stay here on the farm and help with the work. They didn't ears much about school, and, after they finished in Winnsboro at Mt. Zion Institute under Mrs. Peyton, they didn't want to go no further. That's a lot more education than me and Dan got when we was growing up.
"You know I told you we always wanted our children to hare better changes than we had. Sometimes it's been a hard struggle. But as long as the other children wanted to go to school, and helped each other so much, we was glad to do without spending. We always say we are happy when we are doing for others. I don't grieve about none of the work I've done, nor the way I have dressed. I never buy much to wear. I like to take care of what I have. Cotton dresses are good enough to suit me. I do have one good silk dross and a nice hat, coat, shoes, and even to gloves now. But I didn't have near that much when my children was growing up and in school. "Lawd, yes'm! Dan and me was oven happier then than we are now, with the children doing so many things for us here at home. But my girls say to me when they come home: 'Ma, we are old enough now to appreciate this home and our education and the kind of home life we have always had.' This place is not fine, but there's so much to enjoy, what with all the things we have around us and knowing it belongs to us, with no debts and mortgages.
"We had saved up some money and had it in the Bank of Winnsbore when it closed up in 1951. We do get some of that back all along. Sixty-five percent they have paid back now, and that's a lot better than nothing.
"Each and every one of us say we'd ruther do with this place than live in a finer house that we don't own. I sec plenty won an dressed in fine clothes, going in big ears, and living in brink houses what they had to borrow the Honey to build, Well, that's all right, too; but I hear my son in town say they spend up all their husbands make and don't save to pay down on their debts. We'd do without a oar any day before we'd give up our home All the people living on the Winns boro Mill hill live in good houses, and with pretty furniture and nice green grass yards, with fine shrubs growing in their yards. But then that belongs to the United States Rubber Company people, and I tell you there's nothing like knowing your hone is your'n. Dan and me says we could not live without the scenes we see around us. Just looking out of our window, as we sit here, looks as pretty as any picture you can buy at the store all painted up. Every time of the year, the trees and these hills - some rod clay, and sons core rod with grass - looks pretty to us. I don't never get lonesome. I like to sit quiet and read and write to the children that's away from home. We would of hated for our children to have been brought up In the Mill Village and a-working in the will. Seems like to me, we are more healthier than where people lives all crowded up.
"Well, we don't spend such now for doctors and doctor's medicine. When the children were growing up, their tonsils had to be took out. Some of them had adenoids, too. But they took then out in clinics, and it didn't cost so much. Maggie has had the cans and broke twice. but it knit and got well. Last summer, Dr. Buckner sent her to the hospital in Columbia to have a minor operation. She's been sights better since that. She don't have that old pain in her side and back like she used to. Some of mine had whooping cough, but Lilly never did have it. Then, I was shore enough scared when Joe had the scarlet fever when he was going to school in Winnsboro. No, we done Just what Dr. Buck-ner told us to, and none of the rest took it. Tom had the diptheria once, too. The doctors give a serum, and he wan't sick long. Of course, I have to be particular how, and Dan does, too; but then we are sort of worn-out-like. We have to rest more and be careful how we eat, but I reckon, for old people sixty and seventy-seven years old, we are right lucky. We're thankful, toe, that our children are well shout all the time, 'ceptin' for colds and such like once in awhile.
"Mine don't care shout running around nights or no time. They take after me and Dan, liking to read a lot. Then we play checkers here together. The girls and two of ray boys play card games now, but they learned that since they been grown. And I see no ham that it's doing then, when they don't slight their work to play. Do you think it is?"
"No," I replied. "I believe we all need recreation, and such games for grown people can be played sanely and furnish fine amusement for the young people."
"Dan never liked to go around and get into arguments about politics, and our boys are the sane. Do we vote? "Yes, ma'am, ay girls vote same as the boys. Each one knows why they want to vote for the one they do. We all voted against the liquor, and I know we'd be a heap better off if we didn't have it. None of our children drink. But we sell our produce to the families in the mill, and sometimes some of the women tells Dan that they ain't got the money to pay, as their man drink it all up. But we been selling there long enough to know the people, and some of the best women has drinking husbands. But they generally pay sooner or later, and Dan sees they are in need and gives to them sometimes. We try to vote for up-standing citizens in our town and county. How, if all of the officers were as good as our probate judge, and the clerk of court, we'd have the laws enforced. Dan and me have tried to teach our children, as they were growing up, to appreciate good and honest man and woman who stood for right.
"We've been glad enough for the Government work those lest years. As I told you, we lost in the Bank of Winnsboro when it closed up, and Bill, Lilly, and Maggie, all was home without work. I've told you about Bill having a Job when they had the C.W.A. and then some of the other work, too, 'til he got on in the town as a paid firerman. Lilly went around helping the women that was on the relief rolls to can. And Haggle's job now with the Department of Agriculture is one of these new jobs in the soil conservation work. Haggie said to me the last time she was homes "Ma, we could get along and have enough to eat and a place to live, but I am bettor satisfied to be working and making something.' And she enjoys her work. They are all saving with money, too."
It was getting dark in the room where Caroline and I were sitting, when I realised I must go home in order for Caroline to have her supper at her regular hour, six o'clock. She went with me to the gate, and, while gathering a bunch of flowers for me, she said. "Be sure to come back on Tuesday afternoon at 2:30 when the Presbyterian Auxiliary is meeting with me. They always want to know all about Kate and her work in China." I accepted her invitation as I drove off waving to her standing in the gatew