In an otherwise identical version the following handwritten comment appears on the top of page 12707: "g-WTC,"
January 11, 1939
Jim Ramsay,
Murray Pike
Paris, Tennessee
Farmer on Relief
Nellie Gray Toler, writer
Revised by Lipscomb and
Aswell.
PRIDE OR NO PRIDE
"I'm pretty tired. Walking them two miles ain't no play for an old rheumatic man like me. I think I'll jist set a spell and rest before I start back."
Jim Ramsay grasped the back of an old chair, pulled it nearer the counter, and slowly sat down.
The clerk of the relief warehouse had just helped him pack his basket with groceries. The old man placed it beside the chair where he could keep an eye on it. "Don't want to let them git away from me," he said. "Supposed to last a month, but they don't. Do good to make what they give me last two weeks. Have to put out extry before the month's out.
"You know, I live about two mile out on the Paris and Murray Pike in a little old house on an old high hill. 'Tain't much house but it's home to Jim Ramsay. I still owe four hundred dollars on it. It might bring six or seven hundred dollars if anybody needed a home. The house ain't in very good shape but it's good enough for Jim Ramsay. I got no kick coming. I got me a house and I git my groceries give to me."
He rubbed his withered knotty hands together and pushed long straight hair out of his eyes.
"I once had a good home paid for when I had a good job. I worked at the L & N Shops for seventeen years. I raised my family of three boys and a girl to be grown and I put them all through high school excepting my baby boy. He was in his third grade in high school when him and his mammy taken and leaved me. The others was all away and at work with good jobs by that time.
"It was meddling folks started the trouble in my family. She had two old maid sisters, my wife did, that jist lived on us most of the time and tried to run our affairs. They dinged on my wife all our married life. They never did want her to marry when they couldn't. Jist jealous is the reason. Well, I tried to keep the home together for the children, but my wife listened to them sisters. Some of the neighbors interfered, too. They jist meddled. I didn't run around none. I stayed at home and minded my own affairs.
"I've always been a quiet home-type of person. Liked to stay at home. I never did believe in going to dances or shows and such like. A man's place when his day's work is through is at home where he belongs with his wife and his family. I use to farm but I got the good job at the L & N Shops. I held it for seventeen years and bought me a good home there in West Paris. Furnished it good enough for anybody and I don't care who. It was good stuff, too, and all we needed for four children and their mammy.
"Well, as I said, them sisters kept on dinging all the days. Everything I done was wrong. Couldn't even buy the groceries to suit them. But I kept working hard. Many a day I've worked all day with wet clothes froze to me. But I kept on for seventeen years working and trying to please three cantankerous women. It was bad enough when I had a job, but when they cut off so many at the shop and I was one of them, my life was terrible. I tramped the streets but couldn't git a job nowheres. Didn't know nothing else to do but rent a farm somewhere and try farming again.
"Well, my wife said she'd never live on a farm again. She jist didn't ever aim to do it. She aimed to live there in town. She wouldn't rent out our house in town and move to a farm with me. Well, I couldn't set in town and feed them all. Of course the children was working, all except the baby, but I couldn't set back and let the younguns keep us up when I was plenty able to work as anybody.
"So I rented a farm and stayed on it. A wife's rightful place is with her husband, but she wouldn't come with me. I kept on trying to farm. Went home every time I could. But she kept up her tarnatious nagging for me to give her the deed to the place there in town. She wanted everything. I tried to git her to let's sell that place and buy a farm. No sirree! She wouldn't do that. Then I offered to sell and divide everything and I'd make part payment on a farm and let her have the rest of the money and half the household stuff. She wouldn't do that. She wanted everything.
"It got to the place she wouldn't live with me as a wife and hadn't for a long time. And she told me if I didn't deed her the place and everything she was going to sue for divorce and everything I had. Well, I didn't think that was fair and I told her that I'd never deed it. Didn't really think she'd law me for it. But she did and I didn't have no money to fight it. She sued me for torture, and everything I reckon that human nature could think of. I took it all. She got the place. She got all the furniture. She took it all, but the lawyer got the money and all the place brought nearly, so she didn't have much left."
He shook his bushy head. "Well, she rathered to live with the children than me. So when the trial was over I come to this little old place I've got here now. I started out all over again without a bedstead or nothing to cook with or anything at all--not even a scratch of a bedquilt or nothing. I tried truck farming. Kept patching the old outhouse up till I could get by and added a piece at a time as I could git till I got what's in the house now.
"I needed a woman to make a home for me and there was a Routon girl. Sue--Susie Routon--and she needed a home. So I married her and she come to live with me and share my trials with me. She was good to me and we have three children, one boy nine years old, one girl seven, and the baby is six years old. She was forty year old the sixth day of May and I'm now sixty-seven. We got along good together. Now, we didn't have the things like me and my first wife, but Susie was good to help me make a home and share with me what we had and try to git more together. It's been hard. Sometimes we had food and sometimes we didn't, but we tried to keep the children from going hungry. Of course, couldn't do for them like I did my first bunch though. I've been married twelve year to her now.
"All my other children is grown and married. I never see them. They's all got good jobs but hardly know their daddy. They're too good for me they think. I worked hard trying to educate them and did. Now they turned their back on me soon as I got down and out and they had good jobs theirselves. The baby has never spoke to me since me and his mam parted. The others jist barely do.
"I hadn't seen my girl for five years and I worship her. When I go through McKenzie, I stop to see her. She is Manager of the Western Union there. She's friendly to me and even asked me down to eat supper one time with her last year and I went. Her mammy lives with her but she wouldn't come in and say a word to me. My girl's friendly, but she don't act like I was her dad. Jist a casual stranger she's being friendly to."
Jim Ramsay scratched his head, pulled an old cotton string from his pocket, and wrapped it around one finger. "Well, for some reason it's funny to me. They all hate me and I done my best for them. Give them all any dad could give children and was always good to them. Never shipped one of them out of the house in my life but they all clung to their mother. Such is life.
"Now since they find I'm down and out completely, they give me a few old clothes. Their clothes is good and they wear them till they git tired of them, but they're still new. Then they git some others and send the old ones to me. They're good enough for me. I'm proud to git them. But none of them never has been to see me. When I got down sick and the doctors give me up and notified them, none of them come on the place and never sent me a thing. After I got up, I got a bundle through the mail, with a few old clothes I was awful thankful to git. They all has younguns, so they put in a few childrens' clothes, too. They ain't never seen them or me either.
"It sure makes life mighty hard to raise children to be grown and them turn against you jist because you lose a good job and can't git another. I've always tried to work and do the very best I could regardless of what happened. If I couldn't git a job at a dollar I worked for fifty cents as long as I was able to work.
"I tried to git on my feet but ain't had very good health. Been subject to rheumatism, too bad for good health. My wife never did have no health much after the first baby come. She had a streak of insanity in her family. Her mammy, Lydia Routon, died in the asylum, but I didn't know that neither till my wife begun to git odd. See, she got snake-bit and completely lost her mind. She's been in the asylum now for a long, long time--most ever since the last baby come, and it's six years now. Well, I tried to make a go of it, looking after the three babies, trying to keep the boy in school. I ain't got no clothes fitten to send him but I try the best I can for I sure want him to have an education if he can git it.
"I had a little garden and I trucked around some and done the best I could. But I ain't been able to farm none and ain't been in several years. My hands is all stove up with rheumatism. I'm all drawed over from it, too. Got a milk cow for the children, but I can't hardly milk it. Well, I had a few old chickens. Somebody stole all of them while I was down in bed. Now I ain't got nothing but the milk cow. No stock or nothing. Got to catch me a ride in and out of town when I come for my 'modities. Sometimes have to walk, when I'm able. Had to walk all the way today because nobody wouldn't pick me up. Guess I looked too much like a tramp in my ragged clothes, but I try to keep them clean even if they is patched and ragged.
"I got along by myself best I could till about a year and a half ago. Then I got sick and couldn't work a lick. I had to ask for help. No way out of it. I sure hurt me to ask for help. It jist got to where I had to. Looked mighty hard to have four grown children with good jobs making good money, all of them. Two is electricians, one's manager of a plant at Huntingdon, one's a Western Union manager at McKenzie. It mortified me to ask outsiders to help feed me and my babies when I got to where I wasn't able. But wasn't nothing else to do.
"I've been to all the doctors with my rheumatism. I've tried everything I ever heard of. Ain't got much faith in doctors now. I can't git no better--jist suffer and draw all the time. My hands ain't got no grip left in them. The doctors said it was working in the shop yards so long in wet clothes all day and trying to plow old wet muddy ground to make a living with nowhere to sleep and no decent bed or place to stay is what got me to that point of rheumatism. No cure for me now. Jist drag along.
"I am doing the best I can to git by now. Takes all I can git because for the last six months I ain't been able to strike a lick of work. Nothing left for doctor and drug bills and clothes and things.
"I'm trying so awful hard to keep the boy in school. The children is smart, too. I kept the children for a year myself. Then I got down sick and had to ask for help for them. Wouldn't never done it for myself, but I couldn't see them three babies starve, pride or no pride. Of course, I couldn't cook things they needed, wash for them, and do for them. My rheumatism was mighty, mighty hard.
"I sent my first children word when I got down and out and asked them to come to see me and help me for the sake of my babies who was their own half brothers and sisters. I told them I needed help and needed it bad. Ain't never seen a one of them since. Then I ask Relief to help me some. I've been gitting aid something like a year now. I git twenty dollars a month for me and the babies and the groceries they give me here once a month. At that, it's awful hard to live with feeding three growing children and myself. But I'm mighty thankful for this much help, for I don't know what in the world I'd do if it wasn't for them helping me.
"If I had a good job and making good money, them other children'd all be hanging around, I know, like they done till I lost my job before. I love my grandbabies. They've all four got children. I went to see two of them when I heard about them. Their daddies wouldn't speak to me and my own sons didn't want me to see them. But their wives brought them out on the porch and let me look at them. That's the only times I ever seen them at all.
"After I got down and out, a Lavada Eaker that was on relief too comed to live with me and keep the children. She got married to a Connor but he ain't working and the Relief is feeding bath of them. We've jist got two rooms and a hall so the place is crowded. We ain't got but two old bedsteads, so the six of us sleeps in them. Need some bed covers awful bad, too. The boy ain't gitting to go to school now because he ain't got no shoes. No clothes, neither, for this bad weather. Want to git him some shoes and a coat if I can out of this check when it comes. Don't hardly know how I can because it takes about all for the entry groceries. I don't like to ask for credit. Guess I couldn't git it noways. They know I'm down and out and sick and not able to pay no bills.
"It's a shame for a man to be in the shape I'm in. I'm ashamed of it, but what can I do about it more than I'm doing? I hope God will give me strength. If he don't, I can't see what I'll do. I don't see how I can manage to see my second children grown."