July 14, 1939
Arthur J. Moore (Negro)
420 North Myers Street
Charlotte, N.C.
Pressing Club Operator
Cora Bennett, writer
Ups and Dones
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Camp Greene	Camp Polk
Mooresville	Smith’s Junction
Durham	Duke City
Biddleville	Booker Heights
"I am the seventh son of a seventh son and if that thing worked right I'd be one of the luckiest men alive, but it don't work, leastways not as far as I'm concerned. I guess if they'd been just seven children I'd of stood a better chance of runnin' into some luck. When a boy's one among sixteen children he don't stand much of a chance. That's how many it was of us in my family and everyone of us was born and raised right here where they had Camp Polk during the War. My father was from Mississippi and my mother come from Alabama and I don't know how they come to be here.
"We farmed and I never remember any of us sufferin' for anything. My father owned a small farm out there and rented extra land. We lived pretty good for country folks, I guess. We was so near town we walked in just most any time we wanted to, but all of us went to school out there. That is, we went to what little school there was. Don't know as they was anything like grades in them days. We just went to school, far as I can remember. We had a short session in the summer and a short one in the winter too.
"I guess the schoolin' we got would mount up to about the seventh grade now. I finished the grades and tried to go away to take up a trade but I never did get it. I went to college a part of two terms. What I was tryin' to get was the tailorin' trade but they didn't give the trade so I finally come on back and give up the whole idea. My eyes went bad on me anyway so after that it wasn't much I could do towards studyin' nohow. I just went on to work. I feel like if I'd gone to school I'd been prepared to make a better livin' than I now make, but I think I've made pretty good as it is. Of course I haven't made the money I'd like to make. I've fallen short by far of makin' enough money to keep up all the obligations I'd liked to kept up.
"My father did what he could for all of us. They was 'leven boys and five girls. One o' my sisters took Normal training at the state school for colored, but she married and went out to Ohio to live. Another one o' my sisters went to college. She's principal of a grammar school here in town. Most o' my brothers went north, as did one o' the girls. Personally, I believe in small families. I guess you can see that, 'cause I don’t have but three children. And still I don't believe in these here birth control practices they got these days. The main reason why I don't believe in it is because I believe it's dangerous to a person's health.
"Well, I went to work as a presser in a cleanin' establishment for $6 a week, and that was plenty because I wasn’t married and didn’t have nobody but myself. I stayed here and went out to Camp Polk to see my folks sometimes.
"It wasn’t long after that till I met my wife. She come up here visitin’ and I got stuck on her and followed her back up to smith’s Junction. And after I got to goin' up there so much a man offered me a job in a pressin’ club and I acted like a fool and took it. Us two decided we wanted to marry. I stayed up there and worked ’bout three years after that and then I come back to Riverton and brought two back with me that I didn’t take up there; my wife and our first baby.
"I didn’t have no job when I first got here so I had to take my little family out to Camp Polk to stay with my folks and was just about to leave for Duke City, where I heard I might get a job, but I got a job here at a laundry in the cleaning and pressing department and I been there every since. That’s been about twenty-three or four years ago now. I been workin’ there ever since. I love the work, been doin’ it all my life, and couldn’t do anything else now if I wanted to, I don’t suppose.
"No sooner than I got this job I moved my family to town and took some rooms. At first I was makin’ $9 a week. (I have made as much as $40 a week durin’ war times.) We didn’t like where we was livin’, you know it’s a hard thing for two families to try to live together anyhow, so we moved into a five-room house. We thought we'd buy the house so I bought it through the Building and Loan and paid every nickel of the $2,000 it coat.
"I had reached one of my goals in life--to own my own home. Life was all I could wish for at that time. In the mean time my father and mother had moved out in Booker Heights here in town. They sold the little farm, as most of the children was grown then and gone away from home. My father bought a nice little place out in Booker. My sister was teachin' then so she helped 'em pay for it. I didn’t have a thing to worry about but givin' my chaps what they wanted. Everything was rosy.
"But that didn’t last very long. My wife took a notion she wanted the house remodeled. Well, it was a pretty old house but we coulda lived there a sight longer without touchin' it. I had been out of the Building and Loan about four months. So when we got to figgerin' on the cost of remodelin' the house we saw it was gonna take right smart money. Then we decided to tear down the house and build a new one just like we wanted it and then we'd know we wouldn't have nothin' to think about after that. And that's where my trouble started.
"We went on into it. The chaps was pretty good size then so my wife started to workin' out as a maid to help me some. We built an eight-room frame house with a basement and it cost about $5,000. Well, my Building and Loan was exactly $15.68 a week at that time and with my wife's help we made it all right.
"Then they cut me from $35 a week to $30 and still I paid my bills. Finally they cut me as low as $20 and there wasn’t no way in the world for me to pay no $15.68 in the Building and Loan and live off the rest. I figgered every way in the world I could to try to save my property but I couldn't find no way out. The depression just got me and my property went up for sale.
"I couldn't hardly take that blow but I had to; my hands was tied. They didn't have nothing like no Federal Loan then and things was in bad fix with everybody. You just couldn't borrow no money from nobody. And for the three years we lived in the new house I nearly worked myself to death. I'd come home from my work on Sad'day evenin's change my clothes, and go right back up town and work in the barber shop till twelve o'clock. And then to see all my work go for nothin'. Well, I just hate to talk about it. It took every bit o’ the pep in me out. I don't guess I'll ever get over it.
"We moved here in this apartment and I guess I'll be here the rest o' my life. Don't seem like nothin' interests me much now. I don't ever expect to fool 'long with tryin' to buy no home no more; fact is I know I won't. I try to keep up enough insurance to bury me and leave my wife a little somethin' if I was to die. Then I hope the boys would look after their mother if she got too old to look after herself. At the rate they're goin' now they gonna be livin' right here with us for a long time. I don't think either one of 'em is thinkin' of gettin' out soon. As long as they want to stay here I'm perfectly willin' for 'em to do so.
"I sent 'em to school as long as they would go. My oldest boy finished high school. I told him if he'd work and help himself I'd do what I could to help him through college. But he said he didn't want to go and I didn’t try to persuade him, because if he didn't want to go it would just be wasted money. The two youngest ones didn’t finish high school; one stopped in the nineth grade, the other in the tenth. I begged 'em to go on and at least finish high school but they didn't want to so I didn't force 'em. I wish they had seen far enough to want to go and to take some trade to make 'em better able to make a livin' for themselves, but they couldn't see it that way. So I let 'em alone.
"Now I take life more or less easy, that's about all I can do. I take an active part in my lodges organizations and in the church. That's where I go to keep my mind off all of this other. I keep pretty busy too. I belong to three lodges. When I'm not workin' I spend the greatest part of my time in the clubroom. I go to all the conventions that meet. You talkin' 'bout swell times, we really has 'em when we go to these big cities all over the country to convention.
"Groin' to my lodge meetin's and church meetin's just about takes up all my time. I fool 'long with all the music organizations in the church because I love music. I used to be able to sing too, but now I've about ruined my voice singin' so many different things; now I don't know whether I sing bass, tenor or what.
"I'm not a person to go around dindin' fault with every kind of pleasure young folks want to do. I think movin' pictures and sports of all kind are all right. I don't see nothin' wrong with havin' 'em on Sunday, neither. All I'd say would be not to have 'em durin' church hours. I think some of our people need somethin' to do to occupy their minds on Sunday evenin's. They might not get in other devilment if they had some place to go. Naturally, I believe in temperance in all things, though. I go to church every Sunday, pay my dues, and don't think there'd be anything wrong if I wanted to go to see a hall game in the afternoon.
"But you know what I've decided to do: Not to let nothin' worry me but so much. I had my ups and my downs and there's not a thing I can do about it all now. Whatever comes I try to meet the situation the best that I can under the circumstances, and the rest I let go."
