Alabama
Belmont, Alabama
October 4, 1938
Ruby Pickens Tartt
CARRIE DYKES MIDWIFE.
Carrie's house is a dilapidated affair; the roof leaks in bad weather, the gallery needs patching in a dozen places, and the rickety front steps give under the slightest weight, but her yard is aglow with flowers. She has done her best to make the place cheerful with zinnias, marigolds, perennial sunflowers and verbena; and their bright pattern somehow reflects her attitude toward life.
Carrie was a child when she first went to work, and from childhood work is all she has ever known. Now, at sixty-eight she finds herself with a "house full of chillun" and an old Negro woman (no relative of hers, but simply a helpless old woman she has taken in) to provide for. And, somehow, she manages to wring a living of sorts from wornout acres which have been planted to cotton since slavery times, meanwhile pursuing her days In contentment and finding in them apparently more enjoyment than many of us in happier circumstances.
Carrie was born at Belmont, about ten miles from Coatopa, and has never moved far from the "white folks" that raised her. She is very proud of the fact that she grew up in her white folks' house, for as a little girl she came to stay with Mrs. H. G. Mitchell whose sister, Miss Gillespie, was an invalid to whom Carrie.
"A 'oman I knew, whut wuz ailing, went to her, en she say, 'Dis here a little ole brown-skinned woman. Short hair. Small feet. Small hands. (Again Carrie's voice was almost a chant). She had a girl. She come up wrong. She laughed at her!' Den she said twuz a sumpin in de water de woman wuz drinking en tole jes' where ter find de spring. En I could witness dat, 'cause I wuz lookin' fer ducks en saw hit. I didn't know whut wuz happening den, but twuz jes' like de conju' woman said hit wuz. I seen her at de spring, standin' over de water lack dis, talkin' to hit. En she put a sumpin in de water bucket, look lack a green pepper. So I could witness dat, 'cause I seen hit all, jes' lack de conju' woman said hit wuz. But how she knowed, I couldn't say. She went in de house a couple uv times whilst we wuz talking, so er co'se she could er cut hit in de cards." (To Carrie this seemed to constitute a perfectly legitimate means of obtaining information entirely disassociated with occult powers of any sort!) "But whether she cut hit in de cards or how she knowed hit I couldn't say.
"Wish Aunt Susan would talk ter yawl about conju'.
(Aunt Susan had replied to all insistance with a stubborn, "I doan know nothin' about hit") All I knows is jes' whut I'se heered from her en she could tell you plenty. She could sho tell you 'bout slave'y time, too, she's talked ter me about hit a lot. Make her tell you about when she wuz pulling corn en they leave de quarter ter go down ter de fiel' in de mawning dey take er thick plank en pile dirt on hit en put a fire on top en put de hoe cake on, en make'em carry hit on dey haids. En by de time dey be done get ter de fiel's whar dey 'sposed ter work, de bread ud be cooked en done, ready ter eat. Lawsy, you ain't never heered er dat? Lots er times we do dat en parch peanuts whilst us walking along wherever we'ze goin'; en reach up on de way en pull de peanuts outen de fire en eat 'em. No'm, hit doan never burn our haids, de dirt en de plank be'ze too thick fer dat."
I hated to leave, but saying good-bye all around I walked down through the front yard gay with fall flowers, followed by Carrie and the children, who formed a semi-circle around the car and stared silently with bright little animal eyes at a respectful distance. In the middle of voluble invitations to be coming back, she suddenly remembered some information she could get from me. "You know de County Nurse over in Livingston?" She asked. "When you gits back ter town, I wish you'd call her en tell her my health ain't so good en when kin I come in fer treatmint? She got plenty er postal cards, ain't she? (Poor Carrie, so anxious not to impose on anyone's kindness) Ask her to write me one, please ma'am."
I backed the car around, sending the "young 'uns" scurrying and at the bend of the road a glimpse in the rear vision mirror showed Carrie and her "house full of chillun" still waving a silent good-bye. I felt that my visit had been a great event in the quietness of her made herself generally useful, waiting on her and at night sleeping on a cot in the same room. Her mother, who had been a slave belonging to John Worley, and Aunt Creasy, her grandmother, worked in the same household and lived nearby, so she was never lonesome or homesick. The Mitchells were good to her and she rememebers them with affection and her childhood with happiness, especially the dolls they gave her. "I always had plenty of dolls to play with,” she smiled.
Miss Minnie Gillespie was unable to walk, and every morning she took the air sitting in a wheelbarrow which Carrie's father pulled through the gardens and perhaps a short distance down the road. "Now I'll tell you sumpin funny on Miss Minnie," said Carrie, laughing with anticipatory relish. One afternoon she wuz settin' on de gallery en I wuz settin' on de floor right beside her playing with my dolls. . . .I 'members it jes' as good! Miss Agnes en Miss Jennie come callin'. Miss Agnes wuz kinda po'ly herself. She had spells. Eh dat afternoon she had er spell, right on de gallery. She screamed en screamed en de hair (she had pretty long hair down to here” - she indicated her waist) “switch on her haid. Lack dis," and shook her wooly mop.
"When Miss Agnes screamed, now, everybody run off en lef po' Miss Minnie. En she so skeered she jump up en run in de house en lock de door! En she never walked a step fo' dat long ez I'd knowed her, but when Miss Agnes screamed hit skeered dat sumpin offen her, en she wuz all right from den on!"
After Miss Minnie's recovery and her services as nurse were no longer needed, Carrie was given other tasks and she continued to stay with the Mitchells. During this time, she attended school, finishing up to the seventh grade, and this elementary education was doubtless of great use to her later. When she married she moved a short distance from her "white folks" and she and her husband farmed for them. Some years later, Aunt Susan, who now lives with her and who go with her on her rounds. Thus acquiring experience, Carrie also became a midwife after a time.
She says that she has brought some fifty or sixty babies into the world and that she used to have more white than colored patients. In fact, one white lady relied on her so that "she say she gotta send atter me don't keer whar she got" beamed Carrie. Sometimes she would arrive before the doctor and bring the baby herself, and she says that she's seen "some swift boys, but not many girls is fast." Now the local nurse comes once a month to hold meetings and "explain the new rules," but Carrie has been unable to attend lately and has given up her practice, if such it may be termed, for this reason. She says she "ain't worthy of de job ef she can't do whut she sought to."
At this point in our conversation, Carrie paused to deny any ability to foretell before birth whether the baby would be a boy or girl. But she added, "I don't know with peoples, but I do know with beasts. If you gonna breed a mare en you turns her haid to de East, de colt'll be lack de mare. Ef you turns her haid to de West, de colt be er horse. Poppa tole me dat, an tole me always breed a mare nine days atter de last colt come, en I ain't knowed hit ter fail. Dey's a colt in de pastur' now what'll prove whut I say!"
The high point in Carrie's life seems to be a storm which struck the neighborhood some years ago. "Hit wuz de frightenest thing I ever knowed," she said. "Hit blew down four houses, en all de time hit wuz blowing I jes' walked up en down slapping my han's en praying 'Lord hab mercy, save us Jesus!' My sister-in-law run out of her house, en I doan see how she made hit ter my place, de wind wuz blowing so bad. I seen her run out de door, en jes' den er big tree blew down ercross her house - she'd er been kilt so ef she hadn't er lef!' Aunt Susan wuz here wid me too en de storm blew a tree down on her roof, but hit didn't knock de roof in. En de wind tuck her hat whut wuz hanging on a peg en carried hit up on de hill, pretty ez you please. We foun' hit dar later, but my house didn't git hurt a-tall.
"You know," she continued, "you can't see de wind, but looked lack I seed a somepin dat day! Spirits is 'imagination, is whut I always say. You hear folks talking about spirits en den you see sumpin whut skeers you en you say dat's spirits! I been skeered plenty er times, but I always come ter find out hit's sumpin I knowed. Dat's why I say spirits is nothin' but 'imagination. One night I seed a sumpin switch de willow branches right in front er me. En I stop en say, 'whut dat!' Den hit switch de willow branches ergain. I jes' stopped still en commence ter holler. Needn't worry 'bout whut I'm gonna do when I'm skeered O I jes' stand still en holler till somebody come git me!"
The play of emotions over Carrie's expressive face as her narrative, turned from fear of the supernatural to comedy at this point, was worthy of an actress. Never have I seen a better portrayal of dubiety and horror, followed by relief in such swift succession.
"Den my husban' come up ter see whut ailed me," she continued, "en tweren't nuthin' but a little steer yearlin' wid horns switchin' down branches!
"En one time when I wuz little, I wuz out wid my mother, en hit wuz a moonlight night. We wuz goin' home cross de lot, en dey wuz a mule name' Mary jes' standin' dere wid her years bucked lack she wuz lookin' at a sumpin'. En in a minute she snort, 'Urrunh." Dat skeered us en we stopped, en erbout dat time she snort ergain. 'Urrunh!' En mother grabbed me en run. She say de mule see a sumpin ter make her snort lack dat. En de mule wuz lookin' right towards dat hill, en dey says dey is spirits up dar. But I always do say ain't nuthin' ever skeered me but come ter find out hit twuz sumpin' I knowed.
"My husband believed in spirits, en I used to tease him - make him so mad! He say one night he out huntin' wid some men, en he had a ole' dog named Bootee. En he see a spirit walkin' long side er Bootee wid a switch in its han'. Didn't none uv de others see de apirit, but he swore hit wuz er sumpin' tall en white. 'Bout time he wuz fixing ter call ole Bootee, de spirit hit him side de haid, en you know dat dog carried his haid ter one side till he died! He always said twuz on account uv de lick de spirit give him, but I useter laugh at him en say 'How come you think hit wuz a spirit? Dat ole dog jes' got sumpin' in his year ter make him cock his haid dataway; en he get so mad! But whutever hit twuz, dat dog sho carried his haid ter one side frum den on!"
Once embarked on a topic which obviously fascinated her in spite of her professed disbelief in the supernatural, the flow of talk went on without interruption. "No ma'am. I doan believe in conju'. I wouldn't give a nickel to have nobody workin' on me! All I know about conju' is whut Aunt Susan tole me. She useter tell me lots about hit, but she so now she doan like to mention it.
"She say one night she dream she walkin' along de road en she thought she step on a needle en hit hurt her severe. She got hit out. She chewed hit up." Carrie's voice became sing-song in intonation. "Whut she represented, hit wuz planted dere fer her. En she got hit." Here her voice returned to normal and she continued, "De next mornln' atter she dreamed dis, she went down de road, personally, en got hit. En de day atter dat, she couldn't walk!
"I had a conju' woman working me wunst. God knows I don't believe in hit, but I had a sumpin' in my ankle, en I doan keer whur I walked when I come back home I'd be lame fer two days. So I went to de conju' woman's house. She warn't dere, so I waited in de yard en pretty soon she come er-skippin' erlong. She had straight hair lack a witch er de pictures in de funny books. She some th'oo de gate en say, 'Hmmmm, somebody been here today, drawed my coffin. En sho 'nuff, dere wuz de marks on de side uv de house! Cou'ee she could er fixed dat up fo' I got dere, I doan know about dat." (Carrie's struggle to preserve her attitude of skepticism toward a cult bred into her race centuries before was amusing.) Den she went in de house en fixed up sumpin,' I didn't see whut she got, but she rubbed off de marks.
"I tole her about my ankle how hit would hurt me when I walked any piece on hit en she say, 'Hmmmm, somebody throwed at you. Grudge whut you got.' But she say she could uphand anything brought befo' her so I asked her to work on me. She took my foot in her lap en rubbed hit. Den she blowed three times. Den she went in de house en got three things, I doan know whut they wuz, but they wuz three things she put on my ankle en rubbed hit. En dat ankle wuz jes' ez well ez de other one, en hit ain't bothered me a bit sence!
"Dis conju' woman didn't charge me much 'cause hit wuz de fust time I'd had anything ter do wid her en she wanted ter persuade me, but she sho charge other folks mighty high. A dress er five, six, seven dollars right back on up. Ef you had a hoss stolen, hit wuz more, but she tell you right now whar ter look fer hit!
usual life, and knew with certainty that for some time to come she would enjoy dramatizing it for the edification of her colored neighbors.
Washington Copy
10/14/38
L.H.
