GREEK STUDY
Subject - Alexander Beztios, teacher of the School for Greek boys in Wilmington, N. C.
Writers: Frances L. Harris
Maurice B. Haskett
Editor: Edwin Massengill
Words: About 1300

Teacher and Waiter

Alexander Beztios (pronounced Ba-jos) was born some twenty-five years ago at Ioannina (pronounced Ya-ne-na), Greece, a town in the northwestern part of the country. His father was an accountant; his mother, a lady of charm and refinement.
Alexander had twelve years of formal schooling in Greece, including courses at a teacher's college, then he entered the University of Athens. He spent a year at Athens and then, in 1932, sailed for New York where his uncle was already installed in the archepiscopal palace. Alexander's father had come to New York during the hectic days of 1914 and was anxious for his son to join him in his new home. He had already decided that Alexander should study at New York University. George unfortunately died soon after his son joined him in New York. Due to financial difficulties attendant upon the death of his father, a year and a half's work was all that Alexander could manage at New York University. After some time had passed the archdiocese of New York, headed by the young man's famous uncle, came to the rescue by finding the young student a place as teacher of a small school for Greek and Greek-American children in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Alexander has not been here three years. This school is conducted afternoons during the term at Tileston School, one the city's larger public schools.
It does not take the place of the city's schools, but rather supplements their work. No girls are admitted to the classes, but about twenty-five boys, ranging in age from ten to fifteen years, are enrolled. Alexander, who looks more like a college undergraduate than a teacher, instructs the boys in Greek language and literature, history, and something of Hellenic philosophy and ideals. He stresses the glories of the Greek Golden Age in order to make his pupils proud of their race and to spur them on to a higher plane of thinking and living. So far he has stayed on as teacher two years longer than his predecessor.
With school days over until September, this summer finds Alexander working in the Brooklyn Cafe, a lower class confectionery-eating place which serves white people in one half of its building and Negroes in the other. This cafe is situated in a socially undesirable part of town and is therefore frequented only by people of the district. Probably not one patron comes there with whom Alexander has more than a speaking acquaintance. The cafe is owned by Steve George who turned the management over to Alexander while he manages a cafe for the summer months at a nearby beach resort.
Alexander Beztios, however, would not have you feel pity for him, nor would he have you think that his Greek-American friends are anything short of splendid. National pride, a deep-seated and exalted glorying in all that is Greek, prompts him to tell you how kind his friends are to him rather than to dwell upon their intellectual shortcomings. Beztios has nothing of the intellectual snob in his nature. He believes firmly in the native intelligence of the Greek, even the worst-off one who has had next to no advantages. But he does long for men and women of his own splendid kind with whom he can talk and associate. He longs for the intellectual communion he enjoyed with his colleagues in New York. His long working hours at the Brooklyn Cafe are so confining that he has no time to make contacts and friendships with Wilmington townspeople of his own scholarly kind. He lives in the midst of a large number of men his own age at the Y. M. C. A., but hardly knows any, even by name.
Last year Alexander made a special trip to Duke University to see about the possibilities of getting an instructorship in Greek. The head of the Greek Department there told him that there were very few students in his department, and that the three regular instructors he already had were quite adequate.
He was no little chagrined to find so few students studying his beloved Greek. The situation is much the same in Greece, he says, with commerce and vocational training steadily on by the increase, while the liberal arts are cherished by only a small group.
Alexander deplores the present political situation in his native country. The dictatorship of Metaxas has put an end to the democracy so dear to the heart of every true Greek No political freedom is allowed. Politics can no longer be discussed, and a Greek, says Alexander, is never happier than, when discussing politics. The ideals of the Greek Golden Age are being overshadowed by greed and commercialism. The government of England is considered the nearest approach to perfection -- a government which hallows the royal tradition but combines it with the practice of democracy.
Alexander has a warm admiration for the Greek Orthodox church and is working earnestly with the local Greek colony for the establishment of a church here. He looks forward to the monthly visitation of the priest from Raleigh. The magnificent Orthodox Mass is celebrated at the Parish House of Saint John's Episcopal Church, which church is also the scene of most of the local Greek weddings. Alexander says that the hope of the local Greeks is to establish a church with a resident priest who will also be a teacher for their school. Alexander, when questioned on his orthodoxy, admits himself one of the faithful. His close association with the Church through years of serving at the altar has left an indelible mark not to be erased by any of the doubts and fears that beset so many of our own intellectuals.
