January 26, 1939.
E. E. Miller
Neon Technician,
Nashville, Tenn.,
E. E. Miller, writer.
SATURDAY ON COMMERCE STREET
It was nearly nine o'clock when I got to the shop that spring coming, I wanted to hurry on in the back and get to work before the shop foreman saw me. But I had to walk up Commerce Street past half of the long show window which was the front of the Gruber and Dixon Electric Company office, then in through the office to get to the neon shop. Everybody in the front was bound to see me. I hoped Nick would be back in the electric shop.
"Good evening Mister Miller," said the stenographer, turning to look at the wall clock.
"Good Morning, Miss Argo. How's your cold today?" I wondered how bad a cold had to be to cause complete loss of voice.
The foreman appeared in the shop door, a short heavy- set hunk of a man. His one good eye glared a fierce blue in his puffy, unshaved face. He looked at the clock, then Saturday on Commerce Street at me.
"Hello, banker," he growled, "Damned if you ain't getting as good as Lonnie and Carl Dixon with then bankers' hours. How many repairs you got ready for me?"
"I put the list on your desk last night, Nick," I answered. I knew that he had read that list the moment he got to the shop, a few minutes before eight, to see which repairs were not ready.
"Yeah, I saw that all right, but hell, is that all you got? How about Domenick's? And how about the bus terminal?"
"They're not ready," I said. "All that are ready are on your list."
He glared. "We're going to lose all this damn repair work with this messing around, and this banking hours working. Them tubes should have been put in first thing this morning. We promise one day service on signs, and tubes lay around here two or three days before they get fixed. I tried to get Dainey to leave this damn neon business alone. Now all my electricians are out on jobs, and won't be back till noon, and I ain't going to send them out then if the signs never get fixed, Nobody don't want to work on Saturday afternoon. You got to have them tubes ready in the morning if you want them put back in that day."
"I had as many ready as I could, Nick," I said. I'd have had to work all night to get all those tubes ready, I had ten as it was, Did you put them back in?"
"Hell, no! You can't afford to have no five or six truck trips on one job, It costs money to run a truck. You got to make one trip catch a lot of jobs to make anything. I'll hold these till you get the others ready. "
He looked at the clock again. "By God, Lonnie ought to be getting here by now. He'd even be late for a banker." He looked at me again. "What the hell do you do of a morning, anyhow? Does it take you two hours to put that wave in your pretty red hair? Ain't that sweet, Miss Argo?" He reached as if to pat my head. I dodged and went on back in the neon shop.
The place was pitch dark. I fumbled to the back of the room and finally found the pull cord. A brilliant cone of light cut through the murky air, Illuminating the asbestos covered surface of a long table, I went over end opened the door to the back alley. I knew that I could not induce the slightest draft of ventilation in the dense illsmelling air which filled the place, but it made me feel better to have the door open. An odor of garbage drifted in from the alley.
I threw the switch near the door and the clattering racket of an air blower filled the room. I lighted the two gas burners behind the long table: The ribbon-fire, a foot long band of blue flame, and the cross-fire, a smaller, hotter fire, like two blow torches facing each other.
Jim Callahan, the other glass blower, came in through the office door. He was a little short-legged Irishman, with pale blue eyes and a broken nose. He swaggered as he walked. He had only worked for us about two months, but there was already a shop legend that he had once been light weight champion of the Pacific Coast.
"Hello, Red," he said, glumly.
"Hello, Jim," I said "How do you feel?"
"Boy, I feel rotten! I feel terrible!" He looked around. "Is Old Nick here?"
"Oh sure, he's over there on his side of the fence, counting bolts and screws. Just wait. He'll be over in a minute to give you your dose of hell. I've already had mine this morning."
"Boy, he better not give me no hell this morning. I don't feel like listening to Nick rave." Callahan slumped against the table, and fished in his breast pocket for a cigar. "Hand me one of them matches, Red."
I was heating a four foot piece of glass tubing in the ribbon fire. It was getting pretty soft. I laid it down on the asbestos pattern it had to fit, a big oval border. Right on the mark. I handed Callahan a match, and he lit his cigar.
"What are we going to do this morning?" he asked presently.
"Tell you what," I answered. "Suppose you go ahead and bend this job, and I'll pump. I've got several repairs that Nick's raising hell about and I'd like to get them finished."
"O. K. I'll turn on the pump for you." He turned to the switch board behind him at one end of the table. 'There was the whirring sound of an electric motor, and the rapid clicking of a mechanical vacuum pump. The clicking rose in pitch as the pump began to draw the air from the glass manifold.
Callahan moved listlessly. He came around behind the table and stood beside me. I put down the tube and showed him the pattern. "Two of these, Jim. This is a border for that Falls City sign you made the other day. "
"You mean the one they hung yesterday?"
"Yep, that's the one. The one you tried to tell Nick was supposed to have a border on it."
"By golly, I knowed it! That's just like everything at this cockeyed place. They don't never get a job right the first time. And Old Nick griping at us all the time Bah!" Callahan jerked his hand contemptuously at the partition which separated the neon shop from the electric shop.
"You said it that time all right. If It's not one thing it's another. Either they leave off a border, or they make the letters too small, or they punch the electrode holes in the wrong place in the body, or they paint the body the wrong color, or something else. But there's always something wrong. Always something got to be changed before the job is right."
I had a tube sealed to the pump manifold by now, and I turned the main glass stopcock to draw the air out of the tube. The clicking noise dropped suddenly to a very low pitch, and then began to rise again. I had the high voltage wires connected to the terminals of the tube and was switching the current off and on, waiting for the tube to light. Suddenly it flared up in a dazzling white glare. Indicating that enough air had been drawn out. I shut the stopcock.
Filling the tubes with neon gas was called pumping" because It required the use of a vacuum pump to exhaust the the air from the tube. According to my instruction manual, "the simultaneous heating of the tube with a high voltage current serves to gasify impurities which are then pumped out with the air. When the tube is thoroughly exhausted the pump stopcock is closed, and the proper amount of neon gas admitted from the glass manifold."
I shut my eyes against the blinding glare. Dazzling white streaks of light aquirmed before me. I knew that pumping was very hard on the eyes. I had to wear glasses when reading, and knew that I would soon have to wear them continually if I kept this up, I wondered If it would be possible to get a job playing the piano in a broadcasting studio. Not solo, just as accompanist.
"Hey, Red:"
I jumped, and released the push button switch. Smoke was curling up from the little table on which the tube lay.
"Holy cockeye, man," said Callahan. "If you'd kept the juice on another second that tube would have been melted flat.
Did you go to sleep?"
"Pretty near." I opened the main stopcock again, The white streaks still moved before my eyes.
"Boy, I sure feel bad," Callahan said presently. "I ain't never going to take another drink as long as I live.
Boy, I mean that, too. I sure feel rotten."
"Did you get soused last night, Jim?" I asked.
"Naw, I never got drunk at all. That's the funny part of It, I never had more than three or four drinks. Five or six at the most. I had a girl over at my room, you know, Old Emmy down here at Eddie's, and we had a few drinks. But I didn't get drunk at all. But I sure got an awful hangover this morning. Boy, I feel rotten. That daggone whiskey just don't agree with me." He picked up a tube and turned back to the ribbon fire. I sealed another tube on the manifold.
Shorty stuck his Jewish looking nose in the alley doorway. Shorty was Emile Sulzberg, a little French speaking Switzer. He was even smaller than Callahan.
He glanced around nervously, then came over to the pump. "Hay, Red," he whispered in my ear,"Hows about fixing a tube for me? I broke vun on dis damn Job we are hanging and If Nick finds it out, he'll can me sure. I'll bring you annuder bottle of wine Monday, If you do."
"Hell, Shorty, that's about six you've broken this week," I said, "All right, bring it in." Shorty bounced out the alley door.
"That daggone Shorty," Callahan said. "He busts more tubes than all the others in the shop put together."Shorty was back in a few minutes, carrying fragments of a glass tube in his hands.
"Holy cockeye, Shorty," said Callahan, "what did you do, drop that one from a ladder?"
"Vell, I vas up on a guy wire. It vas de only place I could get to reach dis unit So I was reaching as far as I could and almost had it in, ven ay foot slipped, so I Just shmacked it against de sign.
"I guess you'll have to make a new unit, Jim," I said, "That's from the Montgomery sign that we made last week. Cone back in about an hour and a half. Shorty." Shorty bounced out again.
Callahan started looking through a stack of rolled patterns at the end of the table, "What the heck makes Shorty so nervous? He Jumps around like a flea in a frying pan all the time. He sure is cuckoo."
"I guess that's from being in the French Foreign Legion," I said. "Shorty claims he spent about four years in there and that he finally escaped. I know that he's really got a silver plate in his head so it's no wonder that he's got the jitters, Anyway, his wine's plenty good."
"Yeah, it's all right," Callahan said, "long as Nick don't find this out, Boy, would he raise Cain! I can just hear him," Jim found the pattern and spread it out on the table.
Lanky Abe Carver the shop boy and general helper, slouched in through the office door. "Red," he drawled, "Miss Argo wants yours and Callahan's time.
"O. K.," I said, "by golly, I forgot all about today being pay day."
Abe wondered on back and leaned against the table, watching Callahan work. I went into the office.
The huge Lonnie Gruber loomed over his desk, hie bulky form filling the swivel chair. Even seated he gave a greater impression of height than his brother, Nick, who stood beside him. Nick turned as I came in the door.
"Here's your second banker, Red," he said. "It's only ten o'clock too, He sure is early this morning. He even beat Carl Dixon here."
"Aw, go on in the back and count screws, you little runt," said Lonnie without heat.
Nick glared. His puffy face because a deeper red. "Little runt, hell," he snarled, "you think It's something to be proud of because you're six feet tall, wear a 19 collar and got a belly like a beer barrel. By God, it would be a lot more to the point if you'd get in here and 'tend to business once in a while." Lonnie was opening his mail. He paid no attention to Nick. I drew up a chair beside Miss Argo at her desk end began adding my time tickets.
"There's another thing," Nick said, pointing at me. "Red draws $1.50 an hour now and gets to work at 9:30 or 10. By God, before we took this place over he didn't draw nothing and worked a hell of a lot harder. When he worked for his self he was at it all the time, and now he comes in and figures up his time on Saturday 'stead of putting it down every night. And Carl Dixon will come in about 11:30 or 12:00 just in time to get his money. Why in hell don't you just mail Red and Callahan and Carl their checks every week so they wouldn't have to come in at all?" Nick paused for breath. "Come to think of it, I guess you couldn't do that. You don't get in as early as they do most of the time. Just fix it so I'm the only one has to sign checks and I'll mail them to all of you. You only come in so's you can be here with them sotty bunch of bums you run around with. Wonder where the hell they are this morning? There's generally some of them in here loafing before any of you bankers get to work."
"Here's a job got to be done right away, Nick," said Lonnie, shoving one of the opened letters at him. "Take a couple of men and a forty foot extension ladder on the truck out to 19th and Church and take down the Gulf Gas sign there and bring it in to the shop. It's got to be done today."
Nick stared. "Why, hell-fire," he said. "Slat's a four hour job. And there ain't an electrician in the shop. Even if there was, we couldn't do it. It'd be two or three o'clock this afternoon before we could get It done.
"That don't make a damn if it's midnight. It's got to be done today, like I tell you. Call in a couple of men from some other job that ain't in a hurry." Lonnie slit open another letter, "Miss Argo, make a job ticket and work order on this."
Nick picked up the work order and started back In the shop. "By God, I'll take four me, and maybe we can get done by about 12:30. If we don't I'm going to quit and come in, even if the sign's still hanging and just got one expansion bolt and no guy wires left to hold it. Darned if I'm going to work all Saturday afternoon just because some lazy hound wants to sleep all morning." He turned as he heard the front door open.
"By God, I thought it was about time. Here's the first bum. The whole damned place will be full of sots pretty soon now. And all of them friends of the 'president of the company.' If this ain't a hell of"-- Nick's voice ceased abruptly as the shop door closed behind him.
The "first bum" who had just come in was Earnest Martin, a chunky, gray haired man, of about average size. He was a contractor. His office was on Eighth Ave., about a block away, but he never stayed there. He spent far more time in our office than in his own.
"Hello, Lonnie," he said, "Miss Argo. Red." He nodded briefly to us, and sat dawn calmly in one of the ten or twelve chairs that always filled the place. He did not appear to have seen or heard Nick.
I handed Miss Argo the completed time tickets and went back into the neon shop.
Abe was still leaning against the bending table, watching Callahan work, He turned, slowly and looked at me as I came near.
"Your friend Mr. Martin is out front, Ave," I said, "You ought to go out and sec him," I knew that Callahan was annoyed to have Abe watching him work.
Abe stared solemnly at me. "Say he is out front?"
"Yep, right out there in the office, He's got a bottle, too. I could see it bulging out the front of his coat."
"Say he has got a bottle?" Abe's sleepy, solemn face spread into a slow grin. "Well, guess I might as well go out and sit with him. Maybe he'll uncork it before long." Abe slouched toward the office door. His long figure moved up and down in the swinging bouncing walk of the country man, but very slowly. As he was reaching for the door knob, the door suddenly swung open and Carl Dixon, burst in. Carl skipped to one side to avoid running into Abe, who stood looking at the door in amazement. Swiftly Carl went over to the far right hand corner of the room from the bending table, and turned on a small light bulb.
"Slow motion Abe." he said. "He won't be through that door by the time I'm ready to go back through it. Hurry up, Abe!" Abe slouched on. through. The door closed slowly behind him.
Carl turned on the single faucet above the filthy sink and stuck his fat hands in the spray of water. The open door to the little four by four closet behind him in the very corner of the room, bore the legend "Please Flush Before Leaving."
Carl Dixon always looked like a chubby little boy about to be late for school. Usually his full moon face had a worried look, but now the wrinkles were around his mouth instead of his eyes He washed the lather swiftly from his hands and shut off the water.
"Where's the towel, Red? Hasn't that boy come yet? What do you all do with these towels? Eat 'em, or take 'em home? Where's a towel?" Carl shot questions in an uninterrupted stream. No one was expected to answer. He always asked a second question before the first could be answered.
"Come on out in the office, Red," He was swishing his wet hands nervously through the air. Suppressed chuckles bubbled out with his quick words. "Come on out here. I want to talk to you."
"Talk to me here, Carl. I can hear just as well here as in the office."
"No, come on in the office. I want to talk to you prlvate. What's the matter, you afraid? I ain't going to fire you. Come on." I shut off the current and followed him. "Come on down, here in the little office," said Carl, swiftly passing Lonnie's desk, his own desk and Mias Argo's desk, Three more of the office chairs were now occupied by Lonnie's friends. "I want to talk to you private. " The little office" was a built in beaver board room at the back half of the alley end of the big office. The front half of this end of the big office was glassed in, like the front on Commerce Street, The little office had one door facing the length of the room, and one opaque glass window feeing the street side. It was lighte by a shaded wall lamp end always looked either very dim or completely dark. I followed Carl in.
A small table stood directly beneath the opaque window. A wicker sofa with three imitation leather seat cushions stood against the other side of the wall and a chair of similar make faced the door. A small straight chair was at the table and a waste basket beside it. It would have been impossible to crowd another piece of furniture in the tiny room.
"Come on, sit down, Red Sit down right here. Carl plopped down on one end of the sofa I sat in the chair.
"No, no, sit over here. Right here beside me. I don't want nobody to hear this."
I reseated myself in the middle of the sofa. Carl put his left arm around ay shoulders and leaned close to my ear.
"Say, Red, what do think - a, why do you--a, what--" Carl seemed suddenly at a loss for words. His right hand fumbled with the arm of the sofa.
God damn!" Carl sprang to his feet. I felt the twinge of an electric shock where his arm had touched my shoulder. A thunder of laughter went up in the room. Above the others I could hear Lonnie's snorting gurgle of mirth.
"Hell, what's so funny about that," sputtered Carl, "You think that's funny do you? That ain't a damn bit funny. Not a damn bit," He rushed out of the little office and on out the door into Commerce Street. The whole plate glass front of the big office rattled as he slammed the door behind him. The laughter welled still higher.
"Some day Carl's going to bust out the whole show window when he's mad,"said Lonnie. "Boy, he sure was mad."
"What happened?" I asked, I was completely mystified.
"Carl wired up the middle seat of the sofa yesterday with a Ford spark coil and put a push button on the arm where he could work it. But when he went out just now to get you to sit on the sofa, we swapped the middle seat to the end where he'd sit. So he got shocked hisself, instead of you." Lonnie's gurgling laugh welled up again. "Boy, he sure was peeved, Carl never could take a joke. Its a good thing all around that lick wasn't here just now. As mad as Carl was, if Nick had made a crack about him never getting to work there'd have been a fight sure."
I went on back in the shop. I still had four tubes to pump and I wanted to be sure that I finished them so that Nick could have them Monday morning.
"What are you laughing about. Red?" Callahan asked, "Boy, it sure must be comical. Did old Carl tell you a funny story?"
I told him about Carl's joke that had backfired. He laughed noisily, slapping his leg and exolaiming, "Boy, oh boy!
"That doggone Carl," he said, "Him and Lonnie is always playing. Sometimes I don't blame old Nick for griping all the time. He does all the work and don't draw any more than the other two.
"Not as much," I said. "They're all supposed to draw the same, but Lonnie and Carl stay behind with the company all the time. Nick never draws any except his forty a week on Saturday, but Lonnie usually draws about ten during the week and then won't take it out of his envelope on Saturday. Carl does the same thing, only not as much of it."
Callahan was silent a moment. Then he asked: "Do you own any of this company, Red?"
"Not now, I used to, but I don't anymore, thank God. I started this company seven years ago with three other fellows but we didn't last very long. None of us had ever run a business before and on top of that the one we made treasurer of the company turned out to be crooked, so we ran it in the ground pretty quick. But we did stay in business long enough to do a little work for Gruber & Dixon, and get them interested in the neon business. Lonnie could see there were possibilities in it and he had had plenty of business experience so when he found out we were about to go bankrupt he agreed to buy us out. He had to argue a little to convince Nick and Carl but they always do what Lonnie wants to in the end. So they bought the Nashville Neon Company and gave me a job working for them and I'm still here.""I often wondered how you come to be in this kind of a job." Callahan said, "You look more like the kind of a guy you'd see in a while collar job behind a desk. So you started out to be a shop owner and turned out to be a glass blower, huh?"
"Yep, that's what happened, And, to tell you the truth, I like it a hell of a lot better, I can make a lot more money working for somebody else for a dollar and a half an hour than I could working for myself for nothing. In fact, as long as the work holds up I can make more than any of the owners do. You and I usually make about sixty a week, and that a more than even Lonnie draws."
"Yeah, that's right, too. But boy, I sure hope we don't have to join the daggone Union. If we do we won't make nothing. You know what old Starkey down at Post told me? I seen him yesterday. "
"No, what did he tell you?"
"Post signed up with the Union about a month ago, and Starkey told me he hadn't made nothing since. He used to make a dollar fifty an hour same as we do, you know. But in the Union agreement it say a that glass blowers mustn't get less than a dollar twelve and a half an hour, and that a lot of the others, electricians' helpers and sign hangers and such, mustn't get less than sixty-five or seventy cents an hour where they used to get twenty-five and thirty. So naturally they cut Starkey to a dollar twelve and a half to sort of even things up, and he can't work no more than forty hours a week, so he can't make no more than forty-five dollars. And on top of that he said that work had fell off something terrible. He said that he hadn't made a full week since they joined the Union. One week he only drawed nine dollars. "
"That's bad," I said. "That's really bad, because Lonnie told me yesterday that he didn't see how we could stay out of the Union any longer. He said if he didn't sign up next week that we would lose all this brewery work for Gerst and Budweiser. The Brewers have a strong Union and they're going to make the beer companies buy Union made signs. So we'll have to join, or else. "
"Yeah, that is bad." Callahan was silent a few minute a. Then he said, "I wouldn't mind joining the daggone Union so much if it was a Glass Blowers' Union, but this cockeyed thing is the Electricians' Union. I had a card in the Glass Bottle Blowers Association before I even started to learn this business, back when I used to blow bottles; and when the neon business come along I kept the same card and belonged to the same Union. And thats what we ought to belong to now, if we belonged to anything. Holy cockeye, we ain't no electricians. "
No, but we're not bottle blowers either, Jim," I said.
"You are, all right, but that's not your work now. As a matter of fact, I never even saw anybody blow a bottle. Maybe we ought to have a Neon Workers' Union, all our own."
"Maybe so. But what burns me up is for the daggone Electricians to take away that revenue from the Bottle Blowers. The Electricians is a bunch of hogs, that's all. They got a lot more members now than the Bottle Blowers has, and they want still more. The Electricians is taking the tube benders away from the Bottle Blowers all over the country. Daggone bunch of hogs, that's all they are. I blame the A. F. of L, a lot for that, They ought not to let the Electricians do it. 'Stead of that, they approve."
"Yep, we ought to have a Neon Workers' Union of our own, Jim. Let's start one in the C. I. O."
"Oh, holy cockeye, no! That daggone John L, Lewis ain't no good. He's a daggone Communist--and a Atheist, to boot. Thats all the whole C. I. O. is, a bunch of Communists. We don't want in that, Red."
"No, I guess not," I answered, I had already leaded that there was no lower form of life than a "Communist" to Callahan's Catholic mind. He was strongly in favor of the Rebels in the Spanish Civil War. I thought it time to drop the subject.
Callahan's thoughts evidently followed the Catholic lead from the conversation, too, for presently he said, "You know, when I first come here I thought Lonnie was a heck of a swell fellow. I never liked that daggone Carl from the first, soon as I knowed he was a Mason. Like as not, old Carl belongs to the K.K.X., too. But I seen Lonnie at mass at St. Mary's the first Sunday I was here, and they told me he was a officer in the Knights of Columbus and everything. Yeah, I thought he was a heck of a swell fellow. But now I ain't so sure. He don't act like no good Catholic to me. And he don't look like no Irishman, neither. He claims to be full blooded Irish, but boy, he don't look it to me."
I thought about Lonnie's square teutonic head, with its lose cropped blond hair, and silently agreed. Aloud I said, "No, I don't think Lonnie is a very good Catholic, Jim. I think he's a Catholic because it's good business to be. Carl gets a lot of business from Masons and other Protestants and Lonnie is the only big electrical contractor in town who belongs to the Catholic Church, so he gets practically all of the Catholic business. He's just a Catholic for the business it gets him."
"Yeah, I think you're right. He ain't no good Catholic at all." He paused, "You don't belong to no church, do you Red?"
"No, I don't, Jim. I'm Just a heathen." There was another pause.
"Thats what's wrong with the people here in the South," Jim said presently, heedless of his implication, "they ain't got no religion. Take out in California where I come from, nearly all the people goes to some church or other. 'Though lots of them belongs to the Christian Science Church and things like that. Bat nearly all of them has got some kind of religion, But here in Tennessee and the rest of the South, the people ain't got no religion at all. That's why they are so far behind the rest of the country."
I thought about a Church of God meeting I had once witnessed in Cleveland. Tennessee. I wondered if Jim thought that kind of religion went hand in hand with progress, but I said nothing. I disliked religious discussions, anyway.
The faint shrill sound of a faraway whistle cut through the noise of the air blower and the vacuum pump. Callahan looked at his wrist watch.
"Holy cockeye," he said "would you believe that it's twelve o'clock already? I'll bet Lonnie ain't even gone to the bank yet, neither. Boy, if they ever paid off on tine here just once I'd drop dead."
"Yes, I expect Nick will be back from taking down his sign before Lonnie gets back with the money," I said. "Nick said he was leaving 19th & Church by 12:30 anyway, and if I know Nick he wasn't fooling."
I had pumped the last of the repair tubes, including the one for Shorty. I shut off the pump.
"Guess I might as well Shave and change clothes," I said, "Lonnie will probably be back with the money by the time I finish."
"Yeah, maybe so," said Callahan. "Holy cockeye, I hope so. I'm commencing to feel like I could eat a little bit now. I never ate no breakfast at all this morning, I felt so rotten. If you're going to shave I guess I'll just go ahead and work till the money gets here, and then we can go down to Eddie's and get a bite to eat."
He turned back to the ribbon fire.
I went over to the grimy sink. There was a wooden locker built into the wall right beside the sink. I had appropriated this locker when we had first moved the plant into this room. I took a small mirror from the locker and hung it above the sink on a nail.
I had not finished lathering my face when I heard a truck drive up in the alley outside and stop at the door of the electric shop. From the corner of the room I was. in. the alley door of the electric shop could be seen. The partition between the two shops was open at this end.
In the mirror, I saw the alley door awing open and Shorty bounce in. Without pausing, he dropped his tool box and rushed In through the electric shop. He was by my side at the sink before Nick appeared in the alley doorway.
"Did you get my tube ready, Red?" he whispered in my ear.
"Yep, it's right over there on the ageing rack," I said.
"Dot's fine, I'll just stick it on de shelf down here under de table, ver Old Nick can't see it, and den I'll put it in de sign ven nobody's around dis afternoon."
"Shorty!" bawled lick from the alley doorway. "Get the hell out here and help unload this truck. Do you think you rate to loaf as soon as the turck gets in while the rest of us work? Grab hold of tills sign!"
Shorty had his tube hidden by now. "I'm coming, Nick," he shouted, as he sped back through the shop, "but by golly, I just had to get in here right den." He disappeared through the alley doorway.
Nick came in as I was washing the last of the lather from my face. "Excuse me, mam," he said with elaborate sarcasm "but do you mind if I wash my dirty hands? And if I was to get fairly clean, maybe you'd lend me some of your powder? Or would you like me to go borrow you a little lip stick?"
"You certainly got back in a hurry, Nick," I said, disregarding his pleasantries, "Do you mean you've got that sign down already?"
"Hell, yes! When we work, we work. There ain't nobody on our side afraid to get their hands dirty. None of us has to worry about how long it will take us to primp. You ought to try working sometime yourself instead of spending so much time trying to make your ugly mug pretty. I found out long ago I couldn't do that and you don't stand much more chance than I do."
The electricians had the truck unloaded by now and were crowded around us at the sink, This one "wash-room" served both shops. Mack Charles, a tall, rawboned, country boy, was arguing with the square faced, loud voiced Allen Cunningham about a bet. "Naw, I didn't, by God," said Mack. "I bet we would be through with the job by twelve o'clock and we was, I leave it to the others."
"To hell with that stuff," said Allen, "You just owe me a dollar. A Job ain't done till you get back to the shop and you know it.""Yeah, dot's right," Shorty chimed in. "Ve charge time till de truck is back in de shop and unloaded, so de job ain't finished till den."
"Aw, hell, keep your trap out of this, Shorty," said Mack, "How about it, Duke, didn't I win?"
"Seems to me like you did," said Duke, "As I understood it, you bet we would have the sign down by twelve o'clock and we did."
"Aw, hell fire," said Allan, "It's plain as day and you know it. What I bet was the job wouldn't be finished by twelve o'clock." 'The argument continued. Shorty horned in volubly but Duke had nothing further to say, was the most taciturn man in the shop, rarely speaking unless answering a question. He left the room. Presently the others followed him into the office, the verbal war still raging.
I had finished dressing by then. I threw my old clothes in the locker, replaced the mirror and shaving tools and locked the door.
"Doesn't look like Lonnie's going to get back this afternoon, Jim," I said, "Why don't you shut off the rack et and let's go out in the office and wait?"
"Yeah, I believe I will," said Jim. "Daggone old Lonnie, he must of got run over." He shut off the gas, and started toward the switch that controlled the air blower.
Lonnie barged in through the office door, carrying two pay envelopes. He had reached the bending table by the time Jim had turned off the blower and closed the alley door.
"Here's yours, Jim," said Lonnie, thrusting one of the envelopes at him, "And here's yours, Red. I'll take a drink out of your jug, Red." He winked at Jim. and laughed, a fat, throaty gurgle of laughter, his stomach shaking, his little, pig-like blue eyes almost closed. "Want a little drink, Jim?" he said.
"Oh, holy cockeye, no, I'm off of that daggone stuff, Lonnie. It Just don't agree with me. I took a couple of drinks last night and I felt terrible all morning. I might take a bottle of beer sometime but I ain't going to drink no more whiskey."
"O. K.," said Lonnie, "Want a drink, Red?"
"No, thanks, Lonnie, not right now. Let's go down to Eddie's, Jim, and get a hamburger and a bottle of beer."
"Boy, that's right where I want to go but I want more than any hamburger. I'm really hungry hy now. I never eat no breakfast at all this morning, I felt so terrible."
Eddie's was a little hole-in-the-wall restaurant, half a block down the street, "Well see how my pal, Old Emmy, is," said Jim, as we went down the street. "Wonder if she had as bad a hangover as I did thin morning?"
"Old Emmy" was a port, young, blonde waitress. She could hardly have been older than 22 or 23 and did not look more than 16.
"Hello, Emmy," sang out Callahan as we went in. "Give us some service over here at table number five," He pounded on the table with the catsup bottle.
Emmy was at the table immediately. "Hello, Jimmy. Hello, Red. what'll you all have?"
"Make mine a gin fizz and some good advice," said Callahan. "How did you feel this morning, Emmy"
"Fine," she said. "I always feel fine, Why shouldn't I? What do you all want to eat?"
"Bring me some of that ham and cabbage and a cup of coffee," said Callahan, "I'm liable to double up on that order after a while, if it's any good."
"Make mine a hamburger and Sterling beer. You'd better take a bottle of beer, Jim It would make you feel better."
"Yeah, I guess you're right. Emmy, bring us two bottles of beer before we eat."
We had two bottles apiece before we went back to the shop. I felt a alight glowing warmth in my ear and temples. "Boy, I sure feel better," said Jim, as we entered the office. "I feel like I might live now."
The office was crowded with people. Nearly all of the chairs were occupied, and there was a steady milling about, like a herd of cattle.
Lonnie was at his desk, dialing a number on the phone. Mike Flanigan, a skinny six-foot-three Irishman with a pimply, pock marked face, was. seated at Carl Dixon's desk, using the other phono. Doc Witherspoon had his chair pulled right into the doorway so that it stopped the door when half open, and we had to walk around him to get in the room. Doc was already half drunk. He had a silly grin on his red, bony face and me telling dirty jokes in a lisping voice. Doc was a retired dentist and, according to shop gossip, his false teeth fit so badly because he had made them himself.
Jim and I looked for chairs but there were none vacant. We went into the little office. The sofa was unoccupied.
"Here we are, Jim. I can fix this all right." I felt under the arm of the sofa and milled one of the wires loose from the push button. We sat down on the sofa.
"Boy, Old Lonnie don't need no phone, does he?" said Jim. "The way he yells all he'd have to do is stick his head out the front door. Anybody in town could hear him without no trouble and he could save the phone for long distance. "
Slim Douglas was tilted back in the wicker chair, smoking a cigarette, his hat pushed far back on his head. His overcoat was open, displaying the well pressed English tweeds which covered his thin frame and long legs. His dark, Byronic face war, turned toward the dim window, displaying his profile to the room. He turned casually toward us and spoke with a slightly condescending cordiality.
"Hello, Red, Glad to see you, boy. Hello, Jim, Would either of you boys like a drink?" He indicated on open pint bottle on the table.
"No thanks, Slim, not now." I knew that Slim had not paid for that whiskey.
"Better join me. Well, happy days." He poured a drink in one of the glasses that ringed the bottle, and drank it carefully. His face contracted momentarily in a slight expression of nausea, "That's pretty bad stuff," he said.
Lonnie had finished his first call and was dialing another number. 'There was an extension phone in the little office. Slim picked it up and switched it to Lonnie's line. "Watch me have some fun," he said.
"Hello," he spoke in high falsetto voice as Lonnie finished dialing and jammed the phone to his face.
"Hello," bellowed Lonnie, "Who's talking?"
Why, it's me sweetheart. Don't you know me, our own dear little Kitty Witty?"
"What the hell! Slim, get off that phone, you damn fooll I'm calling my wife. Saw honey, I'm not yelling at you. Naw, there ain't. That was Slim Douglas, Slim, get on the phone again and tell Jane that was you, or I'll break your god damn neck!"
Slim explained in a careful, unexcited voice, He smiled as he hung up the phone.
Lonnie was down in the little office in a minute. That sure was a bright trick," he said. "Next time find out who I'm talking to before you say anything about Kitty. How I'll be in the dog house a month, just for that."
"Don't get excited, old timer," said Slim. Have a drink."
"Hell, yes, I'll have a drink. What have you been doing trying to kill the bottle while I used the phone? Have a drink Red, you and Jim." Lonnie poured two enormous drinks and tended than to us.
"Daggone it, I believe I will take one. One can't hurt me. I got to got some water, though. ant some water, Red?" I shook my head. Jim got an empty glass and brought some water from the sink in the shop. He gulped down half of the whiskey and quickly swallowed some water.
"I'll save this for a little later," he said, placing the two glasses carefully on the darker end of the table. I sipped my drink slowly.
"Come on. Slim, you about ready to go eat?" Lonnie put on his overcoat, corked the bottle and stuck It in a pocket. Then he took it out again and looked at us, "You all want this?" he said. "Go on, I'm going to leave it here, anyway. We'll get some more at the bootleggers Come on, Slim."
"You know, I kind of believe I misjudged old Lonnie this morning," said Callahan after they had gone. "I believe he is Irish, after all. He acts like it. The Irish is the best and most free heartedest people in the world, anyway. Yeah, old Lonnie's a pretty nice guy.
"Yep, lie's all right." I was beginning to feel that Lonnie was a pretty nice guy, that Jim was a pretty nice guy, that we were all nice guys. The world seemed very cheerful and comfortable.
"How do you feel, Red?" asked Jim in a minute.
"Pretty good. In fact, very good."
"So do I. Boy, I feel fine now. Maybe we ought to go over and play the piano." (There was a rattly upright in the parlor of Jim's boarding house.) "Boy, I never will forget the night you played on that piano after we had that gin fizz. Old Paderooskee didn't have nothing on you. Holy cockeye, I though you was going to knock it to pieces. The land lady says to me next day, 'Mr. Callahan, don't let that fellow with the bushy red hair play on that piano no more when he's mad. He's liable to tear it to pieces.'" We both laughed. I felt that I had been highly praised.
"Yeah, old Lonnie's a pretty nice guy," he stated, after a brief pause. "Daggone, I don't blame him for not staying here with old Nick griping at him all the time. Though I don't know as I blame Nick for griping, neither, with Lonnie never staying here." There was another pause. "So you used to be a shop owner, huh, Red?"
"Yep, up to about six years ago. That is, beginning about seven years ago. We didn't last very long."
"How come you to pick out the neon business to go into, Red? Looks to me like you would have found something else."
"Well, I guess it was because I had already worked in a neon shop, and knew something about the business."
"Holy cockeye! you mean you had worked in this business before you all started your own shop seven years ago?"
I laughed at Jim's amazement. "Yep. I worked for the Signal Sign Company, the first neon plant that was ever in Nashville. I wasn't a glass blower, though. I was a pattern tern maker. But I had to work at night lots of times and after everybody else had gone I'd light the fires and practice glass blowing. But after a while, somebody told old man Enloe, who owned the plant, that he sure ran his machinery an awful lot at night, and he found out what I was doing and made me stop. He said if I learned to blow glass, I would want to do that instead of make patterns and he wanted me to make patterns."
"So you didn't learn to blow glass, then, huh?"
"No, not right then. I kept on making patterns. But old man Enloe went broke about a year after that and four of us that had worked for him started the Nashville Neon Company, I borrowed $250 and put in it, and then another $250 before we finally sold out. Gruber & Dixon gave us $300 and took all our debts, so I got seventy-five dollars back. And while we had our own company I learned to blow glass and pump there. I practiced when we didn't have much work, which was most of the time. So I got the experience and a job and seventy-five dollars beside."
Jim was silent a minute, then said "But how come you to be working at that Signal Sign Company in the first place? And how come you to borrow money to go in business? Holy cockeye, I'd a thought you would be getting money from your folks and going through college or something."
"I thought that's what I would do, too, Jim. But my folks didn't have any money. You see, my father died the last year I was in high school and left us without any income. There was my mother and me and my four brothers. I was the oldest, so I had to go to work."
"Oh, I never knowed your daddy was dead, Red. I'm sorry to hear that."
"Yes, he died ten years ago," I said.
"My daddy's been dead six years," Jim said. "But I was done growed up when it happened. But we never had nothing when I was little, anyway. My daddy made good money, he was a bricklayer, but he had ten kids and had to take care of his mother besides. So we never had no money or nothing. I left school in the seventh grade and went to work in a glass factory, carrying in for the bottle blowers. That's how I come to be a glass blower. Then when bottle blowing went on the bum, I got into the neon business."
There was another silence. "How long did you say your daddy had been dead, Red?"
"Ten years."
"And he died when you was in high school, huh? How old are you now. Red?"
"I'm twenty-six, Jim."
"Holy cockeye, man, is that all? I knowod you was a lot younger than me, because I'm forty-four, but I figured you was anyway thirty. Twenty-sis, huh? "
"Yep, that's all," I said, "Twenty-six."
"I never meant you looked old or nothing, Red," he said after a short silence. "I just meant I figured you was a little older than what you are. You was sixteen when your daddy died, wasn't you?"
"Yes," I said. "He died the day before my sixteenth birthday."
"That sure is bad," Jim said, sympathetically. "What kind of work did he do, Red?"
"He was an editor. He edited a farm paper."
Oh. I see. Editors is people what writes, ain't they? Did he make pretty good money?"
"Yes, pretty good. He was making about six thousand a year when he died."
"Yeah, that's good money. I guess you wanted to do the same thing, didn't you?"
"Well Jim, to tell you the truth, I wanted to be a ' musician. I thought I was going to be a great piano player when I grew up. I began studying music when I was about ten years old and I thought I would be a second Paderewski and travel around all over the world, giving concerts. But I wasn't really as good as I thought I was, of course, so it didn't matter so much that I had to stop studying music. I might have gone on and studied and turned out to be another piano teacher, but that's about all."
"Aw, you play good, Red. You play plenty good. That is, as much as I know about that classic music you do. Boy, I never will format the first time I heard you play, though. I thought you was going to play something like the "Twelfth street Rag" or "Alexander's Ragtime Band." And when you started knocking out some of that classic stuff I thought 'Holy cockeye, me and Red don't play the same stuff at all when we play music." But you play good, Red."
"Thanks, Jim, you do, too. I wish I had as good a sense of rhythm as you do."
"Yeah, I have got pretty good rhythm, ain't I? But that's what it takes to play music like what I play. You got to feel it. And if you ain't got that feeling for it, you can't never play it right no matter how hard you try."
"No. I guess not," I said. "I know I never could learn to play it right. "
"Well, you didn't want to play that kind, noway. You wanted to play classic music and that's something else again. So you wanted to toe a big piano player, huh?"
"Yep, that's what I wanted. But if my father had lived I would probably have gotten a job in his office and read proof or edited copy or something like that, and been a white collar worker, like you said."
"Yeah, that's what I figured." There was a silence. Let's take another drink, Red. Old Lonnie give us the bottle after all. "
"O. K." We killed the bottle.
I was feeling very relaxed and talkative. I felt the urge to confide in Callahan.
"To tell you the truth, Jim, I'd still like to get out of the noon business and do something else. I'm pretty tired of it. Of course, we make pretty good money right now, but from the way business is falling off we won't make very much a few weeks from now. Especially not after we join the Union.
"We'll be just like Starkey, lucky if we make ten or twelve dollars a week. And I'd like to get in some other kind of business, even if I don't make as much money. Some thing I'd like better, you know. "
"Holy cockeye, Red, you mean you don't like glass blowing.
"Well, not very such. I liked it fine when I first got into it. It was very Interesting work, and I could make more money than I had ever made before. But there were a few years after that when I was lucky to make fifteen dollars a week, and I'm afraid it's going to be that way again before very long. And when it gets uncertain, its bad. I'd rather make twenty-five dollars every week than maybe eight this week and eighty next, or maybe none. That kind of business gets you in debt. "
"Yeah, I guess you're right, Red. What you ought to do. is get you a job as editor or something." With complete innocence, Callahan started me in at the top.
"Yes, I think I will try to, Jim. Only I'm afraid it will have to be ' something'."
"Yeah, that's what you ought to do. But I figure I'll stick to glass blowing, a while, anyway. I like it better than any job in the world. Of course, if it gets to where I can't make nothing at it, I'll have to quit, I guess, but I sure would hate to. It's the kind of work I like."
There was a lull. We could hear the babble of voices in the big office. Then the front door swung to with a crash as Lonnie and Slim Douglas came back in. The crowd seemed to get noisier at once.
"Come on. Jim, let's leave," I said. "The party will really got rough now."
"Let's just go out in the big office. There's a couple of chairs near Carl's desk now. Then Lonnie or any of them that wants to can use this little office, and we'll leave pretty soon. I want to steady up a little hit; then we'll go over to the room and play the piano."
"All right." We went out and took the chairs near Carl's desk. I was a little unsteady on my feet, too.
Lonnie hung his overcoat on a rack, near his desk, He sat down and picked up his phone.
Joe Maxey got up from a chair and walked for the little office door, Joe was short, blond and stocky. He walked with the absolutely serious concentration of a very drunk man. He wobbled slightly and fumbled with the knob on the little office door.
"What are you doing?" boomed Lonnie into the phone. Joe turned slowly and looked at him with bleary eyes."Who wan's a' know, summitch?" he mumbled. He swayed, holding on the half open door. Suddenly he swayed back into the door frame and slid gently to the floor, his back propped against the door jamb, his short, stocky lege sticking out in front of him, spread wide apart. He began to snore, Vo one paid any attention to him.
Lonnie had finished his first call and was dialing another number. This time he held the phone close and almost whispered into it. He talked for a long time. Finally I heard him say, a little louder. "All right. Be round to get you about five. Bye, honey."
Lonnie hung up the phone and went down to the little office. Joe was still sprawled in the. doorway. Lonnie dragged him inside and laid him on the sofa. "Somebody'll have to take this burn home if he don't sober up by night," Lonnie said. " We can't have no party with Joe drunk on the sofa."
Callahan looked at Joe with disgust and unsteadily rose to his feet. " Come on, Red, let's get out of here. These bums is Commencing to get pretty drunk now and first thing you know there'll be a fight or something. Let's go over to my room."
"O. K. " I said, We pushed out through the milling crowd.
"It's a good thing we didn't stay there much longer, Jim," I said, as we went down Commeerce street. "And its a good thing you don't live more than a couple of blocks away, too. I think I'll take a cold bath instead of playing the piano."
"Yeah, I don't believe I could play the piano so good right now, neither. Holy cockeye, I'm glad we got out of that place, though. They'll still be there tomorrow morning and I got to jet some rest and sleep tonight. I got to get up and go to six o'clock mass in the morning.
