Professor Tom Terrill, of the University of South Carolina at Columbia, has located another version of the "Casinghead Gasoline Plant (continued)" in the WPA Papers in the Oklahoma Historical Society, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. That version is dated August 10, 1939.
Oklahoma Writers' Project
"People in Oil"
Writer: Dan Garrison
CASINGHEAD GASOLINE PLANT, (Continued)
"Come on, Buster. Let's look the Plant over."
"Who shall we look up first, Dan?"
"Let's go to the Main Engine Room and look up Four-Trey. We want an operating engineer to tell his story."
"Four-Trey ain't a damn bit backward in talking about himself. He'll talk you deaf, dumb, and blind."
"On the way how about telling me how this casinghead gasoline plant runs. You ought to have it figured out by now."
"Why hell yes, I've got it figured out. It took me a long time, but I've got it down pat now. See if this ain't right. The wet gas comes in the Plant from the wells through those big vacuum lines. The gas passes through those two scrubber tanks by the yard fence. Any liquid - oil, gasoline, or water - drains out of the bottom of the scrubber tanks, and the gas comes out the top and is sucked into the Main Engine Room by the Bessemer gas engines. The gas is sucked in the top valves, and is pushed out right away through the bottom valves. The gas is pushed out to the Stills......
"Fine. You do know your stuff."
"I ain't finished yet."
"You can finish telling me later. We'll take it step by step. The Main Engine Room, the Chem Lab, the Stills, the Field Office, and end up with the Bunkhouses."
"Bunkhouses! There ain't no bunkhouses no more. They've been sold and taken away."
"Where's Walrus then? We want a life story of a crum boss."
"Ain't you heard tell about Walrus?"
"No. What about him."
"He's gone to Silent City. I'll have to tell his story for him."
"Walrus died on us about six years ago. Out of a clear sky, he laid down on the Meter Shop floor, jerked a couple of times, and died. That's all there was to it. The next day Wild Tom had him buried. No one went to his funeral. And if us boys hadn't taken up a collection for a wreath, he would of been buried like a pauper.
"Walrus came to Seminole from Louisiana. Of course, Walrus wasn't his rightful name. He had a big bushy mustache, and that's how come us boys to call him Walrus. He had been working for the company better than thirty years when he was transferred to Seminole.
"Walrus was sixty if he was a day.
"When Walrus reported out here at the plant. Wild Tom put him to work helping P. J. P. J. was head-mechanic then. The reason Wild Tom done that was because Walrus had the name of being a powerhouse, and he had been a mechanic-helper most his life. Old Walrus started out like a whirlwind. He worked like a circus elephant, lifting all the heavy parts of the Bessemer engines all by himself. He worked so hard that it damn near killed him. He just couldn't keep it up. It was too much for the old man. And the damndest part of it all, Walrus was such a faithful company man he didn't know how to work any other way than hard and fast like a mad man. He thought it was his duty to work like that for the company.
"Walrus was as dumb as a carload of poles.
"Well, after Walrus couldn't do the work of three good men, and just got in the way of P. J. and the other helpers. Wild Tom pulled him out of the engine repair gang. He told Walrus to take off his overtime and rest up. In the meantime Wild Tom would find a place for him.
"Wild Tom would like to have laid Walrus off, but he couldn't do it.
Walrus had old friends who were big shots in the company, and they wanted Walrus kept on the pay roll. Chances are Walrus and the big shots started out in the gang together. Something like that. Anyhow, Wild Tom couldn't lay Walrus off. So he laid the crum-boss off, and put Walrus to cleaning up the bunkhouses.
"And that's how come Walrus became a cram-boss.
"And Walrus was mighty grateful to the company.
"Dan, you remember the trouble Walrus used to give us boys in the bunkhouses. We couldn't do nothing without him running to Wild Tom and snitching on us. If we got drunk, shot crap, played a little poker, or snuck a gal in for a few minutes. Walrus would come snooping around, and when he caught us, he would hightail it up to Wild Tom's house and snitch. Hell, he had Wild Tom throwing ring-tail fits all over camp. Wild Tom didn't give a damn what us boys done, so long as we didn't burn down the bunkhouses. But because Walrus had snitched, Wild Tom thought he had to do something. Wild Tom threatened to kick the next bastard who got drunk out of the bunkhouses till the day the bunkhouses were sold and moved. Nobody ever got kicked out, and nobody was backward about getting blind drunk.
"Us boys hated Walrus' guts. He was a goddam dirty snitch.
"Remember the mean tricks we used to play on him, Dan. Remember the night we pulled the master switch putting out all the lights, and then snuck down the hall and rapped on Walrus' door, and when he opened up, turned the Foamite fire extinguisher on him. Man alive! Did he raise hell. He went streaking up to Wild Tom's house like a turpentined cat. When Wild Tom seen him, he damn near choked to death, laughing. We sure was ornery to old Walrus. But he had it coming to him.
"Oh yeah, I damn near forgot about the time we gave Juanita two dollars to slip into Walrus' bed naked. That was the only time Walrus got Wild Tom to come right down to the bunkhouse and give us hell.
"There was another thing about Walrus. He was plenty tight. The only money he spent was for food. He didn't eat at a cafe. He would buy cheap hamburger meat and a loaf of bread, and fix his own meals in his room. He would cook the hamburger over the gas heater. Damn if I don't believe he ate hamburger and bread for every meal.
"And he never spent a lousy dime on clothes. He wore an old pair of overalls which he patched up from old clothes us boys threw away. He half-soled his own shoes, too. And he wore any old hat that was given to him. When Walrus was all dressed up he looked like a scarecrow.
"What Walrus done with his money had us boys wondering for a long time. He didn't have no wife or family anybody knew of. And for better than thirty years he averaged making $130 a month. Where was that money? That's what we wanted to know. It was rumored that Walrus hid it. That he had his money buried in the ground right next to the north bunkhouses. One night us boys damn near collapsed the bunkhouse digging around the foundations, looking for it. We found a couple of worms, and that's all.
"The truth came out later when the depression hit. Walrus had sunk all his money in company stock, paying as high as $86 a share. When the Crash came, the company stock went as low as $15 a share. Walrus lost his life's savings. The company hadn't been as faithful to old Walrus, as he had been to the company. The loss broke the old man.
"When the company sold the bunkhouses to private party, Walrus was put to helping the meter men. He worked only a short time before he laid down on the Meter Shop floor, jerked a couple of times, and died.
"The only ones to remember Walrus was us boys he snitched on."
"If there's no bunkhouses and no Walrus, Buster, we'll have to skip the crumbboss. Here's the Main Engine Room. What we want now is an operating engineer's life story. Hope Four-Trey will talk."
"Try and keep him from talking."
"What in the hell have they done to the Engine Room? It used to hare eighteen units. Thirty-six 160 H. P. Bessmer engines. They've cut it in half."
"The whole Plant has been cut in half. They don't have an oiler no longer to help the operating engineer. He's got all the work to do; watch the engines and the load, mop up, clean up, and oil up. The stillman don't have a helper no longer neither."
"The field must be playing out fast."
"Every goddam thing seems to be playing out fast."
"There's Four-Trey now. He's as thin and ugly as ever."
"Four-Trey! Here's a man who wants to listen to you talk..... Sure he's nuts!"
"You don't want to put all I tell you in a book. You want to use, to use -- 'discretion' -- yeh, that's it. When I get talking, I talk my full mind. Seldom talk, but when I do, I open up the whole way. Hold nothing back. So just use --Hell, use your head!
"I've had a full life. Tried something of everything. I started off on a farm near Mt. Vernon, Ohio, nearly fifty years ago. Forty-nine, to be exact. When I was sixteen years old I fell in love with a married woman ten years older than myself. He name was Myrtle, and she was married to my oldest brother, Harley. Harley lived in Mt. Vernon and sold insurance to farmers. It got so I didn't like Harley. He was loving Myrtle and eating her cooking, and that was just what I wanted to be doing. I loved Myrtle so bad, I went around telling farmers not to buy insurance off of Harley. I told them the insurance company he represented wouldn't pay off. It was as crooked as a barrel of snakes.
"Myrtle tried to treat me like a little brother, and when that didn't work, she started treating me as if I was a bad boy. That didn't work neither. Harley slapped me down several times because I wouldn't keep my hands off Myrtle. I couldn't. I had no control over myself. I was that bad in love. Harley told me if he caught me hanging around his house, he'd whip me clean of hide. I went to writing letters to Myrtle.
"Then the pay off came. Myrtle did me a dirty trick. Harley was going to St. Louis to an insurance convention, and he would be gone for nearly a week. I wrote Myrtle that I would be in Mt. Vernon the second Harley left. We would have a week together. A whole week together without Harley slapping me down for getting fresh with her. And we'd go off together before Harley got back. My plans didn't work out. Myrtle deserted me. She went with her husband to the convention in St. Louis....
"I'll get to the oil fields in a minute. You want to hear my whole life story, don't you, Dan? All right! You'll hear it my way or not at all.
"I followed Myrtle to St. Louis, but I couldn't find her. For the first time in my life I got drunk. Spent every cent I had on whiskey. My whole $2.75. Broken in spirit, penniless, sore at heart, and suffering from the damndest hang-over I've ever had, I joined the Navy.
"I'll cut this part of my life short. I'll just say that at Training School in San Pedro, I took to serious drinking and hell-raising. I wanted to forget Myrtle. When I wasn't drunk or in a cat-house, I was in the brig. Most of the time I was in the brig.
"One morning a letter came to me from Myrtle. I didn't open it right off, but carried it around in my pocket next to my heart, or near it anyhow. That evening I got stinking drunk. And with tears pouring down my joyful face, I opened the letter and read it under a street light. Myrtle said she knew I was going to make good in the Navy, that she had the greatest confidence in me, and that when I came back to Mt. Vernon, she knew I wouldn't be a silly bad boy, but a responsible man. The letter was signed: 'Love, Myrtle'. That was all I could see. 'LOVE, Myrtle'.
"That set me off. I bellowed my joy. I stopped people on the street and told them of my great joy. I became a damn nuisance. A cop, who didn't share my joy, not knowing Myrtle, pinched me and slapped me in the hoosegow. The charges: drunk and disturbing the peace.
"Myrtle's letter was the cause of me getting kicked out of the Navy. I had one too many charges against my record. The presiding officer at my court said I was a delinquent and ought to be in a reformatory. He said the Navy was no reformatory, not by a long shot. I had to agree with that statement. And he said though it looked like the USA would be involved in the World War any day, that I was goo great a handicap for any man's Navy, especially in wartime. 'Let the Army have him!' he roared. And the whole court laughed like hell. The Navy has very little respect for the Army.
"But I didn't mind getting kicked out of the Navy. For now I could rush home to Myrtle. I walked from California. I rode the rods from California. Finally, I got to Mt. Vernon, Ohio. Got there just in time to be drafted by the Army. The USA had declared war on Germany.
"I've told you about Myrtle just to show you how a woman can make a fool out of a man, especially a young boy who doesn't know his stuff, who lets his ballocks run away with his brains.
"During the World War.....
"I ain't going to fight the whole goddam War over again. I'll get to the oil fields presently. I'm talking to Dan, and not you, Buster. So keep your big mouth out of our conversation.
"Where in the hell was I? That's right. In the Army and in France. I put in eighteen months overseas. Right in the thick of it. Did you ever drink any of this cognac? It's powerful stuff. They had to keep me up front to keep me sober. I was drunk most of the time though. And I spent about half my time in Prance in the guard house. I had a good time for myself in the Army.
"It was in the Army I got my nickname. Four-Trey. I was the best crap-shooter in the A.E.F. My training in the Navy had put me ahead of the other boys. I could roll a seven with any man's dice. Even bounce a four-trey off the wall. I made better money in the Army, shooting crap, than I've ever made before or since in my life. If I didn't average making $300 a week, I threw the dice away and loaded me a new pair.
"After the war, I supported myself by gambling. I kept on the move up and down the East Coast. Me and my partner wasn't making enough money to keep us living high, so we took out for the boom towns of Oklahoma and Texas. To win big money gambling, you've got to go where people make good money and are careless with it. That last point is important. An oil field worker can squander money faster than a drunken sailor.
"Me and my partner was cleaning up when a kid stabbed my partner in the back. The kid was working on a pipeline out of Amarillo, making fair money, but he lost his wages when my partner had a lucky run. My partner made fourteen points in a row. That made the kid sore, and he claimed the dice were loaded. But even if the dice were loaded, that don't give a man the right to split you wide open with a knife.
"I had to leave Amarillo. The boys had it in for me too. Never did find out how that stabbing was settled. I heard my partner died, but I don't know whether the kid got the chair for it or not. It's a sure bet he didn't. A man couldn't get justice in those early boom towns. The laws were scared to enforce the law. They kept to themselves most the time.
"That knifing did something to me. It took the nerve right out of me. I decided to give up professional gambling for a living. So when I landed in Slick City, I got a job in the oil field working in a construction gang. The Carter was building a gasoline plant, and I worked with that part of the gang that sets these Bessemer engines. It wasn't long before I was pushing one of the gangs. No one can say I didn't learn about gasoline plants and gas engines from the ground up.
"After we finished that plant, the company sent me and a few of the other boys to Cromwell to help build another plant. The plant was built four miles out of Cromwell, at a gap in the road called Struggleville. In Struggleville I ran across my old war buddy, Bill Chapman. Bill was slated to be chief engineer of the new plant.
"Naturally, the first thing Bill and I done was to get drunk and look up some women. The next night we got drunk again and talked till it was time to go to work the next morning about what we done in France. All the whiskey and cognac we drunk. All the French girls we laid up with. And all the fights and brawls we started. We even talked French to each other. I had forgotten all the words I knew except two or three, like 'parlez-voo', and a couple of others. Most the endings of French words are pronounced 'a'. It don't make no difference if the word ends in a 't' or a 'r' or just any letter, it's pronounced 'a'. It's dumb as hell, I know, but that's the way they talk in France.
"I told you to keep your big mouth out of our conversation, Buster. I'm telling you for the last time. When I said I wasn't going to fight the World War over, I meant just that. A service man, especially one who spent eighteen Oklahoma Writers' Project months in the front line trenches in France, don't like to talk about the War. He wants to forget about it. Now let me talk. I've got to go check the boilers, and can't give you the time I'd like to give you. If you can come back later, I'll fill in the gaps. Now where was I?
"To finish up quick. Bill Chapman made me an operating engineer when the plant was built. And when this plant was built here in Seminole, I was transferred over here. That was in the early part of 1927, and I have been here ever since.
"Sure I'll answer personal questions. But make it snappy.- Yes, I'm married and got two kids. My home is like everybody else's home here in the oil fields. A place to eat and sleep. The less you say about my wife the better. If it wasn't for the kids, I'd run her off. I wanted a woman to lay up with so I took this girl in. I married her after the second child was born. We went to Arkansas and got married because the company thought we were already married. She's an ignorant girl, no book learning, but she's good to the kids. I could of done worse, I guess. But I doubt it. Let's just skip my wife.
"Yes. I belong to a union. The greatest union in the country. The American Legion. I take an active part in its program. I'm chairman of the Americanism Committee.
"I haven't shot crap for better than a year. The boys won't gamble with me. I'm still too good for them.....There goes the safety valve. Got to blow the boilers down. I've talked too goddam long."
"Don't put that down about Four-Trey being too good for the boys, Dan. That's a damn lie. The boys won't gamble with him because he's crooked. He also shortchanges the boys. He's a bad one for borrowing money too. He makes $150 a month, but he's always borrowing a $1 here and a $1 there. And he never pays back his debts. If you remind him, he gets sore as hell, and claims he paid you back. Several of the boys have invited him outside, but Four-Trey won't fight. If you ask me, he's yellow. The boys leave him alone."
"Lie or no lie, I've got to put down exactly what the folks tell me."
"But Four-Trey ain't folks. He's just people."
"Here comes P. J. We just as well get his story."
"You know he's been busted back from head mechanic. Wild Tom is head mechanic. P. J. is his assistant now."
"That's what you said. But we want P. J.'s story. We want somebody with religion. We don't want all our life stories to be told by crap-shooter, whiskey-guzzlers, and whore-hoppers." "P. J. is just plomb full of Christ. He'll make a good one."
"I'd shake hands with you, Dan, but I'm pretty dirty. We've just finished putting in new piston rings on 6. It's hard work when you're short-handed.
"Dan, there's not much I can tell about myself. I've always led a quiet steady kind of life. A Christian Life. You know I don't run around much. My home and my church and my work are my only interests. And my boy and girl. I didn't go to leave them out.
"The first job I ever had was in the coal mines around Henryetta. I'll carry to my grave the scars I got in the mines. Can you see those black marks through the grease? That's coal dust. It's under the skin. All coal miners have marks like that.
"I worked as a mechanic in the mines until 1924. That was the year of the big strike. All mines were shutdown. The strike lasted three years, which just about starved out most of us boys. They left the coal mines for the oil fields in droves. It wasn't till 1927 that I could bring myself to going to Oklahoma Writers' Project the oil fields. If we hadn't been starring, we'd never have come. A man will do most anything when his family is starving.
"The stories I heard of the sinful way folks were living in the oil fields was the reason I didn't want to come here. Our preacher had been to Seminole, and he told us of the lust and drunkardness and murders. It was no fit place to bring your family. It was damnation for youngsters. I have always been a God-fearing man, and my wife is a God-fearing woman, and we have tried to raise our boy and girl to be God-fearing and clean. I felt the temptations in an oil field would be too strong for them. Youngsters are weak in resisting the ways of the flesh. They haven't had time to get completely shed of the original sin.
"But starvation drove us, like other mining folks, to the oil fields. All we could do was pray to God that our boy and girl wouldn't stray from the path of righteousness. And, thank God, I can say today that my two children are right with God. Both of them have been saved. The boy is now going to Oklahoma Baptist University over in Shawnee. And next year, if it's God's will that I'm still working, the girl will be going to that teacher's college at Ada.
"So we came to Seminole and continued leading Christian lives. And you can guess my gladness of heart when I found thousands of other folks living in God's grace. Drunkards, lustful men and women, and murderers were not the only people working in the oil fields. I soon learned that most oil field workers had good hearts, but weak wills. Some of the most sinful people were good at heart. And one of these days, they will leave go of sin altogether and accept the Lord Jesus Christ for their personal Savior. I know that to be so.
"Yes, Buster, I even have hopes for Wild Tom.
"And speaking of Wild Tom. It was through Tom that I got my job here in Seminole. He was chief engineer. And I'm holding the same job I first got, right now. I've "been right here at this Plant for twelve years. Tom's dad and my dad used to coal mine together back in Pennsylvania. They were good friends. It was Tom's dad that talked my dad into coming out West. So, you see, I've known Tom for a long time. No, he wasn't always as wild as he is right now. He was unruly, but not wild. If a man isn't right with God, working around a casinghead gasoline plant will make him wild. That's right. He'll be throwing ring-tail fits all the time.
"Tom went out to the Texas panhandle with his uncle. He always wanted to be a cowboy. He wanted to ride horses and whoop it up. And I understand he made a good cowboy.
"My dad was killed in that mine explosion at McCurtain in 1912. My mother died several years later, after the family moved to Henryetta. I've got three brothers and four sisters. They're married and scattered all over the country. Haven't seen or heard from them since I came to the oil fields. But we'll be getting together soon. You may be right at that. Buster. It may be a breadline that'll bring us together. You're not fooling when you say that. I put my trust in the Lord. And if it's His will I go on a breadline, I'll gladly go on a breadline. My wife and my children and myself will go on a breadline glorifying God and His Holy Name. Yes, sir I put my trust in the Lord.
"I'd like to talk to you boys longer, but I've got to go. What you boys doing tonight? We're holding a revival at the church. Every night we're saving souls for God. You boys come on down to the church. It will do you good to get close to the Lord. My wife is leading the testimonials tonight. Services will start at eight. You know the church. It's on the highway to Shawnee. Just this side of that first tank farm.
"Come to the house for supper, Dan. We won't make company of you. Oh, you're eating with Buster. Well, Ruby will feed you good. Some other time Oklahoma Writers' Project then. No, no 1 I don't believe it, Duster. Dan's got better sense than to get drunk. Mind your conduct boys. Mind your conduct. And may the good Lord forgive you."
"Amen, brother. Amen!"
"Shush, Buster."
"Now what in the hell can you do with a guy like that?"
"Let's go over to the Chem Lab now. Is Clarence still the Plant chemist?"
"Clarence was sent to Fittstown. Baldy is the new chemist. He is also chief engineer of the Plant."
"Let's get this straight once and for all. Baldy took Wild Tom's job."
"That's right. And Wild Tom took P. J.'s Job. Since the Depression most everybody has been busted back."
"Is Baldy out of the Tulsa office?"
"Hell no! Baldy came from the East. He's a swell fellow though. Want me to tell you how the Stills work now?"
"We'll listen to Baldy first."
"Better leave me out of your book. I've been with the company many years, but I've worked only a few years in the field proper. I'm a chemist, a laboratory worker. My life to the average person would seem quite dull. On graduating from Cornell, I went into a laboratory for the Standard at Bayonne. And there I remained until poor health forced me into the air and sunshine. The company transferred me here to Seminole. That was four years ago. 1935. And here I am.
"Not a very exciting biography, you see.
"No, Buster, I've never been drunk. I don't even smoke. No, I've never 'horsed around with the gals'. The first woman I went with was my wife. I may add that I have two daughters. They both attend George Washington University in Washington, D.G. My wife makes a home for the two girls in Washington.
"That's about all there is to tell about my life. I warned you it wouldn't be exciting.
"Beg pardon. I didn't catch what you said. Oh I see, you want to know what I do for a living. Run tests mostly. All kind of tests. I have to find out if the gasoline is sweet or sour. Whether it will corrode metal. If the gasoline corrodes metal, you wouldn't be able to use it in your car for any length of time. It would eat into the metal, and you would have lots of replacing of parts to do. It would prove very expensive.
"Then I have to test a sample of gasoline from each stock tank before it is pumped to the loading rack. We must know the vapor tension of each tank of gasoline. If the vapor tension is too high, it can't he shipped. It is too volatile. Evaporates too quickly. The gasoline must be weathered down, lose some of its volatility.
"These same samples from each stock tank must also stand a color test. The color must be what we call water-white. If the gasoline is off color, it must be re-run through the re-run still. Oil is what discolors gasoline. And we can't have that.
"Then there are numerous other tests. Even if I had the time to explain them, you wouldn't use them all in your book. The different tests would take a book by themselves.
"Yes, it's routine work, but I enjoy it. It's all I know. And every once in a while you run across a new problem. We have invented many new gadgets which have helped the oil industry. We get credit for our inventions, hut no money. All improvements made on company time and with company equipment are owned by the company. I'm not saying whether it's right or wrong. I'm not in a position to discuss it.
"Come back and see us anytime, Dan. I'm Interested in what you are doing. I hope the book will he successful."
"Dan, Baldy didn't tell all he could of told. I know a couple of things about him myself."
"You're not going to make them, Buster?"
"Now how do you like that!"
"Well, are you?"
"Hell no I"
"Go on then."
"Baldy's wife is a high-powered bitch. She came out here one summer, but wouldn't stay in a company house. Oh no, it wasn't good enough for her. She stayed in an apartment over in Shawnee. Baldy could only be with her over the week-end. He had to stick pretty close to the Plant in case there was trouble. A chief engineer has a twenty-four hour job. Shawnee is eighteen miles from Seminole. Which is just about eighteen miles too far.
"Baldy's wife allowed how Seminole was no fit place for her two girls. Ladies don't live in rough, coarse oil field towns like Seminole. That's what that high-powered bitch said. She just as well come right out and called all the women in Seminole whores. For that's what her words meant.
"That summer was the first and last time she's been out here. And I think that's why Baldy likes it out here. He ain't got no social ambition. He's a swell fellow. He doesn't think his sweat don't stink. If I was Baldy, I'd divorce that snooty bitch. Baldy sure is a fool when it comes to her.
"You know what he does, Dan. He sends her every cent he makes except $50. That's all he lives on a month. $50. She's having a big time for herself in Washington, D. C, and Baldy is living worst than any roustabout. And him the chief engineer. Why he hasn't even got a personal car of his own. Damn near every oil field worker has some kind of car. It may not be much of a car, but it's still a car, and it can run after a fashion.
"Baldy pays $15 a month on his company house. He gets his own breakfast and lunch. For the evening meal, he eats at P. J.'s house.
"The whole truth about Baldy is, he ain't firm enough, he's a quiet, kind man. Never heard him raise his voice. And it sure pains him to order men about. He'd rather do the job himself. When he does give an order, he always tells the men that it's not his wish, but it's a ruling of the company. And when a lay-off is ordered by the company, Baldy will apologize to the men he's got to lay-off for doing so.
"Us boys like Baldy. And if anyone takes advantage of his kindness, that person is no less than a dirty son of a bitch.
"That's about all I've got to say about Baldy."
"The stills are next. Now is the time for you to explain how they run, Buster."
"Okay. Here goes. Where are we. Oh yeh, the wet gas comes out of the Main Engine Room under high-pressure and goes through the absorbers, those tall things sticking up over there. In the absorbers is mineral seal oil that strips the wet gas making it dry gas. You know, takes out of the wet gas the stuff that makes gasoline. The mineral seal oil is then pumped through the stills, and the gasoline is steamed out of the oil. The mineral seal oil is cooled off and pumped back to the absorbers. The gasoline is pumped to that real tall tower over yonder. That tall tower is called the stabilizer and it knocks the high test gasoline out. You know what I mean, the butane and other high gas is taken out of the gasoline, so you can use the gasoline in a car or truck. That high gas is too wild to handle in combustion engines. If you stick your finger in that high gasoline, it will freeze your finger off. And it evaporates so fast, it looks like it's smoking. Anyhow, you finally get gasoline that you can use, and it is stored in them stock tanks there until it is pumped to the loading rack to be shipped out. Casinghead gasoline is usually blended with other gasoline.... And that's how casinghead gasoline is made."
"Yep, that's the general idea."
"General idea hell! That's how it's done."
"Well, I'll be damned. Art Compton is still on the Stills."
"Hey, Art ! Come over here. We want your life story."
"Like most of the boys here in the fields, I come off a farm. I didn't quit the farm because I didn't like farming. I come here to make more money than I was making off the farm. But that ain't no different from any of the other folks here. Everybody come to this oil boom to make more money than they were making somewhere else. Even those big shots who already had plenty of money, enough for theirselves and their families to get by on for the rest of their days, come here to make still more money. Guess it's just natural for a man to want to better himself and his family.
"To tell the truth, I wasn't, making a living for my wife and five kids.
I've got eight kids now. A farmer working on shares can't make a living for his family. I don't care how hard you work and how good a farmer you are, you can't make a go of it. Sure, you can live like a dog; eat a little, sleep a little, and ran yourself rawbone trying to get together a mess of food to eat a little more. A man ain't going to live like that when he knows he has a chance at working at something else which pays enough money so he won't have to live like that.
"I had that chance and took it.
"You remember Guy. He pushed the yard gang here at the Plant before Outfit took the job over. Guy was transferred to Little River. The company was putting in practice its ruling that a foreman couldn't work his kinfolks. Guy had several of his kinfolks working for him. I know that for a fact, because Guy was my first cousin, Uncle Milburn's oldest boy. I'd written Guy about a job, and he told me to come on down, he'd get me on. And that's just what I done.
"Like most of the other boys, I started out in the gang. I'll never forget the first job I was on. It had nothing to do with oil. Gas, yes. But not oil. Me and another fellow had to dismantle the outhouse the construction gang used when it was building the Plant. When we got the outhouse down and out of the way, we filled up the hole, patted it kind of solid, and scattered gravel over it. Today you couldn't tell where that outhouse was. We done a job any man would be proud of.
"It didn't take me very long to catch on to the work around the Plant. I've always been handy around engines, and I know how to handle tools. A man who has tore down and put together a Model T Ford as many times as I have is bound to know a little of something about engines and fittings. Some of the boys think I got to help on the Still because I was related to Guy. I'll be honest with you, that might of helped some, but it wasn't the real reason. If I hadn't of been handy with tools and caught on quick to the work, I'd never been made a stillman's helper. That's the God's truth, boys. I know a lot of the boys say I pulled vacuum, was a suck, but you know that ain't so. If I'm working for a man, I believe in giving him a good day's work. You'll agree that's right. Because I was handy with tools and made a good hand I was put on as a stillman's helper.
"A stranger looking at these Stills would think it was nigh on impossible to learn how to operate them. When I first saw all these towers, and coolers, and pipes running all which-a-ways, I thought to myself it would take a man with more. Brains than I got to run them. But it ain't as hard as it looks. Practically everything runs by itself, automatically. You set your pressure the way you want it, then if it gets too high the valve automatically closes, and if it gets too low, the valve opens up some. For control of temperature, we've got thermocouples that work automatically. All a stillman has to do is to check pressures and temperatures to see if the valves are working all right. Of course, we've got to keep a record of all the gasoline we make on our tour. We've got to run some tests, and many other routine jobs. It ain't hard work, but it keeps a man pretty busy.
"When I first come on the Stills, we didn't have all these automatic regulators and thermo-couplings. We had to race all over the yard regulating by hand the pressures and temperatures. It kept two of us busy. That's why they had both a stillman and a stillman's helper, instead of just a stillman like they've got now.
"I was a stillman's helper about six months when Jim Abbot, the Stillman, was sent to South America, and I was put in his place. I got a raise from $130 to $175 a month. I thought I was sitting on top of the world. I felt mighty proud of myself.
"Back in Missouri on the farm, if I averaged making $50 a month I thought I was getting along pretty good. Then when I was put on as a roustabout at $130 a month, I thought I was a big shot. But when I saw my first $175 check, I knew for sure I'd be a rich man in short order. I get a laugh every time I think of what was going through my head back in '28. Somehow, things didn't turn out the way I'd planned them.
"Right now instead of being a big shot, I'm doing what I was doing in Missouri before I come to Oklahoma. I'm farming. Of course. I ain't putting in no big crop' but I've got a good size garden, and I keep a cow and chickens. Got to do it to get by. It didn't take me long to find out that grocerymen and merchants fix their prices to take care of a worker's wages. I was making $175 a month, and my bills just about took care of it. When the Depression hit, the company didn't cut our wages, but told us we had to buy the company house we lived in or move out. We was allowed to pay a little each month. That cut $15 a month off my check. Then my car costs me. And we've had a lot of sickness. And I've had to send money to the old folks who live with my sister in Springfield, Missouri. I've got to help with their expenses. The money goes so fast, I can't keep up with it, just don't know where it all does go. All I know, we're flat broke a week after every pay-day. If I hadn't put in a garden and bought that cow and them chickens, me and my family would of starved a long time back. We wouldn't of exactly starved, but the kids wouldn't of been in school, especially high school, and the old folks would be doing without. It would be pretty tough on us.
"I put in a full day. When I work the morning tour, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., I get up early and work my garden. One of the older boys milk the cow and takes it out to pasture. My old lady looks after the chickens. By 7:30, I've got most of my morning chores done, and I come here and put in eight hours running these Stills. After work I work my garden some more, and do odd jobs around the house. By 9 p.m. I'm dog tired and go to bed. When I'm on daylight tour, 12 midnight to 8 a.m., or evening tour, 4 p.m. to 12 midnight, my schedule is different of course. This working for an oil company and farming at the same time keeps a man busy. I'm on the go all the time.
"The only place I go besides to work is to church. My whole family goes to church twice a week. We go to. The Holy Penecostal Church in town. I've had no Oklahoma Writers' Project education to amount to anything I can read and write a fair hand and do a little figuring. I know enough to get by and that's about all I know.
"If I get laid-off, I'm going to try and get myself a filling station and pig stand all together. You've seen them on the road. My kids will run it, and me and my old lady will take it easy. No, I ain't going to sell no beer, and I won't stay open on Sundays. I plan on doing a little preaching on the side.
"I'm like Four-Trey in a way. And in another way, I ain't nothing like him. I don't believe in unions. A man ought to belong to just one organization -the church. That's what our preacher says, and he's right. My kids raise money for clothes and shoes by selling Judge Rutherford's pamphlets.
"I'll go back to farming only when I own my own land. And the way things look, that ain't very likely."
"Buster, Ruby won't mind if we're late for supper, will she?"
"Why hell no. I'll whip her ears down if she gets sassy."
"It won't take us much longer. I saw Ralph before I looked you up. We won't have to worry about him. The reason why I want to go to the Main Office is to see if Wild Tom is there. He was at the warehouse when I was there before."
"You've talked to Ralph. Then we've already got a life story of an office punk."
"I got Ralph's story, but it's dull as hell. His whole life can be told in a few words."
"Ralph, the head clerk, is a drone. He works hard and long, carrying out his assignments in a steady, mechanical way. Nothing seems to disturb him. If he gets bawled out, which is seldom, he says nothing. If he gets praised or kidded, which happens often, he says nothing. He has no opinions on anything. The workers, engineers, stillman, and foremen, who haven't had much education, rely upon him to do their letter writing -- official and unofficial. And what Oklahoma Writers' Project the men like about Ralph, he keeps his mouth shut about their affairs. A virtue the men consider unusual in an office punk.
"During the boom days, and before he got married, Ralph never went out carousing with the boys; drinking, gambling, dogging, and the like. He stayed in the bunkhouse and listened to his radio, an old battery set which wasn't so old in 1927, or he worked on his reports at the office.
"Ralph was born in Tulsa. He went to high school and business college. He started working for the company in Tulsa as a clerk, and he was sent to Seminole at the beginning of the boom to help in the Field Office. After five years, he was made head clerk. And he has held that job ever since.
"Ralph married just before the big-lay off, at the suggestion of a Tulsa official. He started going to church socials, and finally a girl nabbed him. His wife is the aggressive, club woman type. She is interested in church affairs, and takes Ralph to church on Wednesday night and twice on Sunday. He obeys his wife's orders in the same steady, mechanical way he obeys the company's orders. They have one kid, who is as quiet and colorless as Ralph.
"And that's all there is to Ralph's life story."
"Man, I'd give a month's wages to see Ralph and his old lady in bed together. Betcha she's got to order him to--------."
"We'll go into that later, Buster, over our beers. Let's knock off Wild Tom, and then go put on the feed bag."
"Yeh. The sooner we eat, the sooner we get to go to town."
"Look out, Buster!
Why that crazy bastard. He damn near ran us down."
"It's Wild Tom."
"Some day I'm going to brain that crazy bastard."
"Wait until we get his life story."
"Whee ! Nearly got you. Jesus Christ! What in the hell are you doing back here, Dan. Don't run off till I've had a chance to talk with you. I'm just as busy as hell right now. Two units down. If we don't make 30,000 gallons every twenty-four hours, the Tulsa office screams like fifty panthers. The dumb sons of bitches! How in the hell do they expect you to keep production up when the gas is playing out and the equipment ought to be junked....Ralph! Hey, Ralph! Phone Baldy to come hot-footing down to the office....Can't talk now. You know enough about me. Just write down a crazy bastard. That'll be enough. You won't even have to put my name down. Everybody will know who you're talking about. ---- Ralph! What did Baldy say. Okay! ... He'll be here in a minute.
"Yeah, I was born in eastern Oklahoma. Who told you that? P. J.I What you want me to do, tell you where I was born, where I went to school, where I've worked, and where I'm going to die? What is this? A census? Oh, is that right. A book on oil workers. Put me down as a cowhand. I've worked around gasoline plants for twenty years, fifteen, anyhow. Started at Burbank and then came here. But I'm a cowhand and will always be a cowhand.
"Grew up on a ranch out in the Texas panhandle. I was the best calf-roper in the state, if I do say so myself. If I hadn't of got a crazy notion of making money, I'd still be on a ranch somewhere. And I'd be a damn sight better off...
"Ralph! Give Baldy another ring. Tell him to get the lead out.....
"I worked for several oil companies in Texas, around Amarillo and Burkburnett, before going to Burkank. I got married at Burbank. Had to do it for self-protection. Buster will tell you how women won't leave me alone. Whee! Did we have the girls. Buster. I was a damn fool to give you a job. You did me more good in a week at that drug store than you've done me out here in ten years. By God, I get horny just thinking about it.
"Here comes Baldy now. Dan, come and spend the night with me. My old lady is visiting somewhere. She spends all her time and my money riding around the country, going nowhere. If my kid hasn't eaten all the food in the house, we'll have something to eat.
"Baldy, "by God, we've got two units down. If those dumb sons of bitches in Tulsa...don't go away, Dan...Number 2 and 15. Yeah, 2 again. I'll be goddam if I know. Jesus Christ! You'd think ... "
"If Wild Tom ain't something. Never seen a man throw so many ring-tall fits in my whole life."
"The same old Wild Tom. Just as crazy as ever."
"Were you here, San, when the loading rack burned down"
"No. It happened right after I left."
"Wild Tom really threw a ring-tail fit that night. Tanks full of gasoline were exploding and being blown all over the place. A small shacktown got sprayed with gasoline and burned to the ground. A couple of high-line poles burned in half and the high-line fell across a tank car. Man, did the sparks fly! It was dangerous as hell. Several of the boys were posted to keep everybody away. All these tanks exploding, and shacks burning, and high-lines falling, and the fire getting out of hand, got Wild Tom so excited he was scooting here, scurrying there, just racing around like a turpentine cat. He was just like a horse when the stable burns down. We couldn't keep him out of the fire. He would rush into the flames, and somebody would pull him out. But as soon as they leaved go of him, he raced right back in.
"Wild Tom was carried off to the hospital long before the fire was put out. His legs were burned pretty bad. That fire damn near kept him from being a trifling man.
"I wish you'd been there, Dan. It was funny as hell. Wild Tom was at his best. He threw a ring-tail fit that was a ringtail fit."
"That finishes up the Plant."
"We'll go home and eat then. I've got to be in town by eight."
"You're sure Ruby won't be put out if you bring me to supper?"
"Why hell no! We don't eat fancy. Hope you're used to beans, bread, salt meat, and stewed peaches, because that's what you'll get to eat."
"I'm used to it. When you work on W.P.A., you don't exactly live off the fat of the land. Didn't you forget something? "
"What?"
"Grapefruit. How about finishing your life story. Outfit cut you short. Let's see, you had just been laid-off in that big lay-off in the fall of 1931. Remember. What happened after that?"
"There's something I ought to tell you before I finish my life story. Can you keep a secret?"
"Don't tell me everything you're told me about yourself is a damn lie."
"No, it ain't that. What I've told you is the God's truth. I swear, Dan. I ain't been lying. It's something else."
"Let's take one thing at a time. First, let's finish your life story."
"Okay. But I want to tell you this other thing before we get to the house. Don't want Baby to know about it."
"Oh, oh I"
"No, it ain't nothing like that."
"Certainly not!"
"Go to hell!"
"The rest of your life story. And the God's truth."
"The God's truth if I ever told it."
"When the NRA came, the company had to put some men back to work. And that's how I got back on the pay-roll. That was in the summer of 1933.
"I forgot to tell you, I got hitched to Ruby just before I got laid-off. I don't think that's the reason they let me go. On my timesheet they didn't write: Laid-off. Married Ruby.' They wrote: 'Temporary Lay-off. No Work.'
"If I hadn't of married Ruby, I guess I'd be down in the Rio Grande Valley right now, trying to get a stake so I could buy a grapefruit farm. Instead I had to stay around Seminole and try and pick up odd jobs. I did a little pipelining for a contractor. I did some work for Ruby's father. He's a tank contractor. But he didn't get much work because the companies have found it's cheaper to keep the oil under the ground than on top of the ground. Those were lean months for Ruby and me and the kid. Yeah, to top it all off, we had our first kid during those idle months. I wanted to call the kid. Depression, but Ruby named him after me. All told, with the few odds jobs I was able to pick up, and the drip-gas I swiped and sold cheap to certain folks I knew, Ruby and me got by. It was damn hard sledding though.
"When the company called me to come back to work, I didn't hesitate. They put me to roustabouting here at the Plant. But how long I'll get to work is something else. Most of the boys who were put back to work under the NRA ruling have been laid-off again. Maybe if I didn't have five kids - yeah, five of them - I would have got the ax along with the other boys.
"Think of it, Dan. I've been married eight years, and I've got five kids. Do you think they're coming too fast?
"I meet Ruby at a dance at the Winter Garden. We kind of liked the way each other danced. And pretty soon we were going together steady. We started to like each other a lot. But we didn't think about getting married till Little Buster wanted to be born. So we got married and set up house just before he came, so he would have a place to stay when he arrived. And it was a good thing we did just that, for we've got five of them now.
"Ruby and me have had lots of fun together. Of an evening we take the mattress off the bed and place it on the floor right in front of the radio. Then we turn the music on real low, to keep from waking up the kids, and then we have fun for ourselves. If we want soft, soothing music, we try to get Wayne King or an orchestra like him. If we want to get rough and rowdy, we turn to Cab Calloway or somebody like him. We sure have a time for ourselves. But for God's sake, don't tell Ruby I told you about this. Boy, she'd really throw a ring-tail fit.
"I guess I've told all there is to tell about my life story. I'm still planning on going to the Rio Grande Valley, and raise grapefruit. There is only one thing I'd like to do better. Be nosey and get paid for it!"
"Thanks, Buster. That finishes off our trip through a Casinghead Gasoline Plant. Things have changed a lot in eight years. Folks seem played out. Every-thing is so quiet."
"Times are quiet now, Dan. But the way these oil companies are laying-off men, and farmers losing their land, and W.P.A. and Direct Belief cut down, putting folks on Starvation - times won't be quiet much longer. As we used to say, 'there's going to be hell in camp!' "
"I wouldn't be surprised."
"Before we get in the house, I want to tell you something."
"The secret?"
"Yep. We're not going to get running, stumbling, blind drunk tonight. Like old times. I'm using that as an excuse. I've got to go to my union meeting."
"I don't blame Ruby for trying to keep you away from a company union meeting."
Company union, hell! A bunch of us boys are holding our own union meeting. We're members of the Oil Workers Union, CIO. We're keeping low till we get a majority before we come out in the open. If the company got wind of this union, us boys who are in on it would be transferred all over the country, and then get laid-off on some trumped-up charge. The company did just that to Bob Stafford and Leroy Birch. Sent one of them to Illinois, and the other one to Kansas, and then laid them both off....For God's sake, keep this quiet!"
"No kidding?"
"You want the password?"
"Well, I'll be damned! You and me will have to celebarate for sure."
"Just like old times?"
"Just like old times."
