Pine Mountain Valley
Georgia
July 1939
There was no way of getting up to Pine Mountain Valley, but the woman who drove a battered old ear from the bus line atop in Harris over to Warm Springs agreed to taxi me up to the project.
"I'll have to charge two dollars to carry you up there," she apologized. "It's about fifteen miles from Warm Springs and the road's not hard surface except for a little piece. They're working on it now too."
After we left Warm Springs we went past a few farms. President Roosevelt's among them, then we started climbing over a series of hills and knolls that looked like worn down mountains. Most of the land was not cultivated but was covered with bushes, scrub oak, pines; amid the green of the foliage the gullies and banks, the ditches, the long scars of road blazed pinkish-red beneath the July sum. The baked red crust on the road crumbled beneath the wheels of the car as it ground slowly up the hills, rattling over the bumps and whining into second or low gear. Conversation was difficult, but we managed to make ourselves heard when we reached occasional smoother stretches. My driver, a pretty woman in her early thirties, had a soft, cultivated voice.
"I've never been up to Pine Mountain Talley before," she said. "I just never did have any reason to go --- don't know anyone there and my home's about thirteen miles from it. I don't believe I've ever even seen one of the settlers from Fine Mountain Valley. I guess they don't get out much. I don't know whether it's true or not but I've heard that the settlers aren't allowed to have ears and that they can't leave the project without asking permission at the office. Well, the government has to look after those people I suppose. They were people who didn't have a thing in the world before they came up here, or if they did have anything they didn't know how to take care of it so they lost it. No, if I were someone like that -- didn't have anything -- and the government gave me a chance like these people have, I wouldn't mind if they told me what to do. I'd appreciate good advice -- look, we must be on the project now."
Painted cottages were scattered along the next several miles of curving road; patches of com, of soy beans, peppers. and (occasionally) cotton grew on the red slopes; there were young peach orchards, young scuppernong vineyards. Beyond the houses end the terraced fields, beyond the pine trees and elderberry bushes of the valley was the bluish-green rim of the faraway hills.
We Passed a large white frame building -- the school. We came to a cluster of brown wooden barracks with signs over the doors --- "Ice-cream, cold drink," "Metal shop," "Shoe shop," and beyond these buildings, set in a square of lawn with crepe myrtles at one side, stood a substantial white farmhouse with windows and wide doorways. This house is the post office and the office building for the Fine Mountain Valley Organized Rural Community.
A plump, bushy-browed man in the post office told me I would find Mr. Bennet, the director of the community, in his office. He directed me through the hall and over a covered passageway to a sort of lean-to that had been added at the rear of the house. On the floor of the lean-to porch men were sitting. All of them wore blue overalls. As I went by their conversation stopped. I could feel their curiosity about a stranger in the community; I could feel their eyes following me as I went into the dim little ante-room of Mr. Bennett's office.
Mr. Bennett was dictating in the adjoining office and I sat down to wait for him to finish. A man in overalls was already waiting and ha began to tell about the different kinds of farm machinery he knew how to run. "Yessir, I reckon I've done just about every kind of work there is to do around here," he drawled. When Mr. Bennett's secretary came into the room and announced in her dry, spinsterish voice "He's through now," the man in overalls went into the other office.
"Hello Jack, come in," he was greeted by a deep voice, "Sit down."
"Mr. Bennett, I've finished on that job down near H street. You want me to start on that piece of ground. we was talking about the other day?"
"Yeah, that's all right, Jack."
They talked a few minutes longer before Jack went out and my turn came.
Mr. Bennett's office was small and dark; it seemed to be overflowing with papers, files, blueprints, pamphlets. He sat behind his desk, but rose to shake hands with me. His hand was hard and rough---the hand of a person who had done manual labor. The general appearance of the man was striking. He was tall, his brown hair was alive with reddish tints and waved straight up from his forehead, deep lines out across his forehead, down from his strong nose, his mouth, his blue eyes. In repose it was a stem looking face, but when he smiled it became humorous and attractive. I explained that I was on the Writers' Project, wanted to stay in the Talley several weeks and asked if there was any place I could board and room.
He asked if I had permission from Miss Shepperson, head of WPA in Georgia.
No, I said, but I had letters with me that would identify me and explain the type of thing I was trying to do.
He was sorry, they wouldn't be enough. "You see," he explained, "this is a WPA community and we've already had trouble with people coming in and stirring up trouble. They do it all the time. Just last week a fellow come in with an armload full of hymn books -- wanted to preach and stuff like that. We don't want no trouble -- have enough right here on the place without outsiders coming in to stir it up. Now I'm not saying that you're coming to make trouble or anything like that, but I just can't take the responsibility of a stranger coming in the community unless I have Miss Shepperson's o.k. or an o.k. from her office. It don't make no difference to me how you get it; I reckon the beat thing would be to go back to Atlanta and talk to Miss Shepperson or Mr. Lane -- he's the assistant administrator.
"You get that o.k. and we'll find a place for you to stay all right. You can put up in the guest cottage where the Home Economist and the librarian and some of them are.
"I'm sorry you have to go back to Atlanta, but you see how it is. We've just got to be careful. Goodbye, and when you get Miss Shepperson's permission, we'll be glad to have you stay in the community."
I went out to my waiting taxi and we started down the dusty, red road to Warn Springs.
Since Miss Shepperson was away from Atlanta I made a conference on Friday with Mr. Lana, the Assistant State Administrator. He could not give me permission himself, but he said he would explain the case to Miss Shepperson when she returned Friday night and would have her office call me on Saturday to let me know the outcome. On Saturday afternoon I was told that it would be all right for me to go into the Talley.
* * *
Mr. Bennett lives in a new two-story house, colonial style, set back from the road on a rise of ground. The two boys who had driven me up from Hamilton said they would wait while I went in to find out where I would stay in the Valley. I knocked on the door of the screened porch and an angular woman dressed in a printed voile and wearing pinz-nez came out. "I'm Mrs. Bennett's sister," she said. "Mrs. Bennett is at Sunday School and Mr. Bennett is sick with a cold. He's upstairs in bed, but I'll tell him you're here. Won't you sit down?"
The long living room, nicely furnished with antiques and reproductions, was uncrowded. and cool. There were books in the recesses on both sides of the white mantel and on the table was a copy of Hitler's MEIN KAMPF. Sun and heat seemed to be shut out of the room.
The soft voiced woman returned. "He's in bed, but he says if you don't mind he would like to see you for a few minutes. Just go up the stairs; it's the last door to the right."
He lay on a four poster bed with the Sunday papers spread around him. Against the white of the pillows his deeply lined face looked sunburned and ruddy.
"Come in," he said thickly. Boy, this cold sure had me down -- I like to have had pneumonia this week.
"I got your telegram and was going to send my wife down to Hamilton to meet you, but she got off to Sunday School before I knew what was happening. This cold has just about got the best of me.
"Miss Shepperson called me yesterday and said it would be all right for you to stay in the Talley. She said she knew the organization you was connected with and it was one of the finest things at all. You see how it was I had to get her o.k., don't you? It wasn't that I thought you would stir up any trouble but we have to be mighty careful. You never can tell. The communist headquarters of the South are in Birmingham you know, and that's not so far away from here. Why all kinds of 'em used to come in here, they'd come in at night in their care and talk to the people. If we was to have any bad trouble it would jest be the end of the project I guess because on account of being so near to the President's Little White House, that calls a lot of attention to Pine Mountain Valley. Before I left Washington they told me when I come down to take this job that I'd be in the limelight. I thought it was going to be taffy, but I found out different. The Atlanta Georgian is a Hearst paper, you know, and they're going to dig up anything they think is against the President or the New Deal -- they're going to ride it hard. Every chance they get they come out with something about the Talley, jest as bad as they can make it. Before you know it some Hearst paper way out in a little California town will copy the story. That's the way it is.
"Another thing that makes it bad for me is that my home where I was raised is right over here in Griffin. That puts me on the spot sure enough. Around Georgia they notice everything I do because they know me. I can remember back when this valley was one of the richest in Georgia. Big owners lived here, raised cotton. The boll weevil ruined 'em, that and teaching their children it was a disgrace to lift their hand to do any work.
"The're all kinds of people here some of 'em jest as fine as you'd, ever see and some of 'em triflin and lazy, you know the kind that went everything handed out to 'em and then complain because they don't get more. There's some, though, that really do work -- they'll make something out of this chance they're getting. I don't know what they think about me around here; if you hear anything they say I wish you'd tell me but don't let them know you do. I know there's some here who think good of me, and they don't always talk so nice to my face; they'll come right out and say what they think any time. One fellow I lent a mule to come to me and said, "Mr. Bennett, I sure have been cussing you; that's the worst male I ever saw." I like that when a fellow comes right out and says what he thinks, but I don't have no use for the ones that act up so sweet to my face and then go behind my back and talk. I like a man who'll stand up to me.
"About a place for you to stay, you jest go on over to the house where the Home Economist is and tell her I sent you. I guess they'll have room for you in with them. They split their grocery bill between them so they'll let you know how much that is at the end of the week. I hope you like the Talley here; we think we've got something pretty good. There's two things I want to say to you: don't stir up any trouble and let me see a copy of whatever you write about the Valley." 
"What if I were a communist," I asked as I rose to go, "What could you do about it, Mr. Bennett? You couldn't ask me to leave the Project could you?"
"Oh couldn't I" he answered. "That's what those communists said when they ware here, 'you can't make us leave,' they said. 'No I don't have to make you leave, 'that's what the law's for,' I told 'em.
"Don't even ask me about what happened; it about ruined me. I weighed 215 pounds and I worried so much that in six months I come down to 169. There was twenty-six families of them communists here, but I didn't have to do a thing. The law did it. That's their job."
* * *
The Guest Cottage at Pine Mountain Valley does not have very much room for guests because eight persons live there already. They call the house "The WPA Retreat" since all of them are employed by Georgia WPA, either directly or through the Talley administration.
Here are the people who live in the "Retreat":
Rachel MacLarty, the valley Home Economist.
Gladys Phillips, Recreational Supervisor and her
eleven-year-old daughter, Claire.
Marie Tarven, librarian, and her twelve-year-old
niece, Nell.
Carl Hager, assistant to Mrs. Phillips.
Mrs. Hager.
Sis, the colored girl.
And from Wednesday through Friday, Mrs. Johnson,
of La Grange who holds handicraft classes in the Valley.
Rachel MacCarthy, tall, blue-eyed., black-haired and. snub nosed, has a face like a nice dog but her disposition is as calm as that of a cow. She talks with a slow drawl which is just right for the droll remarks she is constantly making. A story is told about her which Mrs. Phillips said was true. It seems that Governor Rivers was so delighted with the punch he drank at a certain occasion he asked if he could see the person who made it. That person was Rachel and when they introduced her to the Governor he said to her "Young Lady, what can I give you in return for making such delicious punch. Just name the thing you want most and if it's within my power, I'll see that you get It."
"Governor Rivers," Rachel drawled, "The thing I want most in the world is a husband, and I don't see how you can give me that."
"Well," he replied, "Just come up to Atlanta and I'll see you get a husband even if I have to call out the militia to bring about the wedding."
Rachel is still in her early twenties. The daughter of an Atlanta doctor, she went to the University of Georgia for her education, taught a year in a small Georgia town, then came to Pine Mountain Valley to teach Home Economics in the school and direct club work among the women. She likes her work tremendously, and the people in the community adore her. They think she's so pretty and. so nice, they like her easy, friendly manners and the interest she shows in their affairs.
On Wednesday and Sunday nights Rachel dates her bean who works on the Project construction crew; occasionally she goes home to Atlanta for a week-end. She makes about $90 a month, owns a car, and dresses well because she makes many of her clothes.
Plump, blue-eyed, bland-faced Gladys Phillips does not look like a woman with a dark past but, within an hour after I met her she was telling me about the tragedy in her life. She started by talking about her work. "I just love recreational work," she said pulling her flowered housecoat together. "I'm really crazy about it -- well, it's saved by life I guess. The doctor told me I couldn't live more than six more months if something didn't happen to give me an interest in life. He said I'd have to get outdoors to build up my body and my nervous system, that's how I got started in my work. I got a job in Savannah, my home town, on the WPA playground. Being outdoors and playing around with the kids got my mind off myself so that before I knew what had happened I was all bound up in my work. Last fall I come up here to get up the Harvest Festival, and well when they needed a new recreational supervisor early this year they asked me to come. I'm crazy about the Valley.
"There's a woman in Savannah writing a play based on my life. She was going to call it "The Damned. Don't Cry," but a funny thing has happened. A Savannah boy is putting out a novel called that, so now I don't know what name she'll give her play.
"I was the youngest of ten children. My father was a school principal in Savannah for years. His family didn't have anything but they believed in education and all that. My mother's people were just opposite. They had plenty of money but they didn't care a thing about education or doing things the right way. After Mama married Papa she went to school until she could talk to him about any subject in the world he wanted to talk about.
"Everyone in the family spoiled me to death because I was the baby. I was born after my mother had passed the change of life and the doctor didn't think I'd ever develop into a normal woman. I never was normal except for a few months after I married. That was when I conceived Claire. They thought it would kill me to have a baby, and I did have a hard time. After she was born, I had to have all my organs out. I'm as hollow as a drum; my tonsils and. appendix are gone too.
"Clarence, that was my husband, was crazy about Claire. She's just exactly like him. He was the cutest thing, always making some funny remark, and we had the best time together. He had inherited a restaurant there in Savannah, and we had a good business. He stayed there to look after the buying and the cooking, I helped around doing whatever they needed me to do. We had a darling little apartment right around, the block, real convenient. Lord, the good times we used to have. I always did believe in giving people plenty to eat and drink when they come to see me, and whenever folks would drop up to see us, we'd send around to the restaurant for beer, all kinds of cheese and meats, and sandwiches. We really did have some good parties in that apartment.
"It looked like nobody could be any happier than we were. Then it happened. One day Clarence walked out of the restaurant and he didn't come back. I was just about plum crazy for a while not knowing why he had walked out like that, where he had gone, or when he would come back. I got deathly sick, then I didn't care whether I lived or died. He was gone for seven months. After Clarence left I went to pieces so that I lost the restaurant. I had to give up the apartment and take Claire with me to my brother's house to live. He was perfectly grand to me, told me I could stay with him the rest of my life, that I didn't need to want for a thing. I knew he meant it too. But I'm an independent cuss, as long as I can wiggle I want to stand on my own feet. I knew I'd have to get out and do something that would that would support me and Claire --not that I cared a damn what happened to me, I just wanted to be independent. That's when I got my job, and I mean it made a new woman out of me.
"Clarence came back one day. He never did tell me where he went or why and I didn't ask him. He told me he still loved me, but he wanted me to get a divorce and feel free to have a good time until he could prove to himself and me that he was worthy to be my husband again. I've had lots of boy friends who've been perfectly grand to me, they've shown me a big time and all that, but I always will feel like Clarence is my husband no matter what happens or what trouble I get into, I know I can count on him to help me out. We have the swellest time together, the three of us. Claire is so crazy for us to live together; she can't understand why we don't. You know what she said to me the other day? She said, 'Mama, sometime when you're asleep I wish Daddy would slip in and put the ring on your finger. Then you'd have to be married to him again.' She's wild about her daddy. 
"Twice a week I date this lawyer from Lagrange. He don't mean a thing to me but we have a big time. He's grand to me. I don't believe he ever comes without bringing us something for the house. He's given us the dishes, and that lamp over there and a mattress and I don't know what all. But gosh he can afford to; besides practising law. he owns a block of stores and fifteen houses in La Grange, and he inherited a pile of money from his granddaddy. I know Ben would do anything in the world for me.
"Let me show you some pictures of my boy friend up in Detroit. Isn't he cute though? You know who he is? He's Henry Ford's private secretary. I met him when he come down to that plantation near Savannah that Henry Ford has fixed up. I've been out with Lew (not real name) many a time and I got to know the Fords real good. They're so nice, not a bit stuck-up or anything, you'd never think that he was one of the richest men in the world. He was so interested in recreational work and invited me to come up to study with some man in Detroit for six weeks -- said it wouldn't cost me a thing. I sure would love to go but I can't get off. Lew looks after everything for Mr. Ford. When they had those strikes a couple of years ago. Lew told Mr. Ford just what to do. Both Mr. and Mrs. Ford treat him like he was one of their family and he's lived with them so long he is in a way. Lew said Mr. Ford was hen pecked. Funny that a man like that would let his wife boss him around.
"Clarence has been working in Washington but this week he's down at a Home Guard camp near Fort Bragg. He's cooking for the Savannah Company. Claire is crazy to go to see him, so I'll guess we'll run down there Saturday. I'm anxious to hear how his plan for opening a new lunch room in Savannah is coming along.
"Sometimes I get so homesick for Savannah I can't hardly stand it even if I do love the Valley. The people here are nice as they can be, and My. Bennett has been mighty good to me. He's wonderful man for the place, most people think a lot of him, but if he says black is black he doesn't mean it's grey. Anyone who is willing to work hard and try can get along all right with him, but once someone lets him down he never forgets it. -- Well, I heard something about that communist affair, that's about all. I never did ask any of the settlers about it because the community was so tom up over it. Nobody likes to be reminded of it.
"Oh Lordy, I feel so bad. I've had these pains in my back for a week. Whenever I get sick I get want my mamma. I guess I wont ever grow up."
Marie Terven has hollow dark eyes, drooping lips, and a tin corded neck, but more than any particular feature you notice the sadness and bitterness that waver in her face -- even when she smiles. It's not so much what life has done, but what it hasn't done to her that makes Marie bitter. She lived in Cauthen, a village some eight miles from the Talley, graduated from a small Georgia college, taught in small town schools, and went to summer sessions at the University of Georgia to take library courses. But because she does not have her degree in Library Science she must take a WPA job. She is sensitive because she is a certified worker Gladys is not, and she feels that it is unfair for Gladys to make a larger salary-- Gladys has no regular hours and many days does no work at all, while she, Marie, must be at the library every day from nine to five or later.
Marie tries not to show that she feels any injustice and aha keeps on excellent terms with the other girls. She sets Rachel's hair and Glady's hair, she double dates with them, she goes to church and the swimming pool and Columbus with them, she helps select books to read, she advises them about clothes -- whether to wear the blue or the red belt with the white dress, whether the clip at the neck is "too much".
But all of Marie's attention is not spent on details of life at "the Retreat." She is very much interested in her work -O- she has a feel for it. Her library la given the same scrupulous attention as her nails or her hair. The big, airy room is made more attractive with pesters, jacket displays, and the careful arrangement of books and magasines. Children's books are on one aide of the room, adult books on the other. (There was one slip-up here. Apparently Marie had never looked inside TESTAMENT OF YOUTH by Vera Brittain, so she had put this on the shelf alongside CHILDREN OF MANY LANDS aeries and other juveniles.) The magazine files may be incomplete and many of them are old, but they are kept in perfect order on shelves where they are easily accessible; government and state agricultural books; there are reading tables and chairs for both adults and children.
Most of the volumes in the juvenile section can be used as reference or supplementary books in connection with school work. This collection includes history, social sciences, travel and mature books, all the latest things that are being published for children to make learning attractive. The titles for adults are more helter-skelter and range from "Gods Little Acre", "I Went to Pit College" and collections of Somerset Maugham or Rebecca Vest to novels by Myrtle Reed, Faith Baldwin or the St. Elmo School. All the books were carefully catalogued.
All day long Marie sits at her desk by the windows overlooking a stretch of green field, a red baseball field, and a curve of red road. She watches the road to see who goes by, she advises people who come in for books and discusses community news with them. If there is nothing to watch or no one to talk to, she reads a book, or a book review section or maybe a publisher's catalogue. Sometimes Nell, Marie's niece comes over from the cottage to keep her company.
Although Nell is only twelve now, there is something old and pathetic about her wizened little face with beady black eyes, her thin, stiff body. When Nell was a baby her mother died, several years later her father was sent to a Tuberculosis sanitorium -- a hopeless case. Since that time Marie has taken entire care of Nell, and all her plans for the future include Nell. Marie's parents are dead, her closest living relative is a sister, the postmistress in Cauthen.
Several times a week Marie gets letters addressed in a big, sprawling hand. These letters are important, and Marie reads them over several times. They are letters from 01in who gave Marie the imitation platinum watch, and the platinum ring set with a diamond. "He gave me these before he got sick," she said with a faint smile, "It surely did thrill me. He had a good job and was making plenty of money, then he got arthritis. For almost a year he was in bed, for two years he walked on crutches. He used to get in his car, drive over to see me and he couldn't get out unless I helped him. I would help get him into the house and put him on the sofa, then when he got ready to leave I'd help him up and out to the car again. His mother told me she used to cry every time he came; it hurt her so to watch him struggling that way and ha was always in pain.
"Now he's lots better, but he still can't do any regular work. I don't know whether he'll ever be all right again. The arthritis affected his kedneys. They had to remove one of them. It doesn't seem right for Olin to have so much trouble; he's one of the sweetest people that's ever lived. I've got a boy friend in Panama with the army, but he's not the person Olin is. I guess we would have been married by this time if it had'nt been for all the trouble."
* * *
Carl Hager helps Gladys. He coaches ball teams and in the summer is part time lifeguard at the swimming pool. On Monday nights he opens up the gymn so that the young people can dance. But he is not quite satisfied; he feels unsure. When WPA is discontinued, or if he has to take the threatened month's vacation without pay, what will he do?
Carl is young -- twenty-six -- with a clean-cut face, nice blue eyes, and a splendid body. "You can't get nowhere now," he said, "If you don't have a college education. And I haven't. I went through the Savannah schools, I played football for the High School, but my daddy couldn't afford to give me a college education. I doubt if I'd a taken it then, anyhow. Kids don't have enough sense to know what's good for 'em. Besides in Savannah unless you're a Jew or an Irishman or an Italian, or your family has a business of some kind you can go into, you're out of luck. The Jews have the clothing business and department stores, the Italians control polities, the Irishmen have the police force sewed up, so if you don't know some one real good who can hand you a job, you can't get a thing there. When I finished High School I worked on boats around Savannah then I managed to get a job on an oil tanker going from Texas to New York. Christ, what a tub it was! We all knew that if a bad storm came up, it would be the end of that boat and us. We were just lucky; a storm didn't come up. I had. a chance to get a job on a freighter that was going around the world. Now I wish I had taken it and seen the world while I could --- it would have been wonderful experience -- but I was in love. Couldn't bear to get that far away. Crazy nut. Now it's too late.
"I had a job driving an oil truck from Savannah up toward Atlanta. Maybe you think that was a soft job, driving a ten ton truck for twelve hours straight. You get used to the driving part of it, but the hard thing is to stay awake. You sing, stop to drink coffee, smoke one cigarette after another and in spite of everything you can do you find yourself driving in your sleep. I used to pick up people along the road. I'd tell 'em that I'd ride 'em as far as they wanted to go in my direction, but they'd have to talk to me. It helps to keep awake if you have somebody there to talk to, even if it is against the company's rules to have riders. Back then it was right after the depression and the roads were full of people ---men, women, children, all kinds.
"I don't know how long I could have stood that, because I took double pneumonia 'bout that time. I was so sick for months they didn't think I could live; it was about a year before I could walk. I was so weak I didn't care whether I lived or died, except I wanted to die. What was I going to do? I didn't have any job and I knew dern well how hard it was going to be to get one, especially since I couldn't do hard work anymore. Getting a job with WPA recreation work was a good thing. I always had liked athletics and out in the open gave me some exercise --- not too hard -- so I had a chance to build my system back up.
"A lot of the time I feel like I'm just wandering in a wilderness, though. This job is all right, but it's not getting me nowhere and it can't last forever. I want something I can work at that will keep right on until I'm old; then I want to retire with something saved up or a pension. I've been thinking for a long time I'd take civil service to be a mail carrier. That comes as near to being the kind of job I want as any. You get a good salary, don't have to work too hard but you're out in the open and you walk enough every day so you keep in good shape. The hours are good, you get a vacation with pay every year, and when you're old enough you're retired with enough to live on for the rest of your life. I think I'll take that civil service exam sometime when I go back to Savannah.
"If I jest made $125 or $150 a month now, I could have everything in the world I want and I could save some too. Me and Marjie both want a house of our own. My father give us a lot, and if we'd been able to get $500 we could have built a little four-room house because my father's a contractor and Marjie's is a carpenter. They had the plans all drawn up for us. But we couldn't get $500 nowhere; didn't have any security. Hell, it don't seem fair when you think about some people who have more money than they can every spend or know what to do with and all they think about is making more. If I thought I could have $150 a month for as. long as I live I'd be perfectly happy.
"I've always been the kind to think about things a lot, guess I take after my father. All this religion and church stuff had me bothered for a while. I done a lot of thinking about it and decided the preachers didn't know no more about it than the rest of us. What I want to know is how they make the Bible agree with the things the scientists say about how the world was created and evolution; I don't see how a person that has all the education a preacher has to have can believe the stuff they do. If I had more education myself, I'd like to talk with one of 'em 'bout it. I love to talk to people who think about things and know enough to talk about 'em. A lot of people never do talk about anything much except gossiping about their neighbors.
"When me and Marjie got married I told her, I said now we're jest starting out our lives. If we take an interest in things, read about 'em and think about 'em, we'll have something that will be with us the rest of our lives, and something to enjoy even if we don't have much money. I despise to see these old people who haven't had a new thought since they finished going to school. Women are worse than men about this. Ever watch a woman read a newspaper? A man will look at the front page, the sport page and maybe read some editorials, but the only thing that most women like is the society section -- just so they can see what a lot of other women are doing, what parties they're having. Lota of women don't even read the funnies.
"I've been mighty interested in the Baropean situation, but I don't know enough to understand everything I see in the papers about it. I don't like Hitler or lots of the things he does, but he sure has helped his country a lot. If we'd get someone who'd do as much for this country, I wouldn't mind having a dictator. My father used to say we ough to elect our presidents for life in this country, then they could do something to help the people Instead of worrying all the time about whether they're going to get re-elected and all that. As it is now, about the time a man learns how to run the country he has to get out.
"I don't believe that Hitler has treated the Jews right, but when I see how they come into a place and get control of things I don't much blame him. They sure can make money and I mean they help one another out. Too bad the niggers don't have any of their smartness. They (the Negroes) are the no-countest things. If you want to get any work out of 'em, you've got to know how to treat 'em, I know, had 'em working for me when I run a filling station is Savannah. I paid a. boy $2.00 or $3.00 a week to come and clean up at six o'clock in the morning and then stay around all day to help. I found out the only way to keep him working good was to keep him in debt to me. Whenever anything was missing from the station, we held him responsible and would charge him for it. That's the only way we could keep him from walking off with everything around the place. I know how to handle niggers all right, and I found out it don't pay to be good to 'em."
Margie, Carl's wife, is pretty in a stolid fashion. Her lips are full and red, her light brown hair is naturally wavy, her blue eyes are heavily fringed with lashes, her skin glows with health. But this is all. There is never any spirit, any animation, she rarely laughs or talks. Her mind is absorbed with little duties --- fixing her nails, setting her hair, washing and ironing her clothes, locking after Carl's clothes. Sometimes she thumbs through magazines, looking at the pictures and the advertisements, but she doesn't read much. She'd rather just sit. Because the most important thing of all in Margie's life is that she is going to have a baby about next January.
* * *
Sis, a full-breasted Negro girl, moves silently about the guest cottage. Her feet are bare; a white cloth is tied, about her head. Sis does the cooking and the cleaning. She sleeps in the kitchen on an iron bed beside the frigidaire and the table where meals are served. While I was there Sis had a very bad. cold. She coughed over the food, the table, and the dishes, for several days she was feverish but she kept on with her work. One day when she was feeling very bad, Gladys was going to take her to the doctor only they couldn't find the Valley doctor that afternoon and the next day she felt better. When she is spoken to, Sis answers in a muted voice. She does not talk or laugh or sing about her work. She is a Georgia Negro and she knows her place.
Life in the guest cottage, a jumble of activity --- Marie off to the library just before nine, pocket book under her arm and parasol to keep off the sun --- everyone to Columbus on Saturday afternoon for movies, supper and shopping --- Marie setting Glady's hair for a date -- Rachel dressing for a meeting on H Street --- Claire and Nell frantically getting ready to go with Carl to the swimming pool at two o'clock -- Gladys washing underclothes in the bathroom -- Margie sitting on the porch in her housecoat, drying her hair -- Marie and Rachel cutting out a new dress for Nell --- everyone dressing for Sunday School Carl bringing home a watermelon (everyone Except Sis gets a piece) -- Gladys off to Columbus for a conference washing hair, setting hair, fixing nails, applying make-up, fixing clothes, polishing white shoes, dressing --- reading -- smutty stories -- swimming, dates, conference. meetings -- life in the guest cottage.
* * *
I met Jim Nicholson by chance. I walked up the red curving hill at the beginning of B street, and there was a man in overalls working over the engine of an old modal A track. "I can't decide if I can get it to work all right or if I better go on down to Hamilton and get it fixed," he said taking off his hat to wipe his forehead. "Hit looks like I might as well jist quit work and go on down there." But he seemed in no hurry to go as we stood in the road and talked.
"Well," he began, "I think this Pine Mountain Valley la about the finest place in the world. Hit's give me a fresh start in life when the depression had took away everything I had. Even all my shoes was wore out from walking them streets in Atlanta looking for work. It's mighty hard to get anything when you're over forty.
"I was among the first ones to come here. There wasn't nothing but men then, living in barracks and helping to build, the community. For six months it was that away, and hit was rough too until the women come and the people settled. Till '37 I stayed on the payroll, helping with construction work, then I went into poultry raising.
"In the spring of '37 I bought 600 baby chicks from the project poultry farm. They charged me 12½ cents a piece for them and let me have the feed to keep going on. We didn't have the money to pay cash for all this, but what they do is charge it against your account down at the office and then when you sell chickens or eggs back to the poultry unit, they credit you with that much. We had good luck that first year. Our pullets started laying in August, we sold fryers and pullets, so that by November of that year we paid back everything we owed. We got the prize for $5.00 for being the first to pay back what we owed.
"We've got around 1300 chickens now. We're buying our house and two acres of land. You couldn't get a place like that anywhere else for $1610 and they give us 16 years to pay for it. We pay around $7.00 a month; already paid over a hundred dollars on it. This year they've loaned me some land to raise corn and fifteen acres of soy beans for chicken feed. Tea ma'am, we feed the chickens soy beans, grind 'em up and there ain't no finer winter greens. Everything I'm raising is clear; I paid for the seed.
"I reckon you're getting hot, standing out in this sun like this. Why don't you go on down and see my wife. She's always glad to have company, because we don't have no children and she has to stay mighty close with the chickens. It's the third house right down here on B Street."
The third bungalow on B Street had a trim, grassy lawn, bordered with flowers and shrubs. A little woman under a big straw hat was working at the vines that shaded the front porch; she was training the tender young shoots around strings.
"Come and set on the porch," she said looking at me solemnly through the horn-rimmed spectacles that dominated her colorless little face, "I believe we might get a breeze. There's one here lots of mornings, though I don't always get time to enjoy it.
"It's a pretty place here; I like to set and look over across at them hills. Hit was about like this in North Georgia where we come from. Me and him both was born up there; we was both raised on the farm, right close to one another; we went to the same school, what schooling they had in them days -- didn't have much because we had to work. After we was married we kept on farming till I had a sick spell and got so I couldn't make a field hand no more. We didn't have no children and it was hard for him to make it by his self farming, so he started a little grist mill and he stocked up with some stuff to sell on the side. He done well on this. We was making good than, with the mill and the store and raising enough truck to keep us in groceries, so we decided to sell out and move down the country a piece to get a bigger place.
"We found a place, fixed it up and stocked it, but business wasn't so good like it had been up where we come from. Hit was a poor section we had moved to. Jim had him a truck that he would go around the country in and buy up produce to take to Atlanta and sell ---that's the way we made moat. When the depress-ion come, though, we was finished. Jim would haul his produce to Atlanta, but he couldn't sell anything. Didn't nobody have the money to pay for it. He'd come back home with the track as full as when he left.
"Our place wasn't clear, we had went into debt to get fixed up and stocked, mo we sold out to pay all we could on what we owed and we went to Atlanta. Jim went everywhere for work. They'd ask him how old he was first thing -- he couldn't get anything to do. Jist as long as he could he held on to the truck, hoping it would help him to get some kind of job. When the money from selling it run out, then we had to take some help from the relief.
"One day Jim went in and he told them, he said 'I'm tired of laying around here with a food ticket; I want some work to do.' They give him a job, working on a park they was making for the city. He felt a little bit better satisfied then. When he heard about this place, Jim lighted out to get in it. The relief woman knowed how he felt about coming here and so she done all she could to get him in. There was one part of it I didn't like so good. They said the men's families would have to stay where they was for a time; Jim brought home a paper for me to sign agreeing to everything, but I didn't know about that part of it. I kept looking at that place where I would have to write my name and I didn't know what to do. I prayed over it, I said to myself and to Jim 'Well, I reckon there's not nothing else to do,' so I writ my name.
"I layed in Atlanta for six months before they let me come here. All that time the men was building houses and getting everything ready for when the families come. On the fourth of July that year they ppaid the families' fares up here to Pine Mountain Valley to see the men and the place, but I wouldn't come. I says, 'No sir, I'm not agoing till I can take my things and stay." That fall I come to this very house. Some of my things was setting in the front room when I walked through the door. I felt right at home from that time on.
"Hit's a good, place here. It' s like living on a farm except you've got all the comforts they have in a town. We like it. We git plenty to eat and a good house. There's some folks here complains, but anywhere you go you'll always find people like that. If the Saviour was to come down and live among them, they'd fall out with him and couldn't git along. I look for a crowd of folks to move out this fall.
"I don't get around to see people the way I ought on account of the chickens. I like to work with them, but hit's mighty confining and you can't trust nobody to look after 'em right. So I jest stay right here at home all the time.
"I reckon hit's a good thing I'm here, the way Mr. Bennett is all the time abringing visitors to see the chickens and the chicken houses. Yesterday evening I had jest finished scouring out the house and was setting here on the porch gitting cooled off, when about ten cars drawed up in front and stopped. Here come Mr. Bennett with a crowd of county agents from all over Georgia and their wives. 'I jist want these men to see the chickens, ' he said, 'and the women folks would like to see over your house.' I looked a sight. I told him, I said, 'I'm ashamed for you to see me this away, but I've been working, and working folks can't stay looking nice. I reckon you'd rather see me this way than to find me setting all primped up and nothing done.' He's a mighty nice man. He laughed and said yes, that was right.
"Don't you want to go see the chickens? They're all right down behind the house in that pine thicket. We still have some of the first ones we got, but they're old hens now. I hate to see them give out; I feel like they fed and clothed us for a year."
* * *
Saturday morning at the Pine Mountain Valley post office. Men in overalls, barefooted children, even a few women gather in the hallway and on the porch of the white farmhouse to wait for the mail. Mr. Parker, the postmaster, has gone to meet the mail train in Hamilton. About twelve o'clock he will return in his car with the sacks of mail to be sorted and handed out -- letters and magazines for the men to glance at as they walk toward their wagons under the elm trees, for the children to finger curiously on their way home.
A man in khaki work clothes stood near the stamp window. His sunburned face and clear grey eyes were alive with a sort of eagerness, a straightforwardness. With him was a little girl, freckled, snaggled toothed, pet looking.
"How is your wife getting along, Mr. Sheppard?" someone asked the man.
"She's still in bed, but she's doing all right, I guess," then he laughed. "I told her the other day if I kept on doing woman's work that I'd he so feminine I'd have to start wearing petticoats."
Mr. Parker came in followed by a boy carrying two sacks of mail. They went inside the room used as a post office and closed the stamp window, the doorway into the hall because they were going to sort the mail.
"You've met Mr. Parker, haven't yon?" Mr. Sheppard asked me. "You know he owned a business worth over $70,000 till the depression ruined him. That old depression hit a lot of us; I reckon I never would have been here trying to farm it it hadn't been for it.
"I worked for the Buick Company seventeen years, knew the inside of a Buick like the palm of my hand. I was in insurance took worked for one company seven years, then I quit my job with that company because they wouldn't pay a claim I thought they ought to, and I got in with another company. I wish I had got into insurance sooner. I like that contact with people -- you get so you can look at a person and see right through 'em. It's interesting work. It pays good too. You can retire and have an income for nine years from renewals.
"About the time I was working with the second insurance company, Mrs. Sheppard decided she wanted to take a business course and she enrolled in the best business college in Macon. After she finished her course, she got a job so with both of us working we managed to save some money. That helped us get through part of the depression after we lost our jobs. When the bank closed up that we had put our money in, you wouldn't believe it but we had drawn out all but about a dollar of our money. It reminded me of the time I drove my car up in the yard and parked it. Just as soon as I did 'Bam!' there went a tire.
"Well, locks like the mail's up. Quick as I see if we have some, we'll be ready to go along."
He called for his mail, was given a circular and a post card, and we went out to the side of the house where a wagon load of sawdust stood in the shade. Jean, the little girl hopped up first and sat in the middle of the load, a big straw hat pulled down over her thick auburn hair, her slim little legs and bare feet poked out in front of her.
"I'll bet this is something you've never done before," Mr. Sheppard said as the horse pulled slowly out to the road we were to follow. "It's slow but it'll get there. And this way the horse does all the work." he laughed. He liked making little jokes, and seemed always to be much amused by them.
But as the wagon creaked laboriously over hard, red roads, the man talked earnestly; the mischevious expression that went with the little jokes had vanished.
Past a group of white cottages with well-kept lawns 
"When we was making money in Macon, my wife and I we bought a lot in a residential section there. Paid $450 for it. And we was anticipating building a house soon as we could save the money. I wasn't going in debt for nothing -- even to build a house. Well, the depression put a stop to our plans there.
"A week after I bought that lot I could have sold it for a hundred dollars more than I paid for it, but nosiree I wouldn't sell then. Now I wish somebody's offer me $200 for that lot;
I'd sell it tomorrow and put the money into a pick-up truck. I need means of transportation more than anything else. If I had a truck, I could make some money next winter -- that is I was planning to, but it looks like Mr. Bennett won't let me this year."
Past several cottages on bare clay hills --
"I'll tell you how it is. I spent two years working out my formula for sausage. I called it "All Pork Sausage," and that is just what it was, made from all of the good meat on the hog --- hams and all --- so it was really good stuff. I could have sold twice as much as I made right down in Columbus at twenty-five cents a pound. That's about a hundred percent profit because it cost me twelve or thirteen cents a pound to make it. I could do everything myself except I had one person to help me --- a colored man to fix the intestines for the cases.
"Last winter I cleared enough to buy us the winter clothes we needed and I put some improvements on the place. I don't see how in the world we're going to manage this winter on the budget we've got to run on."
Past cornfields, pine thickets, an empty house with a cotton patch in front 
"You see Mr. Bennett won't believe me when I tell him making the sausage don't interfere with my farm work. I do it in the wintertime when you can't farm anyhow, but he won't listen to me because last year I had some hard luck, had to fix a place for my hogs and fix my chicken houses all by myself just when it was time to get my crops in. Naturally I was late getting my stuff in and I showed a loss on it. But it wasn't on account of making the sausage. Everything come at once and I didn't have any help --- that was all.
"Sometime back I had a chance to get a good Chevrolet truck for a down payment of $50. I know the dealer real good who was going to let me have it, and I know that was a good bargain. could have paid the rest of the money on it from what I made on my sausage. The trouble I used to have was finding some way to hand what I made down to Columbus; with a truck I could have had a steady market during the winter. Part of the $50 I could have paid by selling one of the cows I had to get rid of anyway, so I thought I had a pretty good proposition. I went to Mr. Bennett and I asked him if they could advance me some to get that truck with.
"I just wish you could have heard him. He flew up and told me no, that I wasn't helping myself any. He looked at my accounts and got madder than ever when he saw I got behind last year.
There's hardly anybody who don't run behind, but he was so hoppin' mad he bawled me out for all he was worth. He said if I wanted to go ahead and sell sausage this winter, they'd take everything away from my place that they had put on it --- stock, equipment and tools, chickens, and stuff like that --- and then see if I could make out with what was mine.
"It don't seem right he can do this kind of thing to a person. I think there's a Democratic principle at stake. I'll do what he says this winter on account of my wife, I can't afford to run any risks now. But next winter I'm going to do something about it ---
"If it was his project I'd leave, but it's not; it's our project. And I believe it's a good thing. We're making a home here, getting security for our old ago, and I'm going to stay until they kick me out, or until they give us something to say about the way things are run. I always did make a good living, until the depression, I believe I still could if I could do some of the things I wanted to. I don't think I'm so old that my mind's affected or that I can't make money anymore. I can't see where it will hurt the project any; the project is just as good or had off as the people who live here. To get a hog out of the ditch you don't have to jump in with him."
Down a steep hill, across a bridge over a rocky stream, elderberry bushes along the road --- corn in the bottom land, com on the hillsides ---
"It's going to take some money to take care of the responsibilities I have. I have a. blind son nineteen years old. He's got to be given some advantages so he'll be able to get along in his life. I've got this little girl seven years old I want to educate and give the best advantages I can. It worries me a lot about my wife. For about three months now she's had to lie in bed. They say it's a case of arrested T.B. They keep taking X- rays but they can't tell us when she'll be able to get up again. And as soon as she gets well, she'll have to have a major operation.
"I know what caused her to get sick. She worked too hard. I tried to, but I couldn't make her stop. She would do the cooking, take care of the house, stand over the stove canning enough to last us for about five years, she'd make butter that was better than most so she could sell it for 30 cents a pound instead of 25 cents like most people got. Mrs. Bennett and several other people at the office were her regular customers for butter and milk. Every week two Jewel Tea Company salesmen would come to the Valley to stay for a day or two and she would room and board them. In all, she used to bring in between twenty and thirty dollars a month.
"But that wasn't everything she done. If I got pushed she'd take care of the chickens and the stock or she'd come to the fields. The first two years here I had cotton and she'd put that bag on her shoulders, come right out to help pick. When I would tell her not to, she'd say any work that was honest didn't lower nobody. Well, I believe that too. But the way it turned out she was mighty expensive help for me.
"I reckon I'M partly responsible for what happened to her. Back when she was going to college, I was in the army making $44.00 a month besides all my living expenses. I used to send her candy, or nuts, all kinds of fruit, and more candy. I loved her a whole lot, I wanted her to know I did. It looked like I couldn't give hey enough things. Well, we're paying for it now I guess."
Ahead of us was another group of cottages. Mr. Sheppard pointed to one.
"There's our place. I hope we can get everything worked out all right so we can stay right there in that place the rest of our lives. I'm getting so I want security for our old age.
That's the main reason I come here."
We drove into the yard and stopped near the screened back porch. "Just come on through the kitchen here; we're making home folks of you," Mr. Sheppard said as we passed a Negro woman who was preparing string beans and corn for dinner.
The house was very clean. I caught a glimpse of a living room furnished with an overstuffed suit, end tables, photographs as we went through the hall to Mrs. Sheppard's bedroom.
She lay flat on her back in the iron bed. Soft, fair hair surrounded a pale face with translucent skin, grey eyes and bloodless lips; there was character and repose in the features of that face.
For some time we chatted about the happenings in the community. "I know more news than I did when I was up," Mrs. Sheppard laughed. "Everyone comes to see me and tells me what's going on now, but I used to have to stay so close with my work I didn't get a chance to see many people."
Mr. Sheppard assumed the expression he wears when he la making his jokes. "It's a shame, ain't it, that I can't get her out of bed to do any work. That's what I get for having a lazy wife; have to do everything myself while she lays here and listens to the gossip."
She laughed and then the pale face became thoughtful. "The worst part about lying here is that I don't know how long I'll have to stay. They say they can't tell me yet. There's so many things that ought to be done around the place. If I could just get up and take care of some of them -- and if I only knew what was going to happen to us. Whether we'll get to stay. You can't tell what will happen here --- nobody feels sure of anything. There's been I don't know how many changes since we came. We're buying our place, but how do we know what the government will do with all this before we can finish paying for it."
I asked about the "trouble with Communists" Mr. Bennett had mentioned.
"Well," said Mr. Sheppard, "I was right here when it all happened and I don't believe it was Communists. I don't see why the Reds would want to come into this place. Yet everytime something happens, they start blaming it on the Reds."
"The people who stir up trouble aren't Communists, they're just common," Mrs. Sheppard said softly.
"That time you was asking about," Mr. Sheppard, continued, "it happened like this. Some of the men that was working here on construction, figured they ought to be getting more money so they signed a petition asking for higher wages. I signed it too, not knowing what it was, but after some of them got up and made some pretty nasty speeches in a meeting I took my name off. Most of 'em that signed it was asked to leave the project."
Mrs. Sheppard turned her head to look out the windown t the foot of her bed. Her voice broke the silence of the room. "I wonder what we'll do if they ask us to leave this fall."
* * *
Ruby Dollar lives each day with a gentle precision. The quiet routine of meals, housework, dish washing, sewing, milking and watching over two daughters fills her life and she is content. Her house is immaculate, even to the bathroom and the screened back porch; her comfortable beds are covered with tufted counterpanes she made herself; in the kitchen every dish is put in its particular place on the shelves of the green and white cabinet.
Ruby never seems hurried, yet by two o'clock she is through with work for the day --- except milking, setting out a cold supper, and washing the dishes. She is free to sit on the porch, to sew, read "True Romances", or look at the movie magazines until Tommy, her husband comes home. She never goes to any of the Community meetings "Because," she says, "there's too much to do here at home."
Although her face does not look young, there is a childish quality about Ruby, her big grey eyes, the black hair falling to her shoulders, her slim little figure. With Tommy she is as playful as a kitten, makes little remarks to tease him, wrinkles up her nose at him and hits his arms with her fists. All of which amuses the big, blondish, slow moving Tommy very much. He looks at her indulgently and drawls, "Now Ruby, you better quit hurting me like that," or "All right now, Ruby."
In the evenings the two of them sit on the porch, watching the road which winds in front of their house on B Street; maybe Mr. and Mrs. Rouze come over from the house next door bringing with them little Jimmy to play with five-year old Joy Dollar. While the men talk together and the women talk together, the children skip up and down the flower-bordered walks or throw rocks into the goldfish pond. Sometimes both families get into the big truck that Tommy drives, and all of them go to the swimming pool to watch the people who are in the water. With silent absorption the onlookers gaze at the divers, the swimmers, the splashers in the lighted green pool; the children get restless and ask for ice-cream cones, than they get sleepy and sprawl limply against their parents.
But the Dollars and the Rouses do not stay very late at the pool because the men have to be up early to work. Mr. Rouse is a painter on the project. Mr. Dollar drives a truck.
The first day I stayed at the Dollar's house, Ruby told me about Tommy's job. "No, Tommy don't farm; we don't even have a garden. All we've got is that old cow out there, two ducks that someone in Columbus give Tommy, end three chickens. Tommy'll not touch chicken less he sees it on foot -- there's too many Hick ones killed and sold off.
"Tommy drives a truck for the Project chicken unit. Every morning around six o'clock he goes to Fort Benning and Columbus carrying eggs and chickens. They get back here about four in the evening. Couple of times a week they haul stuff up to Atlanta. Tommy likes the work real good."
After I had spent several days at her house, Ruby lost some of her original shyness and talked to me quite freely as we ate our meals together in the neat kitchen.
"When I first met Tommy he was making around thirty dollars a week weaving them Chenille rugs in the Calloway mills at La Grange. They paid by the piece then, and I mean Tommy was really good. But I think they changed the way they paid not long after that because I know Tommy didn't make so much after we was married. He kept on working in the mill until the strike come. I've forgot just when that was, about nineteen thirty-four I believe or something like that. Anyway Tommy he had joined the Union and when they called a strike he come out. There was lots of 'em come out and went back in, but Tommy's not like that. If he starts something he's going to stick to it. His brother tried to make him go on back to work when they seen the strike wasn't going to amount to anything, but Tommy siad no. Course when the strike was over he couldn't git no work in La Grange or nowhere else. That's how come we was to come here. It turned out to be the best thing for us. Me and Tommy both likes it here. We don't have as much money tp spend as we used tok but we're really getting along better. Tommy makes between $45 and $50 a month on his salary. We're buying this house -- pay $7.00 a month on it. Besides this we have to pay the light bill and get our groceries, but I don't never go over $20 a month for groceries. Most every money I make a little extra money selling milk to Mis' Rouse, or sewing for somebody or taking in a roomer here. Like I said there's not much money left for us to spend, like we had when we lived in La Grange, but we've got more.
"I never did like living in town so much although the Call way village is real pretty --- they have nice houses and the prettiest lawns. with grass and trees and all. I'm a country girl though. Live there all my life till I was sixteen years old. We stayed on Grandpa's place in Alabama, my Daddy farmed part of his land for him because Grandpa was getting too old to take care of all his farm. Mostly they raised cotton. And believe me it was a good thing Papa went to La Grange to go to work when he did; right after he left the country the boll weevil come and nobody could make anything after that.
"There was five children in our family and all four of us that was old enough went to work in the mills. I was in the sewing room, hemming bath mats, and I liked it. It was such clean, easy work. None of us rushed so much because if one person turns out a lot, then they expect everybody else to do as good. So we just agreed on about how much to do in a day and done that. I didn't work there but only six months because I got married. Tommy didn't want me to work no more then.
"It's easy keeping house here, everything's so nice and we've got all the conveniences you'd have in a town. I have a lot of extra time because I don't have to spend so much time cooking. None of us is big eaters, and I declare Tommy don't eat enough to keep a bird alive. He jist about lives on sweet milk. Two years ago he had a operation for stomach ulcers. He didn't even know he had 'em, and was in Atlanta with the truck when this awful pain started. He didn't do nothing but walk right down the street -- all doubled up with hurting so had to the hospital there. Soon as he got inside the hospital, he collapsed, and when he come to they had done operated. They said he' a been dead in two more hours because the ulcer had busted. After he come to, they called me up to tell me that he had been successfully operated on. I always have been glad it happened so I didn't have time to worry about it.
"Well, every since his operation Tommy has been on a diet. He can't eat no grease, no pork, nothing real sour and lots of other things. I know his diet off by heart, and long as he eats at home he don't have any trouble because I'm not a-going to let him have anything that's wrong for him. But he'll go down to Columbus and eat something that he know he oughtn't to have and he'll come back here hurt in'. All this week he's been sufferin'. He's so stubborn I can't make him listen to me. Makes me so mad."
Supper was the one meal of the day when Tommy ate with us. Although he was usually very silent, occasionally he delivered remarks in his loud, even drawl.
"You know how my father and mother set up housekeeping," he asked one night at supper. "Papa and Mamma was married and that night he took her home to the little house he had fer 'em to live in and she cooked supper. All the furniture there was in that house was a cookstove and a bed. When Mamma got supper cooked Papa took a door down and nailed it up against the wall fer a table; they didn't have no chairs; set on boxes to eat. I remember hearing 'em tell about it many a time. I reckon they must have eat out of the pots, cause I don't believe they had no dishes either. People now think they've got to have everything there is when they start housekeeping. Well Mamma and Papa got along all right even if they did start with nothing. They lived in the country at first, before Papa took a notion to move to La Grange. He run a saloon there from about as early as I can remember; I bet I've drank a thousand gallon of beer in my day.
"I'm willing to stay here fer the rest of my life -- me and Ruby likes it real good, don't we Ruby. Hit makes me mad when you hear folks kicking all the time about the Valley, always talking about Mr. Bennett and them because they don't git everything they want. Them people wouldn't like the Lord Jesus himself if he was to come here to live.
"Ruby, honey, give me another glass of milk."