August 25,1939
Herbert Crow (Prison Guard)
Ethel Deal, (Writer)
Dudley W.Crawford, Revisor.
Orininal Names	Changed names
Herbert Crowe	Hugh Craig
Burke County	Banks County
"I'm twenty five years old; good looking and a grass widower. My wife and me couldn't hit it off, so we decided to separate. I think if two people can't make a go of it they're better off apart. I suppose you think I'm putting the cart before the horse.
"I've lived here all my life", said Hugh Craig as he hung his bare feet over the swing. "I quit when I entered the tenth grade in high school. Maw and the girls insisted on me finishing. I was tired of school and wanted to git out and make some money for myself. I played the devil too. If I had stuck to my school I might have made something out of myself. Sometimes I can see now where I missed it. The girls never had no chance for a education, neither did my parents. That ought to have learned me some sense. The pity of it is can't hope to get rich working in a cotton mill out the right kind of mill people succeeds just the same as anyone else. I'm not proud of anything I've done. It'sbeen very little I've helped them out, but I've got to take my hat off to Maw and the girls. They may have been ignorant but they've got what it takes to get along.
"When they come here before I was born they didn't have a decent rag to put on. I've heard them tell how when they went to the mill and the other hands gathered in groups and talked and laughed at their frocks and turned up shoes, handmade at that. Pap, he went barefooted to the mill every day. Maw never could git him to act civilized. He just didn't give a damn. Laughs and titters didn't bother him none.
"I remember Maw got terrible put out at him once when we was going on an excursion up in the mountains. It was a church picnic and all of the best people was going. We'd talked about it for weeks. Maw and the girls had new frocks, hats and shoes. Maw's new dress was black satin and she was so busy helping the girls dress she didn't notice Pap was not dressing; just had on his overalls, brogans, and hickory shirt.
"At first Maw forbid him going that way, but Pap come from the mountain that way and lowed as how he'd go back that way.
“I made six seventy five running frames when I first went to work. I drifted from one mill to another and kept a job most of the time. Sometimes I got out of a job and just loafed.
"For the past six months I've been a guard at a prison camp. I have to stand on my feet twelve and fourteen hours a day, and most of the time it's out in the hot sun. We take the prisoners out about six in the morning; take off an hour at noon to eat, and get back to camp at six. They are fed mostly pinto beans, bacon and bread.
"The guards and foremen eat at a separate table. We have a fine superintendent. He allows the prisoners to take a bath in the evening and he turns them out so they can play horse shoes and other games. The food is cooked by grade A prisoners---- trustees. It takes five of them to do the cooking. You can always tell a grade A prisoner; he wears overalls with a bib, the others wear hip breeches."
Herbert wriggled his toes, lit a cigarette and continued, "Fifty dollars a month ain't much, I know, but I wouldn't mind it so much if I didn't have to, stand on my feet so long. Then, too, I get my board and room at the camp; that's about six dollars a week. I guess I'll stick it out if my feet don't get to hurting too awful bad. That pay check looks mighty good every two weeks.
"We ain't never had none to run away since I been there. Sometimes they walk off and forgit to come back till somebody catches them. They are locked up at night behind bars.
WI like baseball, play a lot down at the camp. I ain't been to church in a coon's age; I'm a Republican by inheritance, but never voted but once. I don't take no interest in such things. Women can vote all they want to; I just don't give a darn what they do. They'd do it anyway, whether it was right or wrong, if they wanted to.
“I'm through with women and marriage too. I got caught one time, that's enough for me the rest of my life. I'm not very ambitious, I can't seem to settle on one thing. The cotton mill don't please me. I don't intend to spend my days grubbing in no cotton mill, I'd go to the army only I'm afraid I won't like it and then have to stay. About the only thing I want is a good job; one that pays well and the work not too hard.
"Good Lord, I got corns on my feet as big as quarters, standing on them so long.
"Another thing I want is a car. I don't mean a old “T” model that rattles so everybody breaks their necks to see what is coming. I want one that glides along smooth as silk. I'm willing to work for it too. By Grabs, I think I'll get real stingy and save up my money and get me one.
"That's all, now; don't put my name to that thing. I know I'm a fool but I don't want everybody else to know it.”
