March 16, 1939
A.G. Alexander (Alecos Hatzialexandris) (white)
Names changed
7 Broadway,
Asheville, N. C.
Cafe owner.
Douglas Carter, writer.
HELLAS IN AMERICA
"I was born in Turkey," said Pete Miltiades, "45 years ago; but I am Greek. It was a Greek town - all the people were Greek - but it was under the government of Turkey. I came to America 26 or 27 years ago - 1912, I think."
Pete’s voice is deep, throaty; his accent impossible to reproduce or describe accurately. He says something like "gooverment" and "Tourkey" - sounds which cannot be precisely expressed in English. One can only say, "He has a Greek accent."
He continued: "We don’t say ’Greek’ - that’s American - we Say ’Ellin’ - E-l-1-i-n. In English it is ’Hellene’ - H-e-l-l-e-n-e. For ’Greece' we say ’Ellas’ - E-l-l-a-s-or in English, ’Hellas’ - H-e-l-l-a-s. We only say ’Greece' and ’Greek’ when we talk to Americans - native Americans, I mean. I am American, myself: I took out my papers years ago. I belong to Ahepa - that means American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association. Get It? A-H-E-P-A. Same people call it a lodge, but all Greeks who want to be good American citizens belong to it, and we put America first. That’s what we got it for. The other Greek lodge puts Greece first - that’s the Greek-American - but Ahepa is American-Greek. We are proud to be American."
"Have you ever been back to your native land?"
"No. I don't want to go back. I had enough of it."
Pete was one of 12 children, and his father was one of seven. They were farmers, and lived in a little town, the farm adjoining. When a son married, his father would give him his proportionate part of the farm lands, and the son, when able, would build his own home. By the time Pete was born, his grandfather’s farm had been quartered, and his father's quarter had been subdivided. Pete was the prospective owner of 1/16 of the original 75 acres.
"But farming was no good then," he said, "and the boys had to work somewhere else if they could. My father got to where he couldn't pay my tuition in school."
"They didn't have free schools?"
"No. Everybody paid tuition. But my grandfather had made a donation to the school. Everybody who had money made a donation to the school, and when somebody died who had made a donation, all the school children attended his funeral. Whenever you saw the school children going to a funeral, you knew that somebody had died who had made a donation. Well, when the inspector came and asked, 'Who hasn't paid tuition?' they made the stand up, and then they said, 'You go home. You haven't paid tuition.' So I went, but my father said, 'You go back to school and tell them your grandfather made a donation. And you stay there.' And they let me stay. And then, later, they did the same thing and they let me stay again. And then another time they wouldn’t let me stay, and my father went. When he came home, he said, ’You go on back to school.’ And they let me stay."
"How much was the tuition fee?"
"How are you going to tell? That money was all different. I can’t take that money and put it in this money. I don’t know how much it was. The money over there now is different from what it was then. I can’t tell you how much it was in American money.
"My father wasn’t doing any good. We had a long dry spell. One of his cows died. My mother got sick. He had to pay the doctor."
"What did your father raise on the farm?"
"Tobacco and food; but that year the tobacco burnt up, and most of the other crops. We had some cows and goats and chickens and pigs, too, but they weren’t doing any good that year.
"So I went to work for a baker in another town. It was near a resort - near the sea. I worked from before day until after dark. I had a donkey - no, not a donkey - not a little one - it was what you call a ’jackass’ - a big one. I worked in the bakery until late in the morning, and then I loaded the donkey - I call him a ’donkey' - with the bread, and I took him to the resort by the sea, and to two other towns, and sold the bread. The baker wouldn’t let me ride him - I had to lead him until I got out of sight, then I would get on top of the baskets and ride. It was all right to ride him back, after the bread had been sold - the baker didn't mind that. When I got back I had to take care of the donkey and put him in the stable, and then I had to go back and work in the bakery again after supper. I slept at the baker's house on a small bed - cot - in the big front room.
"The work was too hard. I got tired of it. My father collected my wages, but the baker didn't pay much anyhow. I never had any money. The boy who had the job before I went there didn't bring back the money for the bread one day. He said he lost it, and the baker couldn’t do anything about it, but the boy got fired. I guess he was glad of it. He got that money, I suppose, but nobody ever saw him spend it. If he had tried to spend it around there he would have gone to jail."
"Was the baker good to you?"
"No. He was mean. Always cursing. I was just working there to help my father. But the work was too hard. I had more and more to do. I told him one day I was going to leave. He said, 'No. You stay here until Christmas, and I will buy you a pair of shoes.' I said I didn’t want any shoes; I was going to leave when that month was up. He cursed me, and ran me out of the bakery - into the street - and kept on cursing me - loud. A man across the street - a good man - came over and said to him, 'Why do you curse that boy? He's a good boy. He's worked harder than any boy you ever had. He's the only one that didn't steal your money. Why do you curse him?' 'He's going to leave,' the baker said, ‘and I told him I'd buy him a pair of shoes Christmas.' I' don't "blame him for leaving,' the man said, ‘you are so mean to him.' So I left. I had been there about a year.
"I went back to my father and helped him on the farm. Things were a little better then, but he didn’t need me to help him. He had plenty of help. All my sisters but one were still there - she had married - and they were helping on the farm. My sister’s husband had moved to Asia Minor, and had a tobacco farm, and he needed help on his farm. One of my brothers had gone to help him, and my father wanted me to go, too, but my brother had come back home for a visit, and he said he didn't like it there, and I didn't think I'd like it, either, so I wouldn't go. I wanted to go to America, but my father didn't want me to go, and he didn't have the money.
"So I went on a strike. Some of the boys from that town had gone to America, and they wrote back and said they liked it fine. They said they were making a lot of money - $1.70 a day - and were having a good time. They were in Pennsylvania, working in a steel mill. I decided to go to Pennsylvania. So I went on a strike, like I said. I told my father I would not work; I would not go to Asia Minor; I would not do anything but go to America.”
"Why didn't you get a job and earn your passage money?"
"If I got a job, my father would collect my wages. They wouldn't pay me; they would pay him; and if he wouldn't give it to me, how would I get to America? But finally he gave me the money, and I came to America." A big grin accompanied the last statement.
"No, He didn’t give me the money. He went to another town and bought my tickets. All the way to the town in Pennsylvania where my friends were. He said it cost $75 in American money. He gave me a little money to spend. Not much. About $5, I think. Six or seven months after I got to Pennsylvania I sent him the money back. I sent him $100. That’s all the money I ever sent back to the old country. I hear people say, ’These damn Greeks come over here and make a lot of money and send it all back to Greece.' I never sent any money back over there - only that $100 to my father; and what would you think if I didn’t send it back to him? He gave me the money to get over here, and I told him I would pay him back, and I did. But I would have sent him some money if he had said, ’Pete, I need some money. I am hard up. Send me some money.' Wouldn’t you? He was killed during the World War, I guess. He went off with some other men and never came back. Nobody ever heard from him again. He must have been killed. They don’t known much about it. My sister wrote me, ‘Our father went off with some men to fight, and they didn’t come back. They must be dead.’ My mother is still living on the farm with my brothers. They are getting along all right."
"What did you do when you got to Pennsylvania?"
"I worked in the mill - laborer. There were a lot of Greeks there. I found my friends, and they had a house with some other Greeks, and they let me stay with them, and the next day I got a job at the mill. One of the Greeks was the cook, and kept house for us, and we all paid him, like the rent, and the food. It was cheap living like that. We all paid so much a week to the treasurer, and he paid all the bills. Sometimes a stranger would come by - a Greek - and we would let him stay for two-three days if he didn't have any money, but he would have to leave soon if he didn't get a job. That's the way we do. If a Greek is trying to get a job, and doesn't have any money, the other Greeks take care of him for a few days, to see if he can get a job. If he can't, he has to go on somewhere else, and the Greeks there will take care of him until he sees if he can get a job. We soon find out about those who don't want to work, and when they come around, we say, 'Go on and get you a job. Don't come around here. You can't live off us. Get you a job.'. But there are not many Greeks like that.
"The work at that mill was not so hard, but after a while some of us went to Pittsburgh.” He manages somehow to make nearly three syllables out of the name - something like Pitts-a-burgh. "We got better jobs there - better pay. Later I went to work for the railroad; Pittsburgh and Lake Erie, or something like that. We built the tracks and after a while they made me foreman. I had 35 or 40 men working for me. I got good pay then, but I wasn't married, and I didn't save any money. Then I went to work for another railroad. I forget the name. I ran a camp - a construction camp - and I made the payroll for the whole camp. I worked for the railroad during the war, and after the war they started laying off the men, and I lost my job. I didn't have any money saved, and I had to wash dishes in a cafe. They didn’t pay high wages, but I had plenty to eat. When I saved a little money, I went to Atlanta. I had to wash dishes there, too. Then I went to Virginia, washing dishes, or anything I could get to do. I learned to cook, and I got a job cooking in a cafe. Then I went to Kentucky and got a job as cook. I was there several years, and when the man who ran the cafe went broke, I borrowed the money from another Greek, end bought the business. I had saved a little, and I put that in, and borrowed the rest. It didn’t take much.
"About six months later a Greek came and wanted to be my partner. He had some money he wanted to put in the business, and said we could fix up a better place, so I took him in. He was married, and had lots of children, and soon he was taking the food from the cafe to his home, for all those children, and I found out he wasn't paying for it. The business was paying for it. He kept the books, and wrote out the checks, but I went over them myself one time, and I saw what he had been doing. And you know what else he had been doing? He had been taking money out of the business to make the payments on his house! I figured it up, and he owed me about $2,000. Next day I asked him for it, and he said, ’It's all right. We are making money here. I’ll pay you back.' And then I asked him, 'How come you take my money to buy your house, and to feed your children, without asking me?' You know what he said? 'We are partners, and you don’t need the money. You are not buying a house. You are not even married. I'll pay you back. We are partners, aren't we?' I told him, 'No! We were partners, but not now. I don't want that kind of partner. I'm through, and I want my money.' Well, all I got was $700 in cash and his notes for the rest, but I was glad to get rid of him. He never paid the notes. He was the only partner I ever had, and I'll never have another one. Greeks have come to me and said, 'Let's be partners.' I tell them, 'No, I don't want any partner. I had a partner once, and I don't want any more.' I'll either have my own place, or work for wages. No partner.
"Well, after that I opened a small place in Martinsville, Va., and that's where I met my wife. She is native American. Her father has a farm in North Carolina, not very far away, and they all came to Martinsville once a week. They always came to my cafe to eat, and that's how we got acquainted. In about a year we got married. Business was not very good there, and so I came here and opened this little place. I've been here about five years now. Business is pretty good. But I want to own my home. I don't like to pay rent. I bought a good automobile, so I can take my children out in the country, but I want my own house, too. I might move if business doesn't get better. I haven't been able to save much money."
"How many children do you have, Pete?"
"Two. A boy and a girl. The boy is seven years old. He's in the second grade at school - American school. The girl is five years old. She only goes to Greek school."
"Greek school?"
"Yes. All children of Greeks go to Greek school. The Greeks in every town have a Greek school, to teach the Greek language and history to the Greek children. We get the Greek preacher or someone who's had a good education to have classes several times a week, and each child pays tuition to the teacher. Of course, the children go to the American - public schools, too, when they are old enough. My boy is very smart. He always gets the highest marks. He is good in Greek school, too."
"Does your wife like it here?"
"Oh, yes. She's crazy about it. We visit her father about twice a year, but she likes to live here.”
Pete's cafe is very favorably located near the center of town, and his business seems brisk, but most of his customers spend very small sums. The place is about eight feet wide and about 20 feet long.
