Edgefield Cotton Mil
(Kendall plant)
Edgefield, S. C.
Dec 15, 1938
G. L. Summer
ELIZABETH P. JACKSON.
Several cotton mill houses are on each side of a narrow, little street, each of similar style and size, but little attention having been paid to lines. In the rear of them, back in a small field, sets an unpainted one-story, four-room cabin. It's front yards consists of a vegetable garden, which is now half grown in tell collard plants, and enclosed with wire fence that runs parrellel with the railroad siding which is between the street and the garden. A corner gate admits you, which winds slightly around the garden to the front porch, a narrow kind porch having a chair and a swing which hangs from the celing with chains, and on it's seat a home-made rug, knitted from olf scraps of cloth. On the right of the house, is a large chicken yard, enclosed with chicken wire fence, and three hen houses, surrounded by about 50 or 60 hens of various types.
A knock at the door, and a wrinkled old woman, stooped, and with white hair, with stands hanging down the sides of her face, cames hobbling to the door and opens it. She does not speak, but looks for about a minute with steeel blue eyes piercing you; then, with a light gleam and a smile, she asks you to come in. Going through a small alcove, through another door, we enetr a large combination livng and bed-room. After stating the purposes of your visit she invites you to sit down, and with a wave of her hand, doubts of she can give much information. She sits in an upholstered rocker, which is directly in front of the small iron heater. She is dressed in a gray-blue suit of clothes that looks much like wide pajamas and in bed-room slippers. Her apparent weariness shows that she is evry hit her 80 years, and her relaxed manner shows that she constantly rests in this large chair. Though the bed seems to be tidily made up, she offers no excuse for the worn and dusty lineoum which is on the floor near the stove and under her chair; and the dirty carpet which brings up the rear towards the back wall and under the bed. In two diagonal corners are two small worn out trunks, which are probably filled with some old clothes and her other things; while across from the door which leads into the dining room, sets a tall, brown regrigerator. The bareness of the walls that are smoothly planed, unpainted ceiling boards, is off-set by several old calendars with pictures, on three sides. By the bed a small radio sets on a table.
Asking her about her husband, and the kind of work he did, she says that her husband died about three years ago; that they had both been reared on a farm, about 12 miles from the court house, and had come to the mill 34 years ago. Three years before he died he lost his health; then he went into running a wood-yard, but couldnt do much except with the help of the boys. Now, that out of her eight childreen, two of whom are dead, all are married and gone except one who lives at another place in the village, with his wife and two children, and the boy who lives with her and supports her by working in the mill as a weaver at $18.00 a week. This son, she says, was always, a home boy; he never went around much, frlloicking, and never cared much about the girls. He is now 43 years old and never married. She seemed to be proud in the fact the he was in the World War, serving two months in the United States and ten months in France, in the ammunition train. He was not wounded in the war, she says.
Talking about when they came to Edgefield, about 22 years ago-- maybe you did not undetsand, she says, we have been in the county 34 years. She says she was a Johnson before she married; that her father was a farmer, and her grfather, too. Her gr-father came from Virginia and settled the same place they lived at about 12 miles below the town. Her husband, Marion Jackson, who was up in age when he died. "My son who lives with me, owns this house we live in, "she says; but he says that it takes everybit of his weekly wages to keep things going, that the old house takes money to keep it up.
"We don't have no automobile" she says, that her son don't want one;" he dont go to no picture show; he wus allus that er way." He goes to work in the afternoons at 2 o'clock and works until 10 O'clock that night, and inquiring how he spends his mornings, she says that he sometimes hangs around the store, or maybe work around his chickens and dig in the garden "You see that step-ladder in the corner by the frigerator," she says, "he uses it to work around here"....Again glancing around the room, it appears to be able to hold many things that are generally around a place, as even a tall, dark bureu or dress seems not to be crowded out of it's corner opposite to the "frigerator"...Then she says they have lots of trash piled around, have so much, dont have good places to put 'em.
"I used to git 'round good, "she says," cook, wash, and help around the garden; but I ain't no count no more". Ruminating about her health, she says that her doctor told her she had ulcerated stomach, is the reason she felt so done up all the time. Seems like, she says, that she can't eat much any more, except some kinds vegetable, like collards, and such; "but I drink sweetmilk," she says.
Her son gets up every morning at 6:30, she says, and piddles around the place, while to negro cook comes and cooks breakfast, which they have about 8 o'clock. This nero woman also does the washing and ironing and cleanin up. They have their washing done in the back yard, but they get their water out a well there, and don't have any city water. Though they have a electric lights which is from the town plant; the light bulb being seen as it hangs down almost to within three feet of the floor, in the center of the room.
Being asked if they had a base ball team at the mill, she says that they do; but her son dont go to the games, because, he says, it takes all his money to keep the old house up.
Talking about the schools around the mill, she says the little house near the mill is used as a union church and as a primary school. The bell, within a low tower, with no sides looks like those of olden times. Having lived in the country on a small farm, as a girl, she didnt get to go to school much. Anywhere from there months to five months each years, was all; and she went only three years. People didnt have much money to run schools then, she says, and then they had to be home in planting season and picking seasons.
She causally mentions her gr-children, the most of whom are grown and working for themselves. All of them have gone to the public schools, some going through High School. She thinks She thinks education is a fine thing for the children, the best thing for the present generation; then, for the first time, she seems proud of her grchildrens accomplishments when she mentions her gr-daughter who is in training to be a registered nurse. "She got but five more months to finish," she says, "she is a little thing, and weighs only 100 pounds." Asking how old she is, she replies that she is about 25 years old. Then, as in a thoughtful mood, she says," hope she will be as good a nurse as our mill nurse here--she shore is afine woman, good to me"...The loud ticking of the clock on the mantel, on each side of which are many pices of paper and small books, near the clock being that of what looks like the Bible, she does not appear to be disturbed by it, since, ho doubt, the customary habit of talking in the same room has made her used to it. Talking about some of her other gr-chuldren, she says that she has one grson who is 23 years old and in the 9th grade at school. It seems that this boy run away from home, lived in the States of Oregon and California, and other places, a few years; then he came back home, but because he couldnt get a Job around here he went back to scook, said he wanted to get more education. Another gr-son, son of another son, is in the 11th grade in high school and is only 15 years old, she says. Says he is a smart boy, helps his father when he got unable to work much, by staying in the store for him in the afternoons. The brother who works in mill in the afternoons and night, stays in the store in the mornings.
Then she wants to know if I know anything about farming; Says her boy likes it, and would like to go on it again, but he reckon he better stay in the mill as he might do better. He likes the mill alright, she says, and likes his boss and super. He don't belong to no union around here, but my married son over yonder likes it," she says. "My son here votes; he is a Democrat, but that's all he does-- he dont work for nobody to help git em elected." "Once I voted," she continues, "only one time, and that wus 'nough fur me." She says that her doctor run for some office, and she wasnt goin' to vote; "but when folks commenced to try to turn me aginst him, I went down and voted fur him." Everybody makes out they are Democrats around here, she says.....
"We got a holiness church over there on tother side of street, you saw it. It is painted white, trimmed in green. They get up some action over there somtimes when they have big meetin'. "Explaining that the union cgurch was used by both the Methodist and the Baptist, she says that she is a Methodist, and still keeps her membership in her old church down in the country where they came from; because her people belonged there and all of them are buried in the church cemetery. She used to go to the Methodist meeting sometimes here and in the country, but cant get about now. But, she says, the holiness church now has more members than the others. They make small contribution to their church sometimes, she says...
"My son," she says, "who lives with me is mighty good to me, and took care of me and his pa, too, mighty good." "If I wus dead," she says, "and he could git a good woman, I would like fer him to marry; but ef he can't git a good one, would he would go to the veterans hospital, than to git jist any kind of a woman." Talking about one of her sons who had died and left a widow and some children, she says that he woned his home, and run a little store in the village. She sya that she talked about him while ag Well, she says, his wife worked in the mill, to, while he worked, both regular and they saved up enough to buy this little home, and then to start their little store. After he died, she went on working in the mill regular, and th children went to school.. "I tell you, she shore is a worker.... she knows how to git along", she says..... One of her grsons now has a store (he is a son of this widow), and he is doing fine, she says.
Asking her if she had any furniture her old grparents used, sh says, yes, some old chairs and a table. Smiling a little, she says that she would show them. Getting up she beckons you to follow her to the back of the house. Goung through the dining room, which appears to be also the kitchen, you see a large old-time dininb table, made of pine, but round and having a smaller round turn-table on it which spins around when it is turned. Opening the kitchen door to the back porch, a narrow long strip with rough banisters, you see against the wall two unpainted chairs of the home made tupe, with about 1/2 inch hickory strips plaited for the seat. By the side of these is a table about four feet high, three feet wide and two feet long; with the-unusual feat of having the square tapering legs nailed with wooden pegs through the panels that fit in grooves just under the table top. It, too, shows evidence of not having ever been stained or printed. Coming back through the dining room and kitchen room, you observe also a cabinet of home made style, back in a corner. The dining table is covered all over with an oil cloth of blue and and wire designs. The floor is bare, not even a sign of a carpet or ug, but had been swept clean. She tels how her mother used to eat from the table. Talking about her mother, she tells of the work her mother did as a weaver. She says that the mother was an expert weaver, worked on an old wooden hand loom which was kept in one corner of the kitchen, and people from everywhere would bring their yarn to her to have it wove into cloth.
The caller gets up and starts to go, then she tells of an auto wreck that happened not far from there, near a road-house, she says. She reckons they wus drunk, cause they that go to the road house, get drunk, they tells me, she says. They sell liquor there, too, so they say, and she begins to mildly berate the authorities for not arresting drunk fellows sometimes. "When they kecth a nigger," she says, "they take him in and put him up." Talking about the white fellows who drink liquor around there and get drunk, she says, if they get much drunk they must stay at home, cause you dont hardly ever see any drunk out, or nobody knows about it.
Then, she says that she hadnt told about living in Newberry once. That she moved to Newberry and lived in the old mill, West End, 19 months, and come back to Edgefield in 1910. She says that she liked it there, the people in the mill wus good, but they just wanted to come back home. Relaxing in her chair, a noise; was heard at the front door. Going to it, she could see nothing, and then said, "them children here, I reckon, trying to get in", and with that straggles back to her chair, and the Cellar departs.
