NOT A LIFE STORY
I found Mr. Antipodes, an affable little Greek, in the basement of his ice cream plant, one of the largest establishments of its kind in Atlanta. The noise of the huge churning fressers, combined with the roar of arriving and departing trucks, was deafening. Mr. Antipodes, with hand extended, fought his way through a maze of rushing workers, and came toward us. I introduced myself in a shout and explained my mission in a breath. With one hand he made a gesture indicating the futility of conversing said such confusion. With the other he drew me into an inner office where the louder noises were slightly lessened, but where the staccato clickings of typewriters added a new note of distraction. 'How! What you say?"
I explained my mission again. That we were making a socio-ethnic study of the Greeks in Atlanta. That we wanted such information as he could give us on the Greek community in general, as he would give on his personal history in particular, "Yes," he said, "now what you want?"
For the third time I went through the act in words of one syllable, Mr. Antipodes nodding all the while. When he spoke it was in the peculiar manner of the Americanized Greek. He telssooped phrases which rendered half his words indistinguishable. Only by mentally repeating the sounds could I untangle his sentences and restring the words into understandable English.
"I give somebody that stuff. You find him. You got it all. Some fellow come see me...oh, two-three year ago. He got it all. We got clubs here, lots of Greeks. He'll tell you."
I felt he could never understand that every racial and economic group in the city had long been regarded as happy hunting grounds by the field agents of many WPA projects and that there was no clearing office whereby the information obtained by a worker on one program was made available to those on another. Instead I went on to explain that this was a more exhaustive investigation, that even more data was needed, that, for instance, we wanted to know when the first Greek came to Atlanta.....
He interrupted, speaking rapidly and animatedly, his objections forgotten. His chest swelled like a pouter pigeon. "I was first Greek come to Atlanta. I was first Greek in country'. Oh-ho-ho, no, I no mean that. I mean I was first in South."
"You mean in Georgia?" I suggested hesitatingly.
"Ho, I think I first Greek in south." But he said it now with a failing inflection, his chest falling like a deflated balloon, as if he didn't quite believe it himself and hardly expected that I would. He looked very unhappy. Sensing ay psychological faux pas I hastily and ostentatiously scribbled down the impossible note. Instantly he beamed and his chest swelled again. He went on rapidly.
"I come to America in 1892...me and another fellow. I was twelve years old. He was young fellow, about thirty."
"From what part of Greece did you come?" I asked. "Belo-ponesus, Attica, the Islands?" (Hurrah for the manual:)
"From Mllst."
"From WHERE?"
"Mllst?"
"Tes, Mllst, MLLST! Hero!!" He jerked the penail from my hand and wrote on the pad, spelling sloud, "A-<text not clear>-l-l-<text not clear>, Mllst!" several clerks looked up and I hung my head.
"Oh," I said, guiltily, and retired to my mental corner. Mr. Antipodes laughed heartily, having won the first round.
"Ha-ha-ha, you no understand Greek?"
"Ha-ha-ha, No." But I came back fighting. "Did you come straight to Atlanta from New York?"
"No, I stay in New York and then I come down to satannah in about a month. I never forget....I see my first Negre in Savannah. He <text not clear> me to death. We no have them in our country, you know, and I see that big black fellow....ha-ha, ha-ha-ha. I come on up to Atlanta on train."
"Well why did you decide to come on to Atlanta, Mr. Antipodes?"
"There was a friend of mine here from the old Country and he writes me about hoe he was doing in Atlanta."
"But......" I had started to rewind his that he had just said he was not only the first Greek in Atlanta, but in the South. I decided, however, that if he saw I was inclined to quibble he might out short the interview. I fumbled for a less embarrassing question. "How did you make your living? What business did you make your living? What business did you get in?"
"Ha-ha! Just any business! Ho-hot First I sell fruit. You know hew it is?" As one who seldom cats fruit and has certainly never sold it, I assured him that I knew exactly how it was.
"My brother and I......"
'Your brother..."
"Yes, we..."
"Did he come over with you?"
"That's right."
("But you old fool...you just said you were the first Greek in this section and that you came over with some 30-year old fellow!") In my confusion I unfortunately changed the subject and failed to track down the brother, "Tell me a little more about your early years in Atlanta. What other jobs did you do?"
"I worked six-eight months for nothing. Long time I work for one dollar a weak."
"Yes? How admirable! But what kind of jobs did you have?"
"All I make I make honest. I not only hone at myself, I try to wake everybody else honest."
I tried again. "When did you enter the ice cream business?"
"I went back and got married...a little girl in my neighborhood. I know her when I was kids. We go to school together. I go back once before. The third time I go back my brother brought my wife over." He laughed loudly, gave me a knowing wink, slapped me on the shoulder and nudged me in the ribs. I didn't get it, but I laughed because he seemed to expect me to. Suddenly it came to me that he was giving as a sort of man-to-man confidence. ("A man's got to have his woman, you know. Ha-ha, ha-ha, ha-ha-ha!!) For lack of anything appropriate to say I repeated his last sentence as I wrote, "....brother brought my wife over." "You say the third time you went back your brother brought your wife over?" It didn't make sense.
"Yes, "he explained firmly, and I felt very stupid.
"Well, Hr. Antipodes, when did other Greeks start coming to Atlanta?"
"Oh, about 1900....1912-14." (Good! New we're getting somewhere.)
"Did whole families come or just the men?"
"No, just the boys come along. My brother came some time." (Dawn! We're off again. That canipresent brother!) I gave up trying to plumb Mr. Antipodes knowledge of the earlier Greeks in Atlanta.
"How many Greeks are there in Atlanta today, would you say?"
"We're no Greeks no more. That's not right. We're Americanised. Our children Americans."
"Of course. But how many Greeks are there in Atlanta?"
"Oh-h-h, about twelve hundred. I've got three boys and two girls." This last was thrown in as a sort of informative borns. Allowing for a wife and that bounding brother I estimated there were still a few over eleven hundred to be accounted for. Hevertheless, we were now back into his personal life.
"How old are year children?"
"Twenty-five, twenty-four, twenty-one, nineteen-eighteen."
"Oh," I said, not sure whether this last was ages or a date.
"I used to be on the governor's staff. Governor Talmadge." So much for the children. He swelled with pride, not pompously, but like a pleased Little boy. "You want to see the Father (of the Greek Orbtodox Church). He'll tell you all this!" (Over my dead body, Mr. Antipodes, over my dead body!) "You no want to hear about me. The Father tell you about all Greeks here."
"But, Mr. Antipodes, we want to get the stories of some of the individual Greek families here in addition to the story of the community as a whole."
"Ho-ho-ho. Oh no, you no want that."
"Oh yes we do. See...here in the manual...." A pause while I thump throught the book for the right page. "See here...."
"Read it to me. What it say?"
"It says,....' selected interviews with individuals in the community and personal histories may add significant information and local color." He took the manual from me and studied the lines I pointed out to him. Then he handed it book.
"What it say?"
Groggily I reread the sentence. "It says....' selected interviews....'"
"Ho-ho-ho, ho-ho. You no want that!"
"But, Mr. Antipodes, you see...." It was no use. He didn't see. I gave up and staggered toward the stairs, Mr. Antipodes walking beside me and patting my arm.
"You come back, "he was saying. "You come back. Anything you want to know about Greeks, I tell you. You find out all you want to know. I'm glad to help."