STATE EDITORIAL IDENTIFICATION FORM
STATE: FLORIDA
RECEIVED FROM___ (STATE OFFICE) JACKSONVILLE
MS GERARDO CORTINA PINERA WORDS 1,874 QUOTA ___
STATE GUIDE ___ LOCAL GUIDE ___ NON-GUIDE YES
TABLE OF CONTENTS DIVISION LIFE HISTORY: READER IN CIGAR FACTORY
COMPLETE FOR THIS SECTION ___ WHAT PERCENTAGE REMAINS ___
PREFINAL REVISE NO. ___ WASHINGTON CRITICISM ___
PREFINAL REVISE NO. ___ WASHINGTON CRITICISM ___
PREFINAL REVISE NO. ___ WASHINGTON CRITICISM ___
PREFINAL REVISE NO. ___ WASHINGTON CRITICISM ___
PREFINAL NEW: ___
VOLUNTEER CONSULTANT:
Name: ___
Position: ___
Address: ___
By <Text Not Clear>
Position State Director
Date: Jan. 9, 1939
1935
Gerardo Cortina Pinera (Cuban
Ybor City
Tampa, Florida
(Reader in cigar factory,
unemployed)
(An autobiography written
for the FERA Sociological
Survey of Ybor City)
AUTOBIOGRAHJY OF A PERSON WHO INSISTED ON WRITING ONE Translated from Spanish to English.
Gerardo Cortina Pinera
I wish, before anything else, to solicit of my dear readers, that they dispense me the most cordial benevolence, since they will not have the pleasure of reading the copy sheets of an upright literary man, but those composed by a humble worker, who by force of sacrifices, has been able moderately to take a little instruction, so that in this manner be able to distinguish the world and its consequences.
My name is that of Gerardo Cortina Pinera. I was born in the City of Havana, the second day of January of the year 1912, reasons for which you will be able to calculate that I have at present the short age of 23 years in the world of the living. An age which will seem short in order to consider a person with the sufficient experience to judge the different worldly problems; an opinion on which I differ as I believe that the world and its consequences are the principal factors which gives to man the experience of living.
I am the son of honorable and laborious Spaniards. My father's name was Juan Antonio Cortina. He dedicated himself laboriously to the commerce of grocery stores in Cuban lands, place in which he founded and procreated a poor but honest family. He was a man of means, and for this reason our home lacked nothing. The name of my mother was Sofia Pinera y Garcia, also of Spanish nationality. Prosperity and happiness inhabited this my poor home as was told to me by elders of the family, while my beloved father had life. But unhappily, death knocked at the doors of my home, and the head of the family went to render tribute to the mother earth. My father did not leave much worldly treasures in the year of 1918. Four years after the death of ray father, my poor mother died, leaving in the world five children without worldly treasures.
The older of my brothers were adopted by sisters and cousins of my mother, and to them is attributed the affection and the compliance which to sons is dispensed. As I was the smallest of all my relatives placed me in the worthy "Granja Dr. Manuel Delfin," place in which I followed a course of five years' study as pupil. My teacher was Mr. Manuel Arteaga, a religious man consecrated to the Catholic order, and due to his unwearied persuasion, it is the reason why in the present days the small knowledge of knowing how to place my name. In the year 1923 I left the training school due to economical reasons and commenced learning the trade of line-maker at the printing company of "La Habanera," house situated on the street of Mercaderes No. 28, in the City of Havana.
For reasons that the second one of my brothers was the second operator of my department, I was able advantageously to learn my trade in the period of four years. It should be recorded that in order to realize this, I found myself in the necessity of presenting documents, which testified that I had 16 years in 1923, so that in this manner avoid that the Secretary of Work of the Republic of Cuba should hinder my apprenticeship. After graduating as operator in the year 1927, I worked at the house until the month of February in the year 1928, and on the 7th day of May of the same year, I took the ship CXJBA, which brought me to this hospitable American land, to the City of Tampa.
Upon my arrival in Tampa, I started working as waiter in a cafe, which found itself situated in 2102, 14th street. At the same time I acquired friends, and these advised me to dedicate myself to reading at the factories, and in this manner it was another field experimented. Months later I went to occupy a place as reader at the factory of Gradiaz Annis & Co., but never leaving the positive position, since the hours of reading allowed me to render another work.
In the year 1931 I contracted nuptials with a daughter of this city of Tampa. Her name is Esther Gemis, belonging to a respectable and esteemed family of the Tampa society. Toward the end of the same year'31, the terrible symptoms of the sickness of unemployment commenced to sprinkle me, and for this reason I lost the employment which I held in said cafe. I was left alone, depending upon a small salary which I had as reader of the small workshop of Arange & Arange, amount which was not sufficient to purchase bread and butter. But to increase the misfortune, the sickness of unemployment was nearing me with gigantic steps, to such an extreme that two weeks later, the "lovers" of the city of Tampa, the Mr. manufacturers, agreed at a joint meeting of their association, to abolish the readings in the workshops because they considered this pernicious.
The distinguished "lovers" of Tampa presented the excuse that in the tribunes of the respective cigar factories, reading was made of radical works, and Communistic newspapers, without knowing that such books and dailies were subject to the strict censorship of the American government.
It is, therefore, demonstrated that, with the assurance of the "censorship," the Mr. Manufacturers were wanting of the truth, as to my thinking, and it is very humble, but gifted with the sincerity that characterized a Christian, as I believe that if the government of the United States permits such foreign works in this country subject to the postal franchise, and for a greater democracy, consents also that newspapers be edited with communistic principles. There is no reason why manufacturers of foreign origin should restrain the democracy given by this sovereign country that reading is given to literature that pleases the people, always and whenever it conforms with the laws of censorship.
If the Mr. manufacturer had no other reason than the one given, which I do not believe, as I esteem that they presented unfounded reasonings, or wickedly inclined, and on taking such measures of abolishing the readings, they threw on the streets more than 40 fathers of family, and converted them as Federal government charges. I believe that they made a double evil, since they did not pay the aforesaid readings in the workshops, as it was the working cigar-maker who sacrificed his earnings to sustain what they qualified as the bread of instruction.
By means of these tribunes, the working cigar-maker received great and advantageous teachings which permitted them to increase their cultural knowledge; and would have permitted them to penetrate clearly the government plan of the President of this great American nation# who at first, on directing himself to the workers of his country, asked them highly that they should group themselves in Institutions so that in this man-ner they should help in his plan of helping the workers.
As it will be well understood who reads me, the Mr. Manufacturers abolished the readings for some obscure reason, which they cannot sustain on the public, face, because they lack the sufficient moral force to realize such a thing. But as all men possess, and honorable is he who possesses an opinion, I wish to emit mine. The Mr. manufacturers of Tampa suspended the reading so as to prohibit that the working cigar-maker could have a clamourer of the "organization" within the workshop.
Let the sensible men of this great American nation answer, honorable citizens who restrain that the workers should group themselves, when the President of the nation, whom they say they love, asks the workers to associate. No. An honorable citizen finds hims if in the obligation of aiding the authorities which he elected, as a respect to the nation, and because of personal dignity.
I know that the Mr. Manufacturers will manifest that the suspension of reading happened in the year of 1931, and the petition of "associate yourselves" emitted by the Mr. President was in the year of 1933. But I would answer to such a thing why did Mr. manufacturers deny the delegates of the "International Cigar-Makers of America", the reopening of the readings in the joint reunion of manufacturers and workers, carried to effect in the month of June of the passed year of 1933. In this case there is only one thing to say: the Mr. manufacturers maintain the tribunes closed because of restriction to government plan of the Mr. President, and not because of fear that the residents of Tampa will convert themselves into Communists.
But leaving to one side the commentary of this anti-democratic action, I dispose to pass over to realize the end that I propose to these lines.
One year later after these events or in the year 1932, my wife converted me into the father of a beautiful girl, on whom we placed the name of Sofia, so that in this manner, remember in my little daughter my lost mother.
In the same year of 1932 I went to form part of that great conglomeration of unemployed who belonged to the offices of the Rational Emergency Council, known as the offices of the Relief. Although I realized prowess to see if I could provide myself with a stable position in any place, and in anything, all my realized efforts resulted sterile to obtain my purpose. Meditating greatly what would result to the world, if it continues through the taken trail, I passed in spiritual meditation, the rest of this year 1932.
Another year had passed over the inhabitants of the planet, and we found ourselves already in the year 1933. Sad year for me, since it was in this year, and on the date always marked on April 2, in which the angel of my home disappeared from this world. The death of my daughter planted uneasiness and restlessness in my home, and yet forgetting that Christian faith which asks resignation of man before the purpose of the Divine Father, the afflicted hearts of all the family is the hour which unfortunately has not been able to find such a balm of consolation.
After the second anniversary of the death of my little daughter, I continued occupying my place in the line of the immense conglomeration of unemployed, in hope probably that the spirits of men, badly treated by the present social developments, they should revest themselves of sufficient force so that in this manner they will find themselves ready to defend with the required energy, the right that every man has of benefitting of that which the earth produces.
It is to be lamented that human beings have persisted in making of man a slave of man. This is to be lamented because Christ said through his apostles that man is made to benefit of that which the world produces, but not that man should make a slave of him.
In this governmental system, so inappropriate, man finds himself relegated worse than the beasts, since these fortunately eat dally, while man encounters great want of tranquility to obtain a piece of bread to give to his small children, and give thanks it can be obtained. But a day will arrive, said Christ, in which those who ask for justice will fee attended to, and such a thing I presume will not be delayed.
I must advise that if in these moments I force my mind to realize this mission, I do not do it solely to satisfy a spiritual expansion, but to carry out the petition that my dear and special friend, John Ferlita, chief of the Sociological Study of the department of Federal Relief, who approached me so that I would write my humble opinion of the evolutionary state of this town and the whys of its actual conditions.