SIM PARSONS
On the Roylston Highway leading east from Morton you turn right at Casper School to old Bryon Road. Its winding curves make it appear that it was laid off to pattern an old-fashioned hairpin.
The first curve is on an approach to a little woodland of young oaks, and in its elbow nestles snugly an old, dilapidated little church, leaning slightly toward the northeast. For many years the summer rains and winter weather have allowed little dry air and no sunshine and the timbers have rotted.
Before the door crumbling rock and mortar steps lead from the roadside to the churchyard steps trodden by many generations of Free Will Baptists or travelers who accepted the invitation so crudely scratched on the left pilaster: "WHOSOEVER WILL MAY COME."
Farther down the road is another curve that turns on a swift descent. On the right atop the next hill is the little white cottage of Sim Parsons.
At first glance the scene indicated contentment. Three clean, rosy-cheeked little boys played about the well-mowed lawn. Flower beds on the north and in the back yard contrasted in color. The little boys stopped playing to look at passers-by. J. D., nine, and nicknamed "Spunky" by his little friends, sat in one of the hand-made pine lawn chairs while he told Willie and Bob giant stories. Willie has had only one year in school and cannot equal his brother in these tales, so both he and Bob sat and listened spellbound. Bob is only two, but he swelled his little chest and "gr-r-r-r-r-r'd" at the "Story of the Big Bad Wolf."
"If you wanner see Mamma," said Spunky, "I spec' she's down in the garden hanging out clothes 'cause she washed terday.“
The children followed me, all talking breathlessly, until we reached their mother. Then they became very quiet and listened to Lucy.
They seemed to feel they must be there for manners' sake or so Lucy, their mother, would know where they were.
Lucy was hanging out clothes, a series of little pants and shirts on a straight clothesline down the garden rows. She shook out the little garments and pinned them on the line, the sun glinting on her dark chestnut hair. Her skin looked healthy and showed signs of contact with the out-of-doors. She had what would be termed a "cook's complexion." She flashed a broad smile and said, "It takes so much washin' for these dirty boys. Sometimes I ask myself what difference does it make whether I clean them up or not for they stay that way just about two minutes."
She pointed to the neat little shirts, a dress or two of her own, and a few pairs of boys' pants: "I didn't know whether or not the colors would stand such hard washin'. I dyed the feed bags and made them into clothes. I'm used to that." She laughed, showing a fine set of even white teeth and a wide mouth. Her light brown eyes danced when she smiled. "This dress I've got on is made of feed bags, too, but I dyed it different. I boiled the material in the dye but I was not as careful the last time I fixed any of them."
The dress was a clear orange and trimmed with dark brown buttons. It was so well starched and laundered that it appeared to be coarse linen.
"The letters will wash out if you wash the bags carefully and scrub hard," she explained, "but sometimes they never come out and then I use the bags for kitchen towels. I have to plan some way to have some clothes for there is so little money we have to use for clothin' that it must go for shoes, stockin's, socks, hats or caps, coats and things that I can't find no way to make. Sim, my husband, only makes $12 a week.
"When you're tryin' to have a home and feed yourselves and children a cow is a great help, but she has to be fed and the hogs, too. Of course, Sim says that the meat is almost as expensive as though we bought it as we need it, but it's here and it's convenient when we do need it and it's lots better, too. Then Sim has to keep up that old car and buy tires and gas for it. It costs a lot but he has to be right on the yard at the Durham Lumber Company at seven o'clock in the mornin's or he might be without a job pretty soon."
Lucy glanced proudly at the gleaming whiteness of her newly repaired home. "Sim says when we had the old house worked over he had to borrow $40 to pay for lumber. Two of his brothers-in-law helped him with the work and didn't charge him anything, and the lumber company give him a big discount on his lumber, so after all it didn't cost so much. We just couldn't a-done it if it had. And now, until Sim gets that $40 paid he'll not get another good night's sleep, for he's just that way. He just can't stand to be in debt. So every penny that we get that don't have to go into groceries, occasional messes of steak from the market, and for gas and oil, is bein' paid on that $40."
By this time Lucy had finished hanging out her wash, painstakingly shaking and pinning the pieces so the wind would blow directly through them. Wearily, but with the same happy expression, she reached for the little tub she had emptied of clothes and said, "Let's go to the house. That is, if we can get in, for I've been so busy today that I left the house to Bob and he certainly makes one more big mess when J. D. ain't here to watch him.
"J. D. and Willie go to school and me and Sim hopes that all three of them will be able to go at least through high school ‘cause I never went to school like I should a-went. I never thought about it then like I do now but down in Chatham where I come from it was right bad to get to school. It was so far to go over them bad roads back there fifteen or eighteen years ago. It just won't convenient to go to school like it is for our children. I'm sorry now that I didn't tough it out and go to school longer 'cause I quit almost by the time I got started. Of course, I didn't know it then but I do know now that you just don't get nowhere without a fair education. J. D. is nine years old and I want him to get on in school so bad. I wish so much that I could help him with his school work and try it sometime, but I'm afraid I may do him harm instead of being a help 'cause there's lots of his school work that I just don't know.
"Now Sim, he never went to school. He just didn't have nobody to make him. His mother was only interested in givin' the gang of them somethin' to eat and they didn't have over-much of that. As soon as he was old enough, just like all of the others, she'd take him along to town with her to the bag mill (Golden Belt Manufacturing Co.) to tote her bags home, all of them seven miles on his back. Sometimes she would get two, sometimes three, sackfuls of tobacco bags to string and she carried the boys along to help her tote them. When they got home she made them cut and turn them and after they were strung she made them tie them.
"Sim did try to go to school once but the other boys shunned him and teased him 'cause he had no father and Sim is very sensitive about that. I think sometimes that he would've gone to school enough to have learned to read and write if it hadn't a-been for that. As it is, he still can't read and he can't write. Now he knows that's the reason why he can't get no better job than loadin' lumber at $12 a week, and he sure does want his children to go to school. Sim loves his children and he hates like everything that they'll have to sometime know that they don't have a lawful grandfather on his side. J. D. has already took him to task. One day he was sittin' on Sim's lap and suddenly he put his arms around his daddy's neck and said, 'Daddy, who was your daddy?'
"It took poor Sim down worse than anything I ever saw. He set there and thought a minute and said, ’Son, my daddy's dead.' That satisfied J. D. for the time, and later that day Sim asked me to go to his mother and ask her who his father was.
I done it. I told her about J. D. askin' Sim who his father was, and of Sim tellin' me that he wanted me to find out 'cause he just couldn't ask her himself. She set there and looked sorter serious for a minute and said: 'I 'speck the poor thing is dead.' But she never told me who he was. When I told Sim he said he didn't expect she knew who his father was. Some say that Sim and Ola have the same father and others say that Ola and June have the same father, but it seems that nobody knows, not even their mother.
"You know, there was eight of them and why all of them is respected is beyond everybody's understandin'. But I think sometimes that she was determined that they should, be for when she moved them into East Durham away back yonder years ago and begun to call herself Mrs. Mary Frances Parsons, instead of Mollie or Moll Parsons as she was called around Redwood community, she was careful not to let them girls go with people of her own class. She'd keep them at home first. She got her a job in the Golden Belt factory makin' tobacco bags and put as many of the children to work as were old enough to work. Most of the eight got a couple of years in school except Sim. He was too timid to make a go of it. Sarah went through the third or fourth grade, and she stuck longer than the others. In this way and in many other ways Sim's mother seems to have managed to gain much of the self-respect that she lost.”
The driveway runs south of the house through a beautiful lawn of original grass, carefully kept free of weeds. Lucy mounted the steps to a closely screened porch which led into the kitchen. Lucy’s "mess" was non-existent. Except for the two washtubs on a bench, containing her last rinse waters, the kitchen was bright. There was a small black and white wood range glittering with cleanliness, an old-fashioned safe, neatly repainted, and a linoleum rug around which the floor was scrubbed to the color of freshly dressed poplar.
From the kitchen Lucy led the way through the dining room--really a dinette--and, like the kitchen, newly ceiled with unpainted lumber. It was furnished with a table and six chairs of a period dating back many years before Sim and Lucy married. They were polished to a clear brightness. On the walls were calendars varying from 1928 to 1938. Lucy said she saved the calendars because she "thought the pictures was pretty” and she "wanted to keep them.”
From here Lucy entered the room she hoped some day to make into a living room. This room, with its old dark unpainted walls, contrasted sharply with her bright kitchen and dinette. She seated herself in a rocker and started rocking rapidly and talking even more rapidly.
"I'm most ashamed of this old black ceiling now that the house has been done over outside and the back rooms ceiled, but Sim is goin' to tear out the saggin' part over our heads here where they put the lights in and put in new ceilin' and paint this room and our bedroom just as soon as he gets that $40 paid. When we had it fixed over I kinder wanted a front porch but it would've cost so much Sim just built a stoop, for he said he could build us some lawn chairs out of scrap lumber that we could use when we wanted to be out on the front. I like the stoop for it looks better than a porch, I think. I was so sorry that they had to tear up and spoil so many of my flowers when they fixed the house but I guess I can have more next year. Maybe if we keep livin' we can have some furniture some day to put in here, but I told Sim since we didn't have none we'd as well put up a bed in here 'cause we had to have somethin' to fill it up. I hated to put up a old iron bed in here but that's all I had."
Over the bed between the corner of the room and window was the only framed picture in the house. The picture looked very old. It was a green landscape scene showing spotted cows grazing peacefully in a meadow.
The afternoon was wearing away but Lucy was so proud of her house that she was not going to allow me to leave until I had seen it all. She proudly led the way into the bedroom. It, too, had dark old walls that had never known paint; but this floor, too, had a linoleum rug. There were two iron beds with soft pastel rayon spreads that looked very fresh in the late afternoon sun. In one corner near the fireplace was a dresser. Between the beds was a single straight chair.
We were interrupted when J. D., followed by his two little brothers, came running and calling, "Mamma, Daddy is coming. I heard his car up the road just the other side of Mr. Clark's."
All three of the children ran back to the corner of the yard to await the coming of their father. In a few seconds a trio of childish voices shrilled: "Hey, Daddy!"
And now the old car could be seen from the yard. Sim stopped at the driveway and all three children clambered in for a ride to the back yard. After the enthusiastic welcome was over Sim noticed there was company. His greeting was friendly.
Even in overalls he is a man of unusual appearance. His hair is titian or strawberry blonde. His eyes are blue-grey and deeply set. His nose is aquiline; his mouth firm, and he has good teeth. Sim is around thirty-eight.
Sim had just returned from work and, a hungry man, he made for the kitchen. "Stay an' have supper with us," he urged. "We ain't got much but we'll certainly be glad to share it with you."
Sim emptied the rinse water from the tubs in the kitchen while Lucy moved swiftly but calmly about the kitchen. Soon she called to J. D. to wash Willie's and Bob's faces. By that time she had supper on the table.
Sim asked a blessing and even little Bob bowed his head. Then they sat quietly for their plates to be piled with boiled turnips, turnip greens, home-made sausage Lucy had canned, flaky hot biscuits and fresh butter she had made earlier in the day. There was milk for the children and coffee for the rest.
Lucy explained that she had boiled the turnips and the "sallet" while she was heating water to wash clothes.
As soon as Sim finished eating he became a little more talkative. His mind turned to politics.
"A man shouldn't never vote for anybody unless he thinks he's the right man for the job," he said. "He ought to be a man who'll make his promises good, an' us who votes ought to think more about the man an' not so much about his politics.
Every man ought to think for hisself instead of lettin' somebody else do his thinkin' for him. Politics has good an' bad sides jest like religion. I don't know much, but I do try to think for myself.
"I cain't read an' I don't know much about folks who is runnin' for office 'cept them right here in my own neighborhood. I don't vote much in a national 'lection on that account. Lucy reads some to me but she don't have time to read to me much, so I cain't keep posted on a lot of things that's goin' on. Things might-a been a whole lot diffrunt if I'd had the chance to go to school jest enough to learn to read and write.
"Mammy liked not to a-been able to feed us, much less send us to school," Sim continued, "but I don't never remember bein' hungry. There was a lot of times when I needed clothes and didn't have 'em. I didn't keer much if I didn't. It's diffrunt now. I'd love to be able to buy good clothes for Lucy an' the kids, an' me, too. I wish I could dress my fambly up an' take 'em all to church every Sunday. I don't exactly believe that you have to go to church to be shore of salvation, but it makes a man feel better inside hisself.
"Lucy likes to go to church. She joined a Baptist church down in Chatham when she was a little girl but she don't git the chance to go much now. Sometimes I keep the chillun for her to go to the little Free Will Baptist Church up the road. Sometimes the chillun goes, too. I’d like to go, but I jest don't have decent enough clothes. I guess I'm too proud to go 'less I kin look jest as decent as t'other men who goes.
"The job I've got jest 'bout lets us live, but it's 'bout as good payin' as any job I ever had 'cept when I worked some at the carpenter's trade. I couldn't do much of that kind of work 'cause I jest cain't work off the ground, climbin' up on roofs an' things like that. I would git a queerness in my head, an' sometimes I'd fall. So I guess there ain't nothin' for me 'cept loadin' lumber. I try not to worry too much 'cause I don't make as much money as some other men. I've jest 'bout decided that I'll have to be satisfied with doin' the best I can. There ain't nobody who's always satisfied. A po' man like me worries 'cause he needs so much an' has so little, but I bet rich men has their worries, too.
"If I could make $20 or $25 a week I could git what me an' my fambly needs. We live pretty good now, considerin', but sometimes it's mighty hard on Lucy to scratch around an' try to make ends meet. I make a big garden in the wintertime an' summertime, too, an' Lucy cans a whole lot of vegetables--squash, snap beans, peas, tomatoes, corn, an' the like--an' she most always has good luck. When our hogs is kilt she makes up a lot of sausage, cooks an' cans a whole heap of it, an' it tastes jest as fresh in August as it did when it was new. She feeds us well. Jest 'bout the time I met her-------"
Lucy came in just then from the kitchen where she had been washing dishes and clearing the table.
"What was that you was sayin' about me, Sim?" she asked.
"I had jest started to say that when I met you I jest won't no good," Sim replied.
"Sim, I wouldn't say that! You never was mean or downright bad!" she protested.
“I thought I'd tell how I was cured of gittin' drunk, Lucy, but you can tell it," Sim said. "I don't keer. That's over an' done with an' maybe one of the best thirds that could'a happened."
"Well, I'll tell it if he wants me to," Lucy answered. “Sim useter not like to work and he just wouldn't work, that is, after he got big enough to go out and get some sort of a job. His mammy made him work when he was little but he quit doin' anything about the time he begun to think he was grown. He let Sarah and Peggy work and feed him and he didn't care whether he had any clothes or not.
"One day some boys give him some bootleg liquor and he got the taste of it. Then he begun to do odd jobs of work but, mind you, he just managed to work enough to have money to buy that half-gallon fruit jar of liquor every Saturday, and no more. Finally, Alex Simmons--Alex always has been a smart, good boy--encouraged Sim to let him go halves in one of his weekly fruit jars. Alex didn't want Sim to drink like that, and he was willing to pay for half of it just to keep Sim from drinkin' too much. That same Saturday Alex finally got Sim to agree to spend part of the money he paid him for his half of a shower bath and a hair cut at the barber shop, and with everything arranged Sim started drinkin' on his quart.
"They got started to the barber shop but not until Sim was pretty near drunk. Every chance he had on the way to the barber shop he would duck between buildin's or back of a signboard and turn up the jar. He was drunk when he reached the shop. He still had the shower on his mind and he had to have it right then and he did. But he turned on only one spigot and the hot water come in boilin' spurts all over his naked body. Sim come out screamin' and fell unconscious to the floor. That cured him of drinkin'.
"Sim won't hardly well of that scaldin' when I met him. I come home with a cousin of mine that'd been visitin' around down in Chatham. She lived in East Durham, too, and Sim come by there one day with Alex Simmons and we started goin' together. Even before he was well he got him a job as a carpenter's helper and was workin' regular, and Sim has been workin' ever since. My folks didn't want me to go with Sim but it only caused us to get married a lot sooner than we would-a if they'd a-let us alone. I never have been sorry of it and I don't think he has either. Sim don't drink at all now 'cept at Christmas time. Then he always makes some eggnog. He never fails to include a pint of good liquor when he makes up his holiday shoppin' list. I don't know why. He just does it."
Everyone who knows Sim Parsons speaks well of him. He gives what he can to unfortunates. He is a friendly and cheerful neighbor and never complains of his hardships. He always does a favor cheerfully.
Sim was born the sixth of eight illegitimate children. There are two said to have the same father; however, there is no resemblance among the lot. His mother is seventy-four years old and more active than most women of forty. She was born in the Redwood section of Durham County and her father, Joshua Parsons was born and reared in Granville County.
Sim is fortunate, as his family is a healthy one. About the only medical expense they've had since marriage was at the birth of the children. Lucy and Sim say they can "spare no more money for such" since they must care for those they have. Deep within both of them is a hope that they can someday have running water and a bathtub.
"It would save so much time keepin' these kids clean and emptyin' tin tubs," said Lucy.
Omar Darrow
Edwin Massengill
<text not clear>
