NEGRO INSURANCE EXECUTIVE
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth Area Supervisor Federal Writers' Project Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Ga.
April 24, 1939
April 13, 1939 W. B. Parker (Negro)
553 West Hancock Avenue Athens, Georgia Insurance Executive S.B.H.
A NEGRO INSURANCE EXECUTIVE
Sam Powell’s well-kept yard was enclosed by a low-clipped abelia hedge, and several rose bushes near the porch gave promise of blossoms soon to open, when I approached his white frame cottage. The porch chairs and swing were green and had apparently been given a recent coat of paint. Receiving no response after I had pushed the button of the electric bell several times, I left, and when I looked back as I turned the corner at the end of the block I saw the man, his wife, and a dachschund leave a car and enter the yard. Retracing ray steps I arrived at the house just as they unlooked the front door, and received a courteous reception.
"Come in, Miss," they invited. "If you had been a few minutes sooner we wouldn’t have been here," I accepted the invitation and entered the living-room. When we were all seated I explained ray mission. The Negroes were silent for a moment, and then the wife asked, "Are you just getting these life histories from Negroes"
"No," I replied, "we are recording occupational studies from people of all races, and I can imagine that you could add some interesting experiences to those that I am hoping your husband will tell me about."
"No, mam," she hesitantly said, "I don't think I want to, because ray mind isn't as active as Sam's. I have too many petty things to bear in mind all the time, while he is free to concentrate on his business, his occupation. You see I teach English in high school, and I have my house to look after and other things to do. I don't want you to get the impression that I'm overburdened with heavy work, for I have a woman to come in about three times a week to do my heavier housework. I pay her $2,50 a week, but it's worth it. You know, I don't think the white people pay their help enough here. It takes so much more to live in a city of this size than in a smell place."
"Do you get a good salary?" I asked.
"Yes, mam," she said, "at least I get the average wage paid teachers. That's $70 a month for the nine-months term. I finished college in Alabama, and attended one summer school in Hampton, Virginia, and I think that I can claim better than average preparation for my profession of teaching."
She seemed to consider her story ended, and in the short silence that followed, I observed my surroundings. The attractive 3-piece living-room suite was upholstered in jacquard velour, and its colors harmonized with those of the occasional chairs, the tapestry cover of the upright piano, the curtains, draperies, end the rose-colored rug; a table held a candelabrum and a vase; and a mirror, suspended from a cord, hung over a console table. There was a handsome cabinet radio receiving set and an end table near the divan, but the piece of furniture that drew my admiration was a drum-top table in the corner near the archway that leads into the hallway. There was not a picture of any kind on the white-plastered walls. The circulating heater seemed large enough to furnish warmth for several rooms.
Through the open door of the front bedroom, I could see a walnut bedroom suite, and a studio couch was visible in the hallway. An open door across the hall revealed another bedroom suite similar to the one in the front room. I could not see into the dining-room, for heavy pongee curtains on the French doors between this room and the living-room obstructed the view. In the course of the conversation I let it be known that I would like to see the other parts of the house, but these hints were ignored.
Sam listened attentively to his wife's conversation without once interrupting. When she had definitely finished her narrative, he began:
"Now, Miss, it occurs to me that since I was not born in this State, maybe you won't be interested in my life history."
He plainly showed his delight when I assured him that this would not render his story ineligible for our use.
"I was born in Georgetown, South Carolina, March 28, 1900," he said, "and I can't remember anything that I did until I entered public school in 1906. My parents operated a cafe, and I assisted them during my spare time after school and during the summer vacation periods. I can very well remember that summer, after I was a little older, when I was paid $3 a week on a Job of cleaning brick at a plant that had burned down, but I don't remember what I did with those earnings, unless I spent them for my own personal use.
"The year that I was 17 years old I completed my junior high school work, end that summer I got a Job out at Camp Jackson, as a carpenter. That was in 1917, during the World gar. I saved that money to apply on my first college expenses, and entered Benedict College in Columbia, South Carolina, in the fall of that year, finishing in 1923. While I majored in mathematics, the liberal arts were included in my studies each year of my college life. I worked each summer in order to earn money for my tuition and other school expenses. One year I delivered papers for The Columbia State; another summer I worked as waiter at the Jefferson hotel. That paid me well, as the tips amounted to quite a bit.
"For several summers I was in the pullman service on the New York Central, going east and west. There was real educational value to those experiences as a pullman porter. Those trips took me into Maine, New Hampshire, and in fact, all through the New England States, as well as to Detroit and Chicago. I liked the big cities of the North as a whole, but I believe the South is the best place to live in for more reasons than one.
"Each fall, I quit my Job and went back to school until I graduated in June of 1923, end that fall I had my first opportunity to put my hard-won education into practice, when I began work as a teacher in the high school in Augusta, Georgia, at the usual salary of $70 per month. No, mam, we were not paid for the entire twelve months of the year; we were only paid for the nine months of the school year.
"When that term of school ended in May of 1924, I entered the insurance world and I have been in that business ever since. My first official insurance job was as traveling representative for one of the larger companies of this State and I was on the road for them from May 1924 until I was made general manager a year later and stationed in the home office in this city. I worked in that capacity until the company I was with merged with another company in 1931, and the newly formed company gave me an appointment as their traveling representative in Georgia, Alabama, and South Carolina.
"In 1933, I returned to this city, and then is when the best part of my life began - I married that year. I had never been married before." He and his wife exchanged glances, and he continued; "I waited until the real person for me came along." They both laughed, a little self-consciously.
"I believe your husband is in love with you," I said to the wife.
"Yes, mam," she happily, but shyly answered, "I reckon he is."
"Well, can't you say the same'” I asked her.
"I reckon I can," she agreed, "for we have been married six years now, and I'm sure no other two people were ever happier than we have been and still are."
Sam answered a knock at the front door, and his wife followed him.
"Is Octavia home’" I heard the visitor ask.
"Yes, mam," Sam replied, "I dropped her by your home on our way here from the office."
"I haven’t been home yet," the visitor stated, "but just thought I’d stop by and make sure that she had come."
Sam is tall enough to carry the 175 pounds of his weight without appearing stout, and he is very black. On this afternoon ha wore a blue business suit, blue and white striped shirt, blue tie, and blue hose clocked in white. His black shoes were a triumph of the bootblack’s skill. His wife is lighter completed and stout. Her straight black hair was coiled in a neat knot on the back of her head. She wore a brown coat that was a shade lighter than her skirt, and a tan blouse. Copper-colored slippers and hose completed her costume. Like their surroundings, the man and wife were immaculate in their personal appearance.
Sam closed the door behind the visitor, and turned on the lights. The late afternoon air was chilly and uncomfortable, and I hoped that he would make a fire in the heater, but did not like to make a suggestion.
"That woman is the mother of my secretary," he explained.
As he began describing his business, and the number of their office employees, his wife interrupted.
"Do you have any children?" she asked.
"Two, a boy and a girl," I replied.
"How long bad you been married before your first child was born?" was her next question, and my reply delighted her.
"That's good news to me," she smilingly answered, "for I can still have hopes. However, it may be that children of my own are not to be, but I do want at least two."
Sam seemed a bit anxious to get off of this topic of conversation, and probably took a long breath before beginning what he very definitely meant as an interruption.
"I stayed on in the home office here until 1935, and then became a traveling auditor for the same company. I resigned this position in 1937 to become manager of the Athens District of the company I'm with now. My territory embraces Elberton, Washington, Union Point, and Covington.
"Our policyholders pay by the week and the dues range from 5¢ to 25¢ per week. The benefits derived from our policies are paid in the event of sickness and death. The sick benefit on a 5¢-per-week policy is $1 per week. As a rule these 5¢ policies are taken out on children. A person who pays 25¢ weekly gets $5 per week in case of illness. Now the rule about this sick-benefit policy is that a person must remain in bed one week, or seven days, before the first claim can be made. In other words, we make no payment for illness that lasts less than seven days.
"Various ruses are undertaken to secure payment of sick benefit claims that don't comply with the rules of our policies. For instance, a sick benefit claim was once filed in our office by a young of women who claimed to have had influenza. A few days later one our agents happened to be collecting on the street where she lives and he saw her going across the street without a wrap on. His report caused a special investigation of the case, and we learned that she hadn't remained in bed for more than three days. Of course her claim was thrown out.
"When we first contact a person of our race about insurance, the first thing they usually tell us is, We can't carry it. We can't make the payments,' ’We follow that up with carefully trained sales talk about the possibilities and the good points featured by our policies, and the next thing they know they have signed on the dotted line, and are keeping their payments up with a reasonable degree of regularity. Of course, we do have a good many policyholders to drop out because of non-payment. We carry them as long as we are permitted to before we cancel the insurance. You'll find about one in a hundred will eventually catch up with all payments after having once gotten in arrears. Whether or not I lose all my commissions on a lapsed policy depends on the amount paid in on it before it is dropped. No medical examination is necessary on policies for $250 or less. If the prospect desires more insurance than that, the examination is imperative.
"The most difficult of all our problems is to prevail on the people of our race to read their policies and understand them. Perhaps this is because most of our race are illiterate, and it's hard for them to comprehend the text even when our agents try to explain it in the simplest form. We issue strict Instructions to each agent to make every endeavor to see that the insured person understands the statements made in the policy.
"Dealing with insurance is a good deal like dealing with the law. A person needn't try to pull something on an agent and get away with it, for the agent is well informed as to his legal status.
"Illustrative of that, I might as well tell you about an experience I had with a young men who came to our office to file an application for a policy on his mother in which he would be the beneficiary. I had to have her signature, and when I sent an agent out to her house to have her sign the application, he found her sick in bed and unable to make her signature. A few days later she was admitted to a hospital and I understand that she hasn't as yet returned home. Of course we rejected that application.
"A number of weeks ago, a young man brought a young woman to my office to apply for a policy on her life. He too desired the policy made out in his favor, that is, he was to be the beneficiary in case of her death. He claimed he was the woman's uncle. Our rules are that the beneficiary, in case of death, must be of blood relation to the insured person, unless it can be proven that there are no living relatives. In that case, the insurance con be mode out in favor of a friend as beneficiary. A few days later a girl, by the name of the one for whom the application for insurance was filed, died. On investigation we learned that the girl who had appeared at our office to apply for the insurance was not the girl who died. She had merely given the name of the sick girl, end the young men was not related to either of the young women. Also, the family of the deceased hardly knew either of the two persons involved in the attempt to defraud our company. We had issued the policy, and the man even employed a lawyer to try to force us to pay the claim. I informed them that I was fully aware of the fact that the policy had been written under false pretenses, and they didn't dare come into court with their claim. The deceased girl had a policy in favor of her mother, and it was duly and cheerfully paid.
"We sometimes have trouble with agents conniving to put over some rather subtle schemes. This doesn't happen often, and we weed out that kind of agent as rapidly as we get on to their tricks. Sometimes when a policyholder decides to drop a policy, the agent will take it over and have the policy changed to make himself or some member of his family the beneficiary, in case the insurance is on some person who is very old or very sick. We usually find it out quite promptly end then we lose no time in dismissing the agent from our service after we have changed the policy to show the name of the original beneficiary. Many a trick like that is tried, and in rare instances they succeed one time, but we never fail to catch up with them in the end, and now we are usually able to spot them in the very beginning of their operations.
"You may be surprised to hear me say it, but we have found that women take to insurance more readily than men do, and they are more systematic and regular about keeping up their payments. As a rule, men don't believe in Insurance. If someone persuades them to take out a policy, they soon forget about it, or give the money for its payment to some member of the family to attend to, and never check up to see if the money is actually being applied to pay those weekly premiums, or if it's being spent on the picture show or something else.”
A few days later I visited Sam at his office. I obeyed the sign on the door, which read, "Don't knock, come in.” However, the door was ajar, and on entering I saw a long table surrounded by chairs in the center of the room and an old-fashioned secretary in one corner. Calenders and placards advertising this insurance company were in evidence on the white-plastered walls, and the woodwork was painted a peculiar shade of yellowish brown.
Through an open door I could see Sam sitting at a desk in his private office. He was typing, and his secretary was busily operating an adding machine.
After I had accepted the proffered chair, Sam continued to study the page he had been typing, and I took advantage of the few moments to notice the room, which was modern in every way, even to the crisp white curtains hanging at the windows that overlooked the street.
Sam got up, put on his coat, and invited me to the reception room, where he very thoughtfully assigned me to a chair at the long table, saying, "that will be a good place for you to write, and it'll be more comfortable.”
"Now, let me see," he haltingly began, "I don't want to be guilty of repetition in what I tell you, and I don't think I told you the motto I made up for my district," He pointed to a placard on the wall which read, "Let us pilot you and yours through life?" "I like that idea," he said, "and I do wish the conscientious objectors, and others who don't believe in insurance, could adopt our attitude and see it the way we do so that their people could be taken care of after they are gone.
"Too many policyholders leave their money for insurance premiums at home with the children or even with the neighbors when they go to work, and then when the agent calls for the payment, no one knows anything about it. After this procedure has gone on until the policy has lapsed, the agent is apt to meet the policyholder on the street and mention the fact which then proves to be an utter surprise to the person who has so trustfully left his business in other hands, A check-up usually reveals that the money has been taken for the personal use of those entrusted with the responsibility of making the payments on the policy.
"Now one of the most peculiar experiences I ever had caused me to do almost a month of investigation before I succeeded in getting the matter straightened out. It was like this; a woman wanted to take out a thousand dollar policy on her husband, end she didn't want him to know anything about it. The husband has a small policy but she wanted to take out a much larger one on him, making herself the sole beneficiary, and she feared that if he knew of it he would object. Of course, it was a requirement that her husband sign the application for this policy and a medical examination was absolutely essential. She was at a loss as to know how this could be arranged. Inasmuch as he had kept up a smell policy with our company over a period of several years, this enabled us to solve her problem. The doctor gave him a free examination, explaining that it was required by his old policy, end the medical blanks were filled for the new policy and attached to the new policy for one thousand dollars. He signed them ell without even noticing any change. That was four years ago, and the husband is still living and he has no knowledge of the policy; the payments on it amount to $11.22 every six months, and his wife takes care of them promptly. I had personally sold him his first policy, and knew the family well, so didn't feel the slightest hesitancy in writing the second policy, for I was confident that he would pass the examination, and that we would collect our payments on this policy for many years to come.
"In another town, we once had a case where a mother was paying the Insurance carried in her favor by her son. After the death of the mother, there was no one who would keep up these payments except an aunt, end she did this on condition that she was made beneficiary. At that time the boy was in jail in another city, so his brother attended to the transfer in compliance with the wishes of the aunt. The boy in jail died, end another relative contested the change of the name of the beneficiary. The relatives of the deceased turned the matter over to a lawyer to investigate the matter. The aunt was perfectly willing to pay the funeral and burial expenses of the deceased, but she was unwilling to divide the balance of the money among the other relatives, none of whom had contributed a cent toward payment of the dues on the policy that she had kept up for a long while. Our company held up payment until a legal decision was rendered that directed us to pay the undertaker's bill, and to turn the balance of the amount due on the policy over to the lawyer who was appointed to divide it equally among the relatives designated by the court.
"Claims for sick benefit bring us more unusual experiences than any other feature of our business. Our policyholders have a doctor fill out and sign their claims for sick benefit, and usually the doctor will tell the patient that he will see that the claim is in properly filed our office. He will carelessly proceed to keep the papers in his own pocket and forget about them. When the patient sees the agent when he comes to collect the next week, he asks about the claim and hears that it has not reached the office. Then there is a howl from the patient when he sees the doctor again. The doctor invariably insists that the claim was promptly filed in the office of the insurance company, but investigation proves that there is no record of receipt of the claim. In order to facilitate matters tie company insists that the doctors retain a duplicate of all papers submitted in connection with claims.
"Now, I want to tell you of an incident of another type. It was told me by one of our agents on his return to this office from a collecting trip, and it struck me as so funny that I think it is worth passing on. He had called on one of his policyholders, a youth who is employed by a white family. The boy was highly agitated when our agent found him on a side porch at the residence where he is employed. Two quart milk bottles, each half full of water were suspended by shoe-lacings, end the boy was trembling as he fingered a huge carving knife.
"'Tom, what are you doing with that carving knife?' our agent asked.
"'Boss, I'se gwine to cut down these here milk bottles, 'cause de ha'nts come last night and tied 'em up here. Dot's a sho sign somebody's gwine die,' Tom declared.
"'How do you know that, Tom?'
"'I knows, 'cause t'ain't nobody but a ha'nt done it, and it's such bad luck, and I'se gwine cut 'em down right now,' was his insistent rejoinder.
"'I wouldn't do that, if I were in your place,' our agent urged, 'without a talk with the lady of the house. Perhaps she put these bottles here for some purpose.' About that time the woman for whom he worked came to the door, and Tom asked, 'See here, Kiss Janie, de ha'nts done tied up dese here milk bottles, and dat's a sho sign of bad luck. I'se gwine to cut ’em down.'
"'Let those milk bottles alone, Tom,' she ordered. "'Ha'nts had nothing to do with this. My boys bought those laces for their boots and they were too short, so they tied the laces to those bottles of water to weight them down and stretch them.'
"'Now, Miss Janie, is dat de truth" Tom cried, 'I sho thought ha'nts had tuk and done it. Zell, I sho am glad 'twon't no ha'nts.'
"My wife end I have our membership in the Baptist Church end attend Sunday School and preaching services there every Sunday. My church letter was transferred here from where I originally joined, and I was baptized in South Carolina. My wife joined the church here in Athens. We try to live good Christian lives, and we don’t think we have many bed habits. At least we don't touch liquor, and neither of us smokes. We endeavor to be good, honest, straightforward citizens, and we desire the friendship and best wishes of our white citizens. Not everyone realizes that we Negroes can't live without our white people, any more than the white people can live without us. I believe that the two races were put here with definite obligations toward each other.
"No, mam, we don't own our home, end we rent our office space in this building too. As I see it now, the insurance business is fast becoming the leading business operated by members of our race, and if my wife and I continue to prosper, we hope to be able to buy a nice home in the near future.
"Now, Miss, I believe that I have told you all that seems to me to be of any importance or interest. Giving you my story has been a pleasure, and I hope that it, will prove of sufficient interest to serve the purpose for which you desire it."
I thanked him end was leaving the office when several other Negroes entered. As I walked out the door I heard them telling about a funeral that was to be held at three-thirty that afternoon. I did not wait to learn how much the magnitude of the final obsequies might depend on the status of the insurance policy.