Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
HENRY ELLIOTT KETCHIN
(white)
78 YEARS OLD
Henry Elliott Ketchin, an influential citizen of Winnsboro, resides at #1 Evans Street. He and his wife and their youngest son, H. E., Jr., and his wife occupy the home. Mr. Ketchin is of medium height and inclined to corpulency. He is notable for his church work, as teacher of the ladies' Bible class of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church in Winnsboro.
"My grandfather, Thomas Ketchin, was born in the village of Howgate, Midlothain County, Scotland, on March 8, 1786. At the age of seventeen, he entered Edinburg University. He spent three sessions there, from whence he became a student of theology in Dèvinity Hall. Later, on examination, he was granted a license to preach the Gospel.
"He was appointed by the Synod to go to Nova Scotia. He landed at Halifax, but, because of the rigor of the climate, he went on to New York; thence to Philadelphia, where he was ordained to the pastorate in December 1820. From Philadelphia, he moved to Shiloh, Sumter County, South Carolina; he was installed there as pastor in 1821. His next call was to "Old Brick Church" in Winnsboro.
"His first wife was Mary McIlwaine; his second, Margaret Beaty. Some of the descendants of the first marriage have played an important part in the history of the State.
"Two of his daughters married Cathcarts, who, because of their hostile views on slavery, moved to Illinois. Their descendants fought in the Union army at the time of the War Between the States. My father, Robert S. Ketchin, and his brother, James, were soldiers of the Confederacy. In correspondence between the families about this time, it was asserted on both sides that kinship of blood would be no cause for withholding the pull of the musket trigger should they catch sight of one another on the battlefield.
"My uncle James, who was killed at Fort Harrison, was a lieutenant of his company. My Aunt Tirzah married Henry L. Elliott. She is the ancestress of many prominent and progressive residents of the Elliott name in Winnsboro, Columbia, Washington, and Haw York City. My father, Robert S. Ketchin, married Priscilla Boyd. From this union was born Thomas Hoye Ketchin, a very successful business man. He was an outstanding figure in state and county politics. At the time of his death, he was head of the Ketchin Mercantile Co., president of the Merchants & Planters Bank, and State senator. My sister, Prisoilla Boyd, Married The Reverend McElwee Ross, of McKeesport, Pennsylvania. My sister, Samuella, married The Reverend Boyce Greer, of Camden, New Jersey. Both of those sisters are now dead. My brother, Robert S., named for Father, lived to manhood, but ho remained a bachelor until his death. I am the only child of that union now living.
"My father fought in the battle of Malvern Hill. He never coased to think of the hardships endured in that engagement. Something of the kind was in his mind when, after the war, he called our home Malvern Hill. The spot was the former home site of General Richard Winn. Father had difficulty in acquiring and paying for the property, owing to some defect of title, an unexpected interest of some mortgagor.
"I was born in the Malvern Hill home, April 23, 1860, and was just a kid when the Yankees made their entry into the town in February, 1865. I was kept pretty close to mother during their stay here, but I remember seeing the flames and smoke from the burning homes and buildings, especially from St. John's Episcopal Church. The latter part of February, 1865, was a time never to be forgotten. The soldiers of Sherman swept in, insulted women, robbed homes, pillaged the countryside, and left behind them ashes, hunger, desolation, and a despairing population. My mother lifted me up to the west window of our room to let me see the flames of the burning Episcopal Church and to the south window to see the conflagrations going on in the southern part of the town.
"Why did they not burn our home? It was this way. Our home was a large two-story house, containing twenty-two rooms. Colonel Menden chose it as quarters for himself and staff. He told mother that she could take her children and household servants upstairs and rest in security, that he would see that the house was not burned, as long as he occupied the lower story. Colonel Menden kept sentinels stationed about our home, day and night, to prevent its destruction. The day he was leaving, a bunch of Yankee soldiers appeared with an axe and stuck the blade of it into the corner of the house. The weatherboarding at this point was all heart long-leaf-pine lumber. They applied the torch, and it took fire before the sentinels arrived and made known the wishes of Colonel Menden. The fire was extinguished as soon as his wishes became known. The dent or gash where the axe had been remained on the building many years. Unfortunately, the home burned down years afterward.
"I first went to school to Mrs. Josiah J. O'Bear. Mr. O'Bear was rector of St. John's Episcopal Church. To supplement his salary, he, his wife, and daughter, Emily, taught a private school. Here I learned my A B C's, how to spell, and how to read. My next teacher was Miss May Blain, who taught in the old ramshackle house in the southwest end of the town. Afterwards, my schooling continued and ended at Mt. Zion Institute. Those in charge of the teaching were Adolphus Woodward, Mr. Farrow, M. C. Robertson, Mr. Clarkson, Captain M. W. Dwight, and Professor R. Means Davis. Mr. Farrow was in charge of the general discipline and the military drill and exercise of the boys. We were very proud of our brass buttons and gray uniforms. T. K. Elliott was captain of the company. The only time I ever saw General R. E. Lee was when he passed through Winnsboro on a train. We boys were marched, as a company, from Mt. Zion to the depot. General Lee appeared on the platform of the rear coach and addressed us. It was drizzling rain, and he expressed regret that we would get our brass buttons tarnished in the effort to see and pay him an honor and a courtesy. I think he had the noblest countenance I have ever looked upon.
"Our school hours were from 8:30 a. m. to 2 p. m. There was an intermission of one hour every day. The Friday afternoon sessions were devoted to declamations and spelling bees. My favorite declamations were: Marco Bozarris and Brutus' address to the Romans. There were quite a number of boarding pupils in the school, from different parts of the county and state. These found lodging in the homes of Winnsboro. Under Professor Dolph Woodward, the school acquired quite a reputation, which was maintained under his successers. Professor R. Means Davis converted it into the first graded school in the State, outside of the city of Charleston. There were quite a number of boys attending Mt. Zion between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one years.
"Professor Woodward was frail; Professor Farrow was small; and Professor M. C. Robertson was robust and as active as a tiger. I recollect a boy, Simon Lumpkin, was called up for a whipping on one occasion. He was large and tough. He fought Professor Woodward, and he would have worsted him had not Professor M. C. Robertson took a hand in the fight. They then administered a terrific thrashing to Lumpkin, but Lumpkin gained sympathy and prestige among the student body for his stout resistance. I remember Jimmie Lyles was a mischievous boy, too. He got a whipping nearly every day. He was the father of Mrs. DuBose Ellison, of Winnsboro, and Mesdames will and Names Mobley, of Columbia. The lady teachers were Miss Mag Blair, Mrs. Ella Gooding, and Miss Emily O'Bear. I studied Latin, French, and mathematics. This course was $60.00 peryyear. I was graduated from Mt. Zion in 1880.
"On November 29, 1899, I married Ella Cathcart, the daughter of a large planter of Fairfield County. Our children are: (1) Dr. Samuel Cathcart, a practitioner in Louisville, Kentucky. (2) Annie, who is married to D. S. Murph, an attorney at law, Washington, D. C. (3) Robert McElwain, druggist.(4) Priscilla, who is married to Dr. William Norris, Baltimore, Maryland. (8) Ella Cathcart, who has a position at Washington, D. c. (6) Margaret, time of Walter C. Cary, District Attorney, Greenville, Tennessee. (7)H. E., Jr., an attorney at law, Winnsboro, South Carolina. He was recently married to Miss Baldwin of Durham, North Carolina.
"I am an elder in the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church at Winnsboro and a teacher of the ladies' Bible class. I have retired from active business, but am still secretary and treasurer of the Partners Mutual Fire Insurance Co., of Fairfield County.
"You asked about the marked changes that I see in Winnsboro since boyhood? 1st. There was only one market in town. On the days they had fresh beef, the butcher rang a bell about every hour to notify the people of fresh beef for sale. Now there are as many as six places where you can get beef at any time, every day, Sunday not excepted.
"2nd. The town had a lamp lighter who filled the street lamps with kerosene oil once a day, lighted then at dusk, and put them out at daybreak. Now we have electric lights.
"3rd. We had nineteen barrooms, where whiskey could be bought at 15 cents a drink or $1.50 per gallon. Now we have three retail shops, where you can get a half pint for 50 cents or a gallon for $8.00, but it cannot be drunk on the premises.
"4th. In the old days, the grocery stores were the nastiest places in town. Barrels of molasses were kept in the rear on a raised platform. The bungs jutted out from the platform, a spigot in every bung, from which molasses was drawn into quart, pint, and half-gallon tin pots and poured into the customer's jug through a tin funnel. Around the barrels, tin pots, and funnels, flies swarmed and buzzed all day long. Generally in this same part of the store was a great pile of salted sides of bacon, the pieces heaped up nearly to the ceiling, with no covering nor screens as a protection from the flies. Now such stores are among the neatest places in town.
"5th. Each merchant or storekeeper had a little plank shack, a privy, behind the store. This was another resort for flies! Each home had just such an unsanitary privy. There were no town boards of health and no inspectors of such places. Houses were not screened against mosquitoes! Is it a wonder that there were so many cases of malaria and typhoid? We now have a Board of Health and an adequate sewerage system.
"I often meditate upon what my father and I would have said and done had we.
We strolled out into the Fortune Part woods on Sabbath evening, as we were so accustomed to do then, and a radio had been set up in a tree and had suddenly turned on in our hearing. Suppose at the same time an aeroplane had appeared in the sky and made a tail spin in our view? We would have thought Judgment Day had come. What he might have done, I don't know, but, as for me, I would have made a bee line for home and mother.
"Our streets were almost impassable. Now they are paved and lit up at night with electric lamps.
"How do I account for so much eroded land in Fairfield? The system of slavery, absentee ownership of lands, and unscientific methods of cultivation. An owner of many slaves would fell a part of a forest for a field. He would plant and cultivate this field for a few years, having no thought for its preservation, as there were many more acres untouched that could be used when the present field fell off in its productiveness. When that time arrived, he again waded into the original timber lands, made a new-ground field, and abandoned the old land to the ravages of winds and waters. It cost less to make new fields under the slavery system of labor than to terrace cleared hillsides. The ditching and irrigation of bottom land took too much time.
"According to an article written by Fitz McMaster, the population of Fairfield, in 1860, consisted of 6,373 white people and 15,738 Negroes. At this time, Fairfield was no place for a poor white man. The rich planter would not associate with him, and he could not associate with the Negro. As a result, these small farmers moved to Alabama, Mississippi, and Texas.
"After the war, there was land but no money, and labor had become hired labor instead of slave labor. Cotton was the only cash or ready money crop. There was no credit. A lien law was devised to gain credit for the farmer. Under this system, credit could be gotten, but it was based on the amount of lint cotton the farm could produce. The landlord had a lien for the rent of the land, and the merchant had a lien for the supplies furnished to make the crop. The merchant graded, classified, and set the price of the cotton. Could a tenant, usually a Negro, be in a more hopeless situation? Goods bought by him from the white merchant had 25 percent added to the cash price. Hence arose the trite saying which grew out of the settlement at harvest time.
'Naught is naught,
And figger is a figger,
All for the white man
And none for the nigger!
"Soon the elegance and aristocracy of society was transferred from the planters of the country to the merchants of the towns and cities. The old land owners were forced to waive their land rents to the supply merchants, to furnish the tenants on the land. Unaccustomed to changed conditions and not inured to manual toil, the old gentry were compelled to mortgage their land. Unable to meet even the 10 percent compound interest which was legal in those days, their lands went to the block and were bought in by the supply merchants. These merchants placed Negroes on one-horse farms, sold each of them a mule and vagon at the 25 percent time prices and furnished him a lien for to the impoverishment of the old aristocracy. Under this system, the good earth washed away.
"It doesn't speak well for the sagacity of our people nor the intelligence of former administrations of the National Government. Though this problem of erosion was recognized, nothing was done to solve it until the coming in of the Roosevelt administration. Since that time, certain methods have been put into practice to conserve and improve mother earth's strength and productiveness.
"I will close my remarks on the subject of the why and the wherefore of our gullies and ravines by saying that three fourths of the country's area is subject to calamitous but preventable erosion. We should emphasise this if our newspapers in our schools, and at farmer's meetings, because the preliminary and most important work of soil conservation is to awaken the minds of our citizens to the necessity of taking definite and immediate action upon the cancerous cause and growth of soil erosion.
"May I close this interview with an amusing incident of my boyhood? While attending school in my fourteenth year, I clerked in a dry goods store in the afternoons and all day on Saturdays. One day a lady came into the store, and it became my privilege to wait on her. After purchasing several articles, she asked that I show her some ladies' garters. We had none, but did have a supply of white elastic, which could be made to serve the purpose. I got the material down and displayed it before her. I called in all my powers of arguments and persuasion to effect the sale, going to the extend of saying that Mrs. Moultrie Dwight wore that kind of garters and expressed her great satisfaction with them. I effected the sale.
"Now Captain Moultrie Dwight was a member of the firm for which I was working. I had no idea that anyone other than the lady customer had been listening to my sales talk. Several days afterward, Captain Dwight and Captain Isaac N. Withers called me back into the accounting room and asked me to take a seat. Captain Dwight looked at me very seriously and said: 'Elliott, I want to know how, in the name of God, you know so much about my wife's underwear?' Taken by surprise, I vowed I knew nothing about her underwear, had never thought of it. whereupon, he said: 'Elliott, you are lying. Sitting in the office alone the other day, I heard you minutely describe just the kind of elastic garters By wife wears. I went home and told my wife that you described even the whiteness of her knees!' Captain Withers, the other member of the firm, asked, 'Did she get mad, Captain?' 'Why no! Confound it, she praised the boy and declared we ought to raise his salary!' He then slapped me on the shoulder and pushed me out of the office. I was a bewildered but a very happy boy."
