May 19, 1939
Mrs. M. N. Campbell (white)
110 M. Alexander Street
Charlotte, M. C.
Textile worker
Mary Brown, writer
Mary Northrop, reviser
Lead to Work.
Original Names	Changed Names
Mrs. Campbell	Mrs. McDonald
Danville, Virginia	Exum
Millard	Wayte
Dan River Cotton Mill	Winding River Cotton Mill
Rock Hill, South Carolina	Delano, South Carolina
Highland Park #1	Maryville Milla #1
Carrie	Hattie
East 5th Street	South Third Street
"Come on in," Mrs. McDonald said. "I'm not feelin' so well. I'm havin' trouble with my kidney.“
After we were seated in her living room I said, "I noticed you spoke as if you had only one kidney. Can it be that you are working in the mill every day in that condition?"
"Didn't you know one of my kidneys was tuck out years ago? The doctor said I would have to be awful keerful what I eat or I wouldn't be livin' much longer."
About that time a small boy ran in and she grabbed him by the arm. "I declare to goodness," she said. "If you ain't gone and wet your breeches again! You're old enough to know better than that. Granny hates to whup you, but it looks like I got to 'fore you'll ever quit.
"That's my little grandson. His mother married a sorry, good for nothin' man and he left her and that sweet child. I can't see to save my life how he could do such a thing. Now I got to take keer of him and his mother. She can't find nothin' to do.
"Well, I have had a hard time all my life. I was raised on a farm. Daddy owned his farm but it was so pore we couldn't raise much 'cept our meat and flour. Ma was sick all the time. Daddy died and left her with 'leven children. I had one sister older'n me and we had the other nine to raise. The winters were colder than they are now. I used to get up when the 'fore-day train run to feed and water the hogs. Sometimes I'd come in and my dress would be frozen where the water had sloshed outen the bucket on it.
"Back in them days there wets no such thing as a window screen, and in Ma's last days I used to sit by her bed and fan flies with a long stick with paper through it. She died when I was fifteen years old. There was a barber in the neighborhood that had been waitin' on me so I decided I'd marry him. I had lowed him 'fore Ma died.
He give all the rest of us a home too. You see, us children owned the place but he brought in the rations.
"That was the first happiness I saw. We had ten children, but I lost six of 'em. Then he sickened and died too when my baby was only thirteen months old.
"I didn't know what to do. I had all them children and nobody to help me feed and clothe 'em. My sister from Exam, Virginia, come to the buryin' and after Wayte was laid away she begged me to go home with her. I didn't want to leave home but there won't nothin' for me to do there so I went to Exum and got a job in the Windin' River Cotton Mill in the spinning room.
"Folks talk about long hours now but they don't know nothin' 'bout long hours. I would get up at half past four o'clock in the mornin's and get ready to go to work at six. A lot of times I would have the children's wash-in' on the line before I left.
“They paid by the day to learn, then ten cents a side. I got so I could run ten aides and made a dollar a day. Wages were low in them days but I could buy meat at eight or nine cents a pound and flour for a cent a pound. Why, I use-ta buy three big head of collards for five cents. And you didn't buy dresses ready made then, you went to the store and bought your calico and made your dresses. I could get two dresses for fifty cents, and they were pretty too. My money use-ta go twice as far as it does now.
“I moved back to Delano, South Carolina, and worked in Maryville Mills #1 for twenty years. The boss said I was the beat spinner in the mill. I run twenty sides over there. Work run good in them days. You don't see it that way now.
"My daughters growed up and were havin' the young men call on them. A fellow from up North was courtin' my oldest girl. I told her she had better watch them Yankees, but, girl-like, she married him--to her sorrow. He was a member of the Roman Catholic Church and she left her church and joined his'n. By youngest daughter, Hattie, married and had three children, but she and her husband fell out so they divorced. One evenin' she come in with my oldest daughter's husband and he throwed the papers on the table and said, 'I married this one in my right name. I wasn't never married to the other one.' I was mad but there was nothin' I could do about it. He took Hattie up North, lived with her four years--that's their child over there playin'--and then left her. I had to go to the pore man's bank and borrow fifty dollars to get 'em home. I'm payin' it back a dollar a week.
"She has tried every place to get work but can't find none. She sold furniture polish as long as the man was in town but that didn't last long. She got $2.50 a day and we had to pay a woman $5 a week to keep the baby. Hattie caught so much cold I told her just to stay home and mind the baby and I'd try to provide for us.
"I moved into one of them housekeepin' rooms on South Third street. Cooked, eat, and slept in one room, and it had just one window. The landlady was one of these "Christian" women. You know the kind. Goes to church on Sunday and is mean as the devil durin’ the week. She charged me $18.50 a month for that one room. Why, the doctor told me I'd die if I didn't get out of that place. For a dollar and a half more I got this five-room apartment, but I'm goin' to move from here because when you come in the hall downstairs you can smell whiskey. It's no fitten place to raise a child.
"Set still till I run and put on a dress. I got to get ready to go to work." I played with the baby until Mrs. McDonald returned.
"I go to work at three o'clock and work till 'leven. All I had to tell 'em out there at Maryville Mills #5 was that I had worked for the same company at Delano for twenty years, but work is a let different now than it was when I was there. The hours are shorter, it's true, but you have to work harder and rations cost more. Two years ago we had only 80 spindles to a side and it won't speeded up. Since they got the stretchout system they have put 160 spindles to the side and it's speeded up until I never catch up, and I still run 10 sides and get mighty little more money. I use-ta get $9 a week and run 800 spindles. Now I run 1600 spindles and get $12.80 if I make full payroll. With all the cleanin' up I have to do here, I have to stay there over time to come even.
"When they started the stretchout down there a lot of 'em joined the union and struck, but I don't believe in unions in the South because the people won't stick together. When the rest struck I just stayed on and worked because I couldn’t afford to lose the time, and the rest were mighty glad to git back to work. They were starved almost to death and they didn’t gain one thing by sticking. Just lost all that time and made the head men mad.
“I’m so glad I can work. I’ll soon be 59 years old. So many people think I’m too old to go to the mill and work, but I keep busy all the time and my troubles don’t worry me like they would if I was just a-settin' 'round doin' nothin'. Yes, when I quit work I want my time on this earth to be short. And I'm ready to go when my time comes." but I'm goin' to move from here because when you come in the hall downstairs you can smell whiskey. It's no fitten place to raise a child.
"Set still till I run and put on a dress. I got to get ready to go to work." I played with the baby until Mrs. McDonald returned.
"I go to work at three o'clock and work till 'leven. All I had to tell 'em out there at Maryville Mills #5 was that I had worked for the same company at Delano for twenty years, but work is a lot different now than it was when I was there. The hours are shorter, it's true, but you have to work harder and rations cost more. Two years ago we had only 80 spindles to a side and it won't speeded up. Since they got the stretchout system they have put 160 spindles to the side and it's speeded up until I never catch up, and I still run 10 sides and get mighty little more money. I use-ta get $9 a week and run 800 spindles. Now I run 1600 spindles and get $12.80 if I make full payroll. With all the cleanin' up I have to do here, I have to stay there over time to come even.
"When they started the stretchout down there a lot of 'em joined the union and struck, but I don't believe in unions in the South because the people won't stick together. When the rest struck I just stayed on and worked because I couldn't afford to lose the time, and the rest were mighty glad to git back to work. They were starved almost to death and they didn't gain one thing by sticking. Just lost all that time and made the head men mad.
"I'm so glad I can work. I'll soon be 59 years old. So many people think I'm too old to go to the mill and work, but I keep busy all the time and my troubles don't worry me like they would if I was just a-settin' ’round doin' nothin'. Yes, when I quit work I want my time on this earth to be short. And I'm ready to go when my time comes."
