Dr. Henrietta Veltman
Paris, Tennessee
January 28, 1939
R. C.
PAY OR NO PAY
Dr. Veltman drew the stethoscope cord over her head, placed the instrument on her desk. She wore a trimly tailored dark skirt and spotless white shirt waist. Her bobbed silver gray hair was combed close to her head.
"The one thing men have more common sense about than women is dressing," she stated emphatically. "I don't have time to iron ruffles and frills going and coming as much as I do. A country doctor's out all night in all sorts of weather and in all sorts of places. Dressing sensible fits my job better than being tricked out like the women here in Paris think a lady ought to dress.
"I always did hate long hair. I spent my childhood trying to get it cut short to suit me. The family would make me let it grow out. But when I started out doctoring here I got it cut off for keeps. Bobbed haired women were considered scandalous thirty years ago. I gave folks two things to talk about all at one time. A woman doctoring and, worse, a woman dressing like a man -- short hair and all. But you know how a Dutchman is. It's going to take more than gossip to make one mend his ways."
She laughed. "That goes for a Dutchwoman as well!
"My mother and father were born and reared in Holland. A doctor told Papa he had tuberculosis. That the low damp climate of Holland would end up by killing him. Getting a chance to travel suited Papa to a T. He brought his young wife to America and that was just the beginning of his roving. He'd buy a small house and some land and start an orchard and fix up the place. Then the moving fever would strike him and he'd be off again. My two older sisters were born in New Jersey. The next one in Virginia. Then the Veltman family shifted to Lincoln, Nebraska, and I was born there. Then we moved to Michigan. My youngest sister was born there.
"Finally the family packed up, left the north, and came down to Tennessee. We settled in a little cross road town about fifteen miles from here. Papa started a blacksmith shop there, but after a while he moved up here to Paris. Then Mama set her foot down on moving. She told Papa the next move she was staying at home."
Dr. Veltman took a fresh linen handkerchief from her waist pocket, ran it over her red face.
"I guess Papa's case of tuberculosis was an arrested one. He was ninety-six years old when he died last October. Mama died when I was in the senior year of high school here in Paris. It was not long before Papa married again. My two older sisters both married. And the youngest girl and I made our home with them. I don't even remember when the first desire to be a doctor entered my head. But it got in there some way and wouldn't get out. The rest of the girls in the family married sooner or later and seemed perfectly content. As for me -- I never could abide a man. I didn't want to marry. I didn't want to be a business woman, either. I tried typing and shorthand and gave it up. I wanted to be a doctor. There were no funds for me to study. Papa never gave me a cent in his life after he married again.
"I thought about it a long time and I finally decided to try it in spite of the fact that all my older friends seemed to think I was 'going wrong.' I borrowed part of the money. My sisters and relatives helped me out with the rest. The medical schools in Tennessee didn't admit women then. So I entered the one closest to home that would take me in and that was the medical college in Louisville, Kentucky. It was hard going the first year. I got so homesick I thought maybe after all it would be wiser to be a lady instead of a doctor. But I stuck it out.
During vacation I stayed in a doctor's office and nursed in the City Hospital there. The ward where I nursed was filled with typhoid fever patients. I'd been there only a short time when I developed typhoid fever. The best thing about that was short hair again. It had always been in good style to crop your hair in typhoid. The family didn't say a word about my hair when I was sent home to recuperate."
Again Dr. Veltman laughed.
"Before I got back to school the medical schools of Louisville had consolidated. The new ruling cut out women students. I had to shift to Chicago for my last year's work. The school had clinics at Cook County Hospital and at the Frances Willard Hospital. I took the Tennessee State Board Examination for doctors when I was a Junior and passed. I finished my work for my degree and graduated in 1910. Then I started practice of medicine in Paris in June of that year."
Dr. Veltman flecked a spot of soot off the full bosom of her starched waist with a short plump finger.
"Things look all rosy when you're fresh from school. I thought the hardest part of doctoring was back of me. Old Dr. Abernathy didn't tell me half what was ahead of me when he tried to keep me from being a doctor. He kept saying, 'It's just not a lady-like thing for a girl, Henrietta.' Well, a woman doctor soon finds out that ethics among medical men is something that's boasted of but not practiced. A few of the doctors have tolerated me. Most of them have knifed me at every turn. But I stuck it out, and I'm glad. I did.
"Some people say I've delivered more babies than any doctor in Henry County. I've been too busy at it ever to stop and count up. Well, there are a lot of healthy youngsters around here that wouldn't know what a regular delivery room looked like if they could remember the first thing they opened their eyes on in this world. No extra surgeon or half dozen internes and nurses waiting for their first squaw', either. A country doctor has a lot of experiences a city medical man misses. When I write that book I'm always saying I am going to write -- 'Being a Country Doctor' -- it's going to be hard not to let the maternity chapter be a volume in itself. And the fee cases won't make near as good reading as those I knew ahead of time I was not going to get a penny for.
"About three years ago there was a bunch of gypsies camping out on old Murry Road about three miles from Paris. About the middle of the night I got a call to go to the camp. I didn't like to go alone so I drove by for my Negro maid, Anna May. Anna May's husband went, too, and stayed in the car while Anna May and I went to the tent to officiate. The night was dark as pitch. The only light we had was my big flash light and an old smoky lantern of the gypsies. Five or six jabbering gypsy women were standing at the door of the tent. They pointed me to the patient.
"A woman was squatting in the center of the tent floor. On examination I found her to be a labor case. Do you know, she refused the cholorform I offered to ease her misery! But she was willing enough to take the medicine I suggested to hasten the delivery. Once the medicine was down I couldn't persuade her to get in bed. When the babies came -- twins, little things, weighing about four and a half pounds and premature -- she was still squatting.
"The women in the tent quacked like a bunch of ducks when the first baby appeared. One of them grabbed a pitcher of cold water and dashed it on the baby. 'Don't do that!' I shouted, 'Get a pan of warm water.' But the same thing happened when the second child was born. After the afterbirth was removed, the gypsy women fixed the bed for my patient. The mother of the twins removed the five skirts she wore and got in the bed.
"The babies were premature -- no preparation had been made for them. Anna May was the only help I had. The gypsy women refused to touch the new born babies. One of them, a young girl, shook her head in horror and threw up her hands, 'No, no, I not married, I not touch.' While I bathed and fixed the navel bands on the two pitiful little specimens, the gypsy women busied themselves with storing the afterbirth under the mother's pillow. They took a great fancy to my forceps, refused to part with them until the next morning. I found the mother and the twins doing nicely when I came back the next day for my instruments. The same crowd of gypsies camped out there on Murry Road last year. The twins were a very much alive part of the camp. One was a normal child but the other was underweight.
"People are always going to be having babies. Doesn't matter what's their race or color. Black or white if a doctor hears about what's going to happen I don't think it's going to hurt his reputation to help the women out -- pay or no pay.
"On Christmas Eve night, just when I'd rather have been home helping with the Christmas excitement, Anna May called me to come down to Buzzard Roost, the Negro settlement. A Negro girl of fourteen had given birth to a baby at six o'clock and they hadn't done a thing for the mother or the child. Not either one of the Negro doctors in town would take the case. It was the girl's second baby. The first is a pretty child, almost white. Belongs to a CCC boy, they say. I couldn't tell whether the new baby is going to be black or white.
"When I got to Buzzard Roost what I found was a three hour old baby and a mother on the filthiest old bed I ever saw. There was an old stove in the room but no fire. A lot of wet coal had been put in and killed what fire was started. No hot water, no clean rags, no clothes. I did the best I could, which wasn't a very professional best. The next morning I talked the Welfare folks out of a layette and a few clean covers for the mother.
"I guess it would be hard for a person that's had as much to do with babies as I have not to love them. And I do. Had to have some of my own even though I never did get around to marrying. Never did like to have to depend on a man for anything anyway. Just after the war when they were asking folks to adopt war orphans I followed the style of the day -- for once. I was determined to get me a little girl.
"Well, I got a double dose of my heart's desire. The matron of the Tennessee Orphanage sent me three months old twin girls on approval. And I approved. I named them Gloria and Joy because that's just the way I felt when I realized they were mine to keep. They were both half sick when they came to me, with rickets and fever. Well, I wish you could see them now. Eighteen years old and seniors in high school. They're perfect specimens of health. Mrs. Postlethwaite, my nurse, helped me with the children. I had to have help. Doctoring and raising a family is more than enough to keep two women busy. Well, we got along so well with the girls that I adopted a little boy, too. I got Keith when he was two months old and he's nine now. I had my heart set on a red-headed boy, but when the orphanage sent Keith I just passed up the color requirement. I haven't any high and mighty ambitions for my children. I have tried to give them healthy bodies, sound minds, good morals, and good educational backgrounds. As bad as collections are and as much of my practice as is done without fees, I've had enough to give them good advantages.
"I'm a great stickler for education. You hear a lot of talk now about socialized medicine -- whatever that may mean. But the masses need education more than free medicine. Socialized medicine, socialized anything else would be all right if it really reached the needy. But it doesn't. The politicians and their friends get the bag. Whenever they set up these county health units the eligibles in the county don't get the positions. The doctor and his corps are imported from somewhere else. Always they're friends of some politician who has a pull.
"You've got to educate the public before health conditions can be improved. Why, the people who need what free aid the State has to offer haven't brains enough to take it. Tennessee gives free treatments for syphilis. But can you get those who have it to take it? Not in one case out of a hundred.
"This morning a little girl -- no more than a little girl -- but the mother of a baby came to my office. Both she and the child she had in her arms have syphilis. The baby is two years old and can't walk yet. Another child is on the way. The mother had heard about free treatments and came. She lives far out in the country and has to walk to Paris. I doubt if she will be back when the next shot's due. One treatment isn't going to do much toward protecting the unborn child. You couldn't drag that low down husband that gave the two of them the disease up here for a treatment. Even if he knows it doesn't cost a penny. Just a plain defective. I advocate sterilization of defectives. It would stamp out a lot of evils. And I hope to live to see the day when they'll pass a law to require a blood test before issuing a marriage license.
"Well, old Dr. Abernathy told the truth when he said doctoring wasn't lady like. That is, if you're afraid to try to correct things people don't talk about in polite conversation. But if I had my time to go over, I'm afraid I'd go wrong again. I'd be a doctor all over again. A country one, too."