Another version of "A Plain Country Doctor", entitled "A Small Town Doctor", can be found on pages 154A-177. In two deleted versions, entitled "I'm Just a Plain Country Doctor", additional information is given, Line fifteen on page 803 and line two on page 812 read: "Doctor somp'n's wrong" and "but truthfully". The name of the interviewer, Lawrence Evans, the area the interviewer worked in, Baldwin County, and the place of the interview, Foley, Alabama, appear on the top of page 801C. The following notes are written on the same page: "This is the Doctor's story which was revised. W.T.C.," "Change names and type", and "Revised by Jack Kytle and Luther Clark." On the last page is Lawrence Evans's signature and the notation (in the bottom left hand corner), 2/16/39/S.J. Otherwise the material in these deleted versions is identical with material in the life history included here.
Places and persons as they appear in "A Plain Country Doctor"	Places and persons as they appear in "I'm Just A Plain Country Doctor"
Dr. Clark	Dr. Abernethy
Evening Herald	Montgomery Advertiser
University	University of Alabama
various camps	various camps, including Pike, Beauregard, Dix, Ogelthorpe, and Merritt
Doc Clark	Doc Ab
Susan Jenks	Susan Simpson
Dr. Waters	Dr. Welch
Carter	Foley
Lucille West	Lucille Black
Ft. Deposit	Stimson
Mulder County	Baldwin County
Herbert	Floyd
Tucker	Miflin
Mary Nell	Mary
Mildred Woods	Mildred Mason
Foley, Alabama
A PLAIN COUNTRY DOCTOR
"Another baby coming," called Doc to his assistant as he replaced the telephone receiver.
"Everything's ready, doctor," she said, handing him a bulky little black bag.
Doc reached for his hat and turned to me.
"Look, you come along," he said; "We can talk on the way."
"Let me stop get a magazine to read while you're working."
"You won't need it; you're going to help me."
When we were in the car Doc continued, "You know, I believe I remember this patient. I think I came out here nine years ago. It was one of the toughest obstetrical cases I ever had; a case of version. That's where the child's head fails to make the proper passage, and the feet and head are exactly backwards. The woman had pains and convulsions for eleven hours. I thought I was going to lose them both. I finally failed to get the head right and had to deliver the infant feet first with forceps. Everything was wrong; but they both did fine. I think this is the same woman, living in the same turpentine camp."
He reached a straight stretch on the sandy road and pressed harder on the accelerator.
"Look, Dr. Clark," I said, clinging to the door handle, let's start at the beginning and talk about what has happened during your life."
"Sure but there's nothing terrific, I reckon," he replied. "I am the son of a Methodist preacher. The male members of our family have see-sawed back and. forth between the ministry and medicine as far back as the record goes, even when my family lived in Scotland. We've lived in the South for six generations.
"I reckon I always wanted to be a doctor. When I was a boy I was always giving sick animals medicine and cutting into them if they didn't get well. I took two years of pre-med work at Southern Univer¬sity. But when I got out of there, I didn't know how I could go ahead with my medical studies. You know how poor preachers are.
"So to get money for the rest of my course, I went to work in the circulation department of the Evening Herald. Then my grandfather died, and I went home for the funeral. There, the subject of my train¬ing was discussed. Well, they all said it was just too bad; all except my bachelor uncle Will who was a doctor and owned a drug store at Fitzgerald. He made me a proposition to come and live with him, work in his store in the summer, and go to school in winter.
"I finished at the University in 1916 and went back to Fitzgerald to help Uncle Will. I felt that I could begin paying him back; and at the same time be getting a little training as an intern.
"The Government solved the problem of accredited hospital intern¬ship, because the World War came along and all young doctors were admitted as first lieutenants in the Army. Some of them were given full credit for internship, and I was one of the fortunate ones. I spent two years in various camps, including some base camps and spike camps. I've forgotten some of the camps now; but I had plenty of experience with men's diseases.
He slowed the motor as we approached a group of shanties. "Must be the place here," he said, "We'll stop and see."
We heard a shriek inside one of the shanties, and he immediately cut off the motor.
"This is it, all right," he said. "Come on in," "Well, look, Doc Clark," I protested. "I believe I'll just wait out here. I can hear enough without going in."
"Come on -- come on!," he said with a flash of impatience, A fat Negro woman met us at the door. Four Negro children, apparently between the ages of three and seven, were scattered around the filthy room. A three-legged stool was beside the bed, where the midwife had been sitting. She had sent her man two miles to telephone, and we had arrived before his return.
"Doctor, somethin's wrong," said the midwife, "Ah can't do no good. You remembers this woman; she's Susan Jenks."
"Yes," the doctor said, "I remember attending her. How many has she had since?"
"Well, ah's delivered five, doctah, and you done brought de fust one."
Doctor Clark went over to the groaning woman. "This seems to be another ease of version." After an examination he turned to me and said; "very similar to the other one I was telling you about. This should be less difficult. The fact that several children have been born since then makes it easier for her now.
"Get me some clean cloths -- clean, now," he ordered the midwife. "and put some water on that stove to boil; plenty of it."
The doctor removed his coat, turned the lining out, and laid his instruments on it. When the water was boiling he told me to put all the instruments in the pan. He took a hyperdermic needle with a long point and jabbed it in the woman's arm. I tried to see the vein under her thick black skin but could not. All I could do was help him hold her arm. The patient writhed and groaned until the anaesthetic took effect. She looked silently at the doctor through glazed eyes.
He began another examination just as she had more convulsions.
The doctor finished and the midwife brought hot water in a rusty tin pan in which he washed his hands, drying them on a faded, but clean sugar sack. He walked across the room and sat down on a woodbox beside the cook stove.
"You might as well sit down and relax," he told me.
"How long?" I asked, but he only shook his head.
"Then we might as well go on with your story," I said. "You were still in the army, remember, when we got here."
"Well, let us see, " Doctor Clark mused. "When the war was over, my commanding officer offered me a good place in his hospital in Minnesota, but I'd had enough of snow and ice. I just couldn't accept. Another superior officer offered me a place as a contract surgeon in a small New Jersey town. I finally agreed to accept this one, and before I was discharged, went up to look around. It was all right; but about that time I received a message that Uncle Will was sick, and wanted my help as soon as I could come. Naturally, I gave up the place in New Jersey and returned to Fitzgerald.
"Uncle had influenza, and it was six months before he was on his feet again. By that time the State Board of Health had given me a clean practice bill, recognizing my Army internship, and I was taking care of Uncle's practice. By the time Uncle was ready to take over again, a job came seeking me. Dr. Waters, of the State Board of Health, asked if I would be interested in being assistant State health officer for two years. I accepted immediately."
The doctor jumped to his feet and was at the bedside in an instant, although nothing had attracted my attention.
"Hurry," he said, "Hurry over and hold her feet!"
The footboard of the bed was so high that I could not stand on the floor and reach her feet. So I got up in the middle of the bed and propped my back against the footboard directly behind the doctor. I took hold of her feet, and just as I got set for what I thought would be strenuous exercise, the doctor climbed off. It was not time yet. Feeling very foolish, I climbed off the bumpy mattress and went over to sit on the woodbox. On second thought I washed my hands, drying them on a pocket handkerchief.
We sat for a long time before the doctor spoke again. The house grew dark and the children began whimpering. The midwife sent them to a neighbor's house. Then she lighted an oil lamp with a smoky flue, and added pine knots to the fire in the stove. A chilly wind came through the cracks in the walls, and around the pasteboard window panes.
"It's not as bad as the first case I took care of," the doctor said. "She's had more experience. Still it's not the easiest thing in the world. The chances are always slim in a case of version." He spoke as if he were talking to himself.
"What about complications, Doctor Clark?"
"The possibilities are greater in a case of this kind than in any other," he said. "She's stopped having convulsions. With the exception of the position of the infant, there is no reason why there should be any other than normal action from here on."
"So you spent two years with the State Board of Health, and then what?" I asked.
"I got married and moved to Carter, and I've been here ever since. That's all there is to the story."
"Not by a long shot, man. Your medical life was really beginning then, and so was your home life. What about it, Doc?"
"I met Lucille when I was with the State Board," he said. She was Miss Lucille West of Stimson. I thought she was the sweetest thing in the world, and still do. When she agreed to marry me I felt that I wanted to settle down. She had a brother who had timber and land interests down in Mulder County. When he asked me to come along with him on a fishing trip I discovered Carter which was then a little town with growing pains and possibilities.
"When we got married, I remember that they dragged an old pair of shoes behind a Ford for two blocks -- with me in them." Doc laughed. He seldom laughed aloud; just a series of chuckles, with his funny wrinkles quivering. I had to laugh, too, because his little bay window hopped up and down like a fishing cork when he laughed. He reminded me of my childhood idea of Santa Claus.
His laugh died as suddenly as it had come. He was at the bedside before I knew what was happening.
It was time.
He motioned me to take my position back at the foot of the bed. The midwife stood by with a pan of steaming water and some cloths. Somewhere she had found a clean sheet, yellowed with age. She spread it over the patchwork quilt that covered the patient. The doctor's hands worked swiftly under the sheet.
Beads of perspiration on her brow, the woman lay still except for an occasional muscular contraction that shook her body. At such times, my hands slipped on her large ankles. A low moan came from the patient as the doctor brought a gray and red bundle of flesh from under the sheet. I did not look again.
A faint mewing struck my ears; then a resounding smack brought a very life-like wail. The midwife took the infant and carrying it to the woodbox, began bathing it in the rusty tin pan of steaming water.
The doctor finished his work and stepped off the bed. I got down, wanting to go out the door, but thought better of it. I would have washed my hands, but everything was being used.
Doctor Clark took some instruments from the hot water and re¬turned to the bedside. He worked for several minutes, and then, while washing his hands, gave instructions to the midwife. She was grinning at the newborn baby, paying little attention to the doctor. Once more he went to the bed and felt the mother's pulse, looked in her eyes and mouth, gave her a pill to swallow, and then began putting his instruments in his hag.
"You stay with her tonight and call me in the morning," he said to the midwife.
"Cigarette?," he asked me, as he flipped two from his case. I looked at the new baby while the doctor was lighting his smoke. It was asleep in the quilt on the woodbox.
"It's a fine boy," the midwife said.
"Name him Herbert," I suggested. "That's the doctor's name." She grinned at me but said nothing. The mother slept.
When the doctor turned on his way out and told the woman to take good care of the mother and child, that was the last I heard of the obstetrical case. I was definitely glad it was over.
"Well, sir," he said, when we were in the car again, "when I came here sixteen years ago, there wasn't such a thing as a road; just a trail and a rough one at that. I've ridden horses, baggies, and Model T's all over these piney woods. Sandy trails used to give me the dickens. Nearly every time I started home I'd get stuck.
"Once I was going to see a pneumonia patient down in the Tucker neighborhood and got stuck in the mud. It was three hours before I could get away to see the patient. I lost that patient. But it was usually when I was returning that I got stuck in the mud or sand --mostly sand. Good roads have changed lots of things. Bringing babies to the world was a big task sixteen years ago but now most people come to my office and go to the hospital. Medical science and rapid transportation and communication have eliminated lots of hazards.
"I started to count the babies I had helped into the world the other day, but something came up to stop the count. It's a large number, though. I put their birth in a little black book, and always send a birthday card to each of them. It keeps my office assistant busy when she has nothing to do. The other day a pretty young lady, fifteen or sixteen, came into my office, threw her arms around me, and kissed me, saying, 'I'll bet you don't know who I am.' Well, I didn't, but I found out that she was one of my babies. The family had been living in California since she was three years old. I had sent her a birthday card every year. You know, I didn't mind that sort of remembrance a bit." The doctor chuckled again.
As we were getting into town I looked at my watch and saw that we had been gone four hours.
"We'll run by the office and see if there's anyone waiting," the doctor said, "and then we'll go over to the house and eat. You've earned your supper."
I said nothing, but I didn't feel as if I would be able to eat.
When we arrived at the office, a little man with blood all over his head sat there holding his face in his hands. He did not look up when we entered.
Across from the man sat a large woman who looked more like a farmer than the man did. She had large angular hands and a bony face.
"I hit him over the head with a shovel," she explained to no one in particular, and then added as an afterthought, "He was drunk."
"Come in," said the doctor, "we'll have a look at it." His voice was cheerful as he motioned me in with the couple.
In the back room, Doctor Clark seated the man in what looked, like a barber's chair. He switched on a light over the chair, washed his hands, and began examining the wound. I saw a nasty looking laceration on the little man's head, and a bump that appeared as large as a baseball. While the water was heating over the doctor's spirit lamp, he laid out a scalpel, a razor, a pair of medical scissors, bandages, adhesive, and reached over to a glass-enclosed shelf for two bottles of fluid with long scientific names.
The little man was still silent. He did not act drunk.
The woman said, "I told him if he ever came home drunk again I'd knock him in the head with an axe, but I couldn't find the axe, so I grabbed a shovel." The blood had run down on the little man's brown shirt.
The wounds must have been inflicted several hours earlier, and no first aid had been given.
"I told him," the woman started again. The doctor glanced up from cutting the little man's hair, and she stopped talking and stood in the corner. Doc washed the wound with a hot towel, soaped and lathered the head, and shaved the entire top and both sides. With a scalpel, he began working on the huge bump. The patient raised up stiffly, squirmed, and sank lower in the chair. The doctor motioned for the woman and me to hold his arms. He opened the wound to remove the dust and dirt, swabbed it with iodine, and drained it. The little man gritted his teeth and perspiration broke out on his forehead. When the doctor began taking stitches the patient grunted each time the needle pierced his flesh.
"I told him," the woman began once more.
"Suppose you wait in the other room," said the doctor. "Every¬thing is all right now, and we'll be through in a few minutes. He finished sewing the wound, bandaged the scalp, and helped the man out of the chair.
"Come back tomorrow at four o'clock," he said.
"You didn't ask the name, Doc. Do you know them?"
"No, I don't know them, but they'll be back tomorrow."
After washing his hands he wrote something in a little black book and said, "Let's go home and see if we can find something to eat."
When we reached the house, twelve-year-old Mary opened the door, flung her arms about her father, and kissed him on the forehead. Still wearing pigtails, she was growing up, tall and straight. She took our hats.
"Where's Tommy?," Doc asked.
"He's asleep; it's far past his bedtime," replied Mrs. Clark, coming from the dining room to greet us. "I didn't know we were going to have company, but there's enough for you both. I'll make coffee and you can have it with dessert."
Doc sighed as we sat down at the table. "This doctor's life gets pretty humdrum," he said. "Deliveries, tonsillectomies, fractures, lacerations -- one bogs down. An appendectomy is a high-water mark for a country doctor. Sixteen years I've put in on this field with no kale to show for it, and not much science left. But when I came here, women were faring little better than animals at childbirth. I feel better about that.
"We have a little money made by careful management of inherited property, but I have made little money from my regular practice. You see, about ninety percent of my patients are farmers and their families. Sometimes they are unable to pay their bills for years, and some never get them paid. If they should pay as quickly as a doctor is expected to answer a call, then we'd be sitting pretty. But crops go against farmers about fifty percent of the time.
"But I was just thinking the other day that the Lord has blessed us. I've always found inspiration in the church. Something my dad taught me to do was tithe. I've always done that. Seems that the Lord blesses people in more ways than one when they tithe. Lucille tithes to her church, and I to mine. She's a Baptist and I am a Methodist; we just never worried about belonging to the same church and it worked out all right. We don't go to church as much as we should, but we take part in all the activities that we are able to support.
"You know, I began from the first giving a tenth of the first payment for my services to the church, and I've been doing it ever since. I'm just a plain country doctor; as the country people say, I'm 'the man with the little black bag.' I'm no good at any special disease, no good at any special operation, just a plain country doctor. But I've delivered a lot of babies. My work is just fair, and there are better doctors. But I have had patients with me for sixteen years.
"I've been fortunate enough to hold a job for four years as contract surgeon for the local Civilian Conservation Camp. When the lads enroll they are healthy, and it's my duty to keep them that way. I go down every morning at six o'clock for sick call and stay about an hour. Treatment consists mostly of first aid, caring for colds, athlete's foot, and shots for such diseases as pneumonia and diphtheria. A company first aid man calls me in case there is something he cannot handle."
"Listen, Doc," I urged, "you haven't told me about your unusual cases yet."
"They're all unusual. But I'll tell you about a strange accident case that occurred about eighteen years ago before I came to Carter. A lad was beating his way somewhere on a freight train. He slipped and fell under the train, and had both legs cut off near the trunk.
We hurried him to a hospital, where we found that he had a fifty-fifty chance. While he was in a delirium that night the nurse stepped from the room to call for help. He tried to get up. The strain was too much on his heart, and it just stopped beating. We had a difficult time locating his relatives, but finally found that his mother lived in Connecticut. We wired her to ask what to do with the body. She wired back that she didn't care what we did with it; she didn't want it. The railroad finally took the body and buried it on the right of way. She was one of the few unnatural mothers I ever heard of.
"This was another case I remember well. About ten years ago a Negro woman brought a twelve-year old boy in and asked me to look at his head. He had a scalp disease, and the head was so swollen that it looked like a black balloon. I lanced his scalp and found it full of pus. He had to keep coming to me for months, and every time he came his mother brought a dime or a quarter, saying that she had no more. His heed was cut until there was not an inch where a scalpel had not entered the skin. But he finally got well.
"After that, the mother came in every month or so and brought a dime. She kept this up for years. I don't know how many times she came in, or how much she brought, for I never kept books on it. It was too insignificant. Then last Saturday she came in with fifty cents, and asked, as she gave it to me, 'Doctah, how much mo' does I owe you?'
"'Mildred, you've been a faithful person about paying your debts,' I said without looking in my books. 'I think that the fifty cents will pay us in full, and so I'll give you a receipt. By the way, how is the boy? I haven't seen him in several years.'
"'Doctah, I don't know how dat boy is; he's been in de jail house in Atlanta for nigh onto two years now.'
"'Well, I'm sorry about that. Here, though, let me write you a receipt.'
"When I got through writing the receipt, it read, 'Pay to the order of Mildred Woods, ten dollars.'
"'Now Mildred,' I said, 'you take this to the man at the window in the bank, and don't come back here unless you're sick.'
"You know," and there was a grin on the doctor's face as he told this, "Mildred came back in the afternoon when I wasn't in and left the ten dollars with my secretary, telling her that I had made a mistake. Isn't that one for the book?"
Excellent;
A Plain Country Doctor
Discussion -- country doctor's life, practice, philosophy, war experience -- method of getting, and paying for education -- settling in practice with two illustrations of patients -- good man, good attitudes -- stout fella.
