July 4, 1939
Fannie Icord (Colored)
Newton, N. C.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Fannie Icord	Dinah Irvin
Caldwell County	Cook County
Newton	Bakerton
Willis Icord	Jim Irvin
Fannie Caldwell	Dinah Clay
Frank Icord	Fred Irvin
Maiden	Luden
Clarenwe Icord	Charles Irvin
Sallie Icord	Sara Irvin
Ira Sims	Ike Sams
"Why Lord bless me child I didn’t know you was here waitin’ far me to come home or I sure would a hurried faster. Come in and git a cheer."
The old colored woman, known as Aunt Dinah was dressed in a blue frock, a brown hat of uncertain age, a red flowered apron, one white and one brown stocking. Her shoes were old and worn. As she came around the house where I was sitting on her front steps she looked like a moving van. On her head was a washing of clothes, tied up in a big apron, she had a bundle under each arm, and a market basket in each hand.
"I’se been over to Miss Cora Byers washing, "she said, "I jes wash fer her every two weeks. Miss Byers allers loads me down when I start home. She is a lady, Miss Cora is."
Aunt Dinah had got out her big snuff box and began to rub her toothless gums with a chewed stick.
"No, I was born in Cook County. I been living in Makerton nigh onto forty years. I’se about fifty I guess.
"Yes I gits the old-agepension, since my old man died. He’s been dead four years now. No, I don’t have it no harder since he died. I has it better. You see one mouth to feed is cheaper than two. Jim wouldn’t work and he was so contrary, pears like it was jes downright cussedness. Never nothing pleased that man. If folks come in he acted like he was a angel. Soon as the door was closed he commenced. I allers lissened; I’se not much to talk. Thinks I to myself, your time is coming. Many a time I tole him he might have his way in this world; but he’s not having it in the next.
"Some folks spends half their time talking. I says little and lissens. Ole Miss Irvin teached me that. My name was Dinah Clay fore se married to Jim. Jim was raised by white folks. 'When we’s married we stayed at the Irvins. Mr. Fred Irvin was good to us. He had a big farm on 'tother side of Luden. Lots of niggers worked fer him. He raised four other niggers same as he did Jim. We had a little two room house on the place. I allers went up to the big house in the morning to work. The Irvin place was fine them times. Twice a week I went over to the big house and cleaned and dusted.
They had two boys and three girls. When Mr. Charles, the oldest, wasn’t off to school some of the others was. Then there was a lot of company coming in. That was a busy place. Miss Sara had to have things jes right. Old Mr. Irvin was awfully wicked though. He liked his licker. Everybody stood around when he had a drink.
"I was raised to go to preaching. Now I goes ter preaching every Sunday. I teaches a class myself at the M.E. Church. I don’t miss Sunday nights neither; we got a good preacher. We don’t pay no regular salary; we jes takes up collection and gives him. Last week it was about twelve dollars. I allers gives a nickel. I pays to foreign missions too. Then I cooks church suppers fer them in the basement. We makes money that way. The preacher we had las summer was a devil in the bush. He was college educated and didn’t work. Jest visit the sick and members. Says I to myself; that man’s a hypocrite, a ram in sheep clothing. He shined up to some of the members, wore white shirts every day and carried a walking stick. Ike Sams lived next door to the parsonage. He’s got three gals; one of them had a baby and in about a month one of the others had a baby. Then first thing you know our preacher was leavin’. The scandal was kept down but everybody knowed them younguns belonged to him.
"I belong to the Ladies Aid. I pays ten cents a month in that. I guess I pays jes about five dollars a year fer preaching. That don’t mean Sunday School. I try to give a nickel fer that. Them nickels come hard but the example is set. Effen I don’t throw a nickel in the collection plate them young people sees it and it’s bad fer them.
"Lordy no chile, I don't keep chickens. It's too much trouble to raise them fer other folks what's too lazy to work. I got a rooster fattenin' now. I'm goin' to have it fer dinner when the preacher comes. He eats every Sunday with one of the members. I keep the rooster in the house when I go to work. I gits six dollars pension; I does two washings a week and I gits one dollar a month fer my house on Snow Hill. I usta live there. We share cropped fer Mr. Charles Irvin two years after his father's death. Old Mr. Irvin left Jim a hundred dollars. We bought this house thirty years ago.
I live by myself. Jimm had three children. They's good to me, allers sends me sumphin' on mother's day. I don't have none of my own.
"If you'll jes come inside I'll show you their pictures."
I followed Aunt Dinah inside. She took me to her best room. "I allers keeps this room locked," she said, "I don't allow people messing over my things." The floor was covered with a grass rug, in the center of which was a bunch of red roses. In one corner stood an iron bed. I commented on the lovely hand-turfted counterpane. She raised the counterpane and showed me at least a dozen hand made quilts she had made herself. An old-fashioned lounge stood in one corner. On the table in the middle of the room was a big lamp with a rose-colored shade. The curtains at the small windows were appliqued in big red roses. After showing me the pictures, she opened a big trunk and showed me her best dress and hat; the one she wore to eleven o'clock sermons. The hat was brown and had a veil attached. The dress was green, trimmed in gold buttons.
From the outside, Aunt Dinah's house presented a dilapidated appearance, with its sagging roof of ragged shingles, walls of half-rotten boards, paneless windows and broken steps; inside, everything was neat and clean.
I followed her up the attic stairs, where there was a small room used for junk. Here she showed me a wooden cradle Jim had made for the first Irvin baby.
"What you mean? Sell dat to them anteek people? I's keeping dat to 'member Jim by. He was allers saying he felt porely. What killed him I dunno; high blood pressure, the doctor said. 'Twant nothing serious what killed him."
Outside, I asked what kind of toilet was on the place. "None a-tall," she said, "jes a back house; not much account either. I usually go down in that big gully there, it saves hiring that back house moved.
"Do you still like figs? Come around to the tree and I'll give you some. I laughs to myself when I think how you tole me you eats them for breakfast with yer coffee. I don't want no sich thing fer my breakfus. I wants somethin' that's fillin'. I don't go in fer none of these fancy diets. Some folks drinks 'mater juice; I jes soon take a pill. I wants sumpin’ that don't keep my stomach gnawing and empty. Some argues they can't eat so and so, that's the way Jim done, they's got high blood pressure. When I was young, people didn't have high blood pressure; they eat all the meat they wants and bread too. Not so many died either, old persons some times got paralyzed."
Aunt Dinah bade me good bye, insisting that I come again some time when she could give me a story. I looked back and saw her disappear around the house with her clothes, and I listened a moment to her clear contralto voice singing, "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot," accompanied by the rumbling of the well windlass and the screeching of the pulley.
