STATEWIDE WRITERS' PROJECT
Miami, Florida
Socio-Ethnic Study
The Greeks in America
Cora Lee Taylor
Jan. 17, 1940
Mabel B. Francis,
Editor
(Mrs.) Mary Ponticos
169 Northeast 53 Street
Mrs. Mary Ponticos, age 36, lives at 169 N.E. 53rd. Street in a white frame bungalow with long sloping green asphalt shingle roof, Two large coconut trees are in the front yard and a profusion of vari-colored crotons are planted around the house and along the short concrete walk leading to the front porch.
One end of the porch is partitioned off into a private lounge and furnished with a three piece wicker set and table; both the lounge and porch are covered with bright, fresh congoleum rugs.
In the living room, the pastel painted walls, Wilton rugs and plaid draperies at the windows present a pleasing effect.
A beautiful mahogany set in the dining room includes a large glass China closet and a buffet on which is displayed an attractive pine needle-shell tray.
In the kitchen there is an immaculate white gas range and a white enamelled work-table, while the back porch is furnished with a frigidaire and a blue painted breakfast set.
There are two large bedrooms neatly furnished with mahogany beds, dressers, boudoir mirrors and conveniently placed between the bedrooms is a white tiled bathroom.
One of the bedrooms is rented to an old lady from Boston who pays her $30 per month including meals. Although Mrs. Pontilcos is provided with sufficient means so that she is not obliged to work, she is glad to earn this additional money.
The first object that attracted my attention was a 400- day clock encased in a glass dome. It was placed on the bookcase mantel below the arched partition between the living room and dining room. The clock is prized very highly, and was a Christmas present from Atlanta, Georgia.
When I asked, "Do you have relatives living in Atlanta?" Mrs. Ponticos replied, "No, not relatives, just good friends.
It look like to me it cos' lot of money."
Her English was quite good,- only occasionally did she omit her articles and express herself slightly out of order. She explained that she had very little difficulty in learning English, because she attended a good parochial Greek school in Turkey where she was required to study both Greek and French. Her knowledge of French made it very easy to learn English. She attended night school here until she took out her citizenship papers and now she reads the American papers every day.
"Do you have relatives here," I asked.
"Yes, honey, I have relatives here. I have a daughter, Evelyn, 12 years old. She go to school in Junior High already. James, my brother, he live here and my older brother, all together with my mother until a few weeks ago; older brother got telegram to come to New Hampshire and go in business. He can't talk good English and needs James to help him, but James won't go for a while. He has good job here now. So my mother, she with my other sister live so I can rent my room.
"My sister live at 6311 Northwest First Place. She have three children, three, seven, and nine years. They never speak Greek. My sister cannot speak so well English as I can, but her children play with other children all the time and she doesn't want them to speak Greek.
"When my Evelyn was little, I could speak only broken English then and I didn't want her to learn poor English, so I taught her to speak Greek and then when she went to school, I knew she would learn good English. So she speak both languages now, and, just so she won't forget it, I sometimes talk Greek to her, but she speaks such good English: How shall I say it? Her tongue is so good that even her teachers are surprised when she tell them that she can speak Greek. There are some Greek children that are born in this country who can speak perfect English, but it is difference with us. We can't hide our tongue. My Evelyn helps me so much. I'm glat I speak so well Ha that's so nice to be able to speak good English!"
Mrs. Ponticos impressed me as an exceptionally brilliant woman. She has bright, snappy dark brown eyes and dark fluffy
hair dressed in a low, long roll across the back of her neck. She was neat and well-proportioned. Her fresh, print house dress had a pastel flowered pattern, and she wore a brighter print kitchen apron.
When she smiled, she showed beautiful white teeth, but her smile was rather affected, though friendly, as if she were trying to make a good impression; or perhaps she might have been just a little shy or self-conscious about her looks, because her family often remark:
"I look so old since my husband died.
"How old do you think I am?" she asked, apparently in the hope that I would not say "forty years old," for that is the dead-line for widows to re-marry.
I guessed, "About 31 or 32 years," not only as an honest opinion, but also because she had told me that Evelyn is 12 years old.
"You think so?" she smiled, "0, 36, I am:
"You see," she continued, "we came to Miami in 1923.
We lived sometimes in the Southwest, sometimes in the Northwest, but this is the first we lived in the Northeast section. My husband bought this home and had his life insured for $3,000 and made good provision for me, but I didn't expect him to leave me so soon. He was always well. I didn't know he had heart trouble. We were so peaceful and happy. Been married 13 years together.
"One Saturday morning in 1936, my husband say he not feel good. He said he felt bloated. I gave him soda water and he say, 'No better. I can't belch.' I wanted to send for the doctor but he sai, 'No. I be aw right.' Then someone came and called him to the door to speak to him and when he got up he fell down. I thought he just faint. Doctor said he had acute indigestion and heart trouble. It was best way for him. I want to go that way, too, but oh, I took it so serious. It was such a shock. I cried day and night and lost 18 pounds.
"I look so old in black. I always have worn black when I go out, but I wear this kind of dress at home. My mother chase me away when I come to see her in black. My husband would not want me to wear black for him, but I loved him so and have to be so careful, because I am a widow and they might talk about me, if I didn't wear mourning. I am so lonesome. This is no neighborhood. Here you don't know who lives next door. When Evelyn goes to school, I feel as if I live in a kind of monastery.
"See my picture taken just before my husband died. If he could see me now, he wouldn't know me. My people say a young widow should marry, but not after forty. I am beginning my fourth year now and bought this gray dress the other day."
"She held up before me a nicely tailored one-piece woolen street dress but rather drab looking without a touch of color, and she continued.
"If my husband see me, he'd say, ' Don't wear gray.' I am so lonesome and will soon be forty. A good husband would be such good company, but oh! I wouldn't want any other kind. Just for company, you know.
"When I get too lonesome, I go down town and walk around in the dime stores and look at the pretty things. I would like to sit in the park, but I am so afraid someone will talk about me. As I am an American citizen, I would not need to wear mourning. All the younger widows I know are married again. There is only one other Greek widow in Miami and she is nearly fifty years old."
"In what province or town in Europe were you born?" I asked.
"I was born in Turkey. We stay at Urussa and I can speak both the languages of Turkey and Greece, but we are not Turks. I am a Greek. I am no more a Turk than my children would be Cubans, if Iwent over there before my children were born.
"My father and mother moved from Greece to Urusaa because my father was a carpenter and he could make more money in Turkey. They build houses so much stronger over there on account of the earthquakes. Some houses are made of heavy rocks and some of squares of hardened mud and daubed with mud inside; some with very thick walls.
"We had not so plenty money, but we had enough. I lived there seven years and then lived with another sister. Over in Turkey they treated the Greeks so mean. They hated the Christians. We never passed over in the Turkish section. The kids would throw rocks at us and say awful things about the Christians. The Turks were not allowed to come to our schools. We had to pay to go to school, but I can't tell how much, for Turkey money is so different. We spent a lot traveling to visit our relatives.
"My mother used to work in the house. She had some kind of instrument that made crepe de Chine silk. Real heavy silk. Not same as cheap crepe de Chine you have/here. She wove it in her own house. She and her older sisters made 150 yards. She made her own wedding dress. It is 43 years old. Still strong. Can wash it a million times. No moths ever get into it. American crepe de Chine is so cheap looking. Made with some grass, I guess. I don't know.
"My mother quit weaving when we moved out of Turkey in 1921. All Greeks were driven out then, but now all is changed. They are friendly with the Greeks. They threw away the fez. Women's veils were taken off and they dressed like the/ English. They changed handwrite. They made alphabet like English and printed just like English instead of backwards.
"We had so many snakes in Turkey, poisonous snakes that would leap across the room at you. I didn't know the names of many, because they had no zoo over there and we did not study snakes. We had cobras, but I guess I never saw any. They used to say that every house had snakes in it. They would get up on top of the roofs of the houses and stretch out between the tiles on the roofs, like we have here.
"We had one big black snake in our house once. I saw the big snake from the roof fall down and run through the hall. It was about five and one half or six feet long.
"When my father died, we were all small kids. He had been baptized in the River Jordon. He went to Jerusalem and was baptized by the Patriarch there and he gave him the grave clothes which he was to wear next to him in his grave. His name was Ephthilimus Ephthilimilou. Both names alike, just as American man might have the name Stephen Stevens, but when he was baptized in the River Jordon his name was changed. They didn't call him Mister anymore, but, Hatze, pronounced Hotsee. He carried his grave clothes with him whenever he took a trip, because he knew he would be buried within a day and there would be no time to send for his clothes, if he should die suddenly.
"After we were driven out of Greece, my mother, sister, two brothers and I came to New York and from there we went on to Norwood, Ohio, only 40 minutes' ride from Cincinnati. We stayed there two years and then came on to Miami. We have many friends here.
"I have 58 year old brother. He doesn't show his age, for he hasn't one gray hair, but my 42 year old sister has been white since 27 years. I saw an unmarried girl the other day only 24 years old with more gray hairs than I My hair just started to gray since husband died. I have only a few and I don't think they are a sign of age anymore.
"When I was a little girl, I heard much about Evil Eye. They said they knew of a bad eye that made a horse fall over and die. One neighbor had such good goat. Milk bag so big. It drag on ground and had to wear leather sack to keep from hurting bag on ground.
"A woman spoke about the goat. She said: 'Oh, poor mother goat. Everyday give so much milk that she have to wear sack over milk bag.' In a short time the milk dried up and the goat died and the woman's little babies had no milk to drink.
"I heard when some kids were so beautiful, it happened that she with Evil Eye would say, ' Oh, so beautiful child.' Then if child got headache or loose appetite, the folks would go to the woman and tell her she have Evil Eye. If she did not Know it, she would say she was so sorry and she would take a sprig of basilica and then make a cross in front of the child's face with the basilica and the child wouldn't feel sick nor worry any more. Or if the parents heard the woman make the remark, they might take the sprig of basilica and make the cross so as to prevent the child from having any kind of bad symptoms.
"sometimes, too, some had a way of holding their fingers, together, two or three, I don't know how. I don't know whether they crossed them or not', but they would do it if they heard some one start saying anything that they were afraid might cause some sickness. They would fix their fingers quick and the Eye would have no effect on them. I don't know much about such things, because we never practiced those things.
"I know that some little Greek children are taught to fix their lips as if they were going to spit, then stick their tongue in the pucker and make a noise as if they were spitting three times so as to ward off the Evil Eye, if anyone who is supposed to have the Evil Eye comes near them.
"Some kind women with blue eyes are blamed for having the Evil Eye, if they also have eyes close together, but usually this superstition is blamed on jealous hearted people. The kind people are very glad to take the holy flower around and break the spell.
"This is why women cover babies' faces with blankets when they take them to church, - so that nobody can look at them or make remarks about them, but after they grew older, they had to cover their faces for this reason, too, but also so that strange men would not know how beautiful they were. I mean the Turkish women before the custom was broken up in 1921."
As I arose to leave, she said she was so glad I had called and apologized for keeping me waiting at the door when I knocked, for she was talking over the telephone at the same time. She explained:
"You couldn't see me, so I talked real loud so that you would know why I didn't come to the door. I didn't want you to come and pay 20 bus fare for nothing."
