Two other versions of the following life history have been deleted. In one version, entitled "Claude Gill," the note-"Names changed"- appears on the top of page 11145 and the interview begins with line twenty-one on page 11147. The names used in this deleted version are written above the typed names in the interview included here. In the other deleted version, entitled "Long As I Live", the handwritten comment--"very good N.B."-appears on the top of page 11145. Otherwise, the material in the two deleted versions is identical with the life history included here.
Approximately 4416 words
SOOTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT LIFE HISTORY
TITIE:
GARY DAVIS
Date of First Writing	December 14, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Gary Davis
Fictitious Name	Reg. No
Address	Route 2, Marion S. C.
Place	Marion Country, S. C.
Occupation	Farmer Day Laborer - garden and yard work
Name of Writer	Annie Ruth Davis
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #5613
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, S.C.
January 23, 1959
GARY DAVIS
(Negro)
ROUTE #2, MARION COUNTY (Rural)
SOOTH CAROLINA
A visit to the home of Gary Davis, Negro, convinces anyone that he is not only a hard worker, but and thrifty person too. Within the small yard, enclosed by a weather-worn picket fence, everything is clean and orderly. A fragrant red rose, his mother's favorite flower, blooms brightly to one aide, while a few chrysanthemums and violets grow in scattered places. Behind the house stand three roughly constructed buildings, which give evidence of honest labor: a barn for his stock, a smokehouse and a dairy. Also, he has built a tiny shed over his pump, which stands in the middle of the yard, to protect it from the weather. During his spare moments of incessant drudging for others, Gary's own hands have made all these things possible.
Within the two-room house, everything tells the same story. In the front room are several broken chairs, two tables, three large trunks, an old organ; two beds, covered with patchwork quilts of many colors, lie close to the fire; a number of enlarged pictures of his people hang on the walls and a beautiful brass fender stands on the hearth of the fireplace. Gary claims that this fender was inherited from his mother. A large iron pot, sitting on the fire coals, gave off a strong odor of collards and fresh meat boiling for the evening meal.
Although most of the cooking usually takes place over the open fire in the first at room, the kitchen opens directly off from this roam. A table, a wood box, and three stoves: a wood stove, oil stove, and an electric stove are placed about the room. Yes, Gary owns three stoves, all three of which have been collected from the cast-aways of white people and brought home to be used, though not as originally intended. The oven to the electric stove - no electric current being available in the little shack - serves in as a place to keep food from flies, rats, and roaches, which he declares are plentiful. But everything is orderly and in repair, due to the careful saving and planning of this old Negro. The inside walls, tightly plastered with discarded newspapers from white people, contains no cracks to let in the cold air. On the narrow front porch are a few chairs and a hammock. When Sunday comes, Gary goes to preaching service - the only frolic he knows - and comes home to spend the remainder of the day lying in his hammock and enjoying his earthly home the laber of his own hands.
"My Lord a Mercy, ain't dat some thing?" exclaimed Begin here cloud. "Yunnah wanting me to tell you all 'bout how I living and getting along in dis world.
"Well, I reckon I'll say I in my sixty-fifth year gwine in my sixty-sixth year. Don't look so, does it? Works hard, too. Reckon me and your ma 'bout one age. Cose I don't know nothing 'bout how old Miss. Davis say she ought to be.
"No'm, I never been raise over to Wahee. I born way down yonder to <text not clear> on Mr. <text not clear> place. Dere where my natal home is - natal home, dat what some people calls dey unitial home. Oh, I had the finest mother and father you e'er hear talk of. Old man Alfred Gill, he been my daddy; my mother, she named Emma Gill. Dey b'longed to de old <text not clear> befo' de free war come on and dat how-come us raise on he place. Old man <text not clear>, he had fine a plantation dere been anywhere in dat country.
"Us get along pretty "well in dem days, but it was sho' a time when I come up. Didn't come up on no gravy train. No, Lord, I been raise to work elbow grease for what ration I get. Pa been say, dem what never work, never eat. Wouldn't never give chillun no meat to eat no time 'cause dey ain't been able to turn out work like the grown ones could. Pa used to tell we chillun dat dem what work hard dat year, he would see dat dey get all the backbone and rice dey could eat on Christmas day. Dat been all de Christmas us thought 'bout asking for in dem days. See, pa had seven head of we chillun to satisfy and it never take just a morsel to go round.
"Us went to school to man named Gunter, but never didn't go no more'n three months out de year. Cose us didn't see the privilege of learning like de chillun gets dese days, being de law don't let you hold no child from gwine to school to stay home and work no more. If us never stay home and work on de farm, pa couldn't make enough to feed us all de year. You see, he was a sharecropper on Mr. Giles place and never get but a third of what crop us made. If de crop been short, us ration been short.
"Dat fellow Gunter he was sho' rough on we chillun. He had a right smart of scholars - reckon he had 'bout a hundred head of scholars. He'd whip you for your learning and if us miss just one word on de blackboard, he'd sho' initiate us for it. Us chillun used to play shinny out on de school yard and another boy, he pick a fight wid me one day. He kept batting me wid his stick and I tell him to quit. He never stop and I pick up my club and give him three of the hardest licks I cloud send. My Lord, he squall like he near 'bout been dead. Dat man Gunter, he come out dere to know what been de matter, and took dat shinney stick and naturally tore me up. Lord knows, he whip me unmercifully. When I go home dat evening and ma see what a worse fix I been in, she stop me from gwine to school another day. Say she never been gwine stand for no such butcher treatment on her child, and what learning I get dem four year till den been all I e'er get. Cose I sorry I couldn't learn like I ought to been learn, but I'm thankful I got enough to take care of myself. A little education's a good thing to my mind, but too much a pretty bad thing another time. Chillun sho' wiser dese days and den dey's weaker too.
"Long 'bout dat age, us get tired living down to <text not clear>, so us pull up and move over to Rama, 'bout four miles from Odell, yonder to the other side of Catfish Swamp. No'm, don't know what year we move to Wahee, it been such a long time ago - it done out my recollection. Grandpa Friday, ma's daddy, been living over to Rama and ma been hungry to go where he living. Den pa been getting old and after he took down wid dese paralysis, he couldn't make out to work like Mr. <text not clear> 'spected him to. Pa, he tell me to go ahead and do like her mind will her to do. See, sometimes if you changes places, you improves, and us made a great success in moving.
"When we get over to Wahee, my mother and we chillun went to work and bought us a fine plantation. Dere been 135 acres in all and it cost us on de border of $900.00. Yes, my Lord, us acoummulated what property we own; us worked every bit dat land out wid we own muscle. Captain, dat been a time. Us made everything us need right on de farm; made 'bout $250.00 a year and de good Lord hoped us to pay for dat plantation in five years time. Us had two cows, mule, horse, oxen - three head of plough team. Made five to seven bales of cotton a year and all de corn, peas, and 'tatoes us could destroy. And chickens, my Lord, us had dem scatter clear to de swamp.
"Pa, he never like it over to Wahee and soon after us get settled, dem paralysis carry him out. Cose ma make we chillun hold 'spect for pa long as he live, but he say he ready to go, 'cause when a man ain't able longer to rule his roost, it time he go. Yes'm, he just naturally been mighty old - near'bout 75 year old, I reckon.
"After pa been gone, ma fall heir to be head of de family and all de property pass in her name. Lord, us had to work to hold dat land and it wasn't no little thing to sulk at neither. Yes'm, it sho' took a muscle to carry dat load. Me and Sugg used to sit up on us oxen cart and haul wood to town to de white folks oftentimes. Oh, I was just a little small hoy den 'bout twelve year old; Sugg, she been a young lady 'bout fifteen year old. I 'member I'd get so cold sometimes, I'd jump down off de cart and walk side de road so as to get my blood touched up. Sugg, she'd set dere and make out somehow screwing and twisting herself now and den. Yes'm us made right smart of little change hauling wood wid us oxen cart and old plug mule; got thirty-five cents for every cartload of wood us bring to town. We had us ups and downs, but de good Lord, look like he hoped us out in short times. Didn't ne'er one of us shirk no duty and ma, she say dat how-come us been so blessed.
"I stay on home till I near'bout twenty year old, and I study ' bout it time I get me a wife. If a man wants to live a good life, it's better for he to marry and have somebody to help him along de path. Be Bible say, 'Blessed every man dat have he own for he be pleasing to de Heavenly Father.' Soon as I get me a wife, I know I had to hunt me another place to hang out, being ma wouldn't let no strange woman e'er come under her roof. Mr. Minter, he hire me to come over to his place and clean up canebrakes he want tore up. Dem canes, dey been high to de loft; promised me $70.00 to get him shed of it. I worked dere from January to April and wasn't nothing left of dat canebrake, neither, time I get done wid it. Clean wore out twenty-five pair of pants, it been so worser and dat man ain't paid me but $10.00 worth of stuff to dis day. Oh, I tell you. I'm a working man - she' hustles.
"Seems like tough luck been setting for me long 'bout dat time. my wife, she get so trifling, I had to turn her loose. She never been up-to-date like she ought to been and I let her go, ' cause de biggest thing what carry anybody in dls world is dey up-to-date. Her took up wid dat preacher man; never had de right principles 'bout her. It's like dis, person got to have 'spect for deyself befo' dey can go abroad. Like a person don't pray right, dey lost - for prayer, it de key of heaven and faith, dat what opens de door.
"She'd have dat preacher man to my house and kill up all my chickens to fix nice rations for him. Den I'd come home on a night and wouldn't see a blessed thing to eat. Wouldn't see nothing but dem pile of bones setting all over dey plates where dey been eating my chickens again and again. First Sunday he come, she make out she been kin to him, but I know dat ain't been so. When I go home Monday evening, he been setting in my door. I ask him what he come for, but he never say nothing. From then and right on, he come and he go - he come and he go. Cose he never come time for me to be home, but I'd see de signs he'd leave. De lastsetting up on my piazza. I say, dis don't mean nothing good, I got to get rid of her. Time he see me, he make tracks off from dere 'cause he know I never had no 'lasses in my mouth for him. After he been gone, I get me a good board and give her two or three of de hardest licks I could send. She cuss me, run off to de swamp, and I ain't see her no more. Hear talk she living over next Florence wid dat preacher man to dis very day. Dat preacher, he know he do wrong to steal my wife and eat all my chickens up. I fret 'bout what to do, but nothing ain't do me no good till I left her in de hands of the Lord and went back to live wid ma.
"After I get back home, ma never live but two years and all de sponsibility fell heavy on me to see after us property. Ma left; a paper dat say every child she had was to get day equal share of de property and 'point me 'minister. She left word another place on de paper dat couldn't nobody never sell none of dat proerty - had to keep it gwine from heir to heir* Cose us had to keep up de taxes and if we let dem slip one year, de law say we had so many year to call, dam back. Lord knows, if it takes all a person can rake and scrape, dem taxes got to be paid.
"Dam other chillun, seems like after ma pass on, day been ill- favored somehow. Rena, she go and marry a man what treat her like a brute. He never rest till he raise a mortgage on Rena's property for $700.00 and den he left dis country. Wanted money and big times wid it. Poor Rena, she been in a fit, but de good Lord, look like he hope her somehow. Railroad man come to de house one day and say if we chillun would sign de word for him to run a tramway through us place, he'd pay us $750.00. Day wanted to run dat track clean from Odell an County Lumber Mill to Meveer, so as dey could haul lumber to de mill in a hurry. All us chillun scratch de pen and lift Rena mortgage wid de money us get. Cose when Rena die, her property never come to we; it go to her one child, Julia.
"My brother Henty, he living yet but don't know "where he A terrible woman come and talk sweet talk to him one day and Henty he never know no better. He put his property in de care of Mr. Rise and run off wid dat woman. Mr. Rice say dat land b'long to him now, but he's talking out he head. Dat land, it ain't safe 'cause it's 'tailed property. Magistrate say couldn't nobody sell none of dat land less'n all de chillun sign de paper and I know I ain't gwine scratch no pen.
"Sugg, my brother Bill, and <text not clear>, dey been hold on to dey part long as dey live. Yes 'm, dat de same land day grandchi llun living on to dis day. But poor Julia, she suck sorrow on dis earth. She take calomel and eat salt fish on top of it; my Lord a mercy, dat poor creature been some salivated. Near'bout every tooth in her head drop out, dey get so loose. Yes, my Lord, Julia sho' been a wheel horse 'bout working. Yunnah know her, dat little low chunky woman dat used to hope Miss <text not clear> up to de hotel? Her died from de Lord's will just like all us got to go some day.
"After ma been gone, I work on dare home 'bout ten year, trying to keep my part together somehow. I sho' got a fine plantation too. Think I done mighty fine - mighty fine. Ain't nobody like Clans. Dat land, it's pulverized fine as you e'er did see 'cause me and dam old oxen sho' draw dat land. I rake up dis black earth out de swamp and scatter all over dam acre; make fine a fertilizer anybody wants.
"Long 'bout dat time, I begin to study, what been de use ma running all dat big plantation and just me one. I say, I gwine let de farm lay by a spell and catch what work I can wid de white folks in town. I come to Odell every day and start keeping up Miss <text not clear> garden and yard. Oh, dey's nioe people. First one and the other of these white people pass Miss <text not clear> and when dey see how pretty I been fixing everything, dey hire me to hope dam too. Lord knows, I been working for your ma near'bout thirty year. I make all dese people garden 'bout here and keeps dey yards looking like a palace. And clean house, dere aint no woman I can't put to shame.
"I been walk four mile to town every morning to work and four mile back home in de evening. It sho' been tough on me too. Tima I'd see crack of day shine. I'd crawl out de bed; draw me a cup of coffee and set out. Soon as I hit town, dis one and dat one down dis street try and stop me to work for dan. Lord knows, I try and hope dem all best I can, but when Miss <text not clear> and Miss <text not clear> calls me, I Gwine to dem; dey stands by me and I gwine stand by dem. It bean so hard on me, I think bout throwing up town work for nothing; dey near'bout worry me to death. Never had nobody home to wash me clothes, cook my rations, and all my fine plantation been gwine to waste too. And Lord knows, de people steal all my chickens, grapes, and vegetables, while I been to town working. I say, I can't stand dis worryation no longer, I gwine get me a sharecropper. Man had nag after me long time to let him run crop on my land for shares. I never want nobody fooling wid my land, but I tell him to come on 'cause it look like I couldn't hope myself. White folks Just wouldn't turn me loose. I been furnish part de fertilizer along wid de land; de other fellow, he do all the rest. At de end of de year, he get half de crop and I get half.
"Dat same year, I hear talk of Marry, cross de creek to Wahee Neck, been want a job to cook out. De next Sunday come, I got to see her and tell her what a predicament I in wid no womankind to look after me. She come on home wid me dat evening and stay till she die two year ago. No, Lord, she wasn't no wife, she been my cook; us never go through no ceremonial. Poor Marry, she sho' know how to cook and wash, but she wouldn't put a hand's turn to scald no house. Dem chinch near'bout been eat me up on a night - couldn't sleep none hardly. Cose she been mighty good and I been right thankful to get her.
"De next year come, Julia Rena's child, die wid big boil on neck and leave boy child, three-year old. Dat been Albert. He daddy a white man and dat how-come nobody want him; de law give him to me. Oh, he been de finest little feller, and I say I'd do de best I could by him, being he was Rena's grandchild. Learn him to go to Wahee Neck Methodist Church every Sunday 'cause if you forsaken de church, you forsaken out of heaven.
"Mercy Lord, I sho' had a heavy 'sponslbility shove on ma wid dat boy. When he come home, Marry she took to de field to hoe cotton and work to Miss Burns house so many day out de week. Tell me she had to catch her some money so as to get her something 'sides rags to wear. Say she never had no mind to nurse nobody child - dat been my botheration. I never know what to say; near'bout worry me crazy. Been so worry up in my mind, I go down side de woods and pray. I get up and I say, dis what de Lord put on me and I'm gwine shoulder de burden,
"I take dat four-year-old boy next morning and set out for town. Cose Albert been too little to walk all dem four miles, but us catch rides on wagons part de time and I tote him on my back part de way. Dat been one smart child; love him just like he been my own. Sho' try and raise him to be 'spectful and have decent manners like I come up. Let him have a goat, two white pigeons, and part de chickens for he own. Do dat to make he satisfy. I keep on taking him to town and he been right handy to hope me wid little odd jobs round white people house and yards. My boy get so he know how to rub furniture, could hoe and rake just like a man, and hope me tote buckets of slops home every evening to feed us hogs and goat on. Us never been making a sufficiency on de farm to last for all de stock to feed on with dat sharecropper man getting half of what was made on de place. I sho' learn dat boy to work. Cose he wasn't no cloud, but he never grow no lazy bone and wasn't no dunce neither long as I had de say wid him.
"Us been get along mighty well together while Marry been living. Yes'm, she got so she been have tender feeling for de boy just like I is. But Marry, she took down sick wid ailment in her cheat 'bout time Albert come sixteen year old. De doctor tell us she had de lung disease and to see she get all de air her could and plenty milk to drink. Miss Burns, she tell me to send de boy to her house every day and get all de milk us could use. Me and Albert tend Marry best us could and de neighbors, day hope us along too. You see, while us been force to stay home and nurse Marry, us never been bringing in nothing. Cose I ain't saying nothing 'bout what I been do 'cause I been glad to do what last I could' for de poor creature. Den one night, I hear a fuss like a gurgle in de mouth and I run to de bed wid de camphor, but wasn't nothing I could do; Marry done been gone.
"Lord knows, I ain't telling you no 'aggeratlon, I near'bout went crazy wid all dat trouble on me. Doctor leave word must burn everything Marry been use, bed and everything. I say, I never been gwine throw away all dem thingss. Bean a sin to 'stroy all dat cover and me never know how I been go buy castle to bury Marry in. But dem neighbor people, dey just naturally took everything and carry it off. Went clean through Marry trunk and strip it. No'm, dey never burn nothing, day carry it home. I see dem women cross de field wearing Marry a clothes plenty times. Lord knows., I just been in too much trouble to hope myself. Had to scratch round and borror forty dollars off my land to pay funeral expenses - plunk out twenty-five dollars for Marry castle. Poor Marry, she did love her church, but dey wouldn't let us carry her castle nowhere 'bout de church. No'm, I never been able to have her 'balmed and dey say she wasn't safe.
"Seems like hard luck just been following me dat year Marry die. Us never had nobody to cook us ration and de boy, he start getting restless and say he want to stay home and farm. Say he want to make he own money; wasn't getting nothing following me 'bout here in town, but little bit of something to eat. Cose I get ten cent a hour for de work he do dese last three year, but dat been go for he ration. I say, he work heavy, he eat heavy. No'm, ain't nobody does pay me but fifteen cent a hour for my work and dat ain't go far wid all dam taxes and funeral expenses on me. De boy, he say ha want to farm de land he ma left him, I tell him ha crazy, he know he ain't come of no age yet. He get so stubborn, I tell him if he ain't gwlne work, I gwlne make he go back to school like de law say for he to do, else I wan't gwine give him nothing but husk to eat. Dem what don't work, dey ought to be glad to get husk to eat, I say.
"De boy, he get more trifling every day dat come; been all de time to dat woman house cross de branch. She put notion in he head to marry her daughter 'cause he been tell her he gwine get fine plantation time he come twenty-one. Yes'm, dat woman stray my boy off to marry her daughter. I tell him he got to mend his way, if he stay on wid me, else I gwine beat him to death. He sasa me; give me worse words. Dat night, he leave home and ain't put his foot back no more. Never want me to chastise him. Say he rather go in de chain gang den to take a beaten. Some day he gwine have to go in de gang, too, from de crowd he following now. Albert been leave home last July, but I never care. After he got big and learn so much mean way, he ain't been nothing but a worryation. Cose if he had stay to school and learn some sense, he wouldn't had time to poke he head in so much devilment.
"My boy gone, I gwlne stay home next year and run my own place. Dat sharecropper, he fall short dese last two year; just make enough to turn $50.00 back I been borrow from de government to run crop on. Never made but about thirty-five bushels of com and half dat b'longed to de sharecropper man. My 'tatoes, de rain sob dem till dey been so rotten, dey tear de ground open all up and down de patch. And my peas, I never try to gather none, so much of dem bean shed off wid de wind - just turned de stock loose In de field to clean up de scatterings. Dem rotten 'tatoes, I feed dem to my hogs. But my hogs, dey teeth grow so long, dey take down wid de palsy and I let another man have dem. He say, dey meat been good as any. Yes'm, I sho' gwine stay home next year and make a fortune on my plantation. Don't care Who call me, my ear gwine be deaf.
"I ain't gwine borrow no more government money, if I can hope myself, 'cause if you ain't able to pay it back, dey'll near'bout worry you to death. I don't know what to think 'bout de way de country gwine nohow; can't hardly disouss de matter. A person can get dese days, but den he got to pay it back. Cose dem what leaves de farm to catch government work, dey sho' gwine suck sorrow one of dese days. Lord knows, if de people don't stay on de farm and make crop, dis country gwine to destruction.
"I gwine back to de farm and show people what it takes to make a crop, 'cause I ain't getting nowhere working in town. cloud Yes'm, white folks gwine miss me; ain't nobody like old cloud don't nothing come strange to me. I gwine stay home and pass my last few days in satisfaction; gwine to de swamp and cut me plenty nice fat lightwood and hold light all night long. Oh, I tell you, dat sho' a fine plantation.
"Yunnah ain't know <text not clear>, is you? Yes'm, she my wife. I get her from over to Wahee Neck de week after Albert leave home. I say, it wasn't gwine hope me noway to stay by myself and live like a dog, I been gwine get me a wife. De Sunday after my boy leave home, I go to church and <text not clear> come back home wid me dat day. I tell her, if she'd stay dere home and hope me out wid my cooking and washing, I'd give her a good home and treat her mighty nice long as she live. Cose she's right smart deaf and got a hitch in her speech someway, but she can wash, cook, and de like. She suit me. Yes, Lord, I satisfy; know I got a earthly home long as I live."
Excellent
Claud Gill, Day Laborer - garden and yard work Reared farm - seven children -- three months school a year -- beating resulted in withdrawal from school - family moved - bought farm - father died, mother carried on - subject married and then drove worthless wife off -- she 'carrying on' with preacher. Mother died - property bequeathed -- part dissipated - subject kept farming -- then decided on day work -- while away, farm went down -- people stole -- hired cook -- adopted nephew -- cook died -- expense. Boy got unmanageable -- left -- sharecropper unsatisfactory. He's going back to farm.
Man especially industrious -- afraid of people leaving farm for government work.
Names changed.