Grayson W. Peschau
Maurice B. Haskett
JOHB AND ANASTASIA PONOS
Anastasia Ponos was born in Smyrna, Turkey, in 1904. Her father was a building contractor and had to work very hard for his living, but her mother came from a wealthy family of shipowners. Her mother's father was a Greek Orthodox Priest. Anastasia attended the public schools and had completed one grade in high school when the trouble between the Turks and the Greek settlement in Smyrna began. The Turks demanded that all the children be taught only the Turkish language. The Bishop of Smyrna refused to accept the demands, so the schools were closed.
Anastasia's parents fled with their children from town. Soon afterwards, the World War began. They found themselves refugees, suffering from cold and hunger. It was not because of lack of food but because the soldiers must have plenty. They were now in Thessalonica.
In 1917 fire broke out in Thessalonica and destroyed two-thirds of the city. All of the male citizens had been drafted into service, so the Government had to employ women to teach in the schools. Anastasia had made high averages, so she was given a position. But she finally resigned her job in order to return to Smyrna with her mother.
After the World War the Greeks and the Turks continued to have trouble. The Greeks had succeeded in capturing Smyrna, so her father thought it was safe there.
Soon after their arrival there John Ponos arrived from America where he had been since 1910. He was the son of a life-long friend and neighbor, Soon he and Anastasia were in love and it was not long before they were married at her home.
John Ponos was born in Smyrna in 1895, His father was a carpenter, and while he worked hard he was not always able to give his family all of the advantages. He died when John was ten and left a dependent family. At sixteen John decided to try his luck in the New World. He borrowed money for his passage from his uncle and sailed. He worked at manual labor in New York for six months, and at the end of that time he secured a job in a confectionery in Wilmington. He worked hard and at the end of two years had repaid his uncle. Then he opened a business for himself, a shoe cleaning and hat cleaning parlor. He did well and in due time became an American citizen. During the War he was drafted and sent as a cook to South Carolina. After the War he returned to Wilmington and opened a confectionery and prospered. In two years he decided to return to Smyrna. This is when he fell in love with Anastasia.
John and Anastasia decided they wanted to live in Smyrna, so John invested everything there in a confectionery. But this proved to be a poor investment from the beginning. Within a few months the Revolution broke out and Smyrna was captured by the Turks. They drove the Greeks out of the conquered territory.
The Christians had to barricade themselves in their houses and hardly dared themselves into the streets. But John was an American citizen and was not bothered like his neighbors. They wanted to get away from this, so John went to the American consulate for advice. They remained in the town until it was fired, then John took his wife, an expectant mother, and a few valuables and hurried to the warship. But the valuables were taken from them on the way and that left them without a thing to their name. They were taken on board and stayed there for two days. Then the ship sailed for Piraeus, but it had to return for more refugees so the people on board were placed on a Greek coal vessel. There they remained until they were taken to the American Y. M. C. A.
The time came for the birth of Anastasia's baby, so she was admitted to one of the best hospitals in Athens. Then on September 3, 1922, they sailed for the United States. Their transportation was paid and also their fare to Wilmington. John had friends there, so he was not worried.
In Wilmington they stayed with a friend, and this friend lent John the money with which to establish a hat cleaning business. Almost as soon as he had repaid the borrowed amount his place of business burned. He lost that and also had to replace the hats destroyed. But soon he opened a new place.
Now John and Anastasia are doing well. They have a nice bungalow in the best part of town, and it is nicely furnished.
They are still members or the Greek Orthodox Church, but Mrs. Ponos attends the Episcopal Church.
Nicholas, the son, has just finished high school where he made high marks, especially in chemistry. He plans to enter State College this fall where he hopes to major in chemical engineering.
