Pete Fox
Chain Grocery Manager,
Paris, Tennessee
Nellie Gray Toler, writer.
Revised by Aswell.
MY JOY IN LIFE
Just enter a Kroger store on a busy day--and all of them are busy with me--and you'll find my happiness. You'll see me when I'm really happy. My life work has been in Kroger stores and it's the only thing I know much about. Oh, yes, I had a little experience in an express office, a few working years, but I don't rate that as anything.
My life began when I left Henry County and went to Memphis to work for Kroger. I guess my work was satisfactory. At any rate it wasn't long before I advanced from checker to being placed as manager in a Mississippi town. I went from there to still another town after about two years. I stayed at one place eight happy years. Then I got a chance to be nearer home and came here. That enables and allows me to come home occasionally on Sundays now.
The advantages of my work are too numerous to mention. I meet all types of people. I make many many friends. Of course, in moving away from them, I lose many of them. My friends are the old people, as well as all ages, even to the tiny little children, bless them! All know me wherever they trade with me. My life is just one of happiness. Although I'm sometimes tired from my work at night, I'm never too let down to still like to be with friends. I don't care to live or stay alone. Making an increase in sales for Kroger each day for my store is my idea of a successful day. Not to let them go down, but to add more customers each day and build new business for my employers is my motto. I'm continually thinking how I can build trade and make more for all concerned.
I hope someday to have a store of my own, but until I can do that I'm perfectly content to remain with Kroger. They are really the best employers in the works. I'd like to be a Supervisor of course, and I hope someday to reach that position. But, of course, I have plenty of years before me to start a store of my own. Right now I'm happy with Kroger. It's the best place to work of any place.
Chain stores can serve the public better than a small store owner, for they've got the wherewith to reach out and give better prices, and so forth. why do Kroger's customers number so many millions? Why, it's due to service strictly. That's the finest thing in life--Service--and the most beautiful word. A satisfied customer is worth a hundred dissatisfied ones, I feel. My motto is every customer to go away feeling cheered when he enters our store. Yes, with Kroger we follow the old adage 'Service with a Smile in our place.' Every member of our force greets each customer with a smile and a cheerful word, no matter how many times a day they enter the store and no matter how small the purchase may be. We want them to come back and to go away content with the merchandise.
My father could not place me through college. I was the only boy at home. One sister older than I, one younger. I somehow wanted to make my own way. Then I was at the stage in a boy's life that I wanted to get out and see the world and make a living for myself and not depend on my dear old dad for my spending money. I therefore quit school in my junior year in high school at Cottage Grove and started seeking my fortune.
I was always interested in mathematics and easily could do any bookkeeping work that came my way. Therefore I found it easy to make a salesman, and I can sell, too, inasmuch as that is my line. It's no force or exertion to me to try to sell anything. I must have been gifted with mixing with the public. That's what Fate intended me to be, I believe. Anyway here I am a salesman and utterly happy in my work. I never recommend anything I do not believe in explicitly. I'm not gifted in being versatile and glib of tongue. I believe honesty in a store as well as life counts more than anything towards satisfied customers. If they know you to be truthful and have the uttermost confidence in you, that means more than any riches you may lay up in the bank, inasmuch as it tends to help you lay up riches, anyway.
My father is a farmer. He makes a moderate living for the family but my sweet old mother--and I'll tell the world a mother is a man's best friend!--has been in very ill health and we've had doctor bills and drug bills galore heaped upon us. Being the only boy and Single, I feel it my lot and duty to aid to my uttermost ability. My sister lost her husband nine years ago and has a son nineteen years of age who has entered and completed high school with honors, more than a year ago now, and who I would like to place him through college, if I could see my way clear to do so. Failing that, I hope he can secure a business course, for I feel that is what he needs and I hope to get him in a Kroger Store. I think that's the best advantage any boy can have to make a real man of himself. He can find himself working for a large chain store and mix and mingle with all types of people and gain much in that respect.
My younger sister married at an early age and she lived in another town. Her husband is also a salesman--for a mechanical line, though. She has the one child, a boy about four years of age. That completes my family life.
I do not know whether I'll ever marry or not. I am on the edge of thirty-four years of age now and still an old bachelor. To me a happy married life is the contented life. Yet I have seen so much in my days of unhappiness and cheating and discontent on both sides that I feel I want to be sure as well as she before I settle down to growing old together. I guess you wouldn't call me much of a courting man. I like to have friends, more than one, and I've never settled down to one girl as yet. The girls have never meant anything to me so far. Just good friends is all. When I meet the Future Intended, I believe I'll then change my plan of living and make a home. That's what I long for. But as to children, I love them in other people, but I can't say that I really care to raise a family myself. I think a boy and girl are a nice family, but I would want my children to have every advantage in life, and the highest education possible to be given them. Unless I saw my way clear to care for them as they should be, I prefer a small family.
I think birth control, more or less, should be considered as to the health of both parents. If it creates a hardship on the health of the wife, I think you can have a happy married life without children. That is--if the man loves his wife as he should. Her happiness should come first with him at all times. That is to say, if you desire a happy union, is my opinion. Yet I think you should be sure you are ready to settle down before you take the responsibilities of married life and that you should discuss every matter fully together and not go into life blind as to all faults, shortcomings, and so forth.
I believe religion has a lot to do with your life and contentment. I should attend church regularly, yet I don't. Just at times. On the other hand, what would this old world be but for the influence of that little Church in the Wildwood? Your morals are more or less up to you. Different people have their own ideas of moral life. I don't lead an immoral life, I believe. I lead the life of the average contented single man. I have pleasure in life, yet it is clean wholesome amusement. After a hard day's work in the store, I enjoy a picture show, or some sport, or an evening of dancing with a congenial bunch. It makes me more contented with life and I get up next morning, refreshed and ready for the day's activities, ready to do my best for Kroger in all ways.
Each day in my life is more or less a new incentive to do better. I don't believe in the old adage," let tomorrow take care of itself." I think I'm conservative and try to save as much of my salary as possible. Yet, all in all, I live a comfortable life. I have a desirable room and meals in a boarding house that is very comfortable. I believe it best to pay more for quality rather than quantity and you need healthful living conditions to make you content with life.
Proper food means more to your health than most anything. I have good health and I attribute it to a moral life, proper diet and cleanliness in living quarters and body. My mother, bless her, reared me in a spotless home and I am the type that wants everything spick and span in my store as well as elsewhere. My friends I want to look nice in their clothes too. Not fine, but neat and clean and well pressed.
More or less outside living has an influence on anyone's life. That cannot be avoided. If you mix with the better class of people you are respected. If mixing with immoral class, you are so considered. Anyone who has responsibilities attached to his shoulder should look up rather than down. It's much easier to climb higher than to fall lower, if you desire. The actions of a man or woman outside of working hours reflects on them in business to a great extent, especially where older people are concerned. Therefore my idea is to live a clean wholesome happy life outside of working hours and yet nothing that will reflect on yourself in business or your employers. For, after all, what the agent does makes or mars the employer's future. I find, with a happy average crowd of men and women today, that they prefer clean living and morals to lowering themselves. They have much more happiness by so doing.
Anything to better yourself, no matter what you are engaged in, is what you should aspire to. Don't be content to stay in the rut. Climb to the highest peak of the ladder and stay there. Success depends on you alone.
I find that the boys working today in stores and so forth, are a moral clean type of young Americans and are really worthwhile and aspiring to the future. My salary is not what I should like, but I know of no position I could fill more satisfactorily than what I am now doing. And most certainly not one that would give me more joy in each day's work and in life. I hope for an increase in salary, for although I'm getting by, there's not much I can do to aid my family as I would like to do. Too, I cannot see my way clear to acquiring a home of my own as long as I have a sister that needs my aid to help her care for her son and make a home of her own. That Possibly has been one reason I'm still single, not being able to support a wife as I should like to do, and thus aid my sister too.
I try to keep fit for my job, inasmuch as a man owes it to his employer to stay healthy. Get up at five or six each morning and take setting up exercises. Then I shower, dress, eat breakfast, and get to the store early to look over things and see if by some means I can arrange a display for more advantage. I usually go to lunch around twelve, and very seldomly remain long away from the store at lunch time, as we are usually busy during that hour. We close around six-thirty during the week and when we have an extra load of merchandise arriving we work at night for a few hours and sometimes until real late.
On Saturday we sell more than the whole week as an average to country people, shop and mill workers. It's always twelve o'clock and sometimes later before we can possibly get away from the store on Saturday night. Sunday mornings I usually sleep late, unless I am going to see my mother.
Each day in my life is in some respects more or less a repetition, I guess. Yet I look forward to each dawn with new zeal for it always brings me some good that I did not realize before.
I enjoy hunting, but haven't time to do so now. My sports and amusements all come at night time and after supper. Yet I find plenty to employ my leisure hours. I read lots, both newspspers and books. Sometimes I just drive in the evenings and relax. Getting a bunch together is also fun, for friends mean much to me and I prize all of mine highly and enjoy mingling with them, as I do not care to be alone at any time. I've found a congenial bunch of men that also have leisure time in the evenings and we more or less get together at their homes and boarding places or downtown. I don't ever loaf in poolrooms and very seldomly patronize road houses, unless with the bunch and just to eat and so forth.
Men are only boys grown up, after all, and the environment you were reared in a home has much to do with your after life, I believe. My good old mother is rather what you may call strait-laced in her views on life and so are my sisters. Therefore, being the one male child in the family, I have possible views on life that men with brothers would possibly view differently. But therefore what I've learned at my mother's knee has helped me become a hard working manager for Kroger, so I'm thankful for all and everything. Perfectly content and happy as I am.