Alabama
Sam Brakefield (White)
N. S. McDonald
COAL MINER
"If I had it all to go over with again," Sam Brakefield said, "I'd have a business of my own. I'd have that, even if it was nothing but a peanut parcher. Since I was fourteen years old I've teen a coal miner; and it's a hard, uncertain sort of life. It's always a 'feast or a famine;' living good when wages are high, and doing without when times are bad."
He sat on the edge of a ditch he had been digging, slowly scraping the red clay off his high rubber boots. Beside him was a gun and a bucket of water. The gun, he explained, was to shoot hawks that had been molesting his chickens.
"You can see by what I'm doing today --- digging this ditch across my land --- that I'm something of a farmer too. But I sure ought to be able to tell you about coal mining. When I was a boy growing up, I talked my dad out of letting me leave our hillside farm that was so poor we couldn't even raise enough for the cows and pigs to eat. That was back in '87, and I soon went to work at the Gamble Mines."
Pausing to light a stubby pipe, he removed his hat and ran strong fingers through his graying, sandy hair.
"Oh, but I felt like a man," he laughed. "I remember, they paid me eighty cents a day, and a day in those times was from sunup to sunset. At first, they put me to digging coal, but when I learned a little more, they gave me a job 'shooting.' That means drilling holes in the coal and then using powder to shoot it loose so it won't be so hard to dig. It was a right responsible place for a strip of a boy; you've got to understand this 'shooting' business, else you might have a terrible accident.
"I tried to do everything just like they told me, working as hard as I could. You know, that's the way to get ahead at anything. It wasn't long before they raised my wages a little, and then in 1903 they made me a foreman and began paying me a straight salary of $75 a month.
"I did pretty well with that much money, but living was costing me more. You see. I had married several years before, and my wife and me had five children to bring up. That's a job, but I'll tell you how we did it; we only paid five dollars a month for house rent, and we saved on groceries. You see, all the salaried men at the mine got their groceries at cost, plus ten percent."
He shook his head slowly, his eyes intent upon the task of removing the clay from his boots. His face was serious when he spoke again.
"I guess I used what you might call business sense in those days. I never did like the thing I did, but I wanted to give my family a good raising; I always put my family in front of everything.
"You see, lots of miners just can't make one payday stretch to the next. It's 'come day, go day' with lots of them. And back in those days it was worse than it is now, for the companies just paid off once a month, and the wages were pretty bad. Then, again, some of the wages were kept in the office, so sometimes it would be as much as two months before a man could draw his first pay.
"The company had worked out a plan where a man conic cash in his salary at eighty cents on the dollar. That is, they would advance him eighty cents worth of 'clacker' money for every dollar's worth of time he put in. 'Clacker' is made out of copper, and it came in five, ten, twenty-five and fifty cent, and dollar sizes. The worker could use it just like real money at the company commissary, but it was no good anywhere else.
"Well, when a fellow wants cash money to spend in town, he'll do about anything to get it. That's why the miners would get 'clacker' from the company, giving up twenty cents on every dollar, and sell it to me in exchange for cash. I would always pay my grocery bills with the 'clacker', and together with my discount, this made my food come pretty cheap.
"What do I think about company stores? Well, they've got better during the years, just like the system of paying workers has got better. But they were mighty bad up to a few years ago. A man that didn't trade at the commissary was fired just as soon as the boss found out about it. If he bought anything away from the company store, he'd better not tell it. If he sent a mail order away for something the commissary handled --- and they handled about everything --- he had to slip around to get his package when it came; he never could tell when a tattler was watching him. You see, the companies always managed to have a few men around who got a big kick out of reporting anything to cause trouble.
"But it ain't for me to be knocking the commissaries. I'm telling about my own self. When I started at the Gamble Mine it was owned by the Tennessee Company, but later it was taken over by the Pratt Mines. When that happened I was raised to $85 a month, and I began right then to save a little money.
"I never did give up my idea that when a man does the very best he can, he will be treated all right. I think that was proved to me, because when the mine was abandoned in 1930, I was making $125 a month. You can see that I had lots to be happy about, but I don't guess we can be happy all the time. My luck had held up too good for it to last always.
"When the old mine played out, I went over to Barney Mine, about eight miles away, and I tell you, I didn't like that place. I had a good reputation and I wanted to keep it, but you can't mine coal with just a reputation. The trouble over at Barney was that they didn't give me any tools to work with. They were old, and their cars were run down; on top of that. I just got disgusted with that sort of business, so I made up my mind I wouldn't stay there.
"That's why I quit and went over to the Flat Creek district. It was a better place, but still not as good as my old place back at Pratt. They had put me to work as inside preparation man, and that means just what it says. I had to look after the drilling of all those holes, getting them in shape for the shots of powder that would knock the coal loose. I also had to direct the undercutting. Machinery did most of that, but I had to know where to place the machine to loosen the earth, and to do the job in the shortest time possible.
"Ma and me were bringing up a good-sized family by this time. We had thirteen children, all told, but we didn't raise but eight of them. That family gave me something to look forward to; giving them a better future than I had had, and keeping them and Ma in comfort. I always tried to talk with my children in a sensible sort of way that would help them in later life. I reminded them as much as I could that there is plenty of room at the top of the ladder, but that it's mighty crowded at the bottom. I kept telling them to get a good education. When you're trained for a job, they come looking for you, but if you're not, why then you're always looking for somebody to take you on.
"After I had been at Hat Creek more than three years, I went over to Number Ten mine as foreman. I was still managing to put a little money aside, but when I look back now, I wish to God that I had saved ten times more than I did. I had enough, by 1932 to buy this farm --- 46 acres all told --- and build the house you see over there aways. It ain't a grand place, but it's strong built. It's meant for service more than looks, and that's another one of my ideas; it's better to do fine than to look fine. We've got three bedrooms, besides a living room, dining room and wash room."
Mr. Brakefield stuffed the tobacco down into the bowl of his pipe and looked thoughtfully across his newly plowed acres. At last, he went on; "The old house gets a little too big and lonesome now, being that all the children have gone; but it's mighty nice to have a place for them when they come on holidays. It's nice to have a secure place for Ma, too, because she deserves the very best in the world. She's worked with me side by side since we married. She's a good woman; the Lord knows she is.
"But talking about her ain't talking about my work, is it? Well, it's funny about a coal miner. He's always either up or down. A long time ago, it seemed like there was two jobs for every miner, but now it's just the other way around. And I tell you, if a miner ain't got some other trade to follow, he's in a pretty bad mess.
"I saw this thing coming a long time ago, I surely did. I just seemed to know the electricity, gas and machinery would replace coal, taking men's jobs away. Why, ten years ago Alabama produced twenty million tons of coal, and in 1933 she put out just ten million tons. That's why I got busy and took up farming sorter as a sideline; I saw this time coming.
"But I'm not grumbling about mining. Things are a whole lot different from what they used to be; working conditions and wages are better beyond comparing. There's more safety now, too, and all the mines have first-aid departments. That's helped them to bring the number of explosions and accidents down to a mighty low figure.
"You know, though, there's more unrest among the miners now than I've ever seen before. Fifteen, or twenty years back we'd, finish our work and then go home, wash up and eat supper. Then we'd all get together and sit around, talking and smoking, having a genteel good time. You don't see that any more; all of the miners and their folks seem to be looking for something that they can't find.
"I guess that's one reason I'm so glad that none of my children follows mining, and it does me good to tell you that all of them are doing right well. Three are living in Texas now, and all my sons-in-laws have good, steady jobs.
"All of the children have a pretty fair education, and that's different from Ma and me. We can read all right, but we can't write worth anything. Howard, he's our oldest boy, made up his mind when he was a little shaver that he'd have a fine education. He stuck to that like a leech and now he's got the education he wanted. He graduated at Southern California University. For awhile he taught school at Judson College --- that young ladies' school --- and now he's a professor at Howard College here in Birmingham.
"You know, it does me good to see what good schooling the children of today are offered. Take the new school over there at Bankhead Farmstead, for instance. It's the prettiest and the finest school in the whole country. All the children for miles around are brought in on a big, fine bus, and they ought to be thankful to Senator Bankhead; he's done a heap for this part of the country. I guess he's done a right smart for other sections, too, but he naturally has done lots of good things at home.
"He and Mr. Roosevelt sure are liked by everybody around here; anything they do is all right. Why, the little children over at the school wrote and thanked Mr. Bankhead for what he had done for them, and he answered their letter right hack. He's never been too busy to look after the little things. That's the reason he's such a great man.
"You'd think maybe I'd quit mining, now that I have my farm, but I'm still at it; I guess I will he till I die. There's something about it that gets a fellow. When I moved here in 1936, the Tennessee Company had lots of out-of-the way hills 'round about. It wouldn't pay them to take the expense of opening them up, so they told me that I could look around and find one worth opening. Well, I knew every foot of ground for miles around, and it didn't take me long to find a good hill for a 'push mine.' It's located about two miles from here, and it produces Mary Lee seam-steam and domestic coal, the non-coking kind. I sell it around here for $1.75 a ton.
"But I don't do much of the work myself; I mostly contract the output to a couple of fellows. It's a drift mine, you see; that is, it goes in on the level. We kept about five men working, and on the average, they'll get out about five tons a day.
"I can't explain much, but there ain't nothing mysterious about mining. When a man goes into a mine, the first thing he must do is to get ready to shoot the coal loose. He goes over the facing, you see, and the coal is in layers. The top layer is about three feet thick, with the bottom layer generally about as thick. There's a ten-inch layer of solid rock in between, so the miner uses a hand drill to get to the coal. First, he uses a four-foot bit in the drill, and then a six-foot bit. After holes are drilled in the lower layer, he scrapes the dust out with a scoop. Then he fills a cartridge with powder and places it in the hole.
"He next takes a long steel needle and sticks it into the hole with the cartridge. Then he takes some fine dirt, and using a tamper, he tamps it plumb up to the mouth of the hole. After that he twists, and then pulls out the needle, leaving a small opening.
"The rest is simple as it can be. When the small opening is made, the miner takes a squib, eight inches long, and fills four inches of it with powder. The other four inches in the squib are sulphurized, so the powder won't burn, so fast. The squib is then placed in the hole and lighted.
"I've found out that a man has time to run about a hundred yards before the powder explodes, and it's not a bad idea to get behind a pillar (a coal prop supporting the mine roof) for protection. About a ton, or a ton and a half, comes from each shot.
"Well, that's the way coal is knocked from the earth in a 'push' mine, such as I operate. Of course, it's different in the big mines, because electricity runs about everything there these days. But for the real fun in mining, I'll take the little mines every time.
"A man's got to be careful, too, in the way he goes about loading his coal; he's got to use care not to get any rocks mixed in. He picks out the rock and 'gobs' it; that is, he throws the rock back into the opening left by the explosion. After it is sorted, the coal is loaded into cars and pulled out by mules.
"Yes, you're right; I've got this mining business fixed up so that I have plenty of time to put in here on my place. I've needed the time, too, because I'm digging this ditch to turn water on some land that needed it mighty bad. I've been digging for nearly a year now, but I'm about finished, thank the good Lord.
"Hang it, I'd have stopped digging a long time ago, except that some folks said I wouldn't finish, it! I guess I'm just a little hit ornery, because I made up my mind that I'd show them. The Methodist preacher is one of the fellows I wanted to show. We're having a steward's meeting tomorrow, and being that the ditch'll be finished by then, I'm just going to bring that preacher down here and make him swallow his doubts."
Mr. Brakefield rose and glanced at the sun, He picked up the gun that he had brought out to shoot hawks.
"Well, I've done what lots of folks do," he laughed. "I've whiled away lots of time talking about myself. But if you'll come up to the house for dinner, I'll repay you for listening. I know Ma will have something good to eat; she always does. You see, we have our 'square' in the middle of the day. It helps a man mine coal and dig ditches."
Coal Miner
Alabama
Excellent
Man formerly miner for large company - discussion of mining wages, developments - commissaries - worked up to foreman - saw slump coming - started sideline of farming - modern safeguards in mining - children have been educated - advances in modern education - he operates a surface "push" mine on his own - discussion "push" mining
Features - A slight entree into a new occupational field. However, no discussion labor trouble or progress in miners' status.
Names not changed.