 Rose Shepherd
No. 204
April 30, 1937.
JACKSONVILLE - Historical.
NEW BERLIN (Suburb)
Personal Interview.
Thomas James Grey, (Aged 84)
Mr. Grey is a long time resident of New Berlin, a native of <text not clear>on, Massachusetts, coming to New Berlin as a member of the crew of the Government Revenue Ship - "The Reliance" - in 1876.
Mr. Grey says: "I had decided on the Navy as my preference life work, and after several miscellaneous voyages, enlisted as <text not clear>of the crew of the U. S. Government Revenue ship "Reliance." <text not clear>was a fighting Irishman, Stephen Cassan. There were six <text not clear>enlisted as coal-passers, and for many reasons, perhaps one <text not clear><text not clear>they were from different sections on Ireland seemed sworn <text not clear>from the start. I was very fond of Stephen, and one night as <text not clear>the mouth of the St. Johns River, there was a terrible fight, I feared for my friend's life. I talked the matter over with the <text not clear>te and told him I would like to leave the service as soon as <text not clear>e, taking my friend with me. He had heard the brawl, too, and he feared there would be some casualties, and told me if, when ship landed at Jacksonville, we two boys would disappear he would cause a very extensive search to be made for us. The next morning "Reliance" steamed up the River and landed at New Berlin, which was an old town even then. Lieut. Wright said -"I am going to call on Capt. Kemp," looking directly at me, which I took as a due to get myself and my friend ashore. We stayed on the landing for a while, then <text not clear>ourselves in the deep woods. The "Reliance" was tied up for a few <text not clear>and whatever information was bought officially, Lieut. Wright received it from Capt. Kemp, who had the store and Post Office here, and the ship did not proceed to Jacksonville, but continued on her way down the coast.
"The picture on the wall there, hand-colored, shows New Berlin the most beautiful town in the world to me, as it was in 1875, the year after I arrived here.
"The Promontory furtherest North shows the residence of Capt. Kemp, adjacent to his store, which also housed the Post Office. Ships put in here often, and there was a regular three-day trip to savannah from Jacksonville, where passage could be taken by train or boat for the North. Mail came the same way - three times a week.
"The next residence is the old von Balsan Home, which is still in possession of the family, now occupied on week-ends and for summer site by the David von Balsan's of Jacksonville. The Methodist Church as in the rear on the Jacksonville road.
"The next residence on the shore line which then extended several hundred feet beyond our present waterfront, is that of the Murwin's then the Buckezz family, with the dock and fish-house at the landing, and adjoining that property was the Toombs home and store. It has all floated off in the River years ago.
"The next night I was walking around, rather homesick, and saw the lights in a new house back from the River and heard the sound of a piano. It was the home of the Methodist preacher, an Eastern man from <text not clear>, but he had been brought down here from Tennessee, anitinment evangelist, to take charges of the new Church. The family and furniture had just arrived that day by boat, and the young lady of the house was trying out the piano. I went in and introduced myself, and being fellow <text not clear>sterners from adjoining States. I soon became fast friends with the family, and the young lady not quite a year later became my life. We lived here forty-seven years together. She is buried in the old New Berlin cemetery back of the town.
"The old Indian Mounds are across the River, back of Chaseville, Dr. Clarence B. Moore, of Washington D. C., was sent here by the Smithsonian Institute and did a great deal of excavating there. He found a great many Indian relics, especially vases and other pottery, but I never heard of any gold-engraved pendant. However, he was on a scientific expedition; and, naturally, whatever specimens he secured, he probably did not feel justified in publicizing here. I saw some of the larger pottery pieces burned in baskets lined with clay, which were quite black, and not particularly beautiful. But they may have been of scientific value.
OLD COQUINA WELL:
"The old coquina well was at Dames Point, and it was quite ancient. Instead of being round, as wells usually are, it was square-root 3-1/2-ft. across, stoned up with coquina blocks. The place where was located is now out a hundred feet in the water.
<text not clear>VON BALSAN'S HOSPITAL:
"Dr. Henry Von Balsan came to this section from New Orleans 1860. He was a surgeon and physician in the German Navy, a most <text not clear>medical man. He and his family were Northern people and Union sympathizers, and when War was declared he and his whole family went down to Fort George. It was here that he had his Hospital during the war. Later it was used as an isolation Hospital for yellow fever uses, Typhoid and small-pox.
"Dr. Von Balsan later went to St. Augustine where he practiced medicine for a great many years. He lived to be well past 90. His new property here was divided between his two sons, Robert and Isadora, and his daughter, Mary Von Balsan. When Mrs. Von Balsan died, she was buried in the old Cemetery here. The second Mrs. Von Balsan was willed the property and personal possessions of Dr. Van Balsan in St. Augustine.
"In addition to being a physician and surgeon, Dr. Von Balsan <text not clear>also a chemist, versed in metallurgy, and also a linguist, in which capacity he was often called upon to act as interpreter when foreign ships landed at New Berlin and Fort George. He was also skilled in the arts and taught his son, Bob, wood carving. There used to be many examples of Bob's work here.
"The point where the Indian Mounds are has now washed in at least three hundred feet. The Huguenots were buried near the old coquina house, probably two hundred feet from the River. Ships sail over the spot now. As the old cemetery slipped into the River, many skeletons, the French who lost their lives in the siege of Fort Caroline, outlined in history as a massacre, were brought to view, and a peculiar thing I noticed was that there were no skeletons with just a few teeth- the jawbones all bore full sets of teeth, indicating that the early explorers and adventurers were intrepid young men, not men of middle age or older.
FORT GEORGE:
The remnants of Kingley's operations and his old plantation Fort George Island were all ruins from my first recollection. At Ft. George Inlet, where the Kingsley mansion house was, there were about twenty-five or thirty cabins composing the negro quarters. They were built to form a circle and were in fairly good condition sixty year age. Each hut was of two rooms, and all were built of "tabby" - that is, shell and lime. The ground was level cleared land. I believe there are one or two of these old "tabby" houses still standing as relies, one of them right down on the beach near the bridge.
PILOT TOWN:
"Pilot Town was so called, because recognized pilots settled there with equipment to guide incoming vessels over St. John's Bar thru the then known channel to the port of Jacksonville.
MAYPORT:
"There never was anything to Mayport from my first knowledge <text not clear>, except as a fishing village. When I first came in 1876, there was lighthouse at the inlet, and I will never forget my first visit when the "Reliance" anchored out from the shore. My friend Stephen cassan and <text not clear>over the sand dunes, the lighthouse seemingly the focal point for the skirling eddies of sand, which had banked high in one spot, and <text not clear>can imagine our surprise when we climed to the tope of the dune to find ourselves looking down the chimney of a two story house. My first <text not clear>on viewing the enormous expanse of white sandy beach, was how she New England women would like to have access to this white sand which<text not clear>they used in large quantities to scrub floors, walks, churns, cooking. <text not clear>, knives, forks and cutlery.
"When I took my unofficial leave of absence from the "Reliance" still had three months to serve, but the life of my friend meant more to me than an honorable discharge. Stephen understood, and when I told him my mother had taught me to cook, scrub, and do my own mending, he said he thought we could make our way as "pioneers." And we did. Stephan also married and established himself and family in a home at New Berlin, and raised two fine children, the son becoming an engineer of note, now dead, but his daughter is still living, a nurse in New York City. His wife died and is buried in the old Cemetery here. Stephen also died many years age from an access at the base of the brain, probably from an old injury received in one of his brawls in the Navy. Ten years after we located here the "Reliance" put into the port of New Berlin, and <text not clear>. Wright, who had been promoted to captain and was in charge of the ship, recognized me on<text not clear>landing. He had a most friendly talk and he accepted my invitation to dinner, where I introduced him to my wife and family of three boys. He also met Stephan Cassan again.
"When I was financially able, I purchased the two lots here on the River where I have since made my home. The lots were 440 feet deep <text not clear>back to the first street in the back. The street along the wat-<text not clear>was called caroline-st., for Dr. Von Balsan's wife, and there was <text not clear>brick pavement along the property line. Much of this has been <text not clear>away and my own house is in danger of toppling over with fifteen three feet of erosion.
"When I first came here, the mail was carried from Mayport to New Berlin by sailboat which continued on to Jacksonville and brought the mail the next day from Jacksonville to New Berlin. This service was operated three times a week. In 1877 a steam launch was placed in operation. <text not clear>. Kemp had the first mail service.
"In the early '80's H.T. Baya of Jacksonville placed a small steam vessel in the mail service - the "Water Lily." Later another of its ships "The Gilchrist" - had the contract to carry the mail.
"David Van Balsan also operated a steam-boat, carrying freight from Jacksonville and fish and shrimp back from this port. Most of the travel was by water also, and it took 2-1/2 hours to make the trip to Jacksonville. The road at the back was poor and very winding, so that travel by team to Jacksonville was a day's journey.
<text not clear>:
"I cannot begin to describe the beautiful woods of this section <text not clear>days, and the large oak and other fine trees three to four <text not clear>thrown, are the grand old pines-all of which the saw-mills which are numerous laterally ate up, and it has never been replaced.
"There was no Railroad into Jacksonville from Waycross down. River service was thru sisters' Greek, by which route passengers for the north could arrive at Waycross at 5 p.m. and leave by rail at 1 a.m. next day, arriving in Savannah the same morning. The "City or Bridgetown" was one of the early steamers to Savannah - an old Missies<text not clear>side-wheeler.
<text not clear>:
Mr. Grey has a marvelous collection of about three hundred <text not clear>and firearms of all descriptions, assembled by his son, Percival. <text not clear>Grey, as he was known, was enlisted as a second Lieutenant at the <text not clear>the world war, but his employers, the Merrill-Stevens Co-, had <text not clear>exempted on account of war duty, and he was destined never to serve <text not clear>country at the front as he wished. Two years afterwards he contracted tuberculosis, and went west, first to New Mexico and later to Tucson, Arizone, where he died. However, his enforced residence in the west enabled him to carry in his hobby of collecting fire-arms. The exhibit occupies the entire room on the second floor of the old home at the New Berlin, and <text not clear>an old cannon, salvaged from the harbor at Havana, Army equipment of the united States from the early flintlock to the latest specimens; collections of "colt's revolvers, from the earliest models to the last<text not clear>Bayonets of all descriptions, a murderous "bolo" of the Philippine Islanders, the "Machete" of the Mexicans, French dueling pistols a revolver-six cylinder, with an eight inch knife ready for immediate action after the six shots had been exhausted ,of the Port Diaz engine, the horse pistols manufactured by the Springfield Co-bearing <text not clear>5,pistals of the Revolutionary war, some with knife attached; <text not clear>shooters of the old cattle cangers of the west, and many others.
OLD <text not clear>:
In a frame is a copy of the New Haven "Journal," of New Haven <text not clear>cut, dated Sept-19, 1782, one of the early issued, 12-x-14.
