Date or first writing:	January 12, 1939
Person interviewed:	Fred Tatum (White)
Address:	Durham, N. C.
Occupation:	Landlord
Writer:	Omar Darrow
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
No. of words:	About 5,600
I LIVE MY OWN LIFE
In the Sunday or week-end traffic around Boylston a stranger might view in the steady stream a singular sort of spectacle--a man who seems a misfit in comparison to the streamlined Packard automobile he drives. This man is Arthur Leavitt.
Close observation of him reveals a complete lack of both upper and lower front teeth, a rotund and ruddy face sharply lined with very small and dark purple veins. The eyes are light blue, round, and kindly. His hair is a dark blond streaked with gray, and his age is around forty-five years.
During hunting season Leavitt is seldom found around Boylston, for he spends most of his time hunting and fishing around New Bern, staying there for weeks at the time. If he finds it necessary to return to Boylston he as Learns again quickly as is possible.
Sometimes he wears good clothes, but generally he comes downtown from his cottage in over-tight overalls which are seldom clean, and a hat that looks as though his favorite hunting dog had used it for a bed. Sometimes he isn't driving his Packard. Instead, he is driving an old ’25 or ’26 model Ford on which he has built a truck body. He uses this truck in his work and also hauls slop, gathered from the homes of his many friends, to one of his little farms for the hogs that he raises.
"I want home-made meat. I was raised on it and I just can’t get used to doing without it," he tells anyone who remarks about such menial tasks.
Leavitt’s house is a neat little white cottage and not greatly unlike those of his neighbors, as practically all have a few scattered shrubs in the yards. On the porches are a few well-painted, split-bottomed rockers, a glider with red and black-striped cushions, and a cocoa mat that generally is well-encrusted with deep heavy streaks of mud.
In the living room of Leavitt’s home there was a lovely imported rug, its subdued colorings harmonizing with the "extra" and expensively upholstered chairs. Brown and tan colors with the slightest touch of rose, in both rug and chairs, blended well with the dark maple desk and desk chair. A few masculine-looking trinkets, including a pair of deer horns, were pushed far back on the desk toward the wall which is papered, as are the walls in the other rooms, a tan eggshell color. On the right of the desk stood a photograph in a frame--one of those old-fashioned, heavy frames. The picture was of a lovely young lady in a "basque" and a "hoopskir," her hair drawn tightly in the back, only to be loosened on the top of the head in beautiful and shapely curls which hung carelessly free.
"That's Mama," Arthur said with a touch of pride in his voice. It is the only picture or photograph in his home.
Arthur isn't a great talker unless he comes into contact with someone who likes to hunt as well as he does.
"Do you get lonely here all alone?" I asked him.
"Well, yes, I do sometimes," he replied, "but I ain't gonna be lonesome long at a time. I'll get out the old gun, call my dogs, and take off after a rabbit, or get in the old buggy and ride if I have no work to do. I wanted Ellie May to stay here with me, but Ballard and her mama who is my sister just wouldn't hear to it. They wanted me to go up there and live with them," he grimaced--"or that's what they said but everybody knows what they'd want me there for. I'm not doing it, though, for they came pretty near to getting everything I had. So I don't trust myself or anything I have with them. Ellie May comes to see me, though, but she has to run away from them to do it ever since that time that they whipped her so hard that I had to get out my old smokerod and run her daddy away from here. I like to a killed him that day. He acted just like Ellie May had no right to come to see me, so they were just so mean to her about it and whipped her every time she slipped down here that I told her to quit trying to come.
"Ballard ain’t going to bother me much more. You know, he’s been so sore that he’s just naturally scared of me ever since that time when he come back from that chiropractic school and accused Ellie of running around with other men. I didn’t care a fig about that. That was none of my business, but it was when he went to Uncle Tom and demanded $10,000 to live with Ellie again. I didn’t wait for Uncle Tom’s answer. I told him we didn’t want them to live with her and that I was giving him the answer with my old smokerod. I gave him five minutes to quit arguing and get out of Uncle Tom’s house. He didn’t think I meant business but I showed him. I ran him out with the gun and then he got scared and started walking a little faster. I shot but didn't shoot to hit him, and then he ran and ran. I ’spected Uncle Tom to try to frail me, as old as he was, but, instead of that, when I went back in to put the old ’rod’ up, Uncle Tom said, ’My boy, has he gone? Ha! Ha! Ha!’ I knew right then that Uncle Tom was with me, so I ain’t been afraid of anything I’d say to him since and I ain't taking nothing off him, either.
"You know, before I ever went overseas I knew just how the land lay. Several people told me of how Uncle Tom laid on his deathbed and begged for a message to be sent 'to my boy.' I would have gotten the first one, too, if it hadn't have been that before I went to camp Agnes heard Uncle Tom tell me, 'Stick to me, boy, I don't know of one I had rather have what I've got than you.’ Well, that just killed Ballard, so when finally Mama asked Dr. Larson to send a telegram to camp, asking a leave of absence for me to visit Uncle Tom, Ballard, it seems, bribed him. At least, that telegram never came to camp. Finally, interested friends, after learning that the telegram never entered a telegraph office here, decided to send one themselves. I got that one. I came home to find Uncle Tom in a very bad way, and my mama, by that time, had learned that Ballard was not the angel that she once thought him to be.
"But, at any rate, things went smoothly enough while I was home. With Uncle Tom so bad, I just passed all that up, although my friends all told me of just how Ballard had been trying to pull the wool over the eyes of both Uncle Tom and Mama in his attempt to make them believe that I was the 'black sheep,' and I learned, too, that Ballard was becoming more and more friendly with J. M. Carson, Uncle Tom's lawyer. Henry Carson, J. M.'s brother, had been Uncle Tom’s attorney until his death several months before. Mr. Henry Carson was a fine man and a good man, so when he passed on Uncle Tom, on account of the great confidence that Mr. Henry Carson merited and J. M. being a brother to Mr. Henry, turned all or his affairs over to J. M. which did seem the logical thing to do. But Uncle Tom had not thought that there could be so much difference in brothers. Every time I spoke my mind about the situation Ballard would remind me that, 'Carson is all right, Arthur. You must remember you have no education; you don’t know anything. Carson is a smart man.'
"I know I never went to college. I didn't even finish high school, but when the good Lord made me He gave me good old horse sense. A fellow don't have to have a couple of college degrees to be able to tell when a sharpster is trying to rob him of all that he has, and God don’t let us all be born fools, either.
"When I come in all tired from a long hunt or a hard day's work that old bed in that bedroom is the most comfortable place I got around here."
Arthur led the way across the hallway to his front bedroom which is a typical man’s room. A chest of drawers, a dresser, a bed of walnut, a couple of chairs, one rocker, one straight chair, were in the room and on the floor was a sand-brown, velvet tapestry rug with dark brown border.
Arthur is rather careful that there are heavy imported scarfs and bedspreads for this room, for when he has company to stay overnight, which isn’t often, he retires to the back bedroom which usually stays disordered with clothing strewn about, scattered pieces of which are ready for laundering, and which he is very careful to gather up once each week.
As he apologized for the disorder of this room he remarked: "I’ve got to get up a bunch of these things and carry them to the country to have mended, that is, if they’re worth it. I never Know whether they are or not. I don’t like the way the laundry mends things. Mama used to say that Mabel and her mama mended just like she did, so I just take them out there and what is no good among them Mabel uses for scrubbing rags. I tear up so many clothes. I’m so fat I bust them out or tear them on brush while out hunting.
"Mabel used to live close to us when Uncle Tom and ma were living, and Mabel and her brothers were my playmates when we were kids."
Arthur’s expression grew serious.
"It's such a pity that Larry turned out so sorry. It just worried Mabel and her mama to death most. He just never was like Mabel and Jim. He musta took back after some of the old Simmses. I’ve heard Uncle Tom say that some of the oldsters of that Simms family was mighty sorry. Mrs. Simms is getting old now and they don’t tell her much about his meanness. It makes me glad that she went out in the country to live with Mabel, for Jake Anson, Mabel's husband, is mighty nice to her. I stayed out there with Mabel and Jake after Mama died. After she died from those burns somehow I just couldn’t stay around the old home, ’cause everywhere I’d turn it seemed I could hear her calling to me for help. When her clothing caught fire, if I had been there instead of out-of-doors, I might have helped her--I don’t know. I just know that nothing has been the same to me since. It was bad enough to come home from overseas to find that Uncle Tom was resting under a new mound of earth and no one to tell me what to do or how to start all over again, and I knew that no matter what I did I could never please my sister, Ellie, or her husband, Ballard. Frankly, they have never quite gotten over it that I was not left in Flanders Field. I know it sounds like barbarians and it’s hard for one who don’t know it to believe it, but there are plenty of folks who know it just as well as I do.
"After Mama died I tried to stay about home and repair the place and do a few things about there that I knew Mama had intended doing or having done, but I just couldn’t stay there much. I tried to spend most of my time taking care of Mama’s properties, for I had never learned anything to do except follow after the farm hands and ’piddle' about with them, talcing care of the garden at home or any little thing that came to hand. And now I didn’t know just what to do, for I’d go to one place to repair maybe a back fence, dig a drain ditch, or plant a few pieces or shrubbery that I’d pick up cheap, only to learn after I did it that Ellie and Ballard already had laid claim to the property.
"Ellie used to be all right when we were kids, but she always was simple-minded and lets someone, who maybe she thinks has a little more sense than she, dictate to her what she is to do, and no one could do that more than her husband.
"What I was getting to was this: I’ll never forget Mabel or Jake Anson, for, as I have already told about Ellie and Ballard laying claim to everything that Mama left and everything it seemed that should have been mine which Uncle Tom left, I soon found myself penniless. I went to J. M. Carson and talked to him, and I got nothing there. A man must eat, but I had no job. I knew I was welcome at Mabel’s house, but a fellow hates to go any place if he can’t pay his way. I thought it all out; I could certainly make my board, for Jake had a big farm and there was plenty of work to do. Both Mabel and Jake were really happy to have me out there. I helped Jake with any and everything he had to do, and I stayed out there for sometime until finally, after much bickering around, I was granted a small allowance--enough for me to live on, provided. I lived cheaply which I always have. Shortly after this, I was allowed to claim these little cottages on Manson Street and a little piece of farm land, so I moved into this little cottage, and have been fixing it up a little at a time until it's livable now.
"I don’t drink liquor any more. All of those liquor cures are no good to a fellow. I’ve always thought that a fellow just had to make up his mind what he is going to do and do it. If he doesn’t do it that way it just isn’t done. That’s exactly why I wouldn’t stay at a place to cure such when the doctor carried me up there. I told him I was not going to stay, and he had as well not try to get away and leave me. So when I learned that he had slipped out on me I ran away and hitch-hiked back here and was in his office a few minutes after he arrived. I drank liquor when I did drink it, because I was so lonely that I just couldn't stand it. Liquor gave me just a little relief from loneliness. I never got ’lousy’ drunk and didn’t ever bother anybody, but I did, drink plenty of old ’bootleg’ corn liquor back there in those days.
“With Uncle Tom and Mama gone and my sister and her husband hating me so terribly for being alive and eligible for a part of the family estates, I’d feel mighty low sometimes, for I’m no hog about money and didn’t feel the need to go out fighting for it. I have lots or good friends who have stuck to me through it all, and it wasn’t for the sake of money that these friends have stuck to me, either; I don’t want that kind of friendship."
"So many have wondered just why you have never married."
"Well, every man can get married. I figure I’ve had trouble enough without getting into more, although I know there are plenty of good and fine women. There was one I might have cared for if she had given me time, but she walked off and married a nother fellow just about the time I began to get interested in her. I never felt it worth the trouble since then to think about them much. I’m friendly to all of them but that’s all."
One night expect a very dirty kitchen at Arthur’s house but it was clean; not in perfect order, for a very large country ham, about a third disposed of, rested on a side table. His kitchen cabinet of dark oak with porcelain top was in good order, and the dishes stacked on the shelves and which are seen through the glass front were all in order and glittered with cleanliness. A linoleum floor covering that was clean but showed long use had a small piece broken out or it near the door to the back porch.
There were curtains at all of his windows, and he is careful to remember that they need an occasional laundering.
"I like to eat home-made meat. Uncle Tom always raised his own meat and done the feeding, too. We always had country ham at home. You know, I always lived with Uncle Tom. It was his and Grandma Phelps' house, and when Mama was married she and Daddy lived there with them. Then shortly after I was born, when my sister was about three years old, my daddy died, so we three stayed right on there; and ever since I could remember I tagged right along in Uncle Tom's shadow until the World War dragged me out. I find much of my pleasure trying to do many things that I used to see Uncle Tom do, but I often feel that I'm sorry that he didn't drive me out back there in those days and make me learn to do something worth while. Maybe now I could raise my hogs and do something else worth while, too.
"I have a good living, that is, as much as I'd care to live up. We had plenty at home, but we never spent much and was never extravagant in anything except extreme amounts of foods of all kinds.
"The pigs are out on a little farm in the country. I always keep plenty of feed out there, and when I don't get out to do the feeding the man who tends the farm feeds them for me.
"I played right much, too, when I was small. Those were the good old days. Uncle Tom spent all of his afternoons right at home, but he’d make me work right much of the time, cleaning out the feed barns and keeping the bins in order, raking out the calf lot, cleaning out the chicken pens, and such. I had to keep all of the manure piles ready to be hauled out to the farms at all times, and I had to keep the vegetable garden weeded in the summertime. There was pine straw to be raked up and hauled to the barn lots for bedding for all those horses, cows, and calves, and there was always an old sow that had to have a new pen filled to the top with pine straw. He was getting old along about then, and the Negroes didn’t do it to suit him and I did, so I fell heir to the job. When I was finished with my tasks and he had gone and inspected my work, if it was satisfactory, I played the balance of the afternoon, and if it was hot weather the old swimming hole was the first thing that popped into my mind.
"There was and still is a tremendous rock that we kids all around called the ’Waterfall,’ for over it a stream flowed from a spring close by. This waterfall was almost on our home lot, so I spent a lot of time building a dam there. Lots of the neighbor boys would come up and help me until we had a veritable ’glory hole' there. My, we had good times there. We’d play somersaulting down the haystacks in the barn lot when Uncle Tom wasn’t looking. I knew all the time when we were doing it that it would be found out and he’d switch me. He always did when he found one torn up. I would not lie about it, for I knew it would do no good.
"We had an old horse named Barney, and another named Fanny. Barney was almost lame when I could first remember. Fanny was younger, and Uncle Tom would not let Barney work. Sometimes he'd get one of the Negroes to hitch her to the old phaeton and drive uptown mornings, but that was seldom; mostly he drove Fanny. There were other horses there, but these two were white horses and fat as moles. Uncle Tom had an extreme liking for white horses, and I never saw him drive other than those two. When I pleased him greatly or done some task really well he’d let me hitch both Barney and Fanny to the phaeton, and I’d get up four or five neighbor girls and Ellie and we would light out to Cousin Nora’s where we had the biggest time. When we went out there we all ate just like we had never had anything to eat in our lives before. It seemed like Barney and Fanny had to figure in all the big events in which I had most fun. We had a number of other horses but the names of them don't linger.
"I didn’t have much playtime after I started to school in the fall until its close the following summer. Maybe that was why I dreaded school so much and would not finish high school. About that time Mama began to talk about not being able to have a cook or somebody to help her in the house. That was something that I had never known before. Uncle Tom and me tried to keep her from doing it, but it did no good for she talked and talked about it. It was too expensive to have to pay someone she’d say. She’d do it herself. I don’t know what come over Mama for we had as much as we had ever had and more besides, but Uncle Tom and me couldn’t make her understand. She worked day after day, cooking, cleaning, and scrubbing and never talking any more of buying her new clothing as she once did. She wore her clothing until it came into slits, sewing them up and wearing them on and on until finally we got used to it, I suppose, but occasionally I would come back at her with the old argument about clothes. Then she would start talking of this piece and that piece of property of hers that had to have new roofs, new paint, new paper until I saw it was all no use.
"I’ve wondered many times what it was that could have been worrying Mama so those days, for at that time she was still very well satisfied with Ellie’s marriage. But there had to be something wrong somewhere for she lost all of her pride. She would go down the street with the same ragged dresses and sewn slits in her clothes that she wore at home, and she didn't seem to care whether they were clean or dirty. She seemed to have no thought of anything as she once did. She went to church as often as she ever did, and then she did dress a little more like her old self.
"Of course, she was Mama to me just the same, but when Lola Tompkins began gossiping about it, it made me plenty hot for when her husband married her she wasn't anything but the daughter of a drunken sot of a brickmason. She couldn't talk about my mama even if she did go downtown, ragged and dirty. She had done no one harm; all or our neighbors liked her, and she never saw anyone in need and not give them something. My mama was a neighbor among all of our many neighbors. Although she grew to seem strange and different even before I went overseas, she never lacked neighbors or true friends.
"All day long she puttered about the house, cooking the foods that Uncle Tom and I liked best, caring for our clothing, and it mattered not if I got out of bed at four o'clock in the morning, Mama was up ahead of me and had fires going in every room that we used. I hated to leave things that way and go overseas, but there was nothing else to do.
"When I returned it seemed that her condition was worse and neighbors said that day after day her whole conversation was of Uncle Tom's feeble condition and of my plight within the firing lines in France. About three years we lived at the old home together after I returned, and then that memorable morning came when she got too near to one of those big fireplace fires. It seemed that she only thought of getting to me and ran out-of-doors, screaming for me, her clothing in a light blaze from the hem of her skirt to her shoulders. All that I could do was to jerk off my coat and try to smother the flames, but she was burned too badly, I didn’t get to her in time.
"Ellie had married very young, and the man she married had never been able to fool me a bit, even though I was just a boy. I knew that he cared more about the family’s money than he did for Ellie, and he’s proved it in every way, for there was never anything sincere about his interest in the family. When Mama died he began to show more and more of the greed that I had known all the while he had. Pretty soon between him and J. M. Carson, I found that they were doing just as they pleased with everything and I had no say-so about anything. I was penniless and homeless.
"Each time I spoke of conditions to Ballard or Ellie they told me that Carson knew what he was doing.
"In the final wind-up, according to this administration, I find myself with these little cottages and my little farm, but that is enough for me to live on.
"A very few years ago Ballard and Ellie told a good friend of mine that I had nothing now, that they had it all, but it seems as though the worm has turned again. Instead, they have nothing, neither do the Tompkins. Carson has it all.
"I wish I could be religious; I’d like to be. I’m no church member, although all or my family and family connections have been members of the First Baptist here, but while I live I have a great desire not to be a hypocrite. I believe that ’what is to be, will be,' and that it is good for us that life isn’t all a bed of roses. Most of us want too much in life--expect too much. I learned long ago that my family relations were my worst enemies. No one here would do a wrong except my relatives.
"I insist that our greatest education comes through experience instead of college degrees, although I often feel that I should have gone to school more than I did. But we only need to know enough, have enough education to live the lives that we like best, and I have that. I like the simple life, and I get more pleasure out of living this way than many I know do who live extravagantly.
"My politics? Why, political parties are necessary, I suppose, but to me they aren’t. I vote, when I vote at all, for the man that I feel is best fitted to serve the people. But then we get fooled sometimes.
"Mrs. Olsen, next door, sorter looks after my house a bit. I get somebody to come and do a general cleaning and she sees to it a little. Mrs. Olsen has been awfully nice to me ever since I’ve lived next door. She invites me over to eat often. Sometimes I go and sometimes I don’t.
"I do get lonesome sometimes and I wish so much for Ellie May. She is my sister’s youngest daughter. She has two girls, but I don’t care for the oldest one for she is too much like Ballard. Ellie May is my only relative who is nice to me; the other relatives don’t speak to me when they see me. I’m not likely to have much to leave anybody, but what I do leave behind goes to Ellie May.
"My health is very good. I spent sometime at the hospital for a general check-up after I quit all of that drinking. My teeth, the front ones, were no good at that time so I had them took out, and for some reason--I guess it is just lack of interest--I haven’t had more put in.
"I’ve always eaten plenty of vegetables, although I am a great meat eater. I never fail to eat vegetables, however, for I was brought up to eat them and drink plenty or milk, too. My out-of-door life helps me to keep feeling fit, and my habits are pretty regular. Although I occasionally stray from my regular habits, I don’t do it enough to affect my health.
"When I can offer an accommodation to some nice lady or a pretty girl, I’m right there. Often I take on one or a crowd and carry them some place that I think they might like to go. No, I am no woman-hater, although I am a bit wary of women somehow--all of them, I guess--some for one reason and others for another. I guess I just wouldn't know what to do with a woman or how to treat one, maybe. At any rate, a man can’t go very far wrong when he takes on some good hunting dogs for his friends. They're always where you leave them and darn glad when you get back to them. I'll just keep my dogs."
When Arthur Leavitt is spoken of around here there are people who will say: "He’s ’nertz'; he’s batty--the fellow who lives on Jackson Street, Old Man Sanders’ great nephew, the fellow who has nothing to do with anybody in the neighborhood, except the people next door. Anybody who inherited the money he did must be crazy to live by himself and hunt all the time that he isn’t feeding hogs, hauling slop, or puttering around his property like a ’handy man.'"
Most everything can be heard about him from one source or another, and while these things are being talked Arthur says: "It don’t matter to me what people say. I just run along and mind my own business and let the other fellow do as he pleases. When I hunt I hunt my own dogs, shoot my own shells, drive my own car, sleep in my own bed, live in my own house, eat my own food; and when I want to do so I dress up; when I want to wear overalls I wear them; and if I go hunting and get into mud up to my neck I have my own bathtub and plenty of hot water convenient. I'm not too lazy to wash the mud off or out of my clothing, either, as for that matter. I know one thing, I ain’t asking anybody to do anything for me."
