Alabama
E. J. Cain
Beyou la Batre, Ala.
Lawrence F. Evans
Box 214
Fairhope, Alabama
October l4, 1938
MASTER CAIN, OF THE GROVER CLEVELAND
of
Bayou la Batre
I stopped the car on impulse and walked behind the shrimp factory where the Grover Cleveland floated lazily in the bayou. Aft, basking in the sun and whittling on a piece of pine board sat the master.
"May I come aboard?' I asked.
Master Cain spat a mouthful of tobacco juice, expertly across the deck, but did not look up. "Aye," he said. The thirty-eight boat deck of the Grover Cleveland. The boat was during the administration of that president--was as clean as an egg shell, and shaped almost like one. Coiled lines rested neatly fore and aft and shrimp nets and trolls were neatly stacked. An upper and lower bunk showed spic and span through the cabin doorway. I passed the engine room and noted that the machinery shone as if burnished only a moment ago. No crew was aboard but then Master Cain ( every one called him Master Cain) was a crew in himself and the Grover Cleveland looked as if ready to put-put out into Mobile Bay or the bayou or the Gulf of Mexico, - or anywhere, simply by a command. Yes, the Grover Cleveland was ready for her next trip to sea for a load of shrimp.
Now Bayou la Batre, long noted for her fishing industries and especially for shrimp, boasts of three shrimp factories, and although the factories maintain fleets of boats with two and three men as crew of each, some of the shrimp men prefer, if they can, to own their craft.
"Working a factory boat is like being a share cropper," said Master Cain. "I been in this here business thirty-five year and it don't pay to work for a factory less'n you own your own boat. Crewmen gets everything furnished and the factory gits a share of the shrimp brung in besides taking out the money the crew has spent for food and oil. Jist suppose that the crew has been out for a week and don't catch no shrimp. What have they made? Well next time they go out they'll probably catch a good haul but they'll owe two weeks grocery bill as well as a oil bill and maybe they've lost a troll or a net wu'th say fifty dollars. They ain't made nothin'. Me, I'll take my own boat every time. I furnish everything and sell the shrimp to the factory and what's mine's mine.
"Have I got time to answer some questions about the business? Well I guess time is what I ain't got nothin' else but. Since I owned this boat nigh on to eighteen year all my time is spent with her out on the water when it's time to go fishin' and sittin' here where l can see the factory, on one side and my house on t'other. My old woman can call me to dinner from here and the factory can tell me hit's time for me to go on out and bring in a load of shrimp.
"Yep, they allus tell me when it's time to go out. We got a Union and every man gits his proper turn. One fellow goes with me and we share on the shrimp when we clear expenses. Expenses ran pretty high with gasoline in the motor so we use paraffin 'stid o' gas. Yes, she works all right. But when shrimps bring a good price we use gas anyway. No good now. Don't seem to be nothin' in nothin'. Remember last year during the season, - it's the best season now - I made more'n two hundred dollars a week for three weeks, clear profit.
"Yep, that's a lot of money in anybody's town - but don't last long. I didn't make more'n half that the rest of the year cause the bottom dropped out of the price. Can't bring in more than thirty barrels in one load sometime and then again they might be times when I stay, out all week and don't git fifteen barrels. The Grover Cleveland can take aboard thirty-five barrel!"
"How do we find shrimp? That's easy. Sometimes the water's a little muddy and then ag'in you can smell 'em. We drop a test troll down and see if they're there. If they aye we just shut off the motor and drift and put out our nets and trolls and two men handles them pretty, easy. We put 'em there below deck and ice 'em until we git up to thirty, barrels. We have to weigh them and keep 'em iced below deck until we git in. Hit's easy, 'Less you're out in the gulf where you have to go a hundred feet to find 'em on the bottom. Now, shrimp is runnin' (they run in schools) up the bay and we git 'em in thirty feet of water all up Mobile Bay as far as Fairhope - that's thirty miles. 'Course they only run in there this time of year, 'cause the water's salty. Springtime when the rivers empty in the bay shrimp goes out in the Gulf. That's harder and shrimp ain't so good then but we could still make a livin' at it if the government would let us. Now we have to stop four months, on account of a law of some kind."
"What do we do then? Well them that's got boats can fish for red-fish and trout and flounder and mackerel. I do. And git by on it - but not so well.
"Them that ain't got no boat mostly has to go on the WPA and things like that. Some jist go on relief 'cause with all the fishermen on Dauphin Island and in the bayou they's a lot o' men here. I growed up here and bean at this game since I was eighteen. 'Member when I married - my wife - she was a Bosage and her people was French who settled here in 1786 - they warn't more'n a hundred men working shrimp. They worked it all year and made a good livin'. Why seventeen year ago I bought this boat for $2500.00 and built that house you see over there besides. They're both mine. Boat's still wuth two thousand dollars in anybody's money. House ain't wuth nothin'. Have to keep that boat up to make a livln' sich as it is. But this here boat is better'n most o' the new ones the factory owns. Wouldn't trade with any, of 'em. Hell no."
"Is shrimpin' a hard life? Yep, it's hard, but I guess everything else is too. Harder on my old lady than on me. Don't mind stayin' out for a week or ten days when she's rough in the Gulf and Bay, but the old woman might not like it so much. Been at it too long now to know anythin' else. We git out in a storm sometimes and might ran out o' grab. Always make my helper do the cookin' so don't worry me much. Git fish and shrimp to eat when there ain't nothin' else. Ain't touched a shrimp in nigh on to five years now, though. Sorta git tired of them. Family still eats 'em. Me and the ole woman got eight kids and it takes a lot o' grab for kids. Yep all living. Had lots o' sickness but they's all pulled through. Guess it's the ole woman that's done it. The grown boys are still with me. Shrimpers too. They go out on different boats. That away, we don't have all our eggs in the same basket and we always got a chance to have somethin' comin' in. Nope, they ain't married, 'cept one girl - she's been married three years - married a shrimper and he works on a factory boat.
"Nope, I don't mind you seein' my house and ole woman. Neither of 'em is much to look at but they'll do yit, even after all the years they've been through. Say, you ain't no revenue man are you? You know this here boat use' to run liquor from Cuby to Mobile an' ever since then I been bothered with revenue men. You ain't! Well then go on up to the house and visit the ole woman. She's cookin' dinner. Shore it's alright. Glad to talk to you - ain't got nothin' else to do."
And Master Cain of the Grover Cleveland, captain and owner of the ship, stayed where he was, sitting in the sun, whittling and chewing his Brown Mule tobacco. A gentle breeze swayed the craft on the lazy bayou as I walked down the gang plank. From there a path led through the rank weeds to a ram shackle, paintless house that might have been of Civil War vintage. The path led into the back yard where garbage, fishing paraphernalia, and tin cans greeted my approach with many odors. From behind a pile of washtubs a three year old boy jumped to life and ran into the house yelling. "Ma! here's a man." I followed the rotting picket fence around to the front, eluded the shaggy chickens and two scrawny puppies, stepped over the broken doorstep and onto a porch with one straight-back chair sitting sedately against the wall.
My knock brought the "Ole Woman," and Master Cain was right. She was an old woman. There wasn't a tooth in her head. Her dress looked as if the thin calico was the only garment she wore. She appeared anaemic, was stooped, and snuff dribbled down one comer of her mouth. The three-year old child stayed behind her thin legs and peeped out with questioning eyes. Through the door I could see the living room.
"Captain Cain sent me up, - may I come in?"
"Shore," said Mrs. Cain as she opened the screen door whose lower half was entirely devoid of screen.
There seemed to be plenty of furniture -- such as it was; old, broken-down, weatherbeaten and on a bare floor. A bed with a quilt spread neatly over it sat against the wall in the corner. There were numbers of straight chairs with rawhide bottoms scattered about. But the house was dirty and disorderly. Two doors opened to other rooms. One was a bedroom with two beds unmade. The other door led to the dining room where an unpainted table was being set by a girl of approximately fourteen years of age.
The table was barren of any cloth. But the barefoot girl looked thoroughly school-girlish.
Mrs Cain excused, herself and vent and spat her snuff out. But she didn't talk much. She said, with her hands so full of feeding nine people there wasn't much time for her to know what was goin' on. And further, with shrimp bringing only seven dollars a barrel and her menfolks to look after when they couldn't average more'n three barrels a week, it wasn't like it used to be.
"Sometimes," said Mrs. Cain, "Me and the two girls at home now pick shrimp in the factory. We don't make much. Could make about nine dollars a week if we could work regular, apiece. But we git about two or three days when they are the busiest."
"How do you spend your spare time, Mrs.Cain?” I asked.
"Law me," she said, "I ain't got no spare time. Hardly time to go to church what with four kids in school this year. They go to the parochial school. We're nearly all Catholic down here, you know - and lookin' after three grown men I'm too busy, to worry about havin' spare time. 'Course I go to all the church affairs and sometimes they have a party. Sometimes we can let the kids go to a picture show but most times they don't have the chance. Keep them busy too. Then they's Union meetin'. I attend when I can, 'cause the shrimp pickers oughter go to that too. I been kinder puny the last two or three year and we ain't gone nowhere nor done nothing but try to make a livin'. I can remember when my grandpere - he was a Bosage (and she said this proudly) - was living. He was the grandson of the first settler of Bayou Batre. There was jist a few people who shrimped then and every- body could made a good livin' at it. But now since there's about two thousand people in this town, most all of them make a livin' shrimpin', oysterin' or fishin'. Leastways they try to. Guess we do about as well as any of them - except in the summer when most of the fishermen go on relief and we can't because we own this house and the Grover Cleveland. But I ain't kickin'. We got five good boys and three nice girls. Don't never give us no trouble. All of 'em work in shrimp when they git big enough. Antoinette - she's in the kitchen; can't work at it now on account of the new law 'bout age or somethin'. But we're pretty well fixed. Most fishermen ain't got a place to call their own. Our roof leaks and the house needs fixin' but still it's ours. Guess we're pretty well off."
Half a block north of Master Cain's house and beginning next door to the shrimp factory a rickety, unpainted picket fence encloses seven "shot-gun" houses, their front doors open to the paved street but their back doors open on a branch of the shrimp factory. Just behind the shrimp factory is the Bayou, mother of the industry, resting complacently, on her sandy, dredged bottom.
But houses is not the name for these hovels. They are all of a pattern, long, ugly, unpainted, dilapidated, with a half porch caving in and pasteboard patches here and there for window panes. One does not need to enter to feel the hopelessness and desolation of the occupants. Ill kept, with scrawny, stooped women sitting on the doorsteps, tousel haired and dirty faced children; nondescript garments hanging on a wash-line between the buildings, all make a picture of despair.
These are the homes of shrimpers who work for the shrimp factories on "shares." Here live the wives and daughters of the men who go to sea and fight for an existence here live the women who strip their fingers to the bone, beheading and picking the shrimp, so that they may earn a few dollars to eke out the meager earnings of husbands and fathers.
Two blocks north and two blocks west another factory group presents a similar appearance. But there are more houses and a large colony. Still another factory is one-half mile west of town on the Shell Road where appearances are in no wise different. Scattered throughout the city of Bayou la Batre, shrimpers live in houses that they have once owned but now merely, rent. Some three hundred families make a living working in shrimp in the dreamy, drifting town of Bayou la Batre. Drifting in a sense of knowing no other thing to do but catch, pick, pack shrimp and wait for the next season to do it over.
It was noon time and I bid Mrs. Cain and her shy little boy good-day his house in better days; in days when the Bayou was more or less unmolested and when there were no shrimp or oyster factories in the neighborhood. Now the house stands between a factory on one side and a wholesale fish house on the other. The bayou has been dredged to his hack door. The road has been paved in front of his door and the business section is two blocks north with the postoffice the first building on the left. Six miles northwest the paved road intersects the Old Spanish Trail, National coast-to-coast Highway 90.
Long the most famous and most southern fishing town in Mobile County, Bayou la Batre's earliest settler was the French family Bosage, who petitioned the Governor in New Orleans, center of the government, to grant him enough land on the Bayou la Batterie to retire on, where he and his family might grow corn and fish and hide their poverty from the well-to-do of Mobile. Thus started the lordly family of Bosage, toward the proletariat family of Master Cain. And thus, today, is the last remnant of the aristocratic family Bosage living a plebeian life in dreamy Bayou la Batre, where oyster shells greet the eyesight and odors of fish assail the nostrils.
Washington Copy
S.B.J.
11/1/38
