June 19, 1939
Mrs. Walter Rowe (white)
Newton, N. C.
Mill worker
Ethel Deal, writer
Mary R. Northrop, reviser
“May be Some Day I Lean Read It Myse’f.”
Original Names:	Changed Names:
Jennie Rowe (Mrs. Walter)	Lily
Jimmy	Nicky
Dave Buff	Joe Ball
Bonnie	Linnie
Amos	Ira
Richard	Edward
Tillie Foster	Janie Cribbens
Lawndale Mill	Blodgetts Mill
Shelby	Carteret
Cherryville	Peachlands
Kale Lloyd	Rafe Collins
Walter	Everett
Newton	Whitesboro
I was going to ask the way to Lily’s house when I saw her looking in the windows of our one department store holding Nicky's hand. They were plainly killing time. She was delighted to go to my little room in the county courthouse for the temperature was about 95°. She was ready to sit down anywhere. Nicky was still energetic so I gave him magazines to look at.
Lily's dress was clean and pressed but it showed wet spots from the heat. Lily was used to things like that and was not embarrassed about it but nevertheless she was embarrassed.
"Looka here, I'm real glad to be here, but I don’t know as I oughta be. I aint got no story!" she said.
Out on the courthouse lawn a red-headed young preacher was serenading the benchsitters. "Tell Mother I’ll be There," he sang. After he finished his song he started telling of the Devil’s cunning temptations. We listened a while in silence.
"I’ve not heard much preachin’, "Lily began." ’Pears like what he’s sayin’s good. He must have the Speerit, talkin’ like that. But if you’d rather hear me than him--
"I was borned down here in McDowell County"--she pronounced it McDall-- "and Pap’s name was Joe Ball. Mam’s name was the same as mine, Lily. I'm the oldest gal. Linnie's the youngest. Ira was the oldest boy and Ed's the youngest. Pore little thing, he's dead now too.
"I aint got no education. Me nor my sisters nor my two brothers was ever in a schoolhouse. First thing I c'n remember was doin' house work, when I wasn't only five year old. It was right hard on me but Mam was sick all the time. Her health was broke down through hard labor in the fields and mean treatment from Pap. We was too pore to have doctors. When Linnie was borned I won't only seven but I helped the nigger woman fetch her."
The preacher was making a great deal of noise outside the window but no one was paying him attention except Nicky. The preacher was old stuff to the men on the benches but Nicky didn't come into town often.
"Sit down, Nicky," Lily said. "How c'n I tell this lady my story with you wigglin' so?"
"Well," she said to me," He don't know what I'm talkin’ 'bout, which is just as well. Maybe he oughta listen to the man.
"Pap made moonshine and stayed pickled day and night. We lived in a three-room log house. Well--two rooms and a loft. Our water was brung from a spring and our toilet was the woods. Washin' clothes was my part o' the work and I done it at the branch. Lord, I dreaded wash-day! The lye soap et the skin off my hands."
She raised her hands and inspected them and let her breath go, not in a sigh, but in an animal sound. She was back at the branch with lye soap and it was eating the skin off her hands. She came back slowly and grew self-conscious.
"I’ve always been shamed I can't talk good like other folks," she said. "Seems like I can't get words together right. Pap wouldn't let us go to school. Said learnin' made girls crooked and made boys wuithless. He couldn't write his name and neither could Mam. He wouldn't let us go to preachin' nor Sunday school. He was afeared somebody would get to comin' to the house and find out about him makin' liquor.
"No'm he never sold none of it less'n we was short on rations or shoes and then he let a neighbor have a turn of it. Most of it he just lapped up hisse'f.
"We et compone three times a day. You couldn't raise much on them hills but corn and turnips and taters. We did have a cow. Sometimes there was wild honey from a bee tree. No'm, we never did go hungry. There was always somethin' to eat even if it did get samey.
"Right diet? To keep us healthy? Mmm-- I never had no time to think about any right diet. My job was to fill up empty bellies. I was hollered outa bed at four o'clock and after I'd got the house cleaned up if I didn't go to the branch to wash, I went to the field to hoe. When I seen the sun get to noon I went back to the house and cooked dinner. Then when I’d hung my dishrag on the plum hush outside the kitchen door I grabbed my splitbonnet and took back to the cornfield. Ira, bein' the next borned after me, was the oldest boy, and soon's he was old enough Pap took him off to work at the still and lef' me all alone in the fields.”
Lily stopped talking and folded her hands in her lap. Her expression was troubled. She wanted to go on talking but made two or three false starts. She couldn't get the words out. I told her I would go to her house the next day and hear the rest if she'd rather not talk anymore.
"It aint that,” she said. ”It's just that I don't know whether I oughta tell you how wicked Pap was. Seems like it'd be a sin to talk about it." She struggled with right and wrong. Outside the preacher was getting louder. The people on the benches around Courthouse Square were coming out of coma.
"The wicked shall be CUT OFF!” he hollered. His words made Lily's decision.
"I come home from the cornfield to cook dinner one day," she said," and there on the porch lay my Mammy. She was bleedin’ at the mouth and bruises was all over her face. Big knots was swale up all over her head. My neck got so choky I couldn't swaller.”
She put her hands over her heart and her eyes showed the remembered pain. "Somethin’ hurt me bad in here,” she said.
"I picked up a bucket stave. It had blood on it. I knowed Pap done it. I got her to bed and washed her face and head with cold water.”
Tears were running down Lily’s face so I walked over to the window where Nicky was still absorbed in the preacher. After a while she went on and I sat down again. She was completely composed. She was so eager to talk now that I felt she had never told anyone of these things before.
”You know,” she said, "there wasn’t a thing I could do. Nothing. He was a devil. After I got her all washed up I went to the leanto to make the fire and get dinner goin’. Before I could get the table set and dinner on, in come Pap, cussin’ and swearin’. I follered him into her room shakin’ like I had the palsy. Ira was with him and he was so skeered his brown had all turned white.
"Pap,’ I said. ’Mammy’s sick.’
"Sick, the hell! ’he hollered. ’Puttin’ on! That’s what’s she’s doin’! I’ll learn her!’
"He grabbed her off the bed by the hair and drug her onto the floor. He kicked her and beat her right there before us.
"The whole trouble was he couldn’t find the key to the trunk that stood in the entry hall and he was takin’ it out on her. She kep’ moanin’ she didn’t know where it was at. It was the worse thing she coulda done, ’cause that’s why he was beatin’ her. She didn’t know where it was at.
"I went back to the kitchen to dish up the dinner. It was all I could do. I wasn’t only a real little girl. My stren’th wasn’t nothin’. If it hadda been I’da stayed and tried to beat him off. And Ira was littler’n me.
"The vittles choked me. Nothin’ tasted right. I tried to rec’lect what Mammy!d told us the Bible said ’bout doin’ good for evil, but it didn’t do no good. I’d look at her and see what that devil had done to her, and forget it all.
"He went back to the still and got drunker and Mam got up and didn’t die. She’s livin’ yet over in the next county and is nigh onto eighty year old.
"Pore old thing, so skeered, always had told us we better dassent not tell anything on Pap, but I swore then I’d tell somebody and ast ’em to help us. The trouble was we lived twelve miles from town and had ho close neighbors and there wasn’t nobody to tell. Janie Cribbens was the closest but I didn’t see her till fall, when she come by one day to get a mess o' turnips. I went out to the patch and told her the whole business. Two nights later the young'uns and me’d gone up into the loft to bed. Up under that roof hot was no name for it. Ira’n Eddie kicked and rolled and pore little Linnie tossed around somethin’ awful. All of us was scratchin’ skeeter bites and was hot and miser’ble. Then there come a loud knockin’ downstairs. We all set up straight in bed. Bam, bam, BAM! I begun to shake like the aspen tree down at the creek.
"’Open up in the name of the law! ’ I heard a man holler. "’Lord God, hell’s goin’ to bust loose,’ Eddie says.
’It’s them damn rev’newers!'
"My legs wouldn’t hold me they was shakin’ so. Janie Cribhens had reported Pap and I was the cause. We all started cryin’ and went down. I couldn’t hardly do it. I knowed Pap’d kill me if he found out.
"Two men with badges on was tearin’ up the house. Two more was outside. Pap was wavin’ around telling ’em to come in, they was welcome. There was so much noise them fool men was makin’ that he seen a chance to get out and he slipped by them other two and got away. There was a sure 'nough row then. Them men was sure mad. They swore they’d get Joe Ball. I was with ’em heart and soul but I dassent say anything and pore Mammy just laid in the bed too skeered to move. Everything they ast her she just shook her head so they turned on pore little Ira. They told him they’d take him to jail if he didn’t tell where the still was. He taken the lantern off the peg behind the kitchen door and led the way.
"Pap was hid on top the hill and seen ’em comin’. ’Get back in that house, Ira!’ he hollered, madder’n hell. So then they started shootin’.
"Well, they missed him, but it was a long time before us listenin’ in the house knowed whether they’d missed or not. He got away. They broke up the still and poured out the mash and he hid out four months. We knowed a little peace.
"He come walkin’ in one day like nothin’ had ever happened. Said we was movin’ to Blodgett’s Mills. That was twelve miles from Carteret. We moved just before Christmas. Ira’n’ Eddie and me got jobs in the mill. After I learned to spool I made $4.50 a week and they made from $5 to $4. Pap couldn’t work, his health was so bad. I don’t know what was wrong. Guess he’d drunk so much liquor he was feelin’ it.
"Altogether us kids made about $12 a week and we sure did live good off it. Us little bitty things helt the family together. Up in the mountains I used to get mad and ast Mammy how come her to marry such a thing as Joe Ball, but now I hated him worse'n ever.
"In that town everybody had education and there we was--not a one of us could read nor write. I was so shamed. And mad at Pap. It was his fault. The mill people laughed at us.
"Ira and me was doffers and the other doffers played tricks on us. You know how they always is about new hands. We was awful green without no learnin' nor nothin'. One day Ira got mad at the way they picked on him and had it out with another boy at dinnertime. That little boy-- he won't but twelve year old--stuck a knife in Ira's heart and he was dead before the doctor got there. I guess that's all there is to tell you 'bout Blodgett's Mills.
"We stayed there four years and moved over to Peach-lands to that mill. Pap went to a revival there and from then on started actin' queer. He kep' insistin' the Devil was in his right foot. One time he got kinder sensible and told Mammy she'd better send him to the State insane asylum before he hurt somebody. We didn't pay him no 'tention. Thought he was tryin' to skeer us.
"We was all workin’ on the night shift. One day it was too hot to sleep and I heard him downstairs talkin' to Mammy so I listened. Pap said, ’I tell you somebody out me down. I was layin’ on the ground with this rope Ground my neck.'
"I was leanin’ over the bannisters and I seen he had a rope in his hand. It skeered me.
"We had $40 in a trunk. He kep' hollerin’ to open it and give him a couple dollars to go to Rafe Collin’s and stay a while. We give it to him. Next day Mammy got to worryin’ ’bout him so we went to our groceryman and had him call up Rafe’s groceryman. Rafe was Pap’s cousin so he got up a search party. They found out Pap had borried a gun and when they come upon him his head was shot plumb off.
"Mammy took it hard. I cried all day. Not because I was sorry he was dead. Because he had died unsaved. I’m goin’ to raise Nicky right so he won’t feel about me the way I felt about Pap.
"He’s in school now but not in Sunday school. People dresses up their children to go to Sunday school and Nicky aint got a thing that’s fitten to look at and I’m not goin’ to let him be laughed at. When I get my next check from the Gov’ment I aim to buy him a suit if it don’t take all for something else. I don’t go to preachin’ much myse’f (though I do try to live right) but Mam’s a good Baptist and I want Nicky to be one.
"The reason I lef’ Mam and come here to Whitesboro was my aunt’s husband died and left her a widow and she needed me to come live with her. But she was so mean I got me a job in the cotton mill.
"I was here three year before me and Everett got married. We got along fine. Sometimes he’d take a drink when he was butcherin’ hogs or somethin', but he never got drunk. Pore Everett worked too hard. He told me ’fore we was married how hard he’d worked and slaved all his life. His folks was renters. Rent a little piece o' ground here and another little piece o' ground there. We always lived with 'em. I didn’t like it. A house aint big enough for two sets o' people.
"Now Everett’s in the hospital all swole up with heart dropsy and I think he’s bound to die soon. He’s been gone nine months. He’s way over yonder in the Veterans’ hospital in Tennessee so I aint got out to see him but once.
"He had started to build us a little house on his Mammy’s lot. That’s how come he’s in the hospital. The doctor had told him not to work, his heart was bad. But housebuildin' was such easy work after all the hard work he had done that he never thought of it as bein’ hard atall and thought it wouldn’t hurt him. Oh, I’ll feel so bad if Everett dies. But he don't know me now. I reckon it's his mind. He sees things crawlin' up the wall and acrost his bed.
"Everett didn't do no fightin' in the war. He never got no fudder'n them camps. But he gets to profit by this fine hospital.
"I tell you it sure is fine the way the Gov'ment treats people. Look at it. Everett in that place bein' took care of and me gettin' $30 a month reg'lar that takes care o' me and Nicky.
"Pap always said none o' his womenfolks could vote but Pap aint here now so I votes every time there's a call to. I can't write but I can sure make a crossmark. The teacher on the WPA teached me the ABC's and some spellin' so I went over to the Liberry while ago and got these two books. They aint nothin' but baby readin' but I mean to learn to read 'em. Nicky can help me. He's in the seckint grade and's real smart, the teacher says. I aim to make somethin' of myself yet.
"Well, me and Nicky'd better go. I hope you'll get the story writ up all right. Maybe some day I can read it myse'f. So g'bye. I don't know when I've had such a good time."
They went out and sat down to listen to the preacher.
