Approximately 3,476 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
NO PENSION WANTED
Date of First Writing	December 16, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Randolph Smith (Negro)
Fictitious Name	Jim Adams
Street Address	Route 4,
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Farmer
Name of Writer	L. E. Cogburn
Name of Reviser	State Office
Jim Adams returned home from the mill a little before noon the day of my visit. Neighbors had told me where he had gone, and I was in my car at his front gate waiting for him when he pulled his team of two large bay mules into the driveway. Jim is an erect mulatto six feet two inches in height and would pull the scales to around one hundred and eighty pounds. That morning he was clad in new-looking blue overalls and jacket and a light gray hat pulled tight over his head.
On seeing me, he jumped from his wagon with a spryness remarkable for one of seventy years and called a boy who was cutting wood in the back yard to drive the team around to the rear and unload. As he approached, squinting his eyes in the effort to recognize me, I called, "Good morning, Jim. Do you remember me?"
Quickening his pace and smiling as recognition came, he answered, "How come I don't remember you. What you got to tell me dis time?"
"It's the other way around this time, Jim. I want you to tell me. No use to tell me you're busy. You're always that. What are you hauling today?"
"I've been to the mill to have some com ground. Had to wait all the morning, so many ahead of me. Thought I'd be one of the first ones there."
"Not the earliest bird this time, eh? Well, it takes an early one to beat you. Jim. There's a good story in you, There's a good story in you, if you'll be nice and let me have it."
"Shore I will. I read about dat in de papers. And you is de gov'ment agent doin' dis work. Le's go inside and set down in de porch."
"You haven't had your dinner yet, have you?"
"No, but dat's all right. I can wait."
"It will take some time for you to tell it all, Jim. You go eat your dinner. I'll eat my lunch I have here. Then we can do a better job."
While eating, I did some additional observing. The home, on a plantation some six miles southeast of Columbia and east of highway #48, is one of the best tenant cottages in that section. It is a rather ancient, dingy T-shaped frame structure on a rectangular lot of about a half acre enclosed by a wire fence. Three medium-size chinaberry trees near the fence in front of the house are the only shade. The yard, of white sand, was attractively clean in front. In the back yard, the winter supply of oak wood was piled on one side. Near the wood pile were chicken coops, poultry house, grinding rock, and water pump. Along the fence was a miscellaneous collection of discarded gas stoves, hot-water tanks, pieces of iron pipe, bottles, and various other sundries of junk - suggestive of a type of thrift which foresees future uses of old things. Extending from the back yard was a stock lot. Near its center stood the stables with loft window bulging with fodder and peaving hay Following lunch, I entered the front porch, which had been screened. It was furnished with four large split-bottom chairs, rockers, two small chairs for children, and a flower stool. "You have a cozy corner here," I remarked to Jim, as he was arranging the chairs for the interview.
"Yes, sir, Boss. I always tries to make things comfortable in my home. Now, them two chairs you see dere is for my gran's when they come to visit us. One of my gran'daughters from New York spent las' summer wid us. She's finished high school. I had to hurry up hero soon one Monday mornin' and take her to Columbia to catch de train to go home to enter college.
"Now, about the story: Just how far do you want me to go back in my hist'ry? I remember my gran' father."
"That's fine. Suppose you begin there."
Apparently uninterrupted in thought, he continued. "His name was Olin Adams. He was a mechanic, owned and trained for his trade by his master, old man Jake Loring, Press Loring's father. He learnt him to work - mend wagons, sharpen plows, and shoe mules and horses.
"My father was Solomon Adams. He was trained and learnt by his father in de same trade. He was the father of thirteen chillun, seven boys and six girls. I'm next to de baby boy, whose name was Gene Adams. He was trained by our father to be a mechanic. I'll tell you he was a smart nigger. He was foreman mechanic in de Atlantic Coast Line roun' yard at Columbia. When a engine would git off de track, he had to go and he'p put it back, and do de mending. He could weld any piece of iron dat was broke. He got up to de top in his trade. They sent him to Washin'ton once."
With a smile, and an air of pride in the accomplishments of his family, he continued.
"All of us could do blacksmith work. We was trained by our father. He tried to make us all industrious. I 'member once I was workin' in de blacksmith shop wid my father, cuttin' de spokes for a wagon wheel. He come by to see how I was comin' on wid it, and says to me, 'You've got dat sear at de wrong slant. A'just it.' After while he come back, and I hadn't changed it. He picked up a board and burnt me up wid it, and say, 'Now, see if you can't do like I tell you.' "
This brought forth a hearty laugh from both of us.
In the same jovial mood, Jim continued, "We had a farm, too. I 'member once I was plowin', splittin' de rows, layin' dem off by stakes set for me to go by. My father come and said, 'Why don't you change your stakes?' I said, 'I'll change 'em.' 'Now is the time,' he told me. Later on, he come back, and I hadn't yet changed 'em. He took up a stake and frammed me wid it. He told me I had to do it; if I didn't, goldarn, he would make me do it." Assuming a more serious manner he continued, "I thank my God for de raisin' he give me. Them things in 'membrance make me more particular now.
"He was ambitious for us. Sent us to school when most of de work was over, after crops was gathered. In de evenin's and in de mornin's, I had a certain portion of de work to do. Every one of us had their part to do, and it better be found done. Yes, sir, Boss, better would. I went through de fourth reader. Studied de blue-back speller. Had us divided in 'short-syllable' and 'long-syllable' classes. As b-i, bi; b-a, ba; b-o, bo; and b-a, ba, k-e-r, ker; baker. When we reached longer words, like sen-si-ble, Con-stan-ti-no-ple, we was in de 'vance classes. In dat same speller dere was some readin' in de back. Comes to my mind's eye now, de picture of de little boy in de old man's apple tree and he throwin' rocks at him. And dat picture of de man and de bear, I could never understand. De man layin' flat on his stomach a makin' like he was dead, so as to keep de bear dat was smellin' 'round over him from eatin' him. I would've had to be sho' 'nough dead to let dat bear git dat close to me.
"In 'rithmetic," going to the wall and imitating his teacher writing on the blackboard, "he would just set de 'zample down, and we had to get de answer. "When he would come 'round to look at our work, he would say, 'Here in dis second column you oughtn't carried but four, and in dis third column you ought of carried six.' Dat's all he'd he'p us. I had to work dry measure, as sixty pounds of wheat make a bushel, fifty-two pounds of com make a bushel, and de like. chillun didn't get it. I asked 'em how many ounces in a pound and they couldn't tell me.
"I just have de two boys. One of 'em is a stenographer, now in New York. He went to Benedict College nine years and got his diploma. He wanted to be a plumber, and he went to de State College"at Orangeburg to study it. After they give him a 'zamination, they 'vised him to study shorthand. He studied it two whole years, but when he did get through, there was a job in New York waitin' for him. He's lived there ever since.
"The other boy didn't take to learnin' like de fust one. He was a bricklayer until they called him to France. He was in service nineteen months. After he got back, he he'p build de Vet'rans Hospital.
"It pays to have trainin' and education in everything. It makes no difference if a man is a farmer, he has as much right to a education as anybody."
"Why did you choose to be a farmer, Jim?
Laughing, he said: "There wasn't much choosing. Dis is how I come to be a farmer. I was raised and trained to do de farm work. Comin' out from de trainin' by my father, people saw great influence in me.
"De fust farm I ever had was as overseer for Mr. Washington A. Clark, president of de Car'lina Bank, and de cashier was Mr. Wiley Jones. Along in them times, a nigger gittin' ten dollars a month, dat was a big nigger. Yes, sir, Boss, people would be ridin' along de road and look at you and say, 'Dat's a big nigger. Dat nigger gits ten dollars a month.' A peek of meal and three pounds of meat was de rations we got, and a house to live in. Yes, sir, they was lots better than what we live in now. If your house leaked then, they would come and do somethin' for it; now they won't do nothin'. I had more then than I have now. You could buy the bes' flour on sale in de market, Dunlap and Dan Valley, for forty cents a twenty-four poun' bag. I lived easier then than now. Me, my wife, and one boy could live on forty cents a week. Bacon was jus' two and a half cents a poun'. Now bacon is twenty-two cents.
"Leavin' W. A. Clark, I went to Mrs. L. D. Shirer, because she was givin' me more: fifteen dollars a month, usual ration, house to live in, and raise what I wanted - chickens, cows, hogs, and have patches. I stayed with her seven years, still workin' for wages.
"After leavin' her, I went on W. G. Shirer's place and rented a farm to work for myself. I lived there fourteen years, until Mr. Shirer's death. Then the place was cut up and sold. At dat time, I move to dis place, a part of de same big plantation I had been livin' on with Mr. Shirer. I've been livin' here for twenty-one years. I pay standin' rent, three dollars a acre for de land we cultivate, makin three hundred dollars for de whole place of four hundred and fifty acres. I sub-rents it to other farmers, what I don't work. I've come in possession of it, I've been here so long. When de county cut dat new road out here, I had to give 'em permission and tell 'em which trees to cut. When dat yonder gov'ment radio beam station was built, I had to sign to it.
"I love to farm, and look at things growin'. At five o'clock in de mornin's I am on my knees, sayin' my prayers and returnin' my thanks. Next, I'm out feedin' up chickens, hogs, cows and mules. And jus' as soon as I am done wid breakfast, I am out in de field till sundown, 'cept de time off for dinner. Dat's what worries me, people don't like to work like they use to. I give them two boys out there a dollar a day, and they don't want to git out early. And before sundown, you can see 'em standin' up and wantin' to quit. They want to go by de clock. When I was wid Mrs. Shirer and de hands would sometimes come late, I ask 'em, 'What you come for? You can't work startin' dis late.' And I'd send 'em right back home.
"Las' week Miss Edie and Mr. Robert Shirer come out here and tell me dat de gov'ment was lookin' up all old people, sixty-five and above, to put 'em on de old age pension. They said to me: 'You should not work like you do. You are gettin' old. You've done enough. You have too much ambition.'
"I was seventy years old las' Sunday gone. In a few days, de investigate' come here and wanted to fix up de papers for me to get a pension. I told 'em, 'Missis, I don't want it. I've got my health and strength now. All I ask is for 'em to he'p me when I git to de place I can't make a livin'.
"I vote on every question dat come up and at reg'lar elections. I voted las' Satday on cotton control. Some white fellows come to me and ask me did I know what I was doin'. They said if I didn't min' I would be votin' myself back in slavery.
"I said to 'em, 'Yes, I voted for cotton control. I git more for my cotton.' Another reason I am votin', is 'cause I have a chance to vote. I said to him, 'Look at de automobile business. It's regulated and organized - de makers, de dealers, and down to de consumers. De price is set by themselves. And de automobiles is sold to de people.'
"De gov'ment didn't give me but five acres for cotton las' year, and I planted only four. Dis year, they give me ten acres, but I'm not goin' to plant but five. Not when I can go out and plant a half acre of beans or sweet peas and make a hundred dollars. I make thirty to forty dollars by complyin' wid de farm practices. They ain't paid me yet for dis year. But las' year I got twenty-seven dollars on my peas, where I didn't cut de vines. For soy beans, a check come to me for ten dollars.
"Now, dis year, I only picked nine hundred and ninety-seven poun's of seed cotton. Dat was on account of de boll weevil. I made a com crop. I pulled over four hundred and fifty bushels of corn. Got peas in every row and didn't do nothin' but pick de peas. You see, they will pay me for dat. They've already measured my fields, both by chain and airplane, and got de same number of acres in each case, forty-three acres. I had been countin' and payin' rent for fifty-seven acres.
"I made six banks of potatoes. Twenty bushels by measure in every bank. I got sale for 'em now at a dollar a bushel. I sells 'em all 'round out there where you live. I've made about two and a half tons of peavine hay dis year. I have some baled, brought over from las' year. I feed my two mules and cows on it. Dat's fine feed for milk producin'. We are not gittin' any milk now, but I'm expectin' for my milk cow to come in in a few weeks. Have two young heifers and one hog. I'll kill de hog a week before Christmas. I sold three head of hogs at eight cents a poun' on foot.
"Religion? A man ought to live up to de conditions of de character of his religion. Religion is right doin'. Dat's religion; do de right thing. church goin' is reg'lar. I have service ever Sunday. Am a Baptist leader, a deacon, a officer in de Baptist Church. Ever second and fourth Sundays our pastor is with us and preaches. In his absence, I 'ficiate. We have seventy-five supportin' members in our church.
"I believe in picnics. We have Sunday School picnics on Sat'day, as a celebration, I call it. I've been superintendent twenty-two years. Everybody 'round here says it beats de record.
"When 'casion comes, I tell 'em how to live. By their move or turn, I can see what they been doin'. Sometimes some of 'em be scared to see me comin', and shun me. I visit de sick. Sunday before las' I went to see five members of de church who was sick. Dat was my duty to do so. I jus' now live happy. Before I lay down at nights, I read a chapter from my Bible and have prayer, and have nothin' to worry me.
"My health has been good. I haven't took a dose of medicine in -- I don't known when. See die foot? It was broke. Automobile wheel run over it, and I had to go to de hospital wid it. When they 'zamined me, de doctors say I stood de highest 'zamination of any. They all talked about it. Dr. Black, ha is my family doctor, attended me and my wife about seven years ego for malarial fever.
"I plow like de others. I worked and helped 'em put up dat beams station.' At first, they didn't want to let me work. Said I was too old to stan' up under it. Finally, they said they'd give me a trial, bein' I was close to de job. They give me a physical 'zemination, and I worked under gov'ment regulations from de start till it was finished. Now I turn off de lights for 'em at six o'clock in de mornin's and turn 'em on at six in de evenin's. They don't pay me for dis. I've been wantin' 'lectrie lights for my home, and they told me they would run de line from de 'beams station' themselves, and it wouldn't cost me nothin'. I'll have to pay for wiring de hoase. Bat will cost me fifteen dollars. But they told me dat de roof would have to be repaired before it could be wired.
"Let me show you through de house."
From the front porch we entered the small living room. The walls and ceiling are neatly covered with many layers of newspapers, as are the other rooms. At one end is a large open fireplace. On each side of the fireplace is a small window., these windows furnishing the only light during the day. Against the wall, on the opposite side, is a davenport. A hall rack is by the door, a washstand in a corner, a dresser in another corner, a settee to one side, and a small table near the center, on which sits a kerosene lamp.
"You see, I always try to have things convenient and comfor'able in my home. Dat davenport can be opened up and used as a bed when we have company overnight."
Going to the door of the adjoining room, Jim continued. "Dis house was 'riginally one room. I put up dis partition to give us dis bedroom. De old lady had to leave early dis morning to go to Columbia to do some cleanin' up for some of de white folks, and she didn't git to make up de beds," he said apologetically.
"That happens sometimes in the best regulated households," I remarked.
This small bedroom, with one little window in which were cardboards and old magazines taking the places of several missing panes, had two old double iron beds. The plentiful supply of bedclothes was in a tumble.
There being but one door to this room, we retraced our steps to the living room. Passing through the back door and across a narrow screened hallway, we entered a well-lighted room, about eight by sixteen feet. A small portion of the farther end is partitioned to form a kitchen; the other end forms the dining room. The furniture, old but good, consists of a china closet, sideboard, dining table and chairs. In one comer of the kitchen is a small-sized cook stove, and across the opposite end was a built-in table.
"I added dis part of de house since I moved here," explained Jim. "If things are not convenient, I make 'em so."
Jim, leading the way back through the narrow hallway into the back yard, said, "Now let me show you some of da old lady's work." Going to a small storeroom built against the kitchen, he opened the door.
"Well, I see you mean to have something good to eat out of season as well as in season."
Arranged on the shelves in glass jars were the family's winter supply of canned fruits and vegetables: cucumber pickle, fig preserves, peaches, blackberries, huckleberries and sauer kraut.
"Yes, all dis means plannin' and work. You see dat pine straw spread in de lot, dat stalk cutter goin' now, and dis pile of wood? I always find somethin' to do. Mos' farmers are settin' 'round and foolin' about goin' huntin', doin nothin', as I say, jus' waitin' for springtime to come before they start to work. Dat's why mos' of 'em on de farm have such a hard time. There's plenty to be done de year 'round on de farm if a man wants to work. You've got to keep steady goin' if you're to make a decent livin' on de farm."