James Person
Edited by
Jennette Edwards
709 E. Jackson Ave.
Knoxville, Tennessee
October 5, 1938
R. R. H.
I CAN READ AND I CAN WRITE
The Negro houses on Jackson Avenue are strung out like ragged clothes on a was line. Unpainted. Run down. Jim Person's house---centering the East side of the Seventh block--stands lopsided from added rooms. One room takes care of Jim. Home-made book cases, racks, stands, tables, piled to the limit with books, crowd the room.
"I can read and I can write and I can figure," Jim said. "Every day I am thankful that I had a chance to learn. A man can't get anywheres much these days without schooling.
Jim wore the blue overall uniform of freight packers on the Southern railroad. His powerfully built frame tallied with his occupation. Jim painted out his books with pride. He talked slowly, carefully.
"I'm fifty-three years old, still studying. Still buying books. I have almost five hundred books here on all kinds of subjects. Lots of them I have read from cover to cover."
He took a pair of silver rimmed spectacles from his inside coat pocket and fitted the hooks to his ears.
"My parents didn't have time to fool with schooling for themselves or any of us children. They were sharecroppers. By the time we would get five or six years old the cotton field got us. I can remember playing about Pappy and Mammy and the older children when they were making the crop and at picking time, wishing I was old enough to help. Before long I was right there slaving too."
Jim pulled a dark oak rocker to a clear space in the center of the matting rug for his visitor. He settled in a straight chair.
"We didn't make much money. not ever enough to get along easy. But from year to year weld manage to get by some way. Corn pone, sorghum and sowbelly was the most we had to eat. I didn't mind. I like tern to this good day. Going to the meeting on Sunday or to some neighborhood shindig at night was the way we had our fun."
Jim took off his glasses and polished the lenses with a clean white cotton handkerchief.
"Mammy died when I was sixteen. Then I pulled out for myself. I worked around for different planters for a couple of years. Then I got a job on the Southern railroad at Chattanooga trucking outbound freight. It was the best job I had ever had and I was set on not getting fired."
He Sighted the the glasses for clearness.
"That was the job that learned me a man's got to have schooling to get anywheres. signboards were posted on the freight cars with the name of the town where the car was to go. You had to know how to read to know what to load up. When the boss would say, 'This truck-load goes to the Memphis car, I'd ask one of the truckers on the quiet---'Which one's the Memphis car?' One day the boss heard me. He called me over, picked up a freight bill. 'Read what that says, Jim,' he said pointing to the words, 'The Southern Railroad.' I was scared stiff. I knew it wasn't any use to give a guess. Mammy and Pappy had learned me that a lie always oat you in a fiddle. 'I just don't know, Boss,' I said right out. 'I can't read a line.'"
Jim shifted his weight in the chair. A smile of satisfaction spread over his honest face.
"Next day at noon-time the Boss brought a first reader book and a tablet and a pencil. He commenced to teach me to read and spell. I was mighty tickled when I could tell him what some of the words were. At noon-times while I was eating my lunch and every night I studied. Before long I could read most of the signs that said where the freight went. I learned how to write my name. I learned to copy and read back everything in the primer. My, I was one proud Negro! Boss was tickled, too. I never will forget him. Never. He was the best man I ever knew. I've got a little picture of him. I never have framed it. I got a lady artist to fix it on a card for me and I keep it for a book-marker."
Jim left his chair and went to the iron bed in the far corner of the room. He pulled back the clean quilt--tucked at the head over the pillows--and found the book with last night's reading place marked. He left the book face down on the quilt and brought back the boss' picture.
"There he is. Fine-looking, don't you think? I never will forget him, because he was so good to me and learned me to read and write. I worked at that freight trucking job until the railroad transferred me to Knoxville. That was a big promotion. I was made a regular officer. I had a badge with "Southern Railway Police on it. I worked all up and down the line on excursion trains and in the Knoxville yards. I was about thirty years old then. I knew I never would have gotten that promotion if I hadn't picked up what little education I had. I kept right on. I went to night school two or three terms. For more than two years while I was an officer I got a white man to come to my room two nights a week and teach me. I paid him fifty cents a night and there wasn't a night that I didn't learn more than a dollar's worth. He was real educated and had a lot of patience with me. Pretty soon I could read newspapers good as white people and books too. here were a lot of words I didn't know the sense of, so I got me a dictionary. I paid twenty-two dollars for it."
Jim went to the center table and straightened the scattered newspapers and books. He dusted off the large dictionary for display.
"My teacher told me this was a good one. It is, too. "Wish I knew just half the words in it. He was all set on me getting good books. One hour of my lesson he would teach me words and reading and the other hour arithmetic. He would work up all sort of simple problems he thought I'd have need of in work. He never did just stick to the book. I never will forget the night he told me how to take the carded weight of a carload of coal, figure how many tons and bushels was in the car. Then how much it would bring at so much a ton. Now that was fun. Just as much fun as reading those freight car names. I got so at lunch hour I'd pick out a car of coal in the yard every day, maybe more than one, figure up tons and bushels. He showed me how to figure lumber, too. I planned and figured ever' bit of the lumber for my coal house last fall Figured it all by myself. I was right proud when my figuring. Came out just exactly like the lumber man's."
Jim got things on the center table settled to his liking. He rubbed his large hands clean on his pants legs and came back to his chair.
"I know I can read and figure better than I can write. I got to worrying about people not knowing what I meant if I put it down, so I got me a typewriter. They can read my letters now. I am secretary of my union and that typewriter is a big help there. Minutes look nice. Most anything makes a good show when you get it fixed up like print. I use it to make out my rent receipts. This house here I don't use but one room--this one I pay the whole house rent and sublet all but this room. I've got two families here now. They're good renters, pay on time. The difference in what I pay rent and what I get from them helps me a lot since I lost my good job."
Jim slowly buttoned up the brass buttons of his overall jacket.
"About three years ago I got cut off from the railroad police 'cause I was the only. Negro officer left on the system. They put me back to trucking freight, though I mostly packs freight in the cars to go out. I watch for thieving on the platform. I don't get paid for that, just paid for packing freight. They told me I'd have to take this job or nothing as they had to cut expenses. I took it. There were a lot of white men officers that didn't have thirty-two years experience behind tern like I did. Not easy to pick up a job when you getting along in years- -I had to take it. Everything that had been coming in for so long went out sooner than I got it. My wife, now, was one to help a man save. one could have helped. she was a good woman. I spent more'n two thousand dollars on doctor's bills for her. Maybe they eased her some. I don't know. Anyway doctors didn't save her."
Jim rammed his hands deep in his pants pockets.
"Since she died I never have come across a woman I felt like I could trust. we didn't have any children. I never was much on raking up relatives, so I'm going it by myself. I do my own cooking, most of the cleaning too. One of the women that rents does my washing. I had a little saved to gether from my officer's salary after I got the main of the doctors' bill paid. I had it in a bank. It busted along with the rest of them. The bank got all I had but wages-and those about a fourth of what I got as an officer."
Jim took off his glasses. He unbuttoned the top buttons of his coat and stored them in the inside pocket.
"If I can just keep my job I'll be satisfied. I'd rather work for what I get. There's lots better folks than me out of work now.
"I ain't going to have a preacher telling me I lost my officer's job for some wrong living. I didn't. I don't hold much With churches and less with the preachers. I loaned my preacher twenty-five dollars more'n two years back I haven't heard a word about it since if a man lives best he can he'll get along. I'm getting along. You can't do a big lot of things on sixty-five dollars a month but you can live and help a few out besides. A preacher's after my money a sight more than he is my soul."
Jim left his chair and went back to the dictionary. He was silent while he hunted a word.
"I thought so. Not any such word. That Methodist preachers tried to trip me on it last time he came here snooping. I seldom go to church. I do like a good moving picture when I'm not too tired to set. I go to union meeting once a week. I'm secretary."
He closed the dictionary noisily.
"I'd rather get a good case of beer and settle right here with time enough to read on any book I pick up than anything I know of in the world. I remember when I used to have to drink and play poker and shoot craps to make me feel big. I don't now. I don't crave going around a lot like I used to."