OLD SHOE COMFORT IN NEW SHOE APPEARANCE
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6
Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6
Athens
and
John N. Booth, Area Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
July 5, 1939
June 5, 19, 1939
Luther Holcomb, Prop. (white)
Holcomb Shoeshop
264 Lumpkin Street
Athens, Georgia
Cobbler
G.M.
OLD SHOE COMFORT IN NEW SHOE APPEARANCE
Mr. Hayes' shoeshop takes up one side of the long room which he shares with the operator of a bicycle shop. His machines for repairing shoes are placed on a long counter at the front of the building, where light floods in from large windows.
Shelves along the wall contain shoes that have been repaired and footwear that has not had its turn in the cobbler’s hands.
In the rear is a low enclosure, furnished for customers who have work done while they wait. The floor here is covered with linoleum in a gay design against a dark green background. The wicker settee and chairs are also painted green, a shade lighter than the linoleum. If the waiting customers desire entertainment, there is a cabinet radio and a rack filled with the latest magazines. A modern floor lamp illuminates the mirror that is suspended over a smell table and a large electric fan on the wall makes the place very comfortable in summer.
Mr. Hayes is of medium height and weight. His blond hair was combed back from his forehead and his tan cotton work suit was clean and neat.
"I’ve been in a shoeshop all my life,” he began. "At least it seems that way to me, for my father was a shoemaker. That’s the only work he ever did." He grinned and continued, "Why, my mother’s family name was Shoemaker, so there was nothing else for me to do but follow that trade.
"I was the only boy, but I had three sisters older than myself. After I was old enough I was in the shop with my father all the time that I wasn’t in school. I started out delivering shoes, but I knew that soon I was going to have to go to work, so I tried to learn all that I could, and my father was just as anxious for me to learn. I worked for him 3 years, and I mean I worked too, for he was a worker and he didn't believe in playing around when there was work to do. I didn’t get any salary while I was working for him, but I had everything I needed and more too, I guess.
"'When I had to stop school and earn my own living, I went to work in another shop for $6.50 a week. I was just as happy with that $6.50 as most kids would be now with twice that much, and of course I was glad to be out of school. I didn't realize then what school meant, but I did in later years and I tried to make up for it the best I could. I think it was about nineteen-sixteen when I left and went to work with the other shop.
"Then the war came on and everything was different. I got a raise; I don’t remember just how much, but it wasn't much. I do remember when I was raised to $9 a week, and my boss paid me off with four two-dollar hills and one one-dollar bill. I wasn’t superstitious about those two-dollar bills, for they would spend just as good as any other money to me. And then too, I was busy courting at that time - just the age when we all fall in love. From then on I received raises pretty regular until I was making a good salary. Then I began to think of marrying.
"I tell you I had a time getting that wife of mine. We were both young, and her father didn't permit her to have any boy friends. He wouldn't hear of me coming to his house to see her, so I had to meet her out all the time, She had a brother younger than herself and she had to take him with her everywhere she went. But he wouldn't tell on us because we carried him to the picture shows with us - that's where we did most of our courting. The kid enjoyed the pictures, but I don't guess we ever knew what was on the screen for we were too busy talking.
”I well remember the time when I thought that her father was away, and I went to the house to see her, for her mother didn't object to me visiting her daughter. Of course it was just my luck that he decided to come back just after I got to the house. And did he raise cain? I'll say he did! I asked him what he had against me that he disliked me so and what I had done that he didn't want me to see his daughter.
"His answer was something I wasn’t expecting, for he said, ’It's what you haven't done, and I don't want to catch you with my daughter again. I mean that!'
"But, you know, that only added fuel to flame, for you can't stop young people when they are in earnest as we were. We soon grew tired of having to slip around and meet somewhere all the time, and the first opportunity we had, we eloped and married. No, we didn't go back for some time, for her father was really mad, but he soon got over that and we were good friends. But, you know, that has learned me a lesson. I don't want my daughter having to meet her friends at any place except at our home, end I mean to try to keep a pleasant home for my children so they’ll want to bring their friends there. Ours is a happy family.
"I was only eighteen when we married in nineteen-nineteen, but I've never regretted it, and neither has my wife - if she has, she hasn't said so or shown regret. We've had our troubles as well as our pleasures, but we’ve met ’em together and managed to come through all of ’em O.K. We only have two children - a boy and girl. They’re both in high school, and we are trying to give ’em every advantage that we can, particularly in the way of education, for now if you don’t have special training you don’t get anywhere.
”I worked in several shops before I went into business for myself. In nineteen thirty-four, when I was thirty-three, I decided that if I ever wanted to do something for myself it was time I was starting, or I would never have anything and still be working for the other fellow. I didn’t have much to start on. Yes, I’d made good money, but we’d spent it as fast as I made it. But, you know, I don’t regret that, for we really enjoyed it and that means a lot, I think, to anyone.
"When I opened this shop I borrowed on my insurance for just enough to make a small down-payment on some of the machines. The rest of my equipment was bought on a straight credit basis - nothing down. I really went to work; I had to. Since that time I’ve paid for all that I started with, and have bought new macninery that cost me a thousand and fifty dollars, plus the freight I paid on it. I had to have two new motors, and they were over fifty dollars a piece. All that’s paid for now except just about a hundred dollars, and I’ll soon have that off my hands. Yet, I guess it 'll be something else then, for I try to keep up with all the new and modern machines and methods for shoe repairing. On the whole, I guess I've made a fair success, especially when you consider the demoralized condition business has been in for the past few years. I've made a good living, and I'm still in the same building that I started out in. I like it here, for it's convenient to the business people as well as to my other customers.
"At first, I didn't have any help except a small boy that did the delivering. I paid him $3 a week and furnished him a bicycle to ride. I opened my shop at 7 a.m. and closed at 7 p.m., and I still keep those old hours. Yes, it was a hard pull; there was plenty of hard work, I find that it takes hard work if you get anywhere, and I'm willing to work for what I have. I had a good many old customers that I had worked for in the other shops, and when I opened up my own shop they brought their work to me. Their confidence in me encouraged me to go on when the outlook was darkest.
"My first day’s work in my own shop amounted to 2.50. I opened the shop in October. Wait! I'll get my books and we'll compare the months of October since I've been in business." He led me to his desk where he opened a ledger and quickly turned to the page labelled "Merchandise - Receipts."
"See," he chuckled, "I took in $190.15 the very first month I was in business - that was October 1934." He turned the pages, and opposite October 1935 I read the total of $295.65. "My business was growing all right," he chortled, as he sought the total for October 1936, which was $474.10. "That didn't mean so much net profit, for then I had to have more help,” he explained. "One man just can't hardly do shoe repairing to the value of nearly five hundred dollars in one month by his own labor alone." The page for October 1937 showed gross income $526.85, but his smile faded a bit when he came to the total of $505.60 for October 1938. "That's the first October that hasn't shown an increase over the previous one. Business just hasn't been so good the past year. Come to think of it, I don't think I've known any shoe repairers that have made a fortune at their trade." He laughed. "I do know two cobblers that are in the pauper's home. Doesn't sound very encouraging, does it? But I'm still willing to keep trying.
"That first delivery boy of mine sure could get things mixed up at times, and sometimes his pranks and forgetful ways would get me in bad with the customers, especially so one time. It was this way: I do a great deal of credit business among my old customers, but I had one that wouldn't pay anything on his account. He had a large family and sent me a lot of shoes to repair. One busy Saturday I was trying to get out all the work I could, and I had two pairs of shoes for this customer - the one that wouldn't pay. I started the boy out with a good many bundles of shoes and told him not to take time to collect for any of the work except from that one customer, and that if he didn't get the money at that house I was expecting him to bring the shoes back." Mr. Hayes laughed heartily. "Do you know what that kid did?" he chuckled. "Well, as the old saying goes, he got me in dutch, for he collected for every pair of shoes, except the ones that I told him to collect for; those he left without the money. He didn't fail to give the message to all the others - that he must have the money or bring the shoes back. ”I had to get busy and do some explaining and apologizing to get my customers back in a good humor, but they were good sports, and the kid was liked by them all. When they found out that it was his mistake they teased him about collecting until he got mad. He left the shop one afternoon without saying where he was going, and didn’t get back until closing time. Before I could ask him where he had been, he handed me some money and said, 'I got tired of hearing so much about being a bad collector, so I just went down to that house and told ’em that if they didn’t pay me, I’d stay and board it out. There I stayed until they give me this money on account.'
"My business grew until I had to get a helper. Now, we're busy all the time. My son works after school hours, delivering and collecting, but he had to have a car to go in. He isn’t like my first delivery boy. My, how proud that one was of his bicycle! I give my son $3.50 a week and furnish him gas and oil. Of course, I know that he couldn’t ever use all that for his delivery work for me, but I don’t mind, for I like for him to have a good time. It’s extra money for him every day for something - mostly shows - and then if his collections are above the average he gets a bonus, so I guess he gets pretty good pay after all.
"Customers in our line of work will bring in an old pair of shoes and say, ’These are so worn out I don’t want to spend much on ’em, but they are so comfortable I don’t want to throw ’em away.’ Yet they expect a first-class job for the price of poor work. It was the frequency of this demand that caused me to coin my slogan: ’Old Shoe Comfort in New Shoe Appearance.’
"When I was first learning this business, soles were tacked on for 50¢, which covered material as well as labor; and what few that were sewed brought 60¢ a pair. That was in nineteen thirteen. The only leather that we were able to get was called second grade, but even at that it was better than the best leather obtainable now. It was stronger and didn't tear as easily as the leather of today. However, it was crudely finished and didn't look so good.
"Brogans were once the regular footwear for everyday and work usage. They lasted longer, were heavier and better made than the work shoes they sell now. A cheap shoe is really a cheap article, for they’re made up of material so cheap and shoddy that they don't stay together long. This is especially so in women’s shoes, for some of ’em are very cheaply made up. Where we used to cut soles by hand and tack ’em on, they are now tailor-cut and sewed on by machines. The hand-turned soles are sewed by hand, but it's very seldom that we have a call for ’em now.
"Women’s dress shoes, as a rule, have the soles cemented on by what is called the 'Welch system,' but all oxfords are sewed by machine and they're really the best type of shoes now made. Only the very cheapest of shoes have any tacks in ’em now. In fact, about the only place a tack is used in repairing shoes is in the heels. We have what we call ’stitched-down shoes.' They’re mostly children’s shoes that are very cheaply made. More pasteboard than leather goes in those shoes, and that’s why children's shoes can be bought so cheap and must be purchased so often.
"We also have the 'McKay' type of bottoms or soles that are sewed through from the inside out. That's the only way that you can use those soles, and I'm very glad that we don't have many calls for that job. It's a difficult chore.
"'Old ladies comforts' were once the popular thing for old women, but not any more. Grandmother has to have a more dressy foot covering now, and it's very few of those old-style shoes that are brought in. Elderly women usually wear neat oxfords, and some still persist in the use of French heels.
"And now I'm going to tell you something else. Most people buy their footwear too small, and our stretchers are always full of shoes and more waiting, despite the fact that I have over a dozen pairs of stretchers. It takes 24 hours to do a really good job of stretching. Men are just as bad as women about buying shoes too small. I would say that practice averages about fifty-fifty between men and women.
"I also do quite a bit of work building up shoes for people that are crippled. Usually only one foot requires special attention, and very few have to have both shoes built up. Most of this work consists of building up the sole and heel to make one foot as nearly even with the other as possible, and it makes walking so much more comfortable and safe. You'd be surprised to know how many people have to have braces in their shoes. The majority of these are for ankle or arch supports. I fit a good many braces, that is, where the feet aren't infected. Where they're in too bad a condition, I don't attempt to fit 'em, for it's so easy to go wrong in fitting braces for the feet, and that only makes it worse. The fitting should be done by a specialist who thoroughly understands bone structure and other important things about the feet.
"The number of flat feet seems to be decreasing. I think that's because the majority of people are learning that it pays to have their shoes fitted by someone that knows how to fit 'em instead of merely buying another pair of shoes. I'll say that not over fifteen percent of my customers use arch supports now.
"'Modern living,' as most people call it, seems to have affected the feet of most of us. I don't know why, but women's shoes that came for repairs used to range in sizes of threes and fours, and now they’re fives and sixes. Can you explain it? Men's are the same; from eights and nines their sizes have gone to tens and elevens and it isn't so unusual to get twelves. The largest shoes that I ever repaired were size fourteen, and the smallest was a baby's first shoe.
"Driving also seems to affect footwear, for the right shoe of anyone who drives an automobile much is apt to show wear before the left. I would say that's caused by using the right foot on the brakes and gas feed so constantly. Bus and truck drivers have more trouble with their shoes than people in 'most any other line of work.
"High-top shoes are just about a thing of the past. We scarcely ever have a pair of 'em brought in, and I don't think they'll ever come back, not in our part of the country anyway. We really don't have weather that's cold enough for 'em, and they're more expensive than the low-cut shoes. The main thing is that the people don't like all that top around their ankles. The increase in use of silk hose for women has had its influence on shoe styles. A silk clad ankle is daintier than one covered with leather. Men don’t use 'em so much either, and I find that it's mostly the men in uniforms that wear high-top shoes. Of course linemen and many truck drivers use high-top boots in winter to protect 'em against the weather.
"Wealthy people have shoes repaired more than any other class of people, for as a general rule they buy shoes that are too expensive to discard very promptly, and they're the ones that are most exacting about repairs. Usually it's a full sole and heel job for them, and they demand the best materials. They don't complain about our prices because they know that the best material and workmanship cannot be cheaply bought.
"I also do quite a bit of work on shoes worn over artificial limbs. Cripples never complain about our prices for their work, so I try to give 'em the best job I can, both in work and material. Their repairs are very exacting, for the shoes must be adjusted with great accuracy to the limb or the wearer cannot walk so well, and his safety could be endangered by a careless job.
"I really get good business from the students at the university. There’s always one in each dormitory who will solicit work for me. I give 'em a percentage on what they get and that helps them as well as me. They really do get up the work.
"I keep my prices in range with the other shops in town. We don't have any labor organizations among the shoe repairers here and have never had any. They did try to organize one time, but cobblers are the most independent workers you ever saw. They won't stick together, and you know they can't accomplish anything as a group unless they'll pull and work together. Even the proprietors won't stick to rules. They'll borrow from and lend anything to each other, but that's as far as the fraternity goes.
"Some people think that shoe repairing is a dangerous job on account of the infectious nature of some foot diseases. However, I don't think that it's any worse than any other work where you come in contact with other people, but the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company won't write a sick and accident policy for a shoe repairer. Can you imagine that?
"I do shoe-tinting also. The girls are always wanting shoes to match their costumes, and this is especially so with their evening dresses. I get 50¢ for tinting cloth shoes and 75¢ for leather shoes. They can be tinted several times, but it has to be a darker shade each time. We very often have rush orders for black-dye jobs for funerals, and although black dye is not as poisonous as it was a few years ago, I don't let a black-dye job go out of the shop inside of 24 hours. I just won't take the chance of a customer of mine getting an infected foot from a wet dyed shoe. Any infection can really be serious and cause the loss of a foot, or even a life, very quickly. The death of President Coolidge's son from an infected foot convinced the world of that.
"A woman came in the shop one day and asked the prices on all of our work, I quoted her prices on repairing shoes, bags, and all leather luggage. When I had finished, she said, 'Well, what are doing, buying you a new home?’
"'No,' I replied, 'I'm waiting to save up the money before I do that.'
"'Well, it won't take you long to get it at those prices,' she argued. 'Do you know that when Jesse James robbed people he rode a horse? Your prices are just highway robbery and nothing else.'
"About that time the expressman brought in a small package and I paid for it. After he left, she asked if she might see the bill. I handed it to her and she looked at it. It was something over forty dollars. She gave it back to me and said, ’Do you mean to tell me that your supplies cost that much? Why, that's highway robbery.'
"'We base our prices for work on the prices we have to pay for supplies and labor,' I replied. 'We have to at least get enough to pay our bills.
"'Well, I take back all I said,' she announced. 'I've just moved to town and I'm hunting a place to have my shoe repairing done.' She’s still one of my best customers, but every time she comes in the shop she laughs at my mottoes on the wall and tells me that they need changing. What do you think?
I looked around and saw several placards, some of which read:
"NO
CHARGE ACCOUNT
KINDLY
PAY CASH"
..
"PLEASE
DON'T ASK FOR
CREDIT"
..
"IF YOU BELIEVE
IN CREDIT
LOAN ME $5.00"
"They're pretty good," I replied, "If you actually eliminate the credit business."
"But I do quite a bit of credit business," he said, "Collections are pretty good. I credit but very few Negroes, but I never have any trouble in collecting from 'em, for they'll pay if they can get the money.
"I also do work for the stores that handle footwear, for they’re always having some shoes that go bad and they have to have 'em repaired for the customers or else replace 'em. I get a good bit of work on leather bags and luggage - in fact, on all kinds of leather merchandise. As I said, we're busy all the time. You've probably noticed that my helper hasn't stopped since you arrived and that work has been coming all the time.
"We very often have work that's never called for, and unless they leave their address there are many times that we can't find the customers to make delivery. We keep the articles for a long time, and then if the owners don't claim their property we try to get it out of the way. If they're men's shoes we can sometimes sell 'em, but we don't have any sales on ladies’ and children's second-hand shoes so we give 'em to the Salvation Army, the welfare office, or some other charitable organization that knows where they’re needed the worst. Those folks can usually use all they can get.
"I told a magazine salesman the other day that I was too busy to talk to him, that I had already subscribed for the same magazines he was selling, and that I didn't have time to read 'em anyway. He certainly had a sharp come back," Mr. Hayes grinned. "He told me that people who never had time to read never amounted to anything, and he guessed that was why I was nothing but a shoemaker. You know most people think that when you get to be a shoemaker you’re at the bottom, but I like my work for it's all that I’ve ever done, and I make a good living for my family and see that they have plenty of everything they need - good clothes - and especially all they need in the way of food. My wife a and I think that growing children need a carefully planned diet to keep ’em well and strong.
"We don’t forget that we need to play too, for there are many times when everyone needs to get out and do something different. Every summer we take a trip to the mountains. We all like that, and we find plenty of amusement around the lakes, as well as in the fun of fishing. We usually catch all the fish we want to eat while we're on those trips. Last summer several of our friends went with us to the mountains. We rent a cottage every summer, and we like that much better than boarding, for we can have what we want to eat when we want it and we love to feel free to invite company. Young folks just naturally attract company. I don’t usually get to stay all the time that my family does for I have to return to the shop, but I go back for the week ends and they stay as long as they want to.”
A young woman came in and wanted new rubber heels put on her shoes. She was in a hurry to get back to her work. When he had finished the job and she had gone, Mr. Hayes said, "She works in one of the local cafes, end those waitresses are on their feet so much that an old run-over heel is one of the most uncomfortable things in the world in their young lives. Those girls are all good customers of mine and I try to do their work in short order so they’ll not have to wait, for they can’t be away from the job long at a time.”
Mr. Hayes evinced more enthusiasm over religion than any other subject. He is a deacon, a member of the finance committee in a local Baptist Church, a Sunday School teacher, and superintendent of the Sunday School. He says that his wife and children are active church workers. "I think,” he said, "that young people who take part in recreation sponsored by the churches are more than apt to lose interest in going to places where they shouldn't be. They grow up into better men and women than those who have not the influence of the church around them.
"I never discuss politics,” he solemnly declared. "You can't afford to when you're in business. Risk it and you'll lose customers before you know it. I find the best way for me to do is just to go on and vote and say nothing, then there'll be no hard feelings.
"What with these terrible arguments about our government that are going on all over the country, I just don't know what will become of it. We'll just have to put our faith in God and in the men we have elected to govern our nation. Many are too critical of our President, but I don't see how they can expect one man to accomplish everything. No matter how wisely he plans and works, we all know one man can't keep up with all the others it takes to go over the nation and carry out these plans. The President just hasn’t had the cooperation necessary to carry out his fine plans to help the unemployed. It's a pity work and jobs ever got into politics, for now if you're out of work and haven't got a pull with some politician you're just out of luck when it comes to work financed by government funds.
"I feel much the same way about women smoking that I do about their political activities. When I was a boy, every time I had to deliver shoes in the red-light district I saw those harpies down there smoking cigarettes. At that time there was no other class of women in this town brazen enough to be seen smoking. To this day the sight of a woman with a cigarette in her mouth reminds me of evil women. Be mighty careful how you quote me on that for some of my more modem customers might take offence if they ever traced this story to me. Sometimes it's best not to say all you think. However, I'm honest about it; I just can't help disliking the spectacle of a woman smoking," he said as he rather sheepishly removed a cigarette from his mouth. When he had carefully extinguished it, he continued: "You've no doubt noticed that my customer's parlor is well supplied with ash trays. That's a necessity, for without the ash trays it wouldn't be a week before that nice furniture would be ruined by live stubs and ashes, to say nothing of the fire hazard with all those papers and magazines that I keep for their pleasure being so easy to ignite."
Several customers came in and Mr. Hayes went to wait on them. One wanted her shoes half soled while she waited. She came back and sat down near me, picked up a magazine and read while her shoes were being repaired. When, in a very short time, Mr. Hayes came back with her shoes repaired and polished, she put them on and said, "They look like new, but they are so comfortable." Mr. Hayes laughed and replied, "Isn't that what most people want, the comfort of old shoes in new shoe appearance?"
As the girl paid for her work and went out, Mr. Hayes said, "You know it’s a pleasure to do a job for someone when they show you that they like the work. Most of our customers are like that. We try to please and they let us know that they appreciate it. We're like all other businesses, we have some customers that you can't please regardless of how hard you try, yet there are very few of those.
"We've started buying our home and I'm paying for it like paying rent. It's an old house - one that was sold for taxes in settling up an old estate - therefore I was fortunate enough to get it very cheap. It was in such a bad condition that I had to have a new roof put on the first thing. It's a two-story, frame structure - four rooms on the first floor and three rooms on the second. I have remodeled it on the inside. The walls were bad from the many leaks, but I've got that all fixed, and when I get a new coat of paint on the outside it'll look lots better. I'm just having the work done a little at a time, as fast as I can pay for labor and materials, and when I do get it fixed as we want it then we will really have a lovely as well as a comfortable home. Much of the repair work I've done myself, but I'll have to admit I'm not an expert carpenter. However, I'm building the garage with no other help except my son, and we are doing a pretty good job of it. It's coming along rather slow, for we work on it only in the afternoons after we leave our shoeshop. When we get the yard fixed up, our home will look so much better. Our lot is small, but it's big enough for us.
"I don't see why we didn't buy a home a long time ago, for we've spent enough for rent to pay for one and then some. Our down payment was only $50 and the rest we pay like rent, $15 a month. I surely hope that nothing happens to prevent our paying for it for I'm getting such a thrill in working on our own house and in our own yard.
"Now I'm afraid I must get back to work. It’ll take both of us the rest of the day to finish up what we have got to get out today. When your shoes need repairing come back to see us."
My dismissal, while pleasantly spoken, was so abrupt and positive that I knew it would be useless to ask again about the wage scale for cobbler’s assistants and other financial details I desired to record. Each time I had tried to get him to talk about net earnings and expenses, he had ignored the issue, and continued to talk of other phases of his work. The rumble of the heavy machines made conversation with the men who operated them impossible, and I left the shop with their roar in my ears.
