Date of first writing:	November 17, 1938
Name of person interviewed:	Ella Paschal (white)
Address:	Puryear, Tennessee
Occupation:	Wife of Job Painter, Carpenter, and Mason
Name of writer:	Ruth Clar K
Revisers:	Edwards and Ansell
SORRY LIVING
I've jist moved around and cleaned up other folks' trash and filth till it breaks me up to think of it. I could have set right down and cried last night when Wrather come home and said Doc had sold this house. It means we've got to git out by Christmas. Ain't never seen a landlord yet that by the time you git a house fixen fit for living he don't make a sale of it. I thought Doc, knowing us, maybe might be different. He ain't, though.
This place of his looked like a last year's bird nest when we come here. Jist simply awful inside and out. I had to use about three gallons of gasoline spraying to git the best of the bed bugs. First week we come we couldn't git no sleep to speak of nights for them bugs. Wrather he wasn't put out a-tall about the way things looked. He jist started right off on the outside, put on a new coat of paint and patched up every corner. Then he says, "Ella, if you and the bugs is calling it quits, I'm ready for papering." And he got all four rooms of it fresh papered at off hours and nights. He aimed to do an extry job of fixing, since it was Doc's house. He thought we'd be setting here as long as we had a mind to. But now it's sold over our heads and we'll have to move.
Oh, I can't think of nothing I'd ruther have than a place of our own. Your work don't count for nothing unless you do.
Wrather's worked like a dog all his life. Trouble is he ain't no manager. If he had been, we'd had a house of some sort for keeps, stead of patching and prettying up run-down ones for others to git the ease of. But I'll say, this for Wrather--ain't a lazy bone in his body. He says a lot of this talk about not gitting work is jist plain down triflingness. Folks don't want a job if they's work to it. I tell him, though, ain't jist everybody got two or three trades they can shift with like him.
His pappy learned him to carpenter a long with farming. And he knows how to do a good job of painting, inside or out. If it's brick laying or fixing rocks in some shape for staying, he can do it. When he's pinched to do it, he can paper a room smooth as you like. Enduring the last five years he's done a little bit of most everything. I'm glad he's job-working now, because it ain't half as wearying as sheer cropping. We've had enough of that to know.
Landowners jist don'y fix nothing to help our croppers. They's a few that's good and kind, but a heap more treats you like a dog and tries to git everything you make and then some. One year we was cropping with the Jacksons. Old Man Jackson was down the clay pit all day. He had a son or two supposed to see to his own crops. I vow to my living soul, that was the laziest bunch of boys I ever see anywheres a-tall Well, wrather give them Jacksons the hog's share of what come from his own crops and time and again he tried to help them git their own in some sort of shape. So that year me and my young-uns growed a good garden. It was peas and beans, cucumbers and tomatoes---jist about everything. We jist about fed the Jackson's all that summer. They'd come down and git a mess of whatever two or three times a day.
Well, one morning I looked out of the kitchen window. I see their mules jist tromping down everything in my garden. The fall peppers and late tomatoes and everything else. One of my boys see Herb Jackson come down there, open the gate, and turn them mules in.
I sent him straight off to git Herb. When he come back he says, "Herb says he put the mules there for pasturing and he ain't going to take them out." That was jist more than I could stand. I was spitting mad, I can tell you! I went right to the field where Herb Jackson was piddling. "Herb Jackson," I says, "you git them mules!"
He didn't give me no back talk. He jist ripped off across that field for them mules. He knowed I meant business that time, all right.
Wrather was still sheer cropping when the sign-up with with the gov'ment come along. The man we was cropping for come and told him he'd rented every acre of his land to the gov'ment. He didn't say a word about our crops we was about middle ways of. The move jist come on us before we, could plan, for it.
After that, Wrather like to never found a job. He says he knowed he walked over two hundred and fifty miles of Henry County and part of Kentucky hunting for a man needing a cropper. Finally, he sighted a shack in the center of a field. He traded for the rent cheap by telling the man he'd fixen the house. So Wrather set in some 'taters for trucking and we moved in. He fixen up the little house. Patched the roof and stripped the windows. Then he traded for some white paint coat. Wrather never was one to slop poor folks'paint on, a house. He fixen that house like he done every one we rented. we got the children started to school.
Everything looked to be settled for a spell. But before long the owner had a mind he could git more out of selling it for straight cash than by renting it. A fellow had see the house from the big road and taked a shine to it. He offered more than enough for the house and the patch of ground.
When the man taken the house and see how broke up we was over moving, he throwed a little our way for the taters. He never knowed wasn't a way in the world me and Wrather could have kept him from gitting the house. Nothing writ on paper betwixt Wrather and the owner.
Ain't but one time since we married when we was noways settled. Wrather cropped on sheers for a good man once when we was both young. Never was a man fairer and squarer. Crops was extry good for two years straight. I don't know how we done it, but me and Wrather saved up a hundred or two to spare.
We looked round for a good spot to put that cash money. Sighted a little farm with a house fit to spread in and we made our first payment. Well, everything hit us but good luck. Last one of the children taken bad sick and had to have doctoring. Half the stock on the place come down with some sort of misery or other. Most of them was cold dead before we'd made a start paying for them. Gaps run through my whole flock of young chickens, them that varmints didn't make off with. When we lost the farm, we was worse off than ever we'd been. It taked us five years to git shet of debt. But we done it. We paid back every cent to them that stood us for the stock. Wrather says he'd ruther rent shacks and fixen them up for others the rest of his life in place of gitting in debt again. I don't know. I don't want no farm. Still, I ain't never see where renting from others is noways towards easy living. I reckon, though, if you're borned poor, you're going to stay poor.
My pappy wasn't no renter. He owned his own farm---such as it was. But the land was too run off to hold seeds in the ground. They was nine children. Pappy done well when he made out to clothe and feed us. Mammy died when I was thirteen and I kept house for pappy and the children till me and Wrather married. Wrather's folks wasn't no better off than mine. He had about the same shot at schooling I had. Not much to speak of when you think what we done for our children. Not a one of them taken a shine to books, but Van. I told Wrather jist the other day, I says, "If me and you had to go without for the next years, I aim to see that boy gits through high school." It's a mystery to me how he keeps track of what he's learning when he's pulled from one school to another like he's been. But he does. They mark him good on his card. "Mark my words," I says to Wrather, "that boy will be a big somebody one of these days."
I don't know as the rest of ours made much show with the education we skimped to give them. Crawford Lee says he never would have got in that CCC though if he hadn't had a pull with them that was educated and had the say of the ones to go.
Hester couldn't do nothing better than marry a drinking man. That man ain't done nothing for her but give her three children and nothing to keer for them with. My girl Myrtle wouldn't stick to her husband. He was trifling. But I believe if folks marry they ought, to tough it out. Christal, my youngest girl, married a boy me and Wrather was awfully set against. He come from a low family. Not a one of them could read or write a line. But you know me and Wrather is sort of ashame of the stink we stirred about them two marrying. They done better than any one of the children. Him and Cristal has a nice home. Paid for, too. They put money in the bank. He works steady at the clay pit and they don't want for nothing. Never will, either. That boy naturally knows how to manage.
Herman's the only one the old ones ain't tried marrying. He had to cut his way out of a scrape last week. Everybody said it wasn't none of Herman's fault no way. Doc said he ought to cut to kill when he got a-hold of that roughneck. I told Herman, though, it matters not who's on the right side of the cutting. One gits cut and the other jailed. I told him to stay clear of such scrapes. Folks ain't going to let Wrather paint their houses if Herman keeps gitting us in bad that ways. Folks don't want no truck with a knife artist's family. I don't blame them. They's got to be a line drawed somewheres. Wrather's got enough jobs promised to git us past the first of March. We don't owe a red cent to nobody, neither.
But we're bounden to find some close place to live around here so's he won't miss out on them jobs. Doc says Wrather's a fool to work so hard. Says any man thats sixty-seven of age can sign something now that'll, take keer of him and him not having to turn a hand. Wrather says he don't aim to ask nobody for nothing jist so long as he can make a shift far hisself.
Why, I bet you he'd have to bow and scrape to them folks up yonder in Puryear to git to sign his name to a thing like that. They don't think you is worth talking to unless you dress high-tony and wear a red tie. Bet most of them that's strutting so high ain't a bit better than them they lowrates. From what I know, if it taked paying your debts to make them strut, they'd better jist go crawling with the snakes. They's one or two I'd like to move so far from it would take a dollar's worth of stamps on a postal card to reach them.
Since we've got to move again, I do wish it was somewheres in the country, but not far from a town, so's they'd be houses to paint, and carpentering to do. Not a farm--not I'd like a patch of ground big enough for a garden and chickens. I'd fence the chickens in so's not to worry the stuffing out of the neighbor people. If the house was anything a-tall me and Wrather could fixen it up.
But I want to cash rent this time. No more sheer cropping for me so long as I live on this earth. It's too sorry living and I don't want no part of it again ever.