BUS DRIVERS
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor of
Federal Writers' Project
Areas and 7
Augusta, Georgia
April 13, 1939
April 10, 1939
Mr. F. A. Taylor (white)
Manager, City Bus Lines
140 I. Washington Street
Athens, Georgia G.M.
BUS DRIVERS
Finding no one in the tiny office of the City Bus Lines, I walked through the garage until I spied two men at work on a bus. A tall black-haired man, dressed in a gray business suit, came around the vehicle and greeted me. He seemed very amused when I told him that I wanted to know some of the occupational experiences of bus drivers.
"Why do you want to know all that?” he teased. "Do you think you’d like to do this sort of work? It gets pretty tough sometimes. However, if you don’t mind waiting just a few minutes, I’ll Join you in the office and we'll see if I can give you any information.”‘
He gave a few more instructions to the men who were working on the bus, and then led the way to the small office, which seemed rather crowded with its desk, safe, and files. He placed a chair for me, sat down at his desk, and began:
”I’ve been manager of this station since it opened here.” I interrupted with the question, "Did you ever do any bus driving before then?”
"Well, yes, but not city bus driving,” he replied. ”I drove on tours for four years. How would you like to know about that kind of bus driving?"
"Fine," I hastened to say, "Please tell me all about it."
"Driving a bus on a tour is really some job," he said, and his voice and manner became more serious. "However, I believe I enjoyed it more than anything else I’ve ever done. Throughout all four of those years I didn’t have a serious accident.: Why the only thing I was ever held up for was for getting on a one-way street in Washington, D. C., and that only kept me tied up for a very few minutes. Yes, I’ve paid fines, that is I’ve paid as many as two fines in all. They were both in Florida, and in each instance the fine was levied on account of my having the wrong license. Ninety percent of the passengers on my tours were women."
"That brings up a question," I told him, "Which do you prefer as tour passengers, men or women?"
"Women, every time," he said without the least hesitancy, "You know they aren’t half the trouble that men are when they go on those long trips. Most of the time the bus company furnishes hotel accommodations, eats, and entertainments - all that is a part of the tour price usually. Occasionally some few passengers would prefer to arrange for their own board and meals, and in those rare instances we agreed for them to do it, provided they did not interfere with our schedule too much.
"In spite of all you near about the ways of women, I’ve found out that it is possible to please them. They ’won’t put up a howl and argue about being crowded in hotels. They’ll sleep several to a room and say nothing about it. They’ll eat anything when they’re off on a trip. Even if they don’t particularly like the food, they’re good sports and don’t complain.
"But the men! They insist on being comfortable. Just try to crowd them up several in a room when the hotels are full and they’ll sure tell you about it, and what’s more, they’ll refuse to cooperate. You have more trouble trying to feed the men too. Yes, mam, I’ll choose to conduct a ladies’ tour any time in preference to a group of men.
"Yes, it’s true the women are going to ask more questions than you can possibly answer, hey really can ask them. They ask the driver every kind of the most personal questions, about from the time me came into this world on up. The way I look at it, you could just give any sort of answer you want to the personal questions, but of course when it’s something regarding the details of the trip or the scenery, then I always gave them as accurate information as possible.
"Maybe you’ve heard that many people, when they get off on a trip like one of our tours, figure that they’re so far away that none of the home folks will ever hear about what they do, so they just turn loose and have one grand and glorious time. It’s surprising how some of the dignified deacons take their shoulders from the wheels that make church work and industry go ’round when they get out of sight of the old home town. They turn out to be the cut-ups and life-of-the-party boys. I’ve had them get so drunk they had to be taken off the bus and sobered up before they were able to go on with us.
"Just about the hardest time I ever had in getting the affairs of my passengers straightened cut was when two or three women on one of our tours wanted to furnish their own rooms and meals. We agreed for them to do this, and they were together in one group. They had made arrangements for their gentlemen friends to meet them at a certain town, but they all stayed at the same hotel where our party was registered. The husband of one of the women in that group called her up to see how she was getting on and to know if she was enjoying the trip. Of course, it would happen that one of the men visitors answered her telephone when it rang. Did we ever get that explained end fixed up? Well, for a time it looked like we might not be able to do it, but finally we did. The wife called me and told me what happened, and we got so busy trying to clear the matter up for the husband that pretty soon it seemed that every phone in that hotel was crossed up. That experience really got that woman’s goat, but she was game, and from then she stuck close to the main crowd until the end of the trip.
"The second tour I conducted was with a bunch of old maids. Now, 1st me see you laugh,” he teased. I couldn’t restrain a grin, for I knew that he had noticed the prefix "Miss,” before my name. "Those were nice old maids," he continued. "We went on a tour to Chicago to see the World’s Fair and then proceeded to New York. Regardless of what other people like to say about old maids, I didn’t have any trouble with that group of them. They were a very congenial crowd of women and everything was always just right. They weren’t always wanting someone to do something extra for them. It took less waiting on for that group than for any other bunch I ever conducted on a tour.
"To tell the truth though, one of those old maids did get on to me one night. We had stopped for the night and in unloading her baggage her suitcase fell and came open, spilling clothes in every direction. I was embarrassed and apologized the best I could and started helping her pick up her clothes. She was mad and told me to get the hell away from there, that she didn’t want me handling her clothes, and besides what did I know about women's clothing. When she said that, all the folks standing around began to laugh at her. She got madder, changed her mind, and ordered me to pick up every piece, fold all those clothes, and place ’em back in the suitcase just like they were before I let ’em get spilled out.
"All those old maids were school teachers, and they seemed to really enjoy that trip. At the fair, I put some of ’em on the roller coaster and one of those women got so excited that she threw her pocketbook away. We had some time finding it, for she had no idea which way she threw it, but finally we did find it. No, she didn’t care to ride on the roller coaster any more.
"On some of the tours I’ve had quite a bit of fun with my passengers when they experience their first ride on the subway in New York. In one party in my charge was an old crippled woman that couldn’t get along as fast as the others, and waiting on her caused us to get caught in a traffic Jam down there in the subway. They were really frightened that time, and I couldn’t get any of that group into the subway again on that trip.
"I’ve been on tours with groups of almost every religious denomination except the Catholics. I may have had a Catholic now and then in some of the groups that I've hauled, but what I mean to tell you is that I have never carried a bus load of Catholics on a tour.
"Once, when I carried a crowd of Methodists on a trip to a church conference, I found them a nice congenial bunch of people. From the beginning to the end of that trip there was no grumbling about anything.
"Soon after that I conducted a crowd of Baptists, and their conduct was just the opposite. Nothing pleased them. No matter how hard we tried, they were grumbling about one thing or another throughout the entire time.
"Another time I carried a bus full of Negro high school students. That was one time when I was quite surprised. It was really one of the quietest crowds I ever handled. There was not one complaint out of that entire crowd, and their behavior was excellent. I had dreaded that trip for I thought I was going to have my hands full.
"The time I went out with 33 girls on my bus for a trip to the mountains and 28 of them got sick at one time is an experience I'll never forget. Did we have a busy night? It was nothing serious; just something they had to eat or drink, but they had me awfully worried for awhile. They were a bunch of schoolgirls and one of their teachers was in charge. I was thankful for that for she knew more about handling sick girls than I did. By the next afternoon they were all well enough for us to proceed on our tour.
"Usually when we carried schoolgirls or boys some of the teachers from their schools went along, but if not, then we always provided our own chaperones. If both boys and girls went on the same trip we carried two chaperones, a man and a woman. We never started out with a group of 'teen-age without an adult in charge.
"What now seems to me to be the worst crowd I ever had to handle was a bunch of rough foreigners. They wouldn't be pleased or satisfied with anything we did for them. They demanded every imaginable kind of extra service on the road and in the hotels, and every place where we stopped was glad to see us haul that ill-mannered crowd away. I couldn't blame 'em for that, for that was one crowd that I was glad to get off my hands, and I hope I never have to take another of that sort.
"I think the trip that I enjoyed most of all was a tour through Canada with 27 boys. I love children, and I find most of them are mighty interesting, and it is a particular pleasure to watch the reactions of children to the sights and experiences of a bus tour. As a rule they are easy to control and are intensely interested in ell you tell them or show them. We had planned to make an early start that first day and do you know that every member of that group of boys was right there at 5 o'clock in the morning, ready that to go, end it was the bus that hadn't shown up. It had refused to run that morning. Another bus was brought out and soon we were off.
"Most of the boys were old acquaintances and friends, and the few new ones were soon buddies with the others and all were having a grand time. Our first stop for sight-seeing was at an old Moravian church. A pastor of the church met us there and admitted the crowd to the building. I enjoyed hearing him explain the history and customs of those Moravians that settled there centuries ago. The boys were interested chiefly in the stained-glass windows that gave an unusual pictoral history of the life of Christ.
"God's Acre was what they called their cemetery, but we did hear a few of the people around there say, 'the graveyard. "In this place of interment no family lots were seen. One section was reserved for women, another for men, and a third for children. The graves were arranged in long rows and as persons died their graves became the next in the line to which their age and sex entitled them interment. This Moravian church was on the campus of Salem College. Before we left Winston we found that the interest of our group in the unusual sights and customs of the place was no less avid than the curiosity displayed by the residents toward our 27 boys.
"We crossed the Blue Ridge Mountains and enjoyed the wonderful scenery without making a stop until we came to the Natural Bridge, where the boys begged for time to visit a souvenir shop and a cold drink: stand. Then we hastily loaded them back on the bus and proceeded to Lexington and the Lee Museum. Although the museum was closed at the late hour of our arrival, one of the authorities allowed the old Negro caretaker to admit our party, and I wish you could have seen those boys when they were suddenly confronted with the skeleton of ‘Traveller,' the famous horse that carried General Lee in the War between the States. Those boys got a right good history course on that trip, for before we carried ’em back home they had seen many of the famous old battlegrounds and other noted places. The cyclorama at Gettysburg fairly took their breath, it was so real looking.
"New York was a big sight to the boys. While our group was waiting for room assignments, we had a peach of an argument with a group of Yankee boys, and while it was purely oral, it just missed developing into a physical contest.
"I could talk to you for a whole day about the details of that trip, how we saw Niagara Falls, and of our visit to the Dionne quintuplets, but the last mentioned items did not interest the boys as much as a fishing trip on Lake Temegami, in Canada, in charge of real Ojibway Indians. Bill Friday was the Indian chief in charge of our party and I’m sure not one of those boys have forgotten him or the six Indian boys who helped him entertain our youngsters. The only really unpleasant feature of our Candian stay was the mosquitoes. We usually kept a squirt gun in one hand for self-preservation. We had a little excitement too in connection with those pesky mosquitoes. One smart boy got up in the night and built a smudge in the tent he occupied with six other boys. The fire ignited the oil soaked waterproof tent and the boys just did make their escape. Their possessions burned along with the mosquitoes and the tent, but nobody got hurt, and that was what counted.
"Some day when you don't have to write about anything else but that tour with the boys I'd love to tell you all about the visit to Coney Island, the tour of the Smithsonian Institution, the stop at Annapolis, and the dozens of other interesting places visited on the return trip. We brought them all back home safe, sound, and happy.
"On another trip I had to stop and pick up a group that had experienced one of the worst accidents that ever happened on any of our tours. The driver of the bus was sick and became unconscious under the wheel and the bus turned over in a sand pile. A few passengers were bruised up a little but not one of them was seriously injured, and after brief attention at a hospital all of the party, including the injured ones, boarded my bus to finish the trip, and none of them seemed to enjoy it more than the ones who had been the worst bruised up in the accident.
"Ball players are another good crowd to handle. As a rule they are friendly, congenial, and agreeable in every way. Of course they are going to holler and shout, but who can blame them for trying to sing, or for their exciting arguments. I always found them good sports even after they’d lost a game.
"Oh, but what a difference there is in the players and the fans going and coming from the games. Often you get a load of fans that are a tough lot and hard to handle. Some of them start celebrating before they leave home and they board the bus with plenty of drink in their pockets, and by the time they get to the game a good many of them don't know what’s going on. When those ball fans reach the disagreeable drunk stage, they can think of more silly questions to ask, and of more things they want done for them. They surely do insist on service, and the way they do gripe about everything is something awful. Their fights are nothing to get alarmed over for they happen so often - just drunken rows, some of them are.
"The only time I ever had my bus torn up was at a ball game. I had a rough time that day. I drove a bus from another town - to Athens and after the game my passengers were all drunk enough to get into a fight with the students. As a result every window in the bus was broken out. My, but that was a fight. I thought I never would get my crowd to stop fighting and sit down so I could get started out of this town that day.
"While driving on tours is hard work, I did enjoy it. Come to think of it, any kind of work is hard if you really work at it. The sights I’ve seen and the experiences I’ve had have been more of an education to me than what I learned in school, and I wouldn’t take anything for the time I’ve spent driving on tours.
"We came to this city with our busses, in 1937 and our partner was supposed to look after insurance and things like that. After operating our busses for one day they were stopped by the city because that partner of ours had not made the proper arrangements about insurance, and it was 6 months before we made another start here. Then, the negligent partner was no longer with us. You’d find it hard to believe the long tale of woe I could tell about the difficulties we had in getting started here. The city fell down on it's contract as well as we did.
"People here have pulled against us in every possible way. Some of them expect more than any one concern can do. The first year we lost money, despite the fact that we endeavored to give the very best service possible in every way. I never saw a town where so many people expect us to give them passes to ride on. Now, you know it’s impossible for us to do that.
"We try to employ only the most level-headed, skillful drivers and we train them for several days before trusting them on a bus without supervision. We require them to be courteous to all passengers regardless of all the foolish questions they may ask, and other provocations, that may arise. One of the questions most frequently asked each day is, 'Which way does this bus go?' Many people will ask that question even if they are looking straight at the sign on the front that tells exactly the direction it is going.
"School children and college students seem to think they are entitled to more consideration than anyone else. Yet most of them use the bus only in very bad weather. The working class of people use them regularly everyday and several times a day, and they don’t demand any more than anybody else. We just can’t please everybody, so we can only try to do our best in every way we can.
"Yes, mam, we surely have caught it since we came to this city. The students asked us to put on a special bus for them one night to carry their guests to a dance on the campus and we were glad to do this for them. Thinking nothing of it except that we were extending a courtesy, we had our bus there to carry the students and to bring them back. The next day we were called into court and fined $50 for running a special bus without a permit. That taught me a lesson. I don’t forget to ask for one now, and if we run a bus over the regular time we have to take out another permit. Foolishness, I call it, or rather it looks that way to me, but we have to do it just the same.
"Our busses start out at 6:30 a.m. and run until 10:30 p.m. During the hours when people are going to work and students are on their way to school we run extra busses over a period of two-and-a-half hours. There are extras for two hours at noon, and late in the afternoon we run the extra busses again for two-and-a-half hours. Busses run on a 30-minute schedule, except in the busy hours I have just mentioned when we put on sufficient extra busses to provide a 15-minute schedule.
"On our city bus line here we have never had a serious accident or a passenger injured. In fact, about the only wreck we have ever had was when a car ran into our bus. Now our bus was standing still when the automobile crashed into it, but of course the case was decided against us and we had to pay for it. Even then, no one was hurt. When one of our busses was standing on another occasion, two ears ran together at the side of our bus, and do you know that case went against us too, and it was decided that our bus was the cause of it all, and we had to pay the damages. Of course we could have gone into further litigation and doubtless we might have gotten out of it but we decided to pay it rather than get into more trouble about it, as it seemed to us that everyone in this town was doing everything against us anyway and we didn't want to make more enemies by court trials.
"There is just one complaint after another, and some of them are for the most foolish things imaginable. I'm kept busy answering the phone to answer such poppycock, as a demand to know why we do not fire a driver because he failed to stop in the middle of a block for a passenger to get off, or somebody wants to report a driver that carried her one door beyond her own house, or maybe he didn't stop until he got to the next corner.
"'Did you ring your bell?’ I usually ask.
"'I did not,' they often reply, 'that driver should have known where to stop for each passenger,'
"Sometimes they’ll call and quarrel at us because they say, 'Tour driver went right on by when I was coming out of my door, and he didn't even stop to see whether I wanted to ride or not.' There's one woman that works in one of the libraries here, and it's an everyday occurrence for her to call up and want a driver fired for first one thing and another. Sometimes she's fussing lust be-cause they don't stop in the middle of the block and wait for her to come, or else they don't try to find out whether she wants to ride or not."
"Are they supposed to stop in the middle of a block for passengers?" I asked.
"No," he replied, "they aren't. They're supposed to stop only on corners, and only then when you are there ready to board the bus. The same rule applies to leaving the bus too. king the bell for the corner nearest your destination. When a bus driver takes on or discharges passengers in the middle of a block, it is just his endeavor to be courteous and helpful. So instead of complaining about what the drivers fail to do, people should thank them for the many little courteous things they do that the company doesn't require or expect of them.
"Sometimes within 5 minutes I'll have two contradictory complaints about the same driver. One person will phone me that, 'He drives too fast.' and the next ring of the phone may be someone saying, 'He goes along so slow it takes him all day to get anywhere.' The boys just grin and take it much better than I could and go on trying to do all they can to please the passengers.
"Someone calls up occasionally to say, ’Your driver didn’t have any heat on his bus and it was too cold this morning. You’d better see about it,' and then in the next moment another telephoner complains that, ’Tour driver had too much heat on the bus, end no window up this morning. I don’t think you should keep such a driver as that.’
"One call will say, ’I just got off a bus that had every window up in this cold weather, I nearly froze.’ On the other hand someone else will tell us, ’Why don’t you teach your drivers to ventilate your busses. I just got off of one that had every window closed tight, and with such a crowd riding on. it, air certainly was needed. "'
The manager grinned. "Make some suggestions," he said, "Tell me something to do or say in such situations. We can’t possibly please all of the people all of the time. Come on. Give me some ad-vice."
"Sure," I told him, "I ride your busses too, and I can’t see why you don’t make them more convenient or more comfortable for m."
"Your complaint doesn’t ring sincere with that grin on your face," the manager laughed, "I don’t think you're mad enough for me to even consider your complaint. However, I'll ask the drivers to see what they can do about it."
"Well, I'd rather you just forgot that fake complaint," I said, "for your drivers have always been nice and considerate of the passengers every time I’ve ridden your busses. It seems to me a more.
"A small Negro boy on the bus kept watching and edging a little further away every time the drunk Negro lurched a little. Finally all the passengers had left the bus except one white woman, the small Negro boy, and the drunk man who was sleeping peacefully, When the driver reached the end of his route and was ready to begin the return trip toward town, the drunk man was still asleep. When the driver started back to wake the man and tell him to get off the bus, the little Negro boy jumped up.
"'Just let me git off his here bus right now, ' he pleaded, cause I just don't want to see you do dat,' and he scurried off like a scared rabbit.
"The driver woke the drunk Negro up. By this time he had fallen across the long seat. When he finally opened his eyes, he humbly said, 'Yas sir, I'se wine to git off,' and promptly toppled over two of the seats. Finally he stumbled out of the bus, and the 'little Negro boy ran all the way around the bus and was on it in one leap. The drunk staggered off down the street, and the little boy kept looking back, as though he feared the man might change his mind ' and board the bus again.
"'Scared, boy,' the driver asked.
"'Not now, boss,' he said, and drew a long breath."
The manager laughed. "Our drivers do have amusing experiences," he said, "but why don't you talk with them, for I know they would be glad to find someone that wanted to listen to them tell of the things that happen on their routes." pleasant topic would be some of the amusing experiences your drivers have."
‘"Funny things do happen on a bus occasionally," he agreed. "The other day a passenger just couldn't understand why we couldn't take him all the way to Bogart, Georgia, just the same as the Greyhound bus had done on another occasion. The driver tried to explain that he was not driving a taxi, and that our busses don't go out of the city. I don't think that passenger ever did understand it.
"On some of the runs the cooks going to work in the early morning nearly run the drivers crazy when a crowd of them get together chattering at one time. If you've never ridden with a big crowd of them you have no idea what a noise they can make.
"One Saturday night recently on one of the late runs, a Negro man got on with a very drunk young Negro. He told his young companion to sit down while he paid the driver, and the boy did as he was told. The older Negro paid only one fare and got off, leaving the young drunk on the bus. With the restraining influence of the older man gone, the young Negro became very noisy. The driver told him if he didn't quiet down he would have to put him off the bus. The youngster decided to get off the bus before it started and wanted his money back. The driver told him the fare had been rung up and would not be refunded.
"'Well,' the drunk replied, 'if I cain't git my money back, I reckon I'd just as well to ride,' and he fell back in his seat, and was asleep by the time the bus got in motion.
I thanked him, end started out of the office. The telephone rang, and as I left the place I heard him saying, "Yes, mam, -------I'm sorry, mam,-----thank you, I'll see what can be done about it." I was sure it was another of those complaints. Probably some luckless driver failed to see a patron coming out of her front door.
