Lucille B. Edwards
Frances L. Harriss
TONY AND GUS MAVRONICKOLAS
Tony Mavronickolas, now sixty-two years old and a widower, was born on the island of Nikaria where he worked on merchant vessels. His wife was also born there. Tony's brother, Andrew, had already come to America, and he had heard that it was a fine place to live, a place to make money. So Tony decided to come.
Tony and his wife landed at Baltimore in 1908. At that time workers were being sought for the iron and steel works in Pittsburgh, so he decided that he would go there and make some money before joining his brother in Wilmington. He and his wife lived in Pittsburgh for two years, and there he took out his first naturalization papers. Tony thought the city was too smoky and dirty. As soon as they could save enough to pay their fare to Wilmington they came to live with Tony's brother. Andrew owned and operated a candy kitchen where he also sold ice cream and cold drinks.
Tony's son, Gus, was born in Wilmington in 1912. He started at the age of six to attend the public schools of Wilmington and attended regularly until he completed the seventh grade. He made good marks. He was allowed little playtime for he had to help in the store.
Gushad a determination to speak good English, so after leaving school he began to attend night classes at the business school. Here he found a way to master the language. He spoke Greek when talking with his father or mother but never at any other time.
In telling of his work, Gus said that he could shell peanuts as fast as the first shelling machines. When he first started to work for his uncle he said that his mother gave him some advice that he has never forgotten: "Treat everybody in a business-like way, be polite and attentive, listen to all they have to say, but don't answer too many questions or talk about yourself. Then nobody will know about your business. Watch the coppers (pennies), hold them tight, and you will soon have dollars."
As the Greeks had no place for their own worship Gus attended Sunday School and church with some of his schoolmates, but as the business grew he was kept in the shop on Sunday to serve the many customers. He said that he was glad to have an excuse to stay by himself, for his friends were not as nice to him as they once had been. When he reached the age of fourteen his social life began to stop, as the boys did not want a Greek to call on their girl friends.
Then his mother died about that time, and his father was so sad that he spent all of his spare time with him.
Gus was always kept busy on Sunday afternoon, for the Greeks were the only ones who kept such places open on Sundays. And this was a very popular place with the younger ones. Every Sunday these boys and girls would tell how they got their money to buy ice cream they would be given a nickel to put in the collection plate at Sunday School, but they would keep this nickel for ice cream and put a penny in instead. To what extent this had influence it is not known, but it was not long before the Blue Lawa were passed. This compelled the Greeks to close their shops on Sundays.
After the Blue Laws were passed Greek after Greek began to leave Wilmington, and among them was Gus uncle. This also meant that Gus and his father were to go. They moved to Pittsburgh, and while there two important events happened in the Mavronickolas family: Tony became an American citizen and Andrew married a young American girl. But the young wife began to show objections to her Greek relatives, so Gus and Tony decided that the best thing for them to do was to return to Wilmington.
Gus returned to Wilmington in the autumn of 1938 and opened the Minute Lunch Stand and is now enjoying a large business. Gus says that his father never associates with anyone, and he guesses that is the reason why he never cares togo out like other young fellows.
