There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Work for Our And Catch Another
"I wouldn't live here five minutes if'n I had a family, but jest me, it don't make no difference."Samuel Dean pushed his horn rimmed spectacles higher on his nose and laughed. His club-glack skill gleamed in the lamp-lights.
"I gits my mail at sixteen-hundred and seven Under wood Street. Uncle Sam don't deliver no mail in no alley. They's only two houses in this here alley. All the rest is coal houses with leaky roofs. Well, I got one of them houses!"
The place swam with a fog of coal smoke. There was a low ceiling and walls covered with badly soiled paper. In one corner stood a blue iron bed neatly covered with a white speead and a blue comfort was folded across the foot. A Franklin heater, in which a fire was roaring, filled the room with suffocating heat. Water in an iron kettle and coffee in a gray enamel pot boiled on top of the stove.
He laughed again and waved his hand about the cramped room. "Look' er over!"
"I'm a bachelor man now," he said. "I was jest settin' here patchin' my pants. If'n I had a wife I'd have to patch jest the same. Did when I had one. I know all about women. Mine ain't never loved patchin'. She sho' 'spised me to wear overalls, too. But Lord, I had to dress accordin, to the work I done. My work is the rough kind.
"Me and my wife warn't never together on nothing' Not even on the raisin' of the chillun. I set down once and told her how I thought we ought to bring them up, or leastways that we ought to git together on her way or mine. And Lord! She nigh blowed the roof off!"
His patching finished, he shuffled over to the bed in the corner and carefully laid the pants on the clean white spread. From a wooden box wired to the foot of the bed he picked up a clock, gave it a Vigorous shake, held it to his ear to see if it was ticking, then replaced it. "Ain't neither one of them no count," he said, pointing to another clock on the mantle. He moved the coffee pot to the edge of the stove before dropping into a rocking chair.
"No," he said, "me and the old woman never was together. She 'lowed as how she warn't goin' my way. She always let'em chillun do things I didn't like at all. Sometime they'd ask her could they go places and she'd say so sweet-like, 'Go ask yo' papa. You know how he is.' I see what she up to. She's jest tryin' to pisen they minds against me, and make 'em think I was the one to always say no.
"A broke up home is the worst thing can happen. It's different 'bout sickness. That's somethin' you can't help. But "jest to have a family and then everything go wrong, that's mighty bad. But 'tain't so. My wife was years younger than me. Now, I soundly knows, it's a foolish thing for an ol' man to marry a young girl, less'n he's rich and spry and able to go round places where she wants to go. The young girl and the old man is livin' in different times and no amount of money can bring them times together.
"Well, in those days I jest worried over my troubles and my young wife so that sometime I couldn't sleep nights. But it don't make no difference how much you worry, yo' life jest goes on the same.
"I had a little home there in Shelbyville I was mighty proud of. A fo' room brick house set up on a hill. We had city water and we had a well. One of these kind you let the bucket down in and draw it up full of good cold water. The place was an acre square. Well, as I was sayin', when me and my wife busted up I told her whatever I had I'd give her a half of it if it warn't but a thimble full. She say she want money. So I turned in then and I mortgaged my home Fo' hundred and fifty dollars was the mortgage. I give her the last cent of it Myself.
"Then I come down here to Nashville and went to work to pay off that mortgage. I worked at the feed mill in South Nashville nearly nine years. That was a mighty good job. I paid off the mortgage on my place. By the time I done that the bottom fell out of everything. I got behind with my taxes on my house. The city been wantin' it for a school house. Professor Harris come down here from Shelbyville last summer and stood right there in the do' and talked to me 'bout it. I knowed I might jest as well let it go. They'd sell it to pay the taxes anyhow. I got a little out it. Nothin' like I'd got if my taxes had been paid up. The chillun could paid a few dollars apiece and kept up them taxes. Then we'd got twelve hundred out'n it. I worried and I worried over it. Things gits on you so you don't know which way to go sometime. Well, talkin 'bout it don't do no good neither.
"My wife and the chillun lives here in Nashville. They lives on Heiman Street there in the old Terry Home. My son carries trays at the hotel. All the girls work. They mama stay home and if'n she don't want to clean up, them girls falls in there on Saturday and do it.
"You want the story of my life? I started to write it once myself, but my home got broke up and I ain't had my mind on nothin' like that since. Some I wrote got scattered and the rest I tore up.
"What they go' do with this stuff anyhow?" He leaned forward and rested his elbows on his knees. "Gittin' ready for war? I'm too ol' to go now. Ain't never been in a war to the point of now and I guess I'm too far gone to do the army folks any good.
"I'll have to study a bit about my life. My age is set down square in the Bible, but I've lost the Bible. I think I was borned 'bout '80. Yes, I think that's right. Out of a family of thirteen chillun, me and my brother is the onliest ones livin'. I was borned in Bedford County and at a place they call Flat Creek. That's 'twixt Shelbyville and Lynch-burg. The first original Deans come from Flat Creek. My father was a farmer, jest a Share cropper, and his name was Aaron Dean. Double 'AA-ron.'
"Bedford County was a powerful wheat country in that time. Why, the buyers would crib eight and ten thousand bushel of wheat and corn, and the same thing when it come to cotton and tobacco. But that didn't do the po' farmer no good. The po' farmer lost all the time. That was on 'count of he couldn't hold his crop over for high prices. Big farmers had warehouses and they could hold they stuff for a big price. Yes sir, it take money to make money, and the little man Lest holds the sack.
"That mind me of somethin' happened when I was in Akron, Ohio, in war times. In those days sugar sold for thirty cents a pound, and I was workin' at a machine shop, loadin' blocks for a floor. Well, it was a white feller there and 'course he wasn't doin' nuthin' but layin' flat of his back whilst we's loadin' the truck. He was a pretty smart man, though. I'll have to give it to him there. He say, 'In ten days you can git all the sugar you want for sixteen cent a pound. The big logo has bought up the sugar and they'll hold it in the warehouses and force the prices down.' Sho 'nough, in ten days' time sugar's sellin' for sixteen cent jest like he say. Things can happen like that when it come to money.
"Well, I lived on the farm till I was nigh grown. Coun-try life is the best life they is. I went from there to Shelbyville where I begun public work. I made ice. Then I went to Early and Williams Lumber Company, I worked fo' years in the lumber yard and five years firin' the boiler at the saw mill. I went from there to Kansas City. I served ten months at are icin' station. I iced refrigerator cars.
"I was lookin' for better all the time. I served eighteen or twenty months at two of the Big Five Packers. Armour and Company, Morris and Company, Wilson, Cudahey, and Swift is called the Big Five Packers. The balance of the time I served 'round railroads. So then I traveled seven years with race hosses, carin' for them. Yes, I'm an ol' race hoss man. I served two seasons with Gerst's trottin' hosses out on the Franklin Pike. I spent several seasons 'round Cumberland Park.
"I worked hard all my life, but age is against me now. They tell me right away now that my workin' life is too short to give me a job. They'll hire a boy befo' they'll hire me, though I'm heap the best worker, mo settled and everything. A young fellow'll work a while and then fool 'round, where I'll work week in an week out. But they say his workin' life is longer than mine. Nothin' for ol' man to do nowdays.
"Didn't git to work but one day last week. Can't lay brick in real cold weather. The mortar'll freeze and when it thaws it'll pop and crumble out. Summer's the season for brick work. I used to do some brick work befo' I left home. I sets grates sometime, too. My work is mighty hard. Carryin' sixteen and eighteen bricks on yo' head sho ain't easy. It give you the splitters in yo' head sometime. I've heard white men say a nigger's head is so hard you can drop a brick on it from a twelve story winder and nigger won't feel it. You can put that down in yo', book as ain't so. Hod carriers and brick carriers has the spiltters in they head from that work same as a white man would.
"I'm so tired most of the time, and that's the reason I give up stewardship at church. Let some of the men that's got wives serve a while. I got to cook and wash and iron, patch and clean up for myself. I don't feel like runnin' to meetin's every night or two. I'm still a class leader and I belong to Sister Marshall's Club. I believe it's the Ever Ready Club. I used to belong to the Masons but I'm unfinancial now. But sho' we had the fun in that institution.
"I likes to read. I likes races, chicken fights, and baseball games. I takes the paper endurin' baseball season. When it's over I quits. I'm not much on football. I used to like to dance. I don't do that now. The dance they do now ain't nothin'. We used to do the square dance. You ain't never seen that kind of dance is you?
"I like them ol' history books and I read them a heap. In the Enropean gov'ment some women has led the country but I can't see nothin' good none of them done. I quit votin' when they give the vote to the women. I got a history of England and a Greek history too. Sometime I git lonesome here and I jump on 'em. I ask a women once where civilization started. She said it started in China, but it didn't. It started in Egypt. After she say she didn't believe the Bible, I let her alone. Woman like that soare me. People go to Egypt these days now lookin' for knowledge. The reason they don't want to give the 'Gyptians credit is 'cause they's niggers. Shucks, undertakers ain't learnt yet how to fix the body like the 'Gyptians done. Wish I knowed how. Make me a barn full of money, mummyin' up the folks. Make 'em so hard and lastin' you could stand 'em up on the graves and they'd be the corpse and the headstone all at once.
"My, you're jest sweatin'. Let me open this door. Why, I'm 'bout to burn you up. Chile, I believes in my fire. It can't git too hot to suit me in my old days. I must have plenty of fire and a good bed to sleep in. I put me in two tons of coal the other day." He pointed to five big cans full of lump coal. "I had enough to last to Christmas left over from last year but I put more in.
"I still sleeps on my feather bed. I was born on one and I still owns one. Winter and summer I has my feather bed. I can't sleep on a hard bed, and that's what them .'01' mattresses is.
"It's funny how I got my feather bed. My bed was a chicken feather bed. My wife's feather bed was goose feathers. When they moved down here they got stylish and started sleepin' on mattresses. She give her feather bed away. I knowed if I ask her for it she wouldn't let me have it. They put it outside where the people they'd give it to could come git it. I ask my daughter what she go' do with that ol' feather bed. She say they'd give it away, but the folks hadn't come after it. So I told her I'd give her mine and a dollar to boot if she'd let me have it. She say all right. I give her the dollar. I rushed home, put my chicken feather bed on my little ol' wagon, and took it on over there and brought my goose feather bed back. She say 'bout a hour after I left the folks come after it. Chile, I was jist in time. Luck was with me that time. I'm sho' proud of my goose feather bed. She's a good-un, too. My daughter's got a little ol' radio she said I could have, but I ain't got no 'lectricity here to feed it.
"I didn't git much larnin', jest the primary grades. Well, to the fifth grade, but that's the same as the eighth grade now. Folks don't know nothin' now. You can take these college graduates and put 'em up to talk. Why they can't talk!
"All my chillun's got a middlin' fair education. Marvin went to Fisk one year and quit. Him and Professor Harris was boys together and classmates. Now the professor is principal of the high school there at Shelbyville. Evelyn, Jane, and Mable all went to Turner College there at home.
"One of my girls don't care for nothin' much but cookin'. She's a jim-dandy good cook. She can cook any kind cake, # just git it out of her head when they was going to school whenever they say, 'Papa I need a book,' I got it. Dollar and a quarter, dollar and a half, whatever it cost. When we broke up, they was a trunk full of books I'd bought for them.
"It's always been my desire to git to the place where when I got too old to work I could take care of myself. But I've had so many back sets. I had no hope of bein' rich but I did want to be comf'table when I got '01 But this has been my bad year. All last year I made forty cent an hour, but this year I ain't made but thirty cent a hour. I pay six dollars a month for this house. It depend on what I want as to what I spend for food. Now, if I git a chicken or lamb roast or somethin' like that, it'll run 'round three or fo' dollars a week.
"These days I don't have no special one to work for. It's jest work for one and catch another.
Lillian C. Love
Lena E. Lipscomb