FREE ADVICE
Original Names	Changed Names
Brigers	Cates
Davis	Bolton
Bonza	Bonella
Date of first writing:	Jane 5, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	Beulah Parsons Davis(white)
Address:	Briggs Avenue
Place:	Durham, N. C.
Occupation:	Fortune teller
Writer:	Omar Darrow
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 3,200
FREE ADVICE
"There's a collector at the door! Excuse me a minute, I'll be right back.
"Sorry as I can be, Mr. Cates, but I don't have a cent today. Yesterday was Sunday and I didn't have a thing for our dinner but a can of soup and some corn bread. The children like it as much as I do and there is little need to complain, I guess, for I could have had a little something else with the quarter I had put aside for the collection plate at church Sunday morning. Somehow it made my soup taste better to know I had to do without something to eat so that I could do my little bit in putting it in. I don't believe in Foreign Missions and giving to Foreign Missions when we have so much need to do for those all around us. I ain't telling you all this, Mr. Cates, to try to keep from paying you today."
"You don't owe me a cent, Mrs. Bolton. I stopped by to try to get you to buy something else. I like to have your name on my account books. Can't I send you some metal chairs for your porch? Everybody needs some porch chairs."
"I don't, Mr. Cates. I never get the chance to sit out there on the porch for the afternoon sun would bake me, and Bonella works all day and she couldn't sit out there even in the mornings. And for the few little minutes that either of us or the boy wants to sit out there, there is that old bench that I have drug about over county after county, for I love the old thing. It's the bench I used to sleep on when my parents took me to the little country church that they both were members of."
"Well, if not the metal chairs, what can I send you? I don't want to know that you need nothing else."
"I do need things and I want things, but when anybody has to do without the more necessary things to pay for a piece of furniture it just don't pay all the time. I skimped a lot to get me a good stove and two good beds and messed along bit at a time till I got a few other pieces, but now if it won't for Bonella working down at the cafe I just don't know what I'd do.
"Ever since I was hauled into court on a charge of telling fortunes without a license folks are just about as 'fraid to come to me as I am to have them. I never solicited a client in my life and I have never charged any-body a penny. Of course, people often give me something or leave some money on the table or dresser, but my advice is always free. I am just as qualified to get license as them who has 'em, but I figure this ways Them who has license charges from fifty cents to $5 and if I had 'em I would be supposed to charge the same, but I figure that there are people who I might help that can't afford licensed prices.
"So, Mr. Cates, if I don't owe you a cent I surely am proud I don't, and I don't want to get in debt any more any time soon. But I'll say one thing for you; you're one of the most honest people I ever dealt with and have been just as nice when I couldn't pay as when I could, but now I have a visitor and I shall have to quit talking.
"Now it does make one feel good," she continued, addressing the visitor, "who has had as hard a time as I've had to know they can still hold up their head, get all the credit, such as I need, and be respected by the church people like I am even though I have been hauled into court by my enemies.
"I only had a few dollars last week and I knew a family of five who were in destitute circumstances. I just couldn't sit down to my table and eat with the right feeling, so I just went and bought them folks a box of groceries. I had one good night's sleep that night.
"If I see someone who really needs help I am going to help them even if I have to do without myself, for I know that somehow, in some way, I’ll get what I need. My Bible doesn't tell me that I shall ever get what I want, but it does promise me what I need. Human beings are funny, odd, or something that I can't exactly define, but we all want too much.
"I started out in life wanting excitement, and I reckon I've had it if anybody ever did. I was raised on a farm, a dewberry farm. My parents owned the farm and a turpentine forest, too, and as far back as I can remember I puttered about among the dewberries and learned all about them. And when the turpentine pines were tapped I was there, too. I was everywhere about the farm that something was going on. I worked on that same farm at farm duties, too, just as soon as I was large enough to do anything. I've hauled wood in a two-horse wagon many days, except it was that I had two mules instead of horses.
"I started to school when I was five years old. The schoolhouse was a two-room affair in a little village, with doorsteps made of logs. It was only about a three-months school year that we had.
"My first sweetheart was a boy that lived near to us. His folks had a farm about such as ours but I went to school with a boy that I plumb hated. He was just about the meanest boy I ever saw. I despised him ever since that evening his sister and myself were sitting on the creek banks, fishing and dipping snuff. Here he come swimming as naked as a peeled onion down the creek and dared us to stay there. We tried to spit snuff on him, but we was so little that we couldn't spit that far.
"If my mama had known we was down there chewing tooth brushes and dipping snuff, well, I guess I'd a been almost killed. We stole the snuff from a box of one of the niggers on the faro. We was afraid to tell on the boy, for then he'd tell on us that we was dipping snuff.
"Along those days I was such a little radical. Just anything that seemed exciting or not according to what is called 'convention' was what appealed to me most. I used to get up a crowd of girls, and sometimes boys, and we'd go coon and 'possum hunting. We used flambeaux, for light. A flambeau is vessel-shaped sorter like some of the teapots we see now. It has a handle but instead of a lid there is only a cork stopper that you draw to fill it with oil. Most anything in the way of heavy cloth can be rolled up for a wick, and the wick is run through the spout. We had lots of fun getting the 'possums out of the trees, and sometimes we'd tree coons in holes in the ground. We dug 'em out, though.
"As I have said, I loved excitement, so one day, being lonesome and blue, I slipped away and set the forest on fire. I knew that would bring folks flying, but I hadn't planned on it spreading so fast as it did. I got afraid in a mighty few minutes that I would be burned up with it. I certainly did run. When I got home I slipped in just as calmly as I slipped out, but exhausted. I hid for awhile so no one would know that I had been running. Everybody was wondering how it happened to have caught fire. I never did tell that I did it until eighteen years after.
"Sweetheart days? Well, I thought my sweetheart when I was a little school girl was the nicest boy I ever saw, but when I began to feel like I was grown up somehow I didn't care a thing for the boys, except I loved to play with them ’cause they were rough. They couldn’t get too rough for me. I went with some other fellows, but it never amounted to nothing.
"Now, who do you think I finally started going with? Why, none other than that same boy I hated so much. Why I ever went with him is still one of the many question marks in my life, for I never could like him, to say nothing of loving him. He was a brute and a bully, but he did have a nice buggy and a pretty horse. He always seemed to like me more than he did the other girls that he knew.
"I went to ride with him occasionally and he treated me nice enough and I was certainly not afraid of him, but it came one day that he was anything but decent. I sometimes hear people say that a man cannot manhandle a woman to the extent of robbing her of her virtue unless she is willing, and I once thought the same. But since that day my sympathy rests with all women in all cases, and I have never had a spark of confidence in any man. I would not have married him even then, but there was something inside me after that that caused me to feel like I just had to marry him to keep from feeling disgraced. But I made such a poor trade with myself that my little bank of idealism startlingly went bankrupt. He was never a good provider and absolutely without ambition to get ahead, and he cared nothing about making for himself any sort of social standing.
"We farmed for awhile altogether, and then we had a little general store down on the highway. We built a house right at the store so that I could look after the store when he was in the fields.
"We had one child, a girl, at this time and we lived here until our second child, a boy, was three years old. I had a number of miscarriages and it was along about the time the boy was born that my husband began going regularly, almost living, with a woman of very low morals; in fact, he insisted on having her at the house part of the time. Of course, I didn't want one like her in our house and I began telling him I would not have it. What I got for such concern can plainly be seen all over my body to this day. Some of the scars are larger and deeper than others, but they are all bad enough.
“I tried to continue enduring it so the children would have a home. Even a poor home is sometimes better than none, but my world, or as much of it as was then left, crumbled. I was crushed as I had never been.
"It happened one night that my daughter had gone to bed and I thought to sleep, but I heard her rolling and tumbling about and groaning in her sleep. I went into the room and tried to rouse her. Finally I did get her awake and asked her what was the matter. At first she would not say anything at all; she only cried. I kept questioning her until finally she came out with the truth that her father, her own father now, had been forcing her to submit to sexual intercourse with him.
"I was so mad I didn't think about going out to find him at his woman's house and letting him have a good load from a shotgun, but I calmed down to one determination and a set purpose. I got the girl out of bed and made her dress, and I rolled the boy into a blanket and out into the downpour we went to a neighbor's home.
"I didn't wait until morning; I asked the neighbor if he would take me and my girl to a doctor. We went. I was so mad I didn't hold anything back. I told everything there was to tell.
"I went back home again only to get my things and the children's. I didn't care a thing about having him arrested; all that I wanted was to free myself and children from him legally and morally. The judge who granted my divorce told me that the only thing he could blame me for was that I didn't take a club and brain him.
"I've had a hard time getting along since then, for his abuse of me had made me permanently unfit for any sort of work that necessarily kept me close at it. I was forced to have rests.
"All my life I have been more or less psychic, and for some reason that I can not exactly define I have deep and desperate hunches about things almost the moment I meet a person. And I am not boasting when I say that my mind tells me right at least nine out of ten times, so people began to ask advice of me. Soon, without making any charges, I was picking up quarters and fifty cents enough to feed myself and the two children.
"My daughter now is old enough to work. She is a waitress in a cafe, but she has never outgrown that complex brought about through her early environment.
"The boy looks just exactly like his father. I certainly do hate that but I try to pray that he will never be the sort of man his father was.
"I am just enough the radical to convention that I am very much in love with a married man and he with me. However, there comes another quirk of destiny. He was forced into a loveless marriage, a sort of shotgun affair that he was not at all responsible for, and when the child was born it was deformed. His sympathy is so deep wherein the pitiful creature is concerned that he resigned himself to conditions, his wife having proven to the world that there was no good in her. The queer part about it all is this: I love him very much, still I do not trust him, yet I am not jealous of any woman whom he might contact. We find much solace in each other's sorrows. We understand each other, and it doesn't matter to either of us just who sees us together for we have nothing to be ashamed of. We do not live in immorality as some more conventional people would declare.
"I have my lady friends, and lots of them are among the very best church people. Many are among the moneyed class. I often am invited to parties of different people. At such times, I entertain the party guests with a reading. Most generally I am rewarded by the host, hostess, or hostesses with very nice substantial clothing, and often they make me a present of some money. As I have said, I have never charged not even as much as one thin dime for any advice I have ever given.
“We, my two children and I, are never hungry, but there are times when I would, if I were able to supply it, have some things that I do not.
“My daughter did not finish high school but quit in the eighth grade. My boy is eleven and passed this year to the sixth grade. I would like for him to finish high school if he possibly can, for it means so much to one to have an education.
“We three attend Church and Sunday School and, as for myself, I do not like to miss a single service. If I do it seems that during the oncoming week nothing seems right. We attend a movie about twice each month.
“We have these three little rooms here, and my rent is $3 a week. Sometimes it is very hard to pay, but we have never had the electric lights connected. I wanted to at one time when I had the extra $5 but decided to buy a cheap rug for the front room. I'd like to have lights but I have to satisfy myself with oil lamps until I am more able, which might never be the case. I cook with oil, too.
"Our doctor bill and drug bill is not so much, considering that others have so large bills. I have to go to a chiropractor once each week. My grocery bill is around $4 per week. I would hardly know just what to say about our clothing bill, for when I have a few pennies that we do not have to have for the above mentioned necessities, it must go for that. But that is precious little.
"My politics? Well, I don't mind saying I am a Democrat and I always work in the elections. I often vote a split ticket, for if there is a Republican running and I think he would be a better man for the office I vote for him. And I think one of the greatest evils of today is that so many folks let others think and plan for them."
LAR
