Athens, Georgia
101½ E. Clayton St.
Mrs. Sue S. White (white)
Sadie B. Hornsby, writer
Sarah H. Hall, reviser
MILDRED LAWSON
The entrance to the School for Beauticians, operated by Mrs. Mildred Lawson, is identified by a placard listing the prices for student work. They are considerably lower than the charges for graduate work.
I paused for a moment to get my breath after climbing the long flight of stairs to the second floor before entering the lounge. Mrs. Lawson was seated before a tall mirror in the practice room, which is partially separated from the lounge by a screen. "Hello!" she greeted me, "Have a seat over there by the window. I'll be with you in a few minutes." She is the instructor in her school, and at that time was having a student apply dye of a reddish shade to her hair.
Three walls of the specious end well-furnished room are lined with pictures of coiffure styles. The fourth wall provides a black-board which is a long, book-laden table surrounded by chairs. Back of the screen in the practice room is all the apparatus that goes with a well-equipped beauty parlor.
The lesson in hair dyeing ended, Mrs. Lawson joined me. She is about five feet tall, Well-proportioned, and on that morning was wearing a white skirt, a pink sweater, and tan oxfords with matching hose. Her blue eyes sparkled when she learned the object of my visit. "So you want to know aboutlife in a beauty parlor!” she grinned. "Well, I've been in this game about 15 years, and I guess I know it pretty well by now, I took up this work because at the time it seemed like a profitable business, I was a stenographer for a fertilizer and peanut-shelling plant in the southern part of the state, and I hadn't been able to earn enough to save anything toward the fund I knew I was going to need to finance ay son's education. Determined to give him the advantages of college life, I made up my mind to move to a college town and enter some business that would enable me to meet all the bills that stood between him and a diploma. So I became a beautician, came to Athens, and, after working as an operator for some time, I opened this school. I believe beauty culture is going to enable me to see that boy of mine through all the expenses of a medical education.
"Don't let anybody fool you about it; beauty culture is hard work, even if we do have lots of fun along with it all. I know exactly the heading I want you to write over the paragraphs I am going to give you. It's this: 'What I Always Wanted to Say About My Customers and Never Dared.'
"There was a woman who used to come to my place every day. She was large and all out of shape --- slouchy, that's what she was. She always gave me the impression that her husband had stepped out on her for more attractive companionship. She was about forty-five or fifty perhaps, and whenever she would come in for a manicure, facial, and hair-do she would say. 'Please make me look pretty so my husband will think I look nice and won't run around.' I did my best, but pshaw! There's some people you can't help, no matter how much pains you take with 'em.
"There are women who come to the beauty parlor to gossip about their neighbors, and they talk about us too. When they come back end begin their tales about others I often tell them, 'We've been hearing what you said about us.'
"There are always some hard-to-please customers in every line of business and beauty culture is no exception to the rule. A certain business woman in this town is the world's worst, I believe. I was operating a shop in one of the hotels where we occasionally had an awful time about hot water from three to five o'clock in the afternoon. One day when she came in for a shampoo I told her the water was too cold. She insisted, 'I want a shampoo,' and went: right on taking down her hair and getting ready for it. Again I explained that the water was too cold, but she would not be persuaded. Finally I consented to let one of our operators begin the shampoo. When that cold water was turned on her head, she jumped up and blessed us all out.
"'Dry her hair,' I told the girl.
"'I can't go out of here looking like this,' she wailed.
"You don't look any worse than you did when you came in, ' I answered. She had the worst looking mop of red hair you ever saw.
"One day last year a northern woman came in here for a permanent wave. She was the haughty type; kept her nose in the air as if everything smelled bad. She was a, huge person, fat and shapeless. She white dress that she wore had large pink flowers on it. Her legs were twice as large as mine, and she wore hose of gun metal to hide their size. This just ma. de her look that much worse. I did her work myself. Eight from the start she began asking personal questions. "'Do you have many customers?' she wanted to know.
"’More than I can manage some days,' I answered.
"'Oh, how do you manage at your age?' was her next boner.
"'At my age?' I asked, 'Why, I'm only forty-one.'
"'Forty-one! Is that all?' was her come-back.
"That last remark of hers made me fighting mad, "but I didn’t let her know it. At least, not then, but I meant to get even with her before she left my shop. I worked right on. She never stopped talking. After she had rattled on about everything else she could think of, she asked, ’How do you like the new fabrics?'
"'Oh, I think they're beautiful if well chosen.' I came back at her, 'but I simply can't stand large prints on fat women, and I always did hate gun metal stockings on anybody.' I knew that was catty of me, but I couldn't resist the temptation. I gave her a good wave, but I'll admit I'd have given her a better job if she had been nicer. "Last week a woman, who is more or less of a crank, came in here and wanted her hair fixed a certain style. Well, we did it exactly as requested. When it was finished she didn't like the way it looked on her and ordered it changed and done by another design. Well, she didn't like that, and had it taken down for a shampoo. By this time the student was nervous and accidentally got some of the rinse water in the customer's eye. That woman jumped up, cursed the student out and left, refusing to pay for any of the work.' Her niece wanted an appointment, but told one of the students that she was ashamed to come because her aunt’s conduct had embarrassed her. I sent the girl word to come on, that we were used to all kinds of people, and that the little episode with her aunt would make no difference in our reception of her. She came and we gave her a satisfactory wave.
"You wouldn't think it, but the surest way to lose a customer is to credit her. After all, credit should never be extended for luxuries. The only thing I ever lost on the university girls was the result of giving credit to a sorority girl who came to my shop just before Christmas for a permanent wave. After I finished the work, she calmly told me to charge it and she would pay me when she returned after the holidays. I've never seen or heard of her since.
"A divorcee, who gets a nice sum from alimony and has a nice car, patronizes my place, and I can always tell when she is about ready to have some work done. Just before she gets ready to spring it on me she can't be too friendlyand nice. I always know what she is up to, for it has happened so often. Then when she thinks she has me under obligations to her, she comes in and has lots of beauty work done. She thinks I'm doing her work for nothing and even tells her friends that her beauty work is free, but some of these days I'm apt to present her with a bill. I'll go slow about it though, for she sends lots of her friends to me, and I get plenty of work through her influence. I don't count that I lose on her, even if I don't collect for the work I do for her.
"Women had long hair when I first started in this kind of work. Oh, it used to make me so side when I had to take down a knot of rancid oily hair that hadn't been washed in three months of hot weather, that I'd often have to stop and run to the rest room to burp. If people knew what we sometimes see when we work with their hair, they'd be more generous with soap and water. Not so long ago a mother brought her little girl in for a permanent wave, and I turned her over to one of my students. When the work was finished and the customers had gone, the student told me that the child's neck, the back of her ears, and the edge of her hair was so filthy she had to take a scrub brush to get her clean. By scrub brush, I mean the stiff-bristled brush we keep for scrubbing scalps that are badly caked with dandruff. That child was from a real nice family.
"Had you noticed that I don't have booths in my shop? I had an experience that cured me of ever being willing to have even one booth in my shop, and anyway I was born in the country and I like plenty of room and wide-open spaces around me, and nothing hidden or concealed. But I'll get back to my story of what really turned me against the booth idea. At the time I was working in an adjoining state, and it was during prohibition time. A college girl came in for a wave. In her booth she was chattering away to the opera tor who was giving her the permanent. In another booth I was dyeing the hair of a customer that we'll call Mrs. Brown. The sheriff in that town was a remarkably handsome man and as he was single women liked to talk about him. My customer and I were enjoying exchanging remarks about his good looks. The girl in the next booth overheard us, and piped up:
"'If you think that sheriff is good looking, you ought to see Mr. Brown, my bootlegger.'
"My customer was the bootlegger's wife, so I quickly said, 'She's right. Your husband is good looking, isn't he, Mrs. Brown?' "That girl was the smart type and thought it was cute to let us ’mow she drank. Smoking and drinking were things that girls had only just started doing then. I spoke out loud that way, for I didn't want her to say too much about poor Mr. Brown. He was a nice man and had a lovely family. After he came back from the war, he couldn't find a job, and that was the only way he had of making a living.
"Since I've been running a beauty parlor of my own, I've bought about three bushels of end curlers, and now I have only about three dozen. Some of my customers will go to the dime store and buy combs which at first glance look something like the ones I use here. When our "backs are turned as we do their work they swap combs with us. Now, I pay $1.25 a piece for my combs and get no reduction on quantity purchases, and it mattes me downright mad to find that someone has swapped me a cheat comb for an expensive one. I reckon I'd better not tell anymore dirt. What I've said is true all right, but I wouldn't be wise if I told too much that happens among my customers.
"Since I have been in business for myself and have more contact with business men, they tell me that women are their best bet when it comes to payment of accounts. On the other hand the National Cash Register men say that women cashiers knock down more money than men. They find it out through checking the cash registers.
"Business women and girls, especially sorority girls, are my best customers. Women and girls who work, patronize beauty shops as a part of their business for they must present a well-groomed appearance if they expect to merit promotion. Sorority girls try to see which one can look the cutest, and it's amazing the change you can see in some of these girls who come in there from the country after they join a sorority and become aware of the possibilities of improvement through beauty shops. You take these women who stay at home; they have more time to do things for themselves.
"Would you believe it if I tell you that married women with responsibilities make the best beauty shop operators?" Mrs. Lawson's students had beenpaying close attention to her narration, and one of them spoke up:
"Why, you know girls look fresher!" she insisted, "Take our mothers, for instance, they have to work so hard at home that I don’t see why they would succeed any better in beauty shops."
"Nevertheless, it is true," their teacher continued. "Don't you think for a moment this kind of work isn't hard. It's much, harder than office work; this is real physical labor. I've done both, and I know the difference. One woman told me that she thought office girls would make the best operators because they have more patience. I told her she was mistaken. In the first place, they would find the work so much harder than office work, and then in the office there is usually only one boss to please, while in this work you have to try to please everyone that comes to you. You have to have the dualities of salesmanship as well as the ability to do the beauty work well. You not only have to sell them your own personality and capability, but you also have to sell them on the idea of having things done they have never had done before, and never realized a need of --- to improve their appearances --- without giving offense. This requires considerable tact as well as salesmanship. You take a woman with a colorless face. If you can sell her on the idea of having her eyebrows and lashes dyed, that makes the eyes look larger, gives outlines to the features, and lends expression to the face to the extent that the lack of color can be made unnoticeable.
"We are trying to make a real profession out of beauty culture. An effort is now being made to get a bill passed by the legislature that will require each beauty parlor operator to pay a state license of $100, and this license is not to be granted to persons who have not completed a standard course in beauty culture. This is to protect those who have made a study of the business and to keep out those who are not professionals. used to be so that if anyone thought they knew the trade they could go ahead and start to work and it didn't concern anyone else. It's not that way now. Before the student can even enter a training school for beauticians they have to present a health certificate showing that a blood test has been made and a satisfactory physical examination passed. The State Board of Health requires that this certificate "be renewed every two years as long as the beautician remains in service.
"In my fifteen years of service in this kind of work, I ran beauty shops exclusively until a short time ago when I decided to open my school of beauty culture in connection with my parlor. As the State Board of Barbers and Hair Dressers do not allow both to be operated in the same rooms, I gave up my beauty parlor and have confined my activities to teaching and directing my school. However, they do permit us to have customers, but we can only make nominal charges, not the regular prices in effect at the beauty parlors that are staffed by graduate operators. Students of beauty culture must present certificates showing that they have completed a six months course, or a thousand hours, before they are permitted to appear before the State Board for examination for their license. Until this State license has been earned a beauty operator is not entitled, legally, to make the standard charges demanded by licensed operators.
"While a pretty face and figure will go a long way in a beauty parlor, I never select an employee because she happens to have nice hair or nails. An operator who is very popular with her customers may not have time to keep her own hair, nails, and face jam up. You can’t judge a good operator by her personal appearance; you have to try them first. In this work as in other lines of endeavor, sometimes the ones I consider my very best operators get the least repeat calls from customers.
"My sister taught me my trade in a small town in this State. She had studied this work in New York and Chicago and had worked at various well-known beauty salons in those places. At that time there was only one beauty shop in Atlanta, and that was known as a beauty clinic.
"I've given training to students from all over Georgia, and I've learned that talent is not absolutely necessary in a successful beauty operator. Good health, patience, a cheerful disposition, and a winsome personality are the prime requisites, but I've never turned down a student because of good looks and fastidious appearance.
"Right now, my out-of-town students board wherever they like and sometimes" they find it expensive and hard to keep up during the period before they begin to earn money. “When my lease expires I'm going to get a large house and have a dormitory on the top floor, using the first floor for my training school. Then I'm going to open a beauty shop, using only licensed graduate operators, in some convenient location in the downtown section.
"When I started this work, I was paid a commission. My lowest earnings were never lower that $5.00 a week, but lots of weeks they were $65.00, and even more at times. When I was operating my beauty parlor I always paid salaries in order to keep down confusion and petty jealousies. If I had an especially popular operator that received more calls than one person could handle, then I let the other operators help that one along so that she could finish with her customers more rapidly. I worked right along with my girls and drew my salary the same as they did.
"The salary and the commission systems each have their own advantages and disadvantages. A girl on commission works harder, finishes her work quicker, and does a better job generally. She will even call up her friends and use all her Influence to draw customers to the shorn where she works because she knows that every additional customer she handles means more money for her. The girl on salary takes her work more for granted, and as a matter of fact, knows she will get her money as long as she pleases her customers and the manager of the establishment.
"Our greatest profit is made on shampoos and manicures. There is less expense incident to these in the material used, than is incurred in finger waves, permanent waves, facials, and massages.
"The youngest customer I ever had was only fourteen months old. She was a doctor’s child. Her mother brought her up here and held the child in her arms throughout the time I was giving her a permanent wave.
"Some of my customers are so old that they come in leaning on a cane. Women of that age are harder to please than the younger people.
"Gum chewing was not allowed when I began working in a beauty parlor. At that time you'd be fired for that as promptly as for any other offense. Gum chewing was actually considered as an offense in those days, while now it is merely a breach of social etiquette. Now since smoking has become the rule rather than the exception with girls, they are more breath-conscious, and I think it is permissible to chew a fresh piece of gum for a moment or two to kill bad breath. Most of our customers chew gum or smoke to relieve the tedium while they are under the dryer. The majority of them read, as they smoke and chew. I prefer the readers, for the others are apt to gossip with the operators, I've always discouraged that sort of thing, for no matter how innocent the intention the conversation always progresses until things are said that should not be passed on, and should an operator repeat some of these personal conversations there is apt to be serious trouble. The only kind of talk I encourage about my shop is for the customers to tell her friends how she likes our work and send them to us to prove it. But gossip! No.
"Illustrative of the danger of common gossip, just let me tell you of an occurrence that took place when I was operating a shop in another state. A very prominet woman and her husband bad separated. It was really a tragic separation, and every woman who entered my shop had a different tale to tell about it. One of ray operators repeated something that had been told her by is a customer about this case,' and it caused an awful fuss. Of course, I had to fire the girl.
"Deliver me from these mischievous girls, I mean the ones that are proud of their ability along that line. It was in that same shoo that I had the misfortune to engage a girl who proved to be just bubling over with so-called innocent mischief. No matter how many customers were in my shop she would exclaim, 'Oh, did you know it's nearly time for the grand parade? There'll be people all dressed up marching, riding horseback, and on floats,' and any other exciting details she could think of would be added to embellish the story. Then after awhile when everybody had gotten busy, if a traffic jam or anything else caused several auto horns to be sounded all at once in the street below, she would stop whatever she might be doing and rush to the window, shouting, 'Look here, the parade is coming!' Of course everybody would try to rush to the windows. One day she had a water pistol and shot the water on a policeman. Was he mad! He came up in my shop and blessed her't out. He frightened her nearly to death. I finally had to let her go because that sort of thing won't be tolerated when you deal with the public.
"I give all types of waves, manicures, facials, hot oil treatments, and shampoos, and I also dye hair, eyebrows, and lashes. No, I have never had any trouble about baking hair too much, for all my machines ore equipped with automatic shut-offs. There's no guess-work about permanent waving in my shop.
"I went in business for myself in 1929, and six years ago I opened my own shop in Athens. I came here because as a Georgia woman, I wanted my son to complete his education at the University of Georgia. To come here, I left a mill town in another state. There wasn't sufficient business there for me to clear enough money to send my boy to college. Now, I've given up my shop for the present to teach girls to become beauticians.
"My students pay me $60 for a six months course, or a thousand hours. When I have enrolled four more students I intend to raise my price to $90 for the six months course my price for six months, or a thousand hour course includes only the "subjects essential for eligibility to stand the State examination, but I also teach other and more advanced subjects in beauty culture, end my price for the complete course is $135. A graduate who has mastered the complete course has prospects of better earnings than the one who has studied only the primary essentials. My students are in training; from nine o’clock in the morning until six in the afternoon, and they have an hour off at noon. One hour of the school is devoted to study. Each student is given regular practical experience in all the subjects in her course. To give you an idea of the amount of equipment I provide for their use, just to mention heaters alone, I have five electric heaters, four gas heaters, and one electric blower for drying the hair. I require all my students to wear white uniforms. I think the uniforms give the girls a much nicer appearance. Now that I operate a training school I no longer do any of the actual work myself.
"My students pay for their tuition in various ways. One girl from the country wanted to take the course but told me she didn't have the money, so I agreed to accept chickens, harm, potatoes, and fresh vegetables. That helped her end me too. One man paid his daughter's tuition with the lumber which was used to remodel try apartment.
"I was born on a farm in the southern part of the State, and when I was about four years old my parents moved to town. Four years later father's health failed and the doctors advised him to move back to the country. Father was a teacher, and he built the first school house' in that community and taught in it. He and several other men organized the Baptist Church and built its house of worship. He was a deacon in that church as long as he lived. One thing sure, just as soon as I am able I'm going back and buy that little old pedal organ that I used to play Sunday School songs on in that old church when I was a girl. Although I quit school when I was only thirteen years old, I've always liked to read and study, and my people were by no means illiterate. "Both of my grandparents fought in the War between the States. Mother's father was badly wounded. When he came home from the war one of his slaves saw him coming and ran 'to meet him'. Grandfather told the Negro not to let grandmother know he’ had arrived until he had cleaned himself up. The old slave ran to the house, got a tub of water and brought it, with plenty of soap, out to the barn. Grandfather was covered with vermin. After a thorough bath, he burned all of the clothes he had worn on his trip home from the way, even to his uniform. He said those clothes were so ragged that not one of the garments were worth saving. The slave, in the meantime, had smuggled a complete outfit of clothes out to the barn for him. Several of grandfather's slaves refused to accept freedom, but scent the rest of their lives in his service.
"Grandfather had been shot in the hip, and all of the fingers on one hand had been completely shot off. He reared two sets of children, and my mother was one of the younger set. The way we explain those two sets is that he already had several children before war was declared. He was gone for the duration of the war, and after he came back home several more children were horn. General Clement A. Evans was my mother's uncle.
"I believe in religion, and am a member of the Baptist Church, but I'm ashamed to say that I don't go like I should. I had religion crammed down my throat until I was married. Mother and. father were very strict and I was reared on the front seat in church, so to speak. But I do went my son to be a good Christian man, and I feel that it is my duty to talk to him about it, to tell him right from wrong, and to point out his mistakes to him. I have denied myself every pleasure end many of the better things in life that he may have a good education and the advantages that will aid him to make a man of himself. After all, my greatest Pleasure is to help him. I'm getting old now, and his future is ahead of him.
"I met my husband in the very room where I was born. My father had owned a large farm. They say folks in South Georgia are land poor -- that was us. Anyway, father decided to sell that old house and part of the land, and he built a nice new house on another section of his farm. A friend of ours bought the land and our first house. One night they gave an old-fashioned square dance and invited me. I went and danced in the room where I was born, and it was at that dance that I met my husband. I had never worked a. day in my life before I married. After marriage, I had to go to work to help earn a living. My husband and I are not living together now.
"When I was operating a shop in another state, I had the dace done in green and tan and put in a very expensive line of cosmetics that were out up in handsome blue containers. The cabinet that had been built for my goods had been painted a shade that didn't harmonize with my pretty blue bottles, so I had the back of the cabinet painted black. One day while I was working on an art teacher's hair, she "began criticizing the color scheme of my shop, and she was especially harsh in her remarks about the black background behind the blue bottles in my cabinet. 'But, I like it,' I told her. 'That's because you do not have any taste,' she replied. From that time on whenever she phoned for an appointment she was always told that we were too busy to do her work. Of course, on some of those occasions we weren’t busy at all, but those things she had said to me hurt, and there are some ways of balancing them up you know.
"Once, after I had made a long distance call, the telephone operator came in for a shampoo and finger wave a few days later. She said that when she was putting my call through she liked my voice and decided she would give me a trial. She was a regular customer after that.
"That reminds me of the time I was a telephone operator. The fertilizer and peanut-shelling season didn't last but a few months, and when I wasn't working out at the plant I was a 'hello girl.' In that town they had a radio station in the drug store. I doubt if it ever was heard outside of that “little town. Anyway, a girl called the drug store and asked that the radio play Gene Austin's ' Infirmary Blues.’ The operator on duty at that time connected her with the laundry. Someone at the laundry answered, 'We don't have any blues for Mr. Austin.'
"'What do you mean?' asked the girl.
"'We don't even have Mr. Austin's laundry listed. He must have sent it somewhere else.' When that girl discovered that she had the wrong number, did that telephone operator get blessed out!
"When I moved my shop to this end of town everything was on the decline. Several of the store buildings were vacant. Soon after that things began to pick up. How, there isn’t a vacant "building in this block. One business man told me not long ago that the merchants in this block ought to get together and pay my rent. My customers almost always drop in one are more of these stores to trade when they come here for their beauty work.
"My hitherto secret ambition is to be a writer. If I had persevered and completed my education as I should have done, I would have studied journalism in college. Then I would have accomplished my aim, which is to pay Erskine Caldwell back for the mud he slung on the South. I've written a number of stories, and sometime I’m going to have them edited and printed.
"Well, I think I have told you about all of my history that it would do for you to put in print, and too, I've been so busy ever since you came in that I'm wondering if you got it all down straight."
The business of her school now claimed Mrs. Lawson's attention. A student had given a customer a finger wave and was just finishing combine her hair. The woman began quarreling because she said the hair on one side of her head had more curl than the other side, and that her hair had been trimmed shorter in some places than in others. "But, Hiss Black," Mrs. Lawson replied, "we have fixed your hair exactly as you directed us to."
The customer was furious. "Well," she snapped, "I don't like it. I want it done over."
Mrs. Lawson again had the woman's hair dressed precisely as she requested, and asked her, "How do you like it now?"
"Oh, it's much better now. How much do I owe you?"
Mrs. Lawson itemized the charges for both dressings of the hair.
The customer's face flamed. "But surely," she spluttered, "you don't charge a customer for work that does not please her, do you?"
“When it is our fault, we make no extra charge," answered Mrs. Lawson, "but each time we dressed your hair exactly as you directed it, and as we were not in error, we are entitled to remuneration for our work."
"Well," retorted the customer, "here's the money, “but just let me tell you, I don't intend to come back. I was sure you wanted to please your customers."
"I'm awfully sorry about this. Miss Black," answered the proprietor of the shop, "but it really was not our fault."
At this, the customer snatched on her coat, and with her hat in her hand, she rushed out slamming the door as she went.
There were unshed tears in Mrs. Lawson's eyes as she turned to me and said, "I've been in business sore than fifteen years, and when things like this come up they still hurt."
"Do come back," she invited me, as I prepared to leave. "I hope you don’t find my story too uninteresting."
She was standing at the top of the stairs as I left, and when I bade her goodbye, I noticed the tears were still in her eyes, end she was putting up a hard fight to keep them back.
<text not clear>
