October 5, 1938,
Margaret Chambers
Fountain Manager
#420 West Clinch Ave.
Knoxville, Tennessee
Della Yoe
Jennette Edwards
SNAPPY FEEDING
"Modeena Prentiss – Lobby!"
Margaret gave a hitch to her slacks as she waited for an answer.
"It's this putrid paging that gets you up when you'd rather be down."
Margaret was slender and attractive. Her blonde bobbed hair was neatly finger-waved. She left the desk and walked to the hall leading to the Y. W. C. A. reading room. She megaphoned her call "Mo-DEEN-a PRENtiss!"
"Miss Prentiss isn't in. Would you leave your number?..."
She settled in the revolving chair behind the desk.
"I've spent some of the best years of my business life answering some sort of racket. Telephone bell. Auto toot. The first job I had when I came to Knoxville was being curb hop for a drugstore. And I mean I hopped. My salary was five bucks a week. I bet I ran off ten dollars worth of heel caps that four months. I was fresh from the country. Aiming to please. Half the time it would be trotting out to see what some old fool in a big car was sitting on the horn for. A penny box of matches, maybe. I'd be there and back before he could have struck one."
Margaret shifted her position to get the telephone receiver.
"She'll be back in her office in the morning. Mrs. Gordon's not keeping desk now. It's her rest period..."
She slammed the receiver back to the hook.
"Some member of the board I bet heard about that back to nature swim the house girls had the other night in the pool. I don't see a thing sinful with birthday clothes. Especially in the dark. I never heard of a mermaid wearing a tank suit. If they won't let us dress decent for swimming I say undress."
She let one leg dangle comfortably over the chair arm.
"That curb hop job taught me plenty. If you get food to the hungry in a hurry they aren't so snooty about what they're getting. Seems to taste better when they see the tray running to their mouths. I was just tickled to death with myself when I got expert. Ten different orders in my head without getting coffee crossed with Coco Cola was going some for a country girl!"
Margaret tilted the chair back.
"I'd been curb hopping for four months when a call came in to the Y for a girl to wait on tables in the feeding side of an up town drug store. Wanted some one under twenty. Seven dollars a week for trotting trays--breakfast, lunch, supper. I was thrilled to death to get a shot at it. I didn't lose use of my legs. Rush hour at lunch made curbing look like rest period. The food they had and the way they had it just got me at first. We didn't have a lot of fancy food in the country, but Mother was a fiend about germs. She'd have died if she had stuck her nose in the kitchen in that joint. Meat had to smell right to her before she'd cook it. Godfrey! You couldn't have paid me to eat some of that stuff I shoved at customers there. Saddest looking sandwiches with wilted lettuce. Half rancid tuna fish. well it might have made their stomachs do the ocean roll but it was cheap. We had the trade. The kind that pay the punch on the check with the tips they didn't leave. That job gave me a good break, though. Made me what I am today. When the manager got a store of his own he needed waitresses. Took a few of us girls along with him. We got right in on the ground floor. He thinned out the old gang that was there. Made me fountain manager. Believe you me, I know something now about why you've got to stretch food if you manage to manage. I'm not giving a dollars worth for a quarter but you can park the baking soda when you eat with us."
Margaret reached for the receiver of the ringing phone.
"You have to fill out a room application blank... Depends on your salary... Everybody has to have a room mate... I can put her name down here. They'll mail her a blank."
She wrote the name and address on the pad as the receiver went back to its hook.
"A fountain manager's got to make fifty percent profit on all fountain sales. Got to--or out you go. Well, I'm still in. What the customer don't know is not going to make them change feeding places. Just get the food to them quick. Hot if they want it hot. Cold if they want it cold. Give them a good line while you're getting it there. Godfrey! I hate to see a sour puss take a person's order! Makes my stomach growl to think about it.
"Being a waitress let me in on a bunch of fountain manager tricks. I was about a post-graduate when I was promoted. A crushed ice Ph. D. Dilute drinks. Really spread spread. Fake filling double dips. The first thing I teach new help's how to roll an ice cream dipper to air proof the filling. If they're still digging deep after the first week they're fired."
An elderly transient came to the desk for her room key.
"Here you are, Mrs. Wilson - 303. I bet if you box that number in stocks, bonds, and races some Friday you wouldn't be stopping at the dear old Y the next time you came up from Atlanta. No, I am not going to tell you how--because as long as I'm here I want you to keep coming."
Margaret put the keyboard back in place.
"She is simply adorable. Heavenly days, it must be nice to have enough money to get out of the way of your family when you are that age. I felt like the idle rich when I first got to be fountain manager. Eleven dollars a week. I've cleared enough this year for the fountain department to get my salary up to fifteen. I never will get more than that no matter how long I make supplies last. Sometimes I get so sick of stretching food I wish I could land a whole gallon of frozen malted milk in the face of a certain somebody that signs my salary check. I work thirteen hours straight five week days and Sunday, anywhere from eight to ten that other day. After the fountain's closed it's up to me to stay there and get it cleaned up for the morning rush. Godfrey--that place was filthy when we first took it over. Just plain nasty. I got my hands in the worse shape, Still do. But I'm going to have the place clean if they put me in the caboose for cruelty to roaches and water bugs. The sanitary inspector said for me to just let him know if the old gang that was there ever tried to get their jobs back. He said none of that slop crew would nose me out as long as the city health department had anything to say about eating places. They were all set for closing the fountain when we took over the store. If you're hipped on trench mouth or the bad disease, drink with us."
Margaret twirled the chair in the direction of the wall clock.
"Plenty of time before I have to shed my slacks and get dressed for work, praise Allahl! I'd like to sit here a lifetime. I'd do desk duty whether they cut something off my room rent or not. I wouldn't give a happy whether the hussies said "Thank you" or not--long as I have a chair like this to settle Fanny in and a foot of space around me where there's not a crowd of people.
"There were eleven of us children at home. Nobody ever had a bed to themselves, let alone a room. We lost the farm after Father died. I don't ever remember living in a house big enough for six people much less twelve after then. I guess mother was a genius to get us all as far as high school. I got two years in the county one before I landed in Knoxville to get a job. I'd rather soda fountain for the rest of my life than to raise and educate eleven children off of butter and eggs and milk money and sewing cheap for everybody in the county.
"They have all sorts of classes here at the Y at night. Public speaking. Personality courses. Just anything you want. That gang that keep the radio running in the room half the night when I come in tired as hell are always talking about improving themselves. Getting better jobs. Maybe I'll get around to it if I ever get shorter hours and more pay. I get a kick out of feeding people, though. I'd get so sick of sitting at a typewriter all day trying to make out what some swell head had made me Gregg down. I've got him just where I want him when I'm feeding him.
"I would like to make enough money to have a room by myself. I wouldn't care if it was in the Y if I was the only one that had the key. To have three people making off with your lipstick. Digging in your cold cream... But I'll take living in the room with ten girls plus all the board members to going back to the farm. Godfrey! The Y's heaven compared to being stuck in the country."