Lula Wright (Negro),
Green's Plantation,
Rural Route,
Tuskegee, Alabama.
Widow Farmer
Rhussus L. Perry,
(Negro Field Worker)
Macon County,
A DAY WITH LULA WRIGHT
I set out to spend the day out in the country on Green's plantation. It was a lovely day in January. The sun was shining warm and nothing seemed more inviting than a day's visit with some of the country folks.
Out on Greens plantation live a number of interesting persons but really," Miss Lu", (Lula Wright) is the central character in the community. The women gather at her house to hear the latest news and <text not clear> When they, have a member of the family, sick they set out to "Miss Lu" for advice. They bring her their family troubles, their trials and tribulations. On Fridays and Saturdays the men and boys come to her house for her son to cut their hair and shave their beards.
Going across the fields from the highway, I enjoyed looking at the sloping hills thick with pine saplings, every now and then a sturdy bare oak, sweet gum, or black gum. The fields near the house were thick with broom' sage" which they, all gather and make into broom. I noticed a pine-pole square pen built by piling pole upon pole until it was about four feet high. In this pen were four large banks of sweet potatoes. The potatoes are banked by piling them up on pine straw, then laying straw all over them. Boards are stacked around them in tapes shape. Some use corn a talks or pine bark. More straw is piled on and then dirt piled up on all this. Just beyond this pen is a little smoke house built for the purpose of curing and storing meat. My attention was drawn to the old dilapidated house in which "Miss Lu" lived. It is a large, old barn like house. The few windows are wooden, resembling doors. The house leans forward and reminds one of an old man bent with age. As I neared the steps I noticed on the right of the house a barn and let. In and around were several healthy-looking chickens, three pigs, a black dog, and two spotted puppies. A gray mule grazed lazily not far from the lot. A little calf was sleeping la the sun just beyond the large pile of wood and kindling.
In the yard not far from the steps stood a huge chinaberry tree, the largest I have ever seen. This tree is not very tall but it's trunk would measure almost four feet in diameter. Most of its roots seem to be above the soil. There is another chinaberry tree a tall, slender one near the gate. Farther to the left is a large pecan tree. Here and there are beds of flowers.
As I started up the steps, I had to look close for a safe place to put my, feet. I called "hello Miss Lu". "Cone right on in offen yo' can git in. Well suh! Come in and sit down by de fiyah." All the while she was busy moving things back out of the way, and asking the fire burn. "I brought you something" I informed her as I handed her a paper bag. "Much erblige ter yo'" She grinned as she took it, joyfully looking into it. She burst into a laugh as she remarked, "Now ain't de Lawd good? Now ain't he good? George Washington smoking tobacco; jes' whut I likes. De Lewd gwineter blees yo' honey, she assured me. She then introduced me to the others who were sitting there. "Dis yeah's my baby daughter. She married'n lives right' cross de road there. Dis yeah's my, sister; she lives a pretty good piece frum heah. She come ter see me terday." After she finished telling me about her sister and daughter she said, "Lawd chile pull off yer coat'n hat an' make yerself at home. 'Scuse my manners. I ain't had real good sense since I come frum dat funeral yesterday, O?, twas a lovely, meeting, but it sho' was sad. Jodie Gobson wuz her name, poor critter. She done groanin' in dis lan'. She had a hard time, her husband treated her so bad. Her folks tuk on so hard. De church was jes' packed. Rev. Reuben Ford, he had to stop praying; de folks dey was carryin' on so bad."
She put another piece of wood on the fire as she said, "I like a good fire, an' den hit has ter be a good fire in heah, dis ol' shack, so open. Dis jes' ain't no house now, it use ter be, but hit ain't good as a hoss barn now. Us begs Miss Green to fix hit but she jes' won't do it. She won't fix nary house on de place, on dis plantation. She got plenty, money but she won't give us a nail ter fix nothin'." I looked up as directed and there were rotten boards overhead ready to fall, it seemed. She carried me across the hall into a large room to show me how decayed and open it was. The floor was still damp from the rain of two days before. Cracks large enough to see the sky, through were in the roof of this room. I said to her, "It is a wonder the government allows people to live in such dilapidated houses. Why, don't you move?" "Well", she said, "I jes' lak dis place. I hate ter leave. I axed Miss Green ter tear dis house down'n jes' buil' me a little two-room and kitchen house but she won't do hit. Iffen she don't do sumpin', we gwineter have ter leave 'cause dis house 'bout ter fall in on us."
We returned to the room where we were sitting. Nearly everything in her house is very old. In the room where we sat were two large wooden beds and one of those olden-time dressers with three drawers and a dim mirror. There were a securing machine, and several chairs that had been rebottomed with plaited shucks. On the mantel I noticed several liniment bottles, a large bottle of castor oil and several salve boxes. At one end was an oil lamp without a chimney. From this mantel hung a scalloped blue oil cloth. Down by the open fireplace sat an old iron skillet with legs, that they use to parch peanuts. All around on the smutty, planks of the walls hung hats and pieces of clothing. A rusty horseshoe hung downward over the door. Old coats stretched over the wooden windows to help keep some of the cold wind out.
"Heah dat dawg howlin'?" she asked. "Dat's a sign o'death sho' er yo' bawn in dis world. Some people don't believe in signs, hat I does.
Her sister said, "We had a dawg once; 'member, sister Lu? When dat dawg howled someone sho' died. Dat's de truf. Yas, suah."
Then Miss Lu interrupted, "Yas suah, las' night my hands eetched an' I rubbed dem tergether and see dis mawnin' I gits de smoking tobacco. Same as money ain't hit? Yas suah, I believes in my signs."
"No'm I ain't lived in this community, all my, life", she replied to my question. "I wuz bawn in 1868 in Cotton Valley, not fur over the way, in dis county of Macon. Yas'm." She kept on as she leaned forward slightly, in her chair, folding her arms in her lap, gazing straight in the fire. "My ma an' pa had leben chillen, seben boys end four girls. Ums de oldes' girl." Her sister sat there witnessing every statement.
I hat was about all she could do for "Miss Lu" always did the talking when she had company.
"Did all of your sisters and brothers get a chance to go to school?" I asked.
"Yas ma'm, ev'ry, one uv us went ter school 'ceptin' Lau ra an' she died fore she wuz oler' nuff ter go. Yas ma'm I loved my gwine ter school an' I had good teachers too. I went ter school til I wuz in de fifth grade. I coulder went on but all dem wuz in my class dey, married an' I jes' stopped 'cause dey all stopped but I coulder wenton two more years. We allus had ter stop an' go ter field 'bout March an' dat's reason we didn't git no fudden de fi'th grade. I she' lacked school."
"I bet your dad fed you all, too." I said. "Fed us," she repeated. I say, dat man fed his younguns! My dad ud buy, bar'ls uv sugar, flour, sacks of rice an' things lak dat. He kilt plenty, meat. Chile de hardes' time I evah seed wus since I been married." She looked at me and smiled as she assured me that she had never really, suffered for food. She reminded me however that she has had to turn in close places to keep things going. She got up, went over to a little pocket hanging on the wall and pulled out her pipe. She laughed heartily, as she held it and said, "Dis is my satisfaction."
She came back, sat down and continued her conversation. "Yas suah, we wore good clothes. Homespun, osnaburg, das whut all de chilllun wore den. Dey wuz good close. We allus went ter Sunday, school an' my ma an' pa dey had fambly, prayer ev'ry, mawnin' en on Sunday ev'ry one had ter git on dere knees."
Her sister witnessed this fact, rose and said: "'Scuse me, lady, I sho' is glad I met yo', hope ter meet yo' ag'in. Sorry I got ter go but I must go now." Her sister Lu asked me to excuse her and she went to the steps with her sister and there they chatted a few minutes.
She returned shortly, seated herself near the fire and began to tell me more about herself. "I bin married, les' see," she began counting her fingers. "Les see, I married in 1886; yeah I married Jasper Sanford in 1886. We had leben chillun. I wuz jes' as good a woman as my ma wuz. She had seben boys'n fe' girls. I had seben girls and fo' boys. Eight of my chilluns livin'. I got three dead."
The smiles left her face as she began thinking of her children who have passed on. She began, as she sat up straight, folded her arms across her bosom, "My oldest son got killed. He wuz gamblin', he wuz a gambler jes' lak his dad. He got shot ter death in Cincinnati durin' de war. He come ter his daddy's funeral in 1918. I say 'Son don't go back an' leave me, yo' dad done gone lef' me; you stay heah wid me.' He sez, 'I can't stay,' I sez, 'Well if yo' go yo' ain't comin' back.' "Jes look lak I had ter say, dat to him." In a pleading manner she reached her arms out as she continued, "I begged him so hard not ter go back. My ma she beg him too. She sez, 'Son I feel lack I ain't gwineter see yo' no mo'.' "Sho nuff in three weeks my chile was shot down, an' wuz buried three weeks'fo' I knowed anything 'bout hit. Lucille, she died in 1927. Fo' chile, she jes' staid sick, complainin' wid her side an' stomach all de time. She stayed sick right round three years, den she died. She had jes' reached twenty-one when she died. My baby, Effie, she died wid de whoopin? couch when she wuz six months ole. Well, dem's gone on ter glory an' I got ter git dere. Dey done worrin' in dis old hard worl'. Dey lef me heah to worry, I'll meet dem some day, Yas das three I got done lef me."
"That is sad to think about," I said, "but you still have quite a few children to cheer you."
"Yas ma'm, but dey all married but two boys an' jes' one uv dem is here, Jasper, dat's my baby, boy; he name far his dad. Den I got two gran'sons heah wid me. Dem three boys dey help me wid my, farm ev'ry, yeah."
Gazing into the fire, "Miss Lu" suddenly, seemed amused on a different subject, for she burst into a roar of laughter and before I could ask her what she found amusing she began: "I wuz thinkin' 'bout my secon' husban', Eddie Wright. Das his name. My fust husban' wuz a gambler. My, secon' pick wuz a no 'count preacher. I quit dat thing in one yeah. Every, time he sees me he ask me to let's go back, but if I keeps my, mind I never will.
I joined her in her laughter this time. She put another piece wood on the fire and lit her pipe and leaned back in her chair as if never was happier in her life. She continued about her second husband, Ums doin' well an' ums gwineter let well enough do. Yo' see Wright jes' didn't know how ter pervide fer no fambly, dat's all ' tis ter hit. I allus believe in havin' plenty ter eat. I wuz raised way dater. Now, yo' see Wright, he had three chillen'n I had eight, dat wuz lebben: Thirteen wid me an' him. Wright would go ter town an' buy a twelve pound sack of flour jes' as big as anything and yo' know dat wuzent no mo' dan enough for one good meal for aller us. I sez ter him one day, 'You let your daughter cook fer you an' I cook fer my chillums.' Dat didn't do any good fer I had ter always be givin' dem sumpin' fer ter cook 'cause he wouldn't have nothin'.
"Honey, she "my chillen sez one day ter me, 'Maw us gwine ter leave heah cause we ain't gwineter take care of dat lazy, no 'count man yo' done up an' married. ' I didn't want my chillen ter do dat. I lef dat man an' me an' my chillen we move heah. I treats him nice evah when I Sees him. He jes' would't do; dat's all tis ter hit an'we jes' didn't wanter take kere of him an' his three chillen. Me an' my chillen we do do bes' we kin for each udder."
The Whistle blew for twelve o'clock and "Miss Lu" jumped to her feet in surprise that it was so late. She exclaimed: "Lawd is it twelve an' I done set heah an' ain't seen about de lady no dinner?"
"Please," I said, "do not think of dinner for me. I Always have my dinner at four and never care for anything to eat so early." She made me feel quite welcome to anything she had and assured me that it was a pleasure to her to feed company at her house. She said, "That's reason I work so hard so I allus have plenty for myself and others too."
Then she began to tell me about her community club. "Ev'ry, yeah. for about thirteen years I have been havin' a little community, club. We has twelve members an' each dese members pay a little along till August. By dis time de each must have four dollars. At Christmas time de each must be done paid in five dollars. Den we takes dis money, an' buy, rashuns in August and at Christmas. We gits heap mo' by, buyin' in bulks lack dat. We git lard, flour, an' sugar. We go ter de chain store, he treats us nice. See dat's a good way ter do. Work together an' we all has plenty all yeah, near 'bout hit!"
"My that's fine," I said. "yas'n I ast de Lawd ter help me an' make a way'n he'll she answer prayer. Me and my granddaughter wuz both members so dis Christmas we had ten dollars. I got thirty-two pounds lard, forty, pounds sugar, and six twenty-four pound sacks of flour an' den we had some lef' fer ter git flaver, soap an' little things lack dat. Come on, "she said, standing up. "Come on, go in de smoke house an' let me show you what I get."
She continued to talk as we walked slowly out of the room in to the hall, on out the door. "We got our secketary. President an' treasure. We allus sing an' pray in our club an' jes' have a good time. When we gits ready ter buy we gits us a wagon, goes ter town (Tuskegee) an' buys our things."
When we were into the yard I mentioned several nice-looking chickens. That I saw. "Yas'm, I got 'bout eighteen hens. A'terwhile deyall gwineter be layin'. "By this time we had reached the mokahouse. She unlocked the door and stepped in. "See", she said, " I got my meat packed down heah in salt in dese here boxes. I kilt two hogs'n I got a can of lard an' three gallons over. See in heah". She was raising a lid from a large wooden box. "See dis whut I got from our little club. "There was her sugar and flour all packed securely from rats. Then she displayed several sacks of peanuts, ten or more sacks of peas, including purple hull, rice peas and speckle peas. On a shelf were a large pan of cracklin's and several jars of canned fruit. "My, but you have plenty food in here", I said. "yas'm I has ter turn 'cause I gwineter feed my chillen an' den I lacks ter have plenty ter 'vide wid others. To' know das what de Lawd wants us ter do.
"I tries ter git dat welfare to give my boy some work ter do but dey won't do hit. I jes' madde three bales of cotton las' year. Yo' see one bale goes for rent. One bale fer fertilizer an' money, ter run de farm of dese boys heah. No dey won't give my boy a lick of work to do. But Lu gwineter make hit. God gwineter help Lu 'cause she trusses Him. Den welfare folks de give me nothin' but eye water fer to cry. Looks lack dey down on me but thank God you can't keep a good man down. I sent all my chillen ter school till dey jes' wanted to quit." We were now on our way back to the house. "Pretty soon", she said, I'll be milkin' all three of my cows an' dat helps out whole lot. One thing, I ain't got no syrup dis yeah, but das all right too. 'cause I take sugar an' make my syrup. I jes' dare yo' take de Lawd wid yo', hed sho' make a way outer no way.
"Sit down," she said as we walked back into the room. "I ain't tole yo' 'bowt my sellin' candy. Un sellin' candy fer a company. Yo' see." She showed me a card with several places to punch and a box of bars of candy, "punch one," she asked me. I punched one and a came out with five cents on it. I gave her the nickel and told her to keep the candy and sell it. "Ain't dat luck?" she smiled. "Thank yo' ma'm." She went to an old trunk, opened it, got out several pretty pieces of cloth and a pretty spread. "Dis is whut I got sellin' candy dese four pieces. Dere is four yards in each of dese pieces. See", pointing to two dresses already made and hanging on the door, "I done made two, de ready, ter wear. I has ter do all lak dat ter keep a goin'. My chillen dey tries ter sake me sit down but I can't sit down. I jes' got ter keep agoin'."
Her daughter, who lives just across the road came in just here and said, "Ma, they are havin' a party, down the road. I think I'll go," Before she had finished, her mother was sighing, "Umph, Umph, I jes' don't lack den parties. Mos' of de youngsters cut up so dese days, Dey, gits ter drinking an' fighting. Honey, ma wish yo' didn't want ter go, 'cause I he worried till yo' come back."
"Well, I guess I won't go." She as sored her mother that she didn't want to cause her no worry" and she went out <text not clear> gave a sigh of relief. "It's so mucher trouble gwine on; I hates ter see um go to dese frolics. When I wuz a girl de boys didn't cut up lack de do now. We would play, nice games. I kin 'member how I useter love ter play, Stealin' Partners. We would all git in a ring, each one have his own partner and one odd one would be in de ring, den we'd sing:
'Rosie, Lady Rosie
O..o..o Rosie
Rosie Lady Rosie.
I got a house ter put yo' in,
Rosie Lady Rosie.
I got a house ter put yo' in,
Rosie, Lady, Rosie.'
All us would be clappin.' our hands and pattin' our feet. O, we had a good time," She laughed. "Dan we useter have'cake walks'; day give a cake ter de one whut walks do straightest. I useter git all dam cakes, O man, I could strut straight."
She got up and walked across the floor to show me how she Meter strut. "I can't strut lack dat now, I got rheumatism in dose ol' joints now." She laughed.
"But you do get about fine", I said to her.
"Yas'm I been had good health, cusin I useter have the toothache'n I done had all of dem took out now. Dey useter give me so much trouble I won't let um put no more in my head; dey, might hurt." She laughed at herself for this.
"I nevah had a doctor in my life. Wid all my, babies I jes' had a midwife but she wuz good ex a doctor. She gid me a quart of whiskey, wid ev'ry one of ay, chillen. Jes' made a toddy, fer me an' let me drink it till; I had had a quart. Yas'n dat's whut she'd do. Den she would make me stay, in de house fer a whole month. Dats reason we ole folks so crach mo' 'count dan our Chillen; " cause we tuk kere of ourselves.
"When my Chillen wuz comin' up I didn't have no doctor neither. I jes' give dem tea an' home remedies. When all my, Chilien dey had de whoopin' cough, I would git someone ter kill me a crow. I take dat crow, boil him down wid salt. I take dat likker and give it to dem whut got de whoopin' cough an' hit sho' help dam. Den when dey had de measles, and chicken pox I made dem go in de henhouse 'backwards an' come out forward, den I gi'e dem shuck and ginger tea an' I nevah had a minute's trouble wid nary. one.
"I 'member one time I jes' had chills an chills and jes' couldn't git well. Dey tole me to steal jes' as much sugar cane as I could hole I did this an' do you know I didn't have another chill! Yas suah, take de Lawd wid yo' an' use yo' head an' yo' boun' ter git erlang."
"Miss Lu" wore an odd but pretty, little blue cap with white stripes. She wore a blue print dress with small white flowers in it and a blue and white check apron with a bib and a thick red sweater. Ear hightop shoes had thick soles and she wore thick ribbed stockings. She weight one hundred and sixty-fire pounds and is about four and one-half feet high. Despite the fact that she has no teeth her face is full and round and there beams an everlasting friendly, smile.
"So glad yo' come ter see old Lula, I loves company, wait a minute." She went out and soon returned with a paper bag. "Heah, yo' plant dese little rice peas in your garden. Dey taste jes' lack English peas. Den when yo' "be eatin' dem yo' think of me. You wouldn't eat no dinner wid me yo' jes' got ter have sumpin' so I give yo' dose peas. Don't you throw dem away neither, yo' plant dem so yo' kin see how good day is when dey green. Yo' come back ter see me agin."
1/18/1939
S. J.