Statewide Writers project
Miami, Florida
Greek Socio- Ethnic Study
Mabel B. Francis
October 24, 1939.
CHRISTOPHER BE LER
842 Dupont Bldg.
Miami.
MIGRATION.
1. When did you come to Miami?
1924, To America in 1902.
2. What town or province in Europe did you come from?
Sparta, Greece.
3. Why did you leave your native home? Give as many reasons as possible.
When my age was 8 years my Uncle came from Chicago to Sparta to visit with my father. He had been many years in America and America was all he could talk about. The big cities, the street cars and telephones any money and the strange sights. America! That word grow bigger and bigger to me. I wanted to see that strange now country and I begged my father to come back to Chicago with my uncle. He laughed, my mother did too. At last, my parents consented to let me come with my uncle. He was willing when he saw that young though I was, I had one thought only in my mind - America. Now I can still remember how big the States of Liberty looked and how high the buildings in New York City seemed to me. We went straight to Chicago and I will never forget the red velvet seats in the train.
4. (a) Where did you first land in the United States?
(b) What did you do to come to Miami?
(a) New York, in 1902.
(b) I did not even know there was a Miami for many years. My uncle had a confectionery and soda shop. There I worked after school and on Saturdays and seemed learned to help with making the confectioneries. To the school my uncle swore I was 10. I had been two years to school in Sparta and he wanted me in the classes with the bigger children so I would not have so many years to go to school. American children were very strange to me but I did not know them much. In had too much work to study and learn. In 1913 a friend, Mr. Wright, wanted me to come to Florida to look over the Everglades land. My uncle agreed that I could accompany him. We came to Miami, too and in the few days we were here. I liked the place more than any I had ever seen. It was eleven years before I came to this place but all of that time I know that some day I would return. The flowers and the trees were so beautiful. I did not forget them.
5. What was your first work or job in America I worked my uncle's soda shop confectionary shop in Chicago.
6. In what states did you live? When? Reasons for moving?
How many of your country men accompanied you?
Did you ever leave the United States? Why? When? How?
When I was fourteen I did not go any more to school, but I continued to study and took private examinations. In 1913 my uncle sold his business in Chicago and bought a farm in Wisconsin. He had grown up close to the soil in the old country and wanted to raise flowers and have a dairy. I went to the University of Missouri and took a two year agricultural course so I could be with my uncle on his farm. My education was not enough to take a regular course but I studied as much as I could besides the agriculture. In the summers I went to the farm and afterward, too, until the war. Then I enlisted with the 322nd. Infantry in the 81st. Division and was trained at camp Jackson in South Carolina. In 1917 we went to France. That time I do not like to remember. When the armistice came, I wanted to go to see my parents in Greece. It was so <text not clear> to France and I had not seen them since I came to this country. There is so much red tape in the army. If my Captain had wanted to, he could have arranged the visit but he did not care. I only wanted to see them for two weeks but the army rules would not let me go and I have never seen them until this day. I came back to the United State and decided to study public accounting. For two years I studied that subject in Chicago. Taxation interested me more than any thing else. No doubt I would have finished my course but I was gassed in France and as you know, Chicago has a nasty climate. The doctor advised me to leave that city so I went to Washington and worked in a real estate office. The Washington climate is as bad as Chicago - top hot or too cold. All of the time I was thinking of Miami so when everybody else in this country tried to come down here in 1924, I came along, too. There seemed to be demand for food places so I opened up a sandwich shop right across the street from Burdine's. My brother had come to this country in 1912 and he came to Miami with me and entered into the sandwich business with me. We did very good for five years but he liked better a bigger city. In 1929 I went back to Chicago and entered into the real estate business. Miami was dead. I thought, but I did not stay long in Chicago before I was sorry I had come back, The stock market crash affected Chicago more deeply than any city in the country, more even than New York. Business was very bad, and in 1931 I came back to Miami. The depression was on and I soon decided to enter into the real estate business.
7. (a) How old were you when you came to the United States?
(b) Did your family come with you?
(c) Describe your family if they came with you.
(d) What work did they do?
(a) 8 years old.
(b) No.
(c) No.
(c & d) My father is an agriculturist and a bee keeper. He raises mostly flowers so I suppose he is more of an horticulturist and three of my brothers help him. Three of my brothers are dead and one is a teacher in a college on the Island of Crete. In the old country every family grows flowers. That makes Greece a beautiful place. Geraniums of many hues and colors not ever seen here are the loading flower, then carnations and roses. Every Greek home in the old country and in America grows one shrub - the basilica. I carry a sprig in my pocket all of the time.
8. How many of your people live in Miami?
No one. One brother lives in Baltimore and the others live in Greece.
9. What is the present size of your family? Sons or daughters married? How many children do they have?
I am not married. I live in a room alone.
10.a. What language do you use at home?
b. Social gatherings
c. Church
d. How and where did you learn to speak English?
e. Do you teach your children to speak Greek?
f. To write it?
The now generation is forcing the use of English in practically eve y Greek home. At the social gatherings the old people chatter to each other in Greek but the young people altogether speak English. All Greek children are taught to speak and write Greek. In Miami we have a Greek school where our children go after American public school to be taught the Greek language. I was talking a few days ago to a little Greek language. I was talking a few days ago to a little Greek boy about 12 years old. At the public school he is friends with a boy named Jim. He and Jim have made an agreement that if he will study hard in English, Jim will go with him to the Greek class and study hard in Greek He makes Jim live up to the bargain, too. I would say that the percentage of elder Greeks who can read and write English would run about 60-40
EARING A LIVING
1. What is your present work? Why did you take it up?
Real estate. I like the brokerage business and the contacts it offers, and I am the oldest Greek in Miami following this business.
2. Have you ever done anything else? What? Where? Why did you change?
I changed because I fool there is a better opportunity to make money and be somebody.
3. What are the different occupations among the Greeks in Miami? Give preparation in trade, heavy labor, professional and others you can think of?
They are mostly in the restaurant business - about 90% I would say are either in the restaurant or some line of food business - waiters, produce or such. There are a few professionals, a few truck drivers and laborers. About 800 Greeks live here now but in 1905 there were only six in Dade Country - five men and women.
How do your countrymen in your line of work compare with these in other occupations as to entertainment, drinking habits, community life, etc?
They are all conducted along the same lines regardless of occupation. We do not have social or class discriminations among the Greek people in Miami.
LIVING CONDITIONS
1. Are there many Greek families living near you? Number? How many times have you moved since you came to Miami? Why?
Only one Greek Family lives near me.
I have stayed in the same place since I came here Most Greeks are home loving and do not like to move except to better themselves.
2. Do you make enough money to give yourself or family all the things you would like to have? Do you think you could do better in another line of work? Reason?
Not lately. Money does not seem so plentiful for even I who no family. I send presents to my family in Sparta but do not have to contribute to their support as many of my friends do. I think the real estate business is very good but I am still trying to find a work that I will like better.
4. Do you live in a house or apartment? Kind? Number of rooms? Number of people in house? Conveniences - telephone, electric refrigerator, radio, etc.?
Most of my people live in houses, and many own them. It is very seldom that a Greek lives in apartment. Maybe two families in one house, but regular apartments, no. most of them have modern conveniences, radio, electric refrigerator and quite a few have a telephone.
4. How many times have you been ill? Treatment in each case? What do you think caused your illness? What is the most common illness which men in your line of work suffer?
We are very healthy as a race but tuberculosis loads in diseases. The Order of Ahopa has established a sanitarium at Alburquerque. New Mexico and tuberculars are sent there from the whole United States. I was gassed in the war and as long as I stay in a warm climate I remain well.
5. Do you make a better living than the Italians, Slovaks or other people who come to this country?
Yes, much better, we think we contribute more culturally as a race than a Dago or Wop.
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL LIFE.
1. How much education have you had? Can you read Greek? Any other language? What? Extent?
Grade school, two year college, agricultural course, two year public accounting course, and for three years I have been studying law at night with Mr. Knight, a lawyer here. I speak Greek, French and Latin and can read them also.
2. Do your children attend public, private or parochial schools?
I am not married. Most of the wealthier Greeks send their children to private or parochial school. The others go to public school and all of them attend Greek class after American school.
3. To what clubs or organizations do you belong? Fraternal? Social? Co-operative? Athletic? Choral? Religious? Political? Educational? When were these organizations founded? What prompted their establishment?
I am not a member of many clubs. For a long time I was in the American Legion in the North and since I have lived in Miami, I have planned to join but I do not have much time. I am secretary of our Greek Community and I know all of the 800 Greeks in Miami and something about them, their families, and their business. The Greek Democratic Club in another organization I am interested in but as an ordinary member. I am Adjutant of the Hellenic Club and secretary of the Order of Ahopa. That is our most important organization and its object is to bridge the gap between the Americans and the Greeks. You know, there is a gap. The Greek does not understand American ways and the American does not know the Greek. To many of them he is just another Dago. I think the weakness of my people lies in their individualism. As a race they are each ambitious, that is, each for himself. He will labor long hours, live under unspeakable conditions, study, save, try in every way to get ahead as a person but not as a part of a group. The Ahopa was organized in 1922 in Atlanta for the purpose of combating the KuKlux Klan but it soon grow beyond that. Perhaps if I tell you the meaning of the word Ahopa you will understand better the meaning of the organization: A means American, H is for Hellenic, E for education, P for Progressive, A for Association - American Hellenic Education Progressive Association. We love our own country but we try to be good Americans. So many Greeks come to America now that Athens College in Greece offers a full Liberal Arts Course in English, there is an English Agricultural School in Salonica and many Greek boys go to Turkey to the American College. French is taught in all Greek Schools and so now is English. It is a great pity Greek is not required in American schools. It would help great deal in the study of the real Bible. But it is coming. In Massachussetts the State Legislature has passed a law putting Greek in the schools. Other states will follow.
4. What Greek publications, if any, do you read? Do you like them better than America papers? Why? What news do you particularly enjoy.
I read the Greek National Herald to keep in touch with the Greek language, but I like American papers best for I think in American. The funnies I do not read. They are not for intelligent adults. Sports I like very much but in America I think they are too greatly commercialized. They are not fun as they should be. The best parts of the paper are the political news and the commentators' columns. Most of all I like books on political economy. Anything about government interests me and when I get my license to be a lawyer I will specialize in taxation. That is the end I studied in public accounting and I expect to finish that course, too, so I can be perfect in my knowledge of my work. Defending criminals would never appeal to me so I shall devote my time to taxation.
5. What people other than Greeks do you associate with in business or socially? Do you ever have any trouble or differences of opinion with negroes, Italians, Cubans, etc.?
Most of my business associates are Americans. I have little time for social life but most of that is among the Greeks. We do not have trouble or argue with any other race usually, though we are hot headed and sometimes fight among ourselves.
6. When you first came to this country did you find that Americans had ways and ideas that differed from yours? Customs such as tipping ones hat; shaking hands; saying "good morning," goodbye; holding a match to a friend's cigarette; "begging pardon" for bumping into someone; permitting a lady to precede you in entering or leaving a room? In celebrating Xmas or other holidays? In saluting the flag or taking off your hat when the national anthem is played; in attending court, addressing judges or officers of the law; in beliefs about Santa Claus; the Easter rabbit; the man in the moon; the right of women to vote; to smoke or drink, to have their hair cut, wear <text not clear> or bathing suits on the streets? Did anything funny or embarrassing happen while you were learning these things? What old customs and traditions do you still observe? What now ones?
Most of the Greeks observe the same politeness that you do. They shake hands, say good morning and do all those things. Some men treat their women as chattels but most of them honor and respect their women, especially older ones. They salute your flag and stand for the Star Spangled Banner. We do no believe in Santa Claus but we exchange gifts on New Years' day. Some of the younger American Greeks lot their children hang up their stockings but it is not usually observed so. Lately, some of the younger women vote but they are not active in political affairs. They do not cut their hair or smoke or wear slacks on the streets but some of them parade up and down the beach in bathing suits. The older women do not. They do not get drunk but they like a sip of wine or whiskey.
FOLKLORE AND CUSTOMS
1. What stories and legends do you know? Superstitions, etc, (Mr. Be Lor promised to write some for me and call me when they are finished)
2. What Greek songs and ballads do you know, new and old.
(See answer above)
3. Anecdotes and small stories tales of your work in America?
(See answer above)
4. Religious <text not clear>ults or ideas as they affect: Marriage, - divorce, celibacy, births, deaths, education.
We believe people should marry if they find the right one, and should have a family. Divorce was never practiced by older Greeks. If their marriage was a mistake they just did the best they could. A few of the new generation have divorces but they are frowned upon by their elders. The burial always takes place from the Greek church with long ritualistic ceremonies and the family wears black as Americans do. Even the peerest parents strive earnestly to educate their children.
5. Do you dress the same as they do in the old world?
No. There, women are more modest. They wear longer fuller skirts and do not have to have so Many vanities. Two or three dresses a year fill their needs.
6. Do you still like some old Greek dishes? Name some special dish and toll how it is prepared. (Mr. Be Lor, promised to get some recipes for me)
7. Do you still play some old game? Describe them.
No, we are too Americanized, but at out dances we do have Greek folk dances along with American modern dances.