1935
Jose Ramon Sanfeliz (Cuban) Ybor City
Tampa, Florida
(Cigar-maker, bar-tender)
(Compiled by FERA sociologi cal Study of Ybor City)
JOSE RAMON SANFELIZI
I was born in the suburb of Sos Sitios, Havana, Cuba, on September 21st, 1870. I learned my alphabet, and first preliminary schooling from my mother and my aunt. When I was ten years of age I was put to work at the cigar factory of Hijos de Cabana y Cajal, of Dragones #6, Havana. I worked here as stripper? In the afternoon when I was through with work, I would go home, eat, and then go to night school. This school which I attended was known as the "Centro de Artesanos de LA Habana(Club of artist of Hauand) At that time this was A sort of Labor Temple in which labor leaders met to discuss their different problems. They also held school at night and had some of the finest teachers in Havana.
At twelve years of age I went to the sugar mill known as "La Concordia" where my father was working as foreman.
"A stripper is one who removes the center stam from the tobacco leaf. I remained here until I was 14 years of age.
On August of the year 1884. I was contracted* as apprentice cigar-maker at the factory of "El Nuevo Mundo "(She new world) of Ramirez and Villamil. I distinctly remember this place as I received many beatings, many blows, and very poor food. I had to remain here two whole years which seemed to me more like two ages.
During the cigar strike at the town of Hoyo Colorado in demand of higher prices, and also that a fixed price be paid by all the cigar factories on each brand of cigar, I obtained employment at one of the cigar factories in Havana. For the space of four years I worked in different factories.
Finally in the year 1890, just a little after the. McKinley Bill went into effect whereby imported cigars were subject to a high tariff, I came to Ybor City. However, I had to return to Havana in the following year due to the death of my mother.
In the short space of one year that I had remained in Tampa I had fore seen that there was a wonderful future here, and accordingly I tried to induce my father to come to Tampa with my two brothers and sister.
The first factory in which I worked was Lozano Pendas & Co. At about this time I became somewhat enamoured of radical ideas in the proletarian field; ideas which were later to prove unwise in the course of my life. These advanced ideas were, at the time When someone wanted to learn the cigar trade, he had to be "esoriturado" pr contracted with the manufacturer thereby binding himself to work for two years, without any salary a sort of "epidemic" among the cigar-makers here. This is a natural thing among people of poor education.
Later I also worked at the factory of Ramon Monet, and then changed to the factory of La Rosa Espanola of Pancho Arango, with whom I had worked in Havana. Mr. Villamil was also a partner of Mr. Arango at that time.
In the year 1895 when the war broke out between Cuba and Spain, I was convalescing from pneumonia, of which disease I was cured by Doctor Martin Caraballo. When the war cry was given at Baire, Cuba, I was again working at the factory of Ramon Monet. We organized the "24th of February Club" at the factory of Monet, and I was made Secretary and Collector of funds in order to help financially the revolution against Spain.
A little later a strike was declared at this factory which caused me to obtain employment once again at "La Rosa Espanola" of Mr. Francisco Arango.
At this factory we organized the patriotic club of "Vengadores de Maceo" (Avengers of Maceo). I was made President of the club, and was also in charge of collecting donations given by the cigar- makers, among which were many Spaniards who contributed to the Cuban cause.
I was also founder of another political club known as "Oracio S. Rubens." This was the name of the consulting attorney of Marti (Cuban apostle). After this club had bean organized, we founded another club of which Mr. Victor M. Munoz was placed as president.
"A great Cuban military hero.
He was fondly nick-named by us "El Abogadito" (The Little Lawyer).
I was married in February of 1896 when I was 36 years of age. We had in all eight children who were all born in Ybor City. Three died, and we had five children left: two boys, and three girls. My oldest daughter was married here, and has four children: one girl, who is already a damsel, and three boys. My other two girls stay at home looking after the home.
I had a brother by the name of Serafin, who left Tampa on an expedition against the government of Spain in cuba He was killed in the year 1897 while engaged in a fierce battle in the province of Oriente, Cuba.
I have also another brother who has dedicated himself to a farmer's life. He married an American girl and has four children.
In the year 1897 a strike was declared in Tampa known as the "Weight Strike. In this strike the cigar-makers a demanded that the tobacco material which was given them for the manufacture of cigars, should not be weighed.
During this strike thousands of cigar-makers left for New York, Key West, and Cuba. I also left for Cuba with my wife and children In August of the same year, my wife returned with the children. I, myself, came back the following week. We found that we could no longer endure life in Cuba as we had become accustomed to a life of comfort and ease in Ybor City which we could not find in Cuba.
Upon my return I went to work with Arango. Afterwards I was engaged as clothing salesman at the dry-goods store of Lee Dekle or Adam Katz & Co on 7th Avenue between 14th and 15th Streets. I was paid a very small salary here, and had to work every day up to 10 o'clock at night, while on Saturdays I had to work until two o'clock in the morning. I remained here until the year 1900. Two years later I received my citizenship papers.
When I left the Adam Katz store I returned to the cigar factory, working for Ybor Manara until May of 1904.
At this time Mr. V. M. Balbontin offered me a position at his barroom., where I learned with great success the art of mixing liquors. I worked here under Mr. Louis Hippenmeier. who taught me how to make the proper mixtures. In the year 1906 he placed me in the barroom of the Tampa New York Exchange, which was owned by Archie A. Cerf.
When the great fire swept over Ybor City on March 1st, 1908, I was working at another barroom on 7th Avenue and Maryland.
In 1909 I was assistant book-maker in the horse races that were celebrated in Tampa until the season was over.
In 1917 I left for Cleveland, Ohio because I could not find work here. For a time I worked in Cleveland in several foundaries. Afterwards I went to work at the E. Startle Hotel, where I entered as dish-washer and then promoted to time-keeper.
While working at this hotel I met a man who was seeking a salesman for a medicine which he had just patented called Andes. It was a sort of laxative medicine. I decided to go to Havana and sell this product there. However, the man failed to comply with his end of the deal, and I returned to Tampa where I went to work at the shipyard. I worked here only a few months.
At about this time Louis Heppenmeier gave me employment as foreman of the liquor warehouse annexed to the Florida Brewing Company. a beer factory which was the property of the family of Mr. V.M. Ybor.
While still employed here I was made salesman and collector for the beer factory, which employment I held until the year 1920 when prohibition went into effect.
In this year I left for New York with my daughter Josephine, who was my constant companion in all my trips. From New York I went to Cleveland, but returned shortly after in 1921 to Tampa. In 1923 I left again for New York with my daughter Josephine, and after working there at various positions I was employed at the McAlpine Hotel situated on 6th Avenue and 33rd Street. I worked here as dish-washer, and remained at this employment until the year 1925 at which time I returned to Tampa, my home base.
From 1926 to 1927 I worked at the theatre of L'Unions Italiana (Italian Club) with Mr. Victor Fernandez.
In 1927 Mr. Joe H. Chamoun placed me as rent collector at the firm of Philip F. Licata & Co., which employment I still hold.
I used to write many articles for the first "Prensa, a Spanish. newspaper which was founded in Ybor City by Mr. Francisco de la Villina, and under the direction of Mr. Jose Cortes Labra, called by all the members of the staff: Jacinto Bonbin.
In 1922 I was circulation manager of "La Traduccion" (The Translation) helping out in all the publications of this Spanish newspaper. For the past year I have been writing articles for "La Prensa," newspaper.
I was one of the founders of the "Club Nacional Cubano" (Caban National Club) today known as the Cuban Club. This predecessor of the Cuban Club was composed of white or black members -- a sort of rice with black beans. There was no distinction of races. When the Ciroulo Cubano (Cuban Club) was formed, however, the negroes were left out. These negroes then formed their own club which is called "Club Marti," situated on 6th Avenue and 11th Street.
I was also Recording Secretary for the Association of Cuban Emigrants of the war of Independence. I had to remain at this post because there was no one who wanted the position.
