Approximately 2,500 words.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
Title: JOE AND SALLIE JONES
Date of First Writing	January 5, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Estelle Williams
Fictitious Name	Sallie Jones
Street Address	1706 Thompson Street
Place	Columbia, South Carolina
Occupation	C.W.A. Garden worker and Cook
Name of Writer	Verner Lea
Name of Reviser	Stats Office
Joe, a tall, loose-jointed Negro, very black and good-natured, was born in Newberry County, South Carolina. He was eighteen years old when last he gazed on the little four-room shack nestled amid rows of cotton and corn. Two acres, to be exact, situated on the Harvey plantation. It was when he visited the Stats Fair in October, 1928, that the first taste of city life began to haunt his otherwise peaceful nature. So there was no rest for him until he bade farewell to his old Aunt Nancy, whose home and loving care had sheltered him sines the death of his mother. He was only five years old when his mother died. He had never known his father. To use his expression, his Pa was a " rambler. " He loved his old auntie who had shown no difference between him and her own brood of six. However, his gilded illusions of city life didn't last long. Before finding work in Columbia, he was forced to share the beds and rooms of first one acquaintance, then another, often suffering the pangs of hunger. Finally, he was given work at a filling station on the corner of Elmwood and Main Streets. He slept on a cot in a small, poorly constructed room adjoining the filling station. Here he remained a year, on a salary of five dollars a week. Joe was a willing and honest worker and made friends easily. It was while on this job that he first started "making eyes" and taking special notice of Sallie. Her job as cook carried her past his place of business twice a day. Sallie was a cheerful, good looking little darky about twenty years old and hardly five feet tall. Her appearance was always neat, and especially so after making Joe's acquaintance. She worked mostly as a means to play.
One morning the cook turned up missing, and so did the filling station helper. Sallie and Joe had gone on a honeymoon. When they returned, Joe's job had fallen into the hands of another. Sallie, who was an excellent cook, found little difficulty in being reinstated. They rented a three-room house on Barnwell Street, and it was she who shouldered the burden of responsibility during Joe's idle weeks. They were happy, however, and very much in love. While their education was limited to reading and writing, both were alert and eager to learn.
There was nothing lazy about Joe. Each day he would make his usual rounds in search of work. Finally, he was given a Job in road construction.
In the early days of Federal aid, Joe, like a large number of others, regarded relief work as something similar to a "gravy train." He left his road work in 1933 and applied for work on the garden project. Eighty-five acres were being cultivated behind the Veterans Hospital. Here cabbage. beans, sweet and Irish potatoes, onions, squash, cucumbers, green peas, turnips and other vegetables were raised in abundance. Then these products were sent by truck loads to be distributed among the poor and needy families. Joe obtained work at two dollars and forty cents a day, five and a half days a week. Because of his ability and conscientious attitude, he was one of the few given regular employment. He was cheerful and had a keen sense of humor. He was six feet tall and weighed a hundred and ninety pounds Joe was an excellent plow hand, and he often said that his was the only language old Kate, the mule, could understand. Kate plowed many a furrow to the tune of Joe's mule talk, and to the amusement of the other workers Often he would pause in his work, rest his elbow on his plow handle and sing:
"See dat pecker-wood
Settin' on de rail
Learnin' how to figger
All fer de white man
Nothin' fer de nigger"
All would laugh and joke, then sing and work with renewed energy.
Sallie had cooked for me four years. She was a loyal and faithful little helper. Early in January, 1934, she came to me and asked if she might get off for a few days. She left on Tuesday for a visit to her sister, Mattie, who lived in Leesville, South Carolina. She promised to return on Sunday night. But, on the following Saturday morning, she was seized with a premonition to return. Something kept telling her to come on back. She battled with her con- science all day. Mattie exerted every effort to keep her over until Sunday night.
"Sallie, you jus' hearin' things; ain't nothin' for you to go back far." But as the sun began to sink in the west, and that invisible something whispered again in Sallie's ear, "go home," she packed up her few belongings and left. When she got home Joe was sitting in a low chair over the fire.
"How come you back? Thought you said you was gonna stay a week." When she told him why she had returned, she said "he most killed himself laughing," and said: 'We got paid off on the project today. You build up a fire in the cook stove, and I'll run down to the store and get us a chicken for supper.'
"I pulled off my good clothes and soon had a fire goin' and the pot boilin'. Then I set down to wait for him and the chicken, Seven o'clock come and went. When eight o'clock struck, I begin to get uneasy, and thought about the sign what was give me up at Mattie's house. You know Joe's little dog name Fox? That dog was lay in' there by the fire sound asleep. After while he start growlin', and keep growlin' a little louder. All of a sudden he run up to me and bark and bark, jus' like he want to tell me somethin'."
Joe's mission was never completed. Sallie's name was suddenly called loudly, which suggested trouble to her sensitive ears. She stood up and saw the dim figure of a man darting up the alley which led to her house.
"Joe's shot. Come quick, and I'll take you to him."
With frightened appealing eyes she looked at him, then ran in a daze to the scene of the accident. The dim light of a street lamp showed her too plainly that her messenger was telling the truth. She bent over Joe and called to him, but received no answer. She placed her hand on his heart, at which time the last flicker of life went out. In his hand was firmly clutched the parcel containing the chicken.
A policeman came up and ordered the crowd away. Joe was hurried into an ambulance and driven to Manigault's Funeral Home, at 714 Main Street, and placed in the morgue among other dead.
In the meantime, great excitement prevailed in a Negro settlement at the lower end of Pickens Street, especially in the rooming house from which the fatal bullet was fired. A drunken brawl and the jealousy of two men over a woman had caused the death of an honest, law-abiding citizen. A pistol had been fired by Roy Jones from a window in this house. Instead of hitting his fleeing rival, it took effect in an innocent pedestrian. It was said by an eyewitness that Joe ran a half a block before he fell.
After a few hundred yards in pursuit, a policeman finally cornered his quarry. He had run for cover in one of the houses huddled in the settlement.
My first intimation of this affair was received about nine-thirty that night. On hearing a knock on my door, I admitted a thin, scantily clad little Negro girl. Sue is sallie's only child, eight years old. Her advent into the world remains more or less a mystery. She was about three years old when Joe and Sallie were married. I recall Sailie's remark on one occasion when she said: "I had no chillun to speak of when I married Joe."
"Miss Polly, Pa got shot. Ma say please let her come over here and spend the night. She say she'll sleep on the floor or jus' anywhere- she jus' grieve so, she say she can't stay in dat house by herself tonight."
When Sallie arrived, she was indeed an object of pity. Tears were streaming down her cheeks, and neither word nor deed seemed to comfort her. In her misery and grief, she called repeatedly on the Lord and beat her fists on her head and breast. Praying was all the relief she got; so she prayed, hardly ceasing all night.
"Miss Polly, I don't know what I'm gonna do. Joe didn't have no insurance. I don't know how we gonna bury him. That undertaker told no when people didn't have Money for the coffin and everything, they just have to take 'em out and bum 'em." Howevor, she was reassured the following morning by the foreman of the project on which Joe worked. Mr. Hall, with others of his workers, went down to the undertakers and peered at corpses until they found Joe's body. To meet the necessary expenses, his C.W.A. fellow workers took up a collection. The Welfare Board contributed $15.00, and Sallie donated her weeks wages of $4.00 and a small amount she had saved. She begged to remain in my house until after the funeral, pleading with me to attend the services with her. On Monday morning, I accompanied her to Manigault's Funeral Home. The chief mourners, C.W.A. workers and others, had assembled. But they were told that the burial could not take place until the following morning. The grave diggers had struck a bed of rock and could not complete their task in time. Tuesday morning, after all had again assembled, a small figure in black came in. Her composurs up to this point had been most admirable. But as the first notes of "Nearer my God to Thee" were heard, and the preacher began his chant and eulogy of the deceased, she threw all restraint to the winds.
"Oh! Lordy, there he. Chi Lordy, I sees him. There he is. Oh! Jesus, how come you take my Joe? There he. Oh! Lordy." It became almost necessary to resort to physical force, before she finally showed some semblance of calmness. It was also important that we get through with this business of burying Joe. Two days had been lost, end the men had to return to their jobs in the gardens.
About eight o'clock, the procession started. Joe was on his last earthly journey, The cold was intense. The ground was frozen. The frost, sparkling on cedars and foliage, reflected myriads of Christmas trees as we came to our journey's end. Eight white pallbearers lowered Joe's last remains into a, grave dug in Potters Field.
A coroners inquest was held a week later. When Roy Jones' case came up for trial, he was convicted. He was sentenced to seven years in the penitentiary within sight of his victims grave.
Sallie remained with me about ten days after the funerei. But she complained daily of a misery in her head. Broken in heart and spirit she and Sue left for her sister Mattie's home in the country. On leaving, she remarked, "Miss Polly, I'll be back in a few weeks. I'm gonna get me a nerve tonic and see can't I get to feeling right."
Four years had passed and gone since I had last seen Sallie. I frequently made inquiries concerning her. But from the meagre knowledge obtained, she might just as well have been swept into eternity along with her late husband, Joe. My surprise was great, however, when on elbowing my way through Silver's dime store a few weeks ago, there stood Sallie. On seeing me, she manifested surprise and embarrassment, as she released the arm of a tall, light- colored Negro about her age. They were standing at the jewelry counter, Sallie was trying on first one ring then another. Their conversation was animated, until she turned and met my gaze. I felt gratified to notice that she no longer wore her look of distress and widow's' mourning. Instead, she was decked out in one of the stylish pancake-shaped hats, which reposed on her left ear, a red dress and coat, and black suede pumps. Gold ear rings and beads completed her costume. The face powder which had been applied a little too generously gave her an ashy look as she greeted me.
"Oh! Miss Polly, I'm sho' glad to see you. I sho' have talked and thought about all of you. This my cousin from up the country where Mattie lives. He come to see the Christmas in Columbia. Both displayed large, very white teeth in a broad grin exchanged between them.
"Annie give me your message. Yes'm, she told me, and I'm sho' comin' to see you durin' the Christmas. How's all your girls? Well, you look for me, 'cause I'm sho' comin' I wants to hear all 'bout you all."
Later, however, my suspicious were confirmed. When sallie walked out of the dime store, it was to embark on a honeymoon with this cousin.
Three weeks later I heard a faint knock on my door. Sallie came in timidly and handed me one of her bright red geraniums that she grew in a tomatoe can.
Always eager to help, she performed first one little odd job, then another. Finally she sat down, and over a cup of hot coffee in the kitchen, her Mood became reminiscent.
"Miss Polly, you know it's 'zactly four years gone this month since I los' Joe. I sho' miss him. I wish the good Lord could o' spared him, but Ha know best. You know that boy I was in company with in the dime store? He's a good boy, and we been keepin' company for some time. Seem like I got so lonely stayin' by myself all the time. We went around to the magistrates office and got married that same afternoon. His name is Rufus Allan. He's got steady work at a filling station. Makes six dollars a week. He also picks up a little change in tips, too. I'm maid at a boarding house on Lady Street. The work ain't so confining, and I get four dollars a week. So if Rufus jus' keep on like he's doin' now, I know we will get along all right. I told him I wasn't gonna have no runnin' 'round and skippin' out at night. I know he's been true to me so far. But you see we jus' been married a month."