Santifee Paschall
Puryear, Tennessee
November 11. 1938
R. C.
Name changes
NIPPITY-TUCK
"I've jist come from the cotton patch over on Mr. Crawford's place," Santifee said. She removed a red toboggan cap from gray streaked brow hair that was frlzzied with a cheap permanent.
"I ain't been much well," she said. "The doctor said I'd Jist have to git my teeth pulled. Some of them got to aching me so bad last spring, I Jist had them yanked out. As long as they- don't hurt, I guess I'll keep them. But tain't nothing gits a fellow down as quick: as tooth ache." Santifee smiled weakly as she threw her arm before her face to hide the few blackened teeth that were so loose they moved when she talked.
She picked up a piece of wood, stirred the dying embers with one end of it, and then dropped the wood on the coals. She stood and watched the fire until she saw that the wood was going to burn, then she sat down in a rocking chair before it.
"We was living out about a mile in a worse shack than this, but we couldn't stay in it through the winter so we moved up here last October. These four shacks, all jist alike, alongside the railroad tracks belongs to the N. C & St. L. Railroad Company. Section hands use to live in them but now anybody who's a mind to can rent them. We've got these two rooms and two shed rooms. I guess that long porch across the front will be nice in the summer time if the sun don't git too hot. You can't hardly tell these houses ever been painted yellow and. brown, but they was once. We don't have no water, no lights, no screens. no garden, no nothing.
"We pay five dollars a month rent and one dollar for water and then pack it half across town. The wood's to buy' ourselves. We did stay in that other room, and. let the girls have this for their sparking room, but it's a farplace in there that burns long wood. I said we'd move in here for the staying room and put up a stove. Well, the very first night after we'd made the change I built a far in this little old farplace where a coal grate's been took out. It throwed off so much heat and done so well we ain't never got no stove. It shore don't take much wood, neither.
"It's been four years ago since we had to give up our farm. We'd bought a little over a hundred acres and had stock and tools and was pretty well fixed for pore folks. But things got so tight we jist couldn't make the payments. So we let the farm go and rented and sheercropped until last year. Mr. Crawford -- we was living on his place -- told Hancy that with the crop reduction he jist couldn't let him have land. Hancy looked and looked for a place but jist couldn't find none. Well, finally he found that little old shack out there where we moved to. Then he got sick and was down six weeks. He'd applied for this here WPA work and as soon as he was able in April he went to work on that. He don't make much but with what me and the kids can do we manage to make out. It's been nippity tuck to git along, though. Jist nippity tuck and mostly nippity.
"Well, Mr. Crawford come over in April and said his allowance was more than he thought. If me and the kids wanted to he'd let us make a little cotton and 'tater crop, he told us. So we done that. It wasn't much but it holped out.
"We'd har'd our boy Henry out so Hancy he got a leave off of' the WPA to help us git in the 'taters and he ain't been able to git back on yit. He's been through with the 'taters three weeks. They's jist too much red tape to this government. When you once gits off, it's gosh awfully hard to git back on. Have to go on relief and they won't sign you up if they's air a soul in the family working.
"You see, the chill'ren was har'd out first to one person then to another. No regular Jobs. That don't make no difference to them relief bosses. What do they keer if folks has enough to eat or not? They's got their own selves a big paying Job telling folks whether they needs relief or not. We shore don't wan't them to have to feed hancy and me. He wants a Job relief, not food relief. Told Hancy jist yestiddy that if he ever got back on that WPA. 'taters or no 'taters, he shore wasn't gitting off. I mean that, too."
The fire had begun to burn well and the room was warm. Santifee pulled off her ragged sweater and threw it on an old trunk in the corner. "See how that grate throws out heat? I tell Hancy 'tain't no use to git a stove now.
"I've had sort of a hard time all my life, but I ain't never had such a hard time as we've had since Hancy's been on this WPA. My mammy and pappy separated when I was four months old. Mammy went off, pappy thought, with another man. Pappy walked and toted me six miles to grandma's. He didn't have nothing much, was jest sheer cropping and so he moved over at gran'ma's. He was her onliest child and her a widder womern so Pappy jist lived on there and took keer of her and me. Then when I was five we hear that my mammy was dead and Pappy he married again.
"Grandma and my Stepmammy couldn't git along. They was a-scrapping half of all the time. Pappy had three other chil'ren by this woman. After they come, Grandma she thought she ought to make them mind the same as she did me, and Pappy thought so, too. But Stepmammy dared Grandma to touch air a one of her younguns. But, mind you, I caught it. Polly, that's my half sister, she's awfully sweet and we ain't had a cross word since shes' grown, was a laughing 'tother day. Said she ought to had her setter blistered for making up lies to git me whipped. I laughed and told her I believed I'd jist blister her yit. Course we's joking.
"Well, I never did go to school much. I lived a long piece from school and had cotton to pick in the fall. I didn't never git farther than the fourth grade, but I learned to read and write a little. About the most I ever done that I was plumb proud of myself for was when we was living near New Providence and one of my neighbors' babies died. She was a pretty bright eyed little girl. So I was out by myself one day and I thought up a pretty little memorial verse. I was sort of surprised I could do as well as I did. I showed it to a neighbour man. He said I knowed it was in you but how did you ever git it out?' We sent it to the Hazel paper and it come out in print. The baby's mammy was proud of it and cut it out to put in a frame with the baby's pitcher.
Dear little Mary Dallas bold
Died of the measles in January cold.
Her sorrowing parents they do say
For them it was a sad, sad day.
But the good Lord in Heaven above
Needed a song bird maybe a dove.
So dear little Mary he did take,
Grieving parents don't let your heart break.
She is happy in her home on high,
She is risen, she did not die.
"I think that's right pretty, don't you?
"When I was ten years old Grandma's brother's wife died. That's his pitcher." She pointed to an enlarged picture, in a wide gift frame, of an old man with high cheek bones, a long beard, and shaggy eyebrows. "He lived in Middle Tennessee. After his wife died he come to see Grandma and wanted her to go and keep house for him. Grandma she wouldn't go and leave me, so they took me. Uncle Henry had a boy he'd raised. He was the beat looking feller I ever see. About nineteen years old. I wasn't nothing but a kid but I liked him a heap. After he left uncle's he begun writing to me. I was only twelve then. Grandma liked him, so we wrote for several months and then he come to see me twice. I would married him, I guess, but he got into a mess of trouble and run off to Texas.
"I run up on Hancy and we married when I was sixteen. Then after I was married about three months I got a letter from that boy wanting to come back after me. I didn't answer his letter but sent him word that I was married. They's been times, plenty of time, when I wished I'd never married. Oh, they's plenty of hard places in married life. Of course, I love Hancy. Wouldn't take a million fur my kids -- but I wouldn't give two cents for another one. And Hancy he drinks a lot. He got to drinking awful bad for a year or two. He'd come in drunk or somebody's have to bring him in at time. We'd have a awful time with him. But he's doing better for the last six months.
"After I'd been married about six years, Hancy met a man. He asked Hancy when we'd heard, from my mother. Hancy said, 'why, her mother's dead.'
"'Dead, hell!' he said.' I know what I'm talking about. 'He didn't know her address but he knowed her sister' address. When Hancy come home and told me I set right down and wrote to my aunt. Yes, my mother wrote to me, and come to see me. Chil'ren jist has to love their mammy and I guess I done it, but I never could feel by her like I did my pappy. Pappy stayed by me when I was little. I don't know my Mammy left. She said she Jist couldn't stay with Pappy. Said he wasn't good to her. Said they wasn't no man in it, but somehow I believed she was lying.
"My pappy is still living but he's gitting sort of old now and he's got high blood. We feel plumb uneasy about him. Pappy done very well during them good years. Accumulated enough to buy and pay for a right good little farm. Then he put a mortgage on it and lost out.
He's running a little grocery store at Mansfield now and gits. Right smart little trade. But he's a having a lot of trouble with my stepmammy. She's gone downright deranged and he's afraid she'll burn up everything a-dashing coal oil on the far like she does."
There was a knock at the door. When Santifee opened it. Two girls came in and asked for Jessie. On learning she was up town they t went in search of her.
"I guess they want her to go somewheres, "said Santifee. "but she ain't a-going with them. That youngest of them two girls is visiting in town. From over across Sandy. they all say she's jist a dandy'. The boys was in here the other night. They was mocking what she said when she was on a drunk at a party the other night. It's jist hard to bring up girls right now-a-days, seems like. Jessie got herself into a mess last summer. A girl drove up here with a boy that Jessie thought she knowed. They ask her to get in and go with them to git another girl and they'd go to a little old tent show that was here in town. Jessle never thought no harm and she come in and told me. She hadn't got out of the section yards 'till that feller grabbed her. She told him to turn her a-loose. She was going to git out of that car.
"He said, 'Oh, no, 'young lady you're going with me.'
"'the hell I am!' Jessie said. 'You turn me a-loose and let me out of here. If you don't I'll call the law.'
"The city marshal was standing right in the street where they'd have to pass. So they got scared and let her out. She cut through by the 'tater house and almoat beat her shadow home. She come in crying and trembling like a leaf. Girls sure do have to be particular these days.
"Chief Allison has a road house out here about a mile. He did have a square dance every Monday night. My girls went out there and danced but I don't reckon they do the round dance. If they do they'd better not let me know it. I don't see no more harm in the square dance than in Ring-Around-Rosy that we played when a kid, but that round dance is awful. It's not bad if people would conduct theirselves right but they jist don't. I'd better not catch my gals doing them round dances. I'm telling you.'
"Yes, Hancy dances, too. He gits a lot of kick out of it. My girl Katy is give out to be the best dancer anywheres around. When Chief gives a square dance and Katy don't go, he sends for her. She's been dancing ever since she was six years old."
In the next room Katy had heard what was being said. Now she swished into the room and spoke determinedly, Ma, I've got to have a new coat for that dance over to Allison's next week."
"No!" Santifee said with equal determination. "You'll have to wait until we sell the 'taters."
"Hell, you'll see!" Katy replied emphatically. She flung out of the room in a hurry.
"I don't know why girls talk like that." Santifee sighed. "I've tried to keep mine from cussing but they do. All of them do now. Grandma would have skinned me alive.
"I belong to the Methodist Church at New Providence where we use to live. We've moved around so much here and yonder that I ain't never moved my letter. But I don't never go to church. In the first place, I don't have nothing to wear. Then the folks here in Puryear is so rotten stuck up. They was a leading member of this church up here said last summer, 'Well I believe we'll have a good meeting if we can keep that bunch of damn poor white trash away'"
Santifee's eyes snapped. "I considered I was as poor as they is, so I ain't bothered them. That's the sort of Christians they is these days. Hancy don't belong to no church. He's too wild for that.
"I've talked to him but it don't do no good. A quart of mule and his fiddle and a good, square dance, then Hancy's as nigh heaven as he wants to be. That's his fiddle on the wall there. A friend of his carved it from the trunk of an apple tree. That fiddle and his insurance is two things Hancy'll hang onto till his 'dying day. We pay up hancy's insurance every week. Looks like sometimes it nippity-tuck to scratch it up. I tell him he ought to drap it. He says he won't till he has to. We don't have no insurance on the chil'ren but we have them in the Burial. It sure makes a fellow feel better if he knows if one got sick and died you could put him and respectable. One of our neighbors last year had been in the Burial.. She dropped it and in less then three months she took pneumonia and died. Her husband had to mortgage everything he had and then he like to not had. enough to bury her. It made me feel downright sorry for him.
"I ain't got nothing but my chil'ren. Doyle, the second boy', is har'd out at Mr. Jackson's and Mr. Jackson has a little girl jist starting to school. It was so far that she couldn't walk to school by herself so Marilee, my twelve year old daughter, is staying out there and walking to school with Ruby Jackson. She's making her board and keep. It's a nice place for a girl to be.
"I've got three grown girls. Jessie is the oldest and she stays at home. Seems like they's so much to do here and us har'ing out every time we can that she keeps busy. Katy stays with Mrs. Dobbins most of the time. She helps Mrs. Dobbins. She's bought her a right smart of good clothes. Mrs. Dobbins helps her make them. Thelma's nursing a woman that had a car wreck. I've got eight, in all. My oldest boy is twenty-eight. He's married and got the cutest little girl you ever see. I miss the children but by their working we manage by nippity-tuck to git along.
"Woman's life sure is a hard life. I've got to look after these girls to keep them from gitting snatched up by some no count man and betrayed. Then I got to keep plugging at Hancy to git back on WPA. It's this old nippity-tuck which takes most of my time."