In an otherwise identical version, additional information is given. Information on the cover sheet of the deleted version is given below. The date on the top of page 2301B is "April 10, 1939."
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6--Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6--Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
April 19, 1939
Athens, Georgia
133 Church Street
Robert and Gladys
Walker (Negroes)
Sadie B. Hornsby, Writer
Sarah H. Hall, Reviser
THE BARBECUE STAND
Ominous rumblings from a vicious looking dog stopped me at the gate in front of Bill Long's house. The only person in sight was a Negro girl who was lolling on the steps smoking a cigarette. When I called to her to come down to the gate and let me in, she reluctantly arose, threw her white apron on a bench, and came slowly down the walk, carefully holding the cigarette behind her.
"Yes, mam" she said in answer to my query. "This is where Bill Long lives, but he ain’t here right now. He'll be back in a few minutes, so come on up to the house and have a seat on the porch. How, you don't have to worry about that dog; he's harmless, the only thing. he'll bite is a piece of meat, when he can git it."
"Are you Bill's wife?" I inquired.
"No, mam,” she replied. "Me and my husband just has a room here, but just as soon as I gits me a good job I'm going to leave him, 'cause he runs around with other women all the time. I helps ay aunt in the barbecue stand, but she don't pay me enough to live on, so I'll just have to stay with him 'til I can do better."
By this time we had mounted the steps of the porch and I was invited to alt down on a home-made bench in the sun. The two-story frame house is painted yellow and its facade is lavishly decorated with flowerpots and porch hexes into which, the plants appeared to have been recently transplanted.
A mullatto woman came out on the porch and began wielding her broom. "Aunt Geraldine," the girl said, "this white lady had done come to see Uncle Bill."
"He isn't here," Geraldine stated, "but if you'll tell me what it is you want, maybe I can help you." It was not difficult to arouse her interest in the idea of telling me the story of their business undertakings as well as more personal experiences; in fast she seemed to regard it as a privilege to tell her story.
As a shining new car of a popular make was piloted into the driveway, Geraldine exclaimed, "There's Bill now! Me and Bill has done lived with the white folks all our lives and we'll be glad to talk to you."
Bill climbed out of his car and before he had reached the veranda, Geraldine was excitedly telling him the purpose of my call. "All right," he answered, ad he disappeared in the house, "I'll be out there with you in a few minutes."
He kept his word and very soon he reappeared in the doorway but did not sit down. "All right, Geraldine," he began, "you and Mary come right on, for this is going to be one more busy day." Turning to me, he said, "Miss, you'll just have to come on out to the stand where we can talk and work at the same time."
Geraldine soon had liver sizzling in a skillet and began preparing other things to be cooked, while Mary's time was spent washing dishes in a vague and indifferent manner. Bill darted back and forth waiting on customers and answering the telephone. The white and Negro races were well represented in the constant stream of customers who thronged his place. While he has built up a great demand for his "hot pig sandwiches.” he has an excellent volume of trade in his neat market and grocery store, all of which flourish under the same roof.
"Please mam, let me have some breakfast, and I'll pay yon tome day," a young Negress cajoled Geraldine, as she perched on a stool at the lunch counter. Geraldine was not quick to reply, and the girl continued, "The reason I ain't got no money this morning is that me and husband got to fighting at the dance last night, and it cost me $5 to keep out of Jail. That's the first time the law ever has got a hold on me, and than it was somebody else's fault. One of them other girls there got drunk and pulled off every stitch of her clothes right there before all the folks at the dance. I was trying to make her put her pants back on when my husband saw me talking to her, and that started our fight." Her tones became honeyed and coaxing as she pleaded, "I'll pay you she 'nough. See if I don't. I ain't had a bite of breakfast."
"I'd be glad to do it for you, sweetheart, really I would," Geraldine countered, "but our food is sold strictly for cash. We do sometimes, under certain circumstances, charge a little in our groceries and fresh meat departments, but here at the cooked food counter is where we have got to take in the cash, or we never would "be able to pay our own bills when they come due." The girl pouted silently for a few minutes, then climbed down from the stool and left.
Bill's snowny chef’s cap was worn with his blue trousers and white shirt. He is tall, heavy set, and very dark. The color scheme off blue and white was also carried out in. his wife's uniform. Both were in the heavy-weight class, and their broad smiles and comfortably upholstered bodies were good advertisements for their cookery.
"Now, Miss, I think I may have a few minutes free to talk to you," Bill said, as he walked to where I was sitting on a huge block of wood that had evidently been prepared for use as a chopping block. "We'll have to talk fast," he said, "'cause I'm mighty busy in the mornings. In fact, it's this way from the time we open every morning 'til about three o’clock in the afternoon; then we have a rest spell until about five o'clock when we have to start preparing meats end other things for supper." He hesitated and looked at me expectantly.
"I don't want to talk. Bill," I explained to him, "I came to hear you talk."
"Yes, mam, I see. Well, I've always tried to conduct myself in a way to be respected by the white folks. Just to tell you the truth, I've lived among white folks all my life. I wasn't bora in Athens, but I've lived here ever since I was 'bout ten years old. I was born in Warrenton, Georgia, and father and mother fetched me to Athens when they come here with a white family that moved from that town to this one. I ain't never done nothing but work in my white folks' houses. And right now ay mother is working for the same family that has employed her for the last 17 years.
"Little and young as I was when they fetched me to this town, I had already dons made me a little money 'fore ever we left Warrenton. My mother worked out and she left me with my grandmother. But to tell the truth, Miss, I never got a cent of that money to spend, for myself. Grandmother kept it all. True, she did feed and clothe me - what little food and clothes I had - and after all I didn’t have no special need for spending money.
"When the white folks my father and mother were working for decided to come to Athens to live, I begged them to bring me along. Mother didn’t want to be bothered with a 10-year old child, and. wanted to leave me with my grandmother but I begged and pleaded so hard that my father said, 'Oh, let’s take the boy with us. We can manage some way.' And so they brought me to Athens. Pretty soon after we got here I got a job rolling an afflicted white man around in his wheel chair. He paid me $1 a week. I remembered as how my grandmother had, kept all my money in Warrenton, so I begged so hard that mother agreed to let me handle what I earned here. I vat a mighty big feeling little mite of a boy, and each week I saved part of my money until I had enough to buy myself some clothes. After the old gentleman died I got a job at $2.50 a week as a houseboy for the white folks that my mother worked for. Yes, mam, I'm here to tell you I she did feel good with all that money in ray pocket every week to do as I pleased. Of course I helped mother and father out when they got in tight places. Once when both of 'em were sick in bed with the flues, I kept right on working ever' day end waiting on them every night. And we had to live on that little $2.50 a week that I was making until they got able to go back to work.
"Mother's white folks had a friend that needed a butler that coulddouble as chauffeur, so they told, 'em about me, and I went to work: for them people at $7 a week. They she did take me along to drive on some nice trips. Once I drove 'em to Hew York, and you just ought to have seen this Negroin that big city. My eyes just couldn't take in all there was to see at one time.
"My white folks let me off early one night in New York, so I said to myself, 'This is my chance to see this here place.' I got on one of them sightseeing busses and started out. I rode and rode, and then I got off and walked awhile. I got lost but I was afraid to say anything to anybody about it. Finally a policeman came up to me and said:
"'Look a here, boy! Is you lost?'
"'Naw, sir,’ I said, right meek-like.
"'How long is you been in this here city?'
"'Just a few days,' I told him.
"'What is you doing here? Where is you from!' Looked like he could think of the most things to ask me about. I told him the truth about how come was in New Work and where I was from, and then I was she 'nough surprised when he told me he was from Georgia too. But he she must a been up there a mighty long time for he talked just like the rest of them Yankees.
"When he convinced me he really was from Georgia, I opened, up and. told him I was lost, but that I had been 'fraid to say so for fear he might lock me up. He laughed at that and said: 'I knowed it all the time. Now, you just follow me and when I gits off I'll take you back where you belongs.'
"When I got back and told my white folks what happened, they said: 'Bill, don't you newer venture out like that no mo'.'
"Time got so hard that my white folks had to let me go, but I didn't have a bit of trouble gitting another job. I ' cided I'd stayed long enough in this city, so I went to Atlanta and to a job in a barbecue stand. I had done worked in the house ever since I was 9 years old and made up my wind I'd had enough of that sort of work, so I didn’t stay at the barbecue place there very long. I worked, in all, about two years in different places around Atlanta. I was saving ay money all that time to set up a barbecue stand of my own some day.
"The last man I worked for in Atlanta never wanted to pay me as much as I was gitting. Pact of the business, he hired me away from a job that was paying more than his job paid me. But after I had been with him two weeks he cut my wages down so low that I up and left, but not before me and him had it. When I quit that Saturday night I come on back home here and rested up a few days before I started out for another Job.
"I she did like them white men at the fraternity house where I done my next work. They was all just as good as they could be to me. Of course they had some few wild parties, but you couldn't hire a single Negro that ever worked for them to tell what they done or who done it. The worst scrape they ever got in was during one of them dances they has ever' year. 'Most all the other boys and their girls came to visit 'em at this big celebration. That special night - it was the next morning for it was about 3 o'clock - one of the boys brought his girl to the house. She was so sick that he didn't want to move her to try to git her to where aha had been staying until she felt better. He was rushing her to the "bathroom and to git to it they had to go through the room of a boy that was already asleep. They newer knocked on his door, but just opened the door and walked on in to try to git through to the "bathroom. That woke up the boy in the room, and he asked: 'Who's in ay room?' They never answered him but just tried to edge on through to that "bathroom. He thought somebody was snooping around his room to git something. So in a loud voice he hollered: 'I say. Who in the hell's in my room? If you don't answer there's going to be trouble.' That poor nauseated girl had stood all she could, and she just let him have it all over his hack. He was one mad white man. Ever' time anybody mentioned it to him after that he wanted to fight. Them other boys she did rag him about it at breakfast the next day, and that is how I come to know about it.
"You know, Miss, it's funny how boys will 'pose on each other. One of them boys went to Miami and fetched hack 12 bottles of whiskey. They was them little, bitty bottles what ain't got more'n a good swallow in 'em. Anyway one of the boys had a bad cold, and the boy what had the liquor let him have one of them little bottles of whiskey. From then on that boy what had the cold would ask for a bottle of whiskey every night, so one night he says to him; 'Look here, pal, if that cold keeps up you'll he a damned sot.' That was hint enough and I newer heared of his being bothered about his liquor no mo.' 'Course you have to see and hear these things actually happen around the boys to know how funny they can seem.
"After I got married, me and my wife made up our minds to open up abarbecue stand of our own. I had done learned how to cook hash, and Brunswick stew, and to barbecue meat, when I worked in the barbecue placesin Atlanta. We dug our first barbecue pit in our own back yard, and that good old meat was barbecued in the real Southern style. We done so much business that first summer that we decided to keep our stand going through the winter with home barbecued meat. We already had it screened but when winter come we boarded our pit up.
"We done business there more'n two years. Our business grew out of that hole in the ground, that was our barbecue pit, to where we had to look around for a much bigger place. Finally we found this place we are in now. We don't like to rent, so bought this corner that our business place is on, but we don't own the house we lives in yet.
"When we was ready to move, we took our business house down, piece by piece, loaded it on a truck with our household furniture in our house, and sold $3 worth of barbecue, all in one day. Wien we sure opened up for business, I had 500 circulars distributed in a radius of 10 blocks around here, and then we went to work, day and night, to build up our trade. I must say we are proud of it now. You have probably noticed that I have as many white customers as Negroes.”
The telephone rang. A Negro that I had heard called "Papa," answered it. "Hit's for you, Mr. Bill."
Bill said, "Hiss, I 'spects you's going to have to 'sense me, for it's time now for my phone orders to begin coming in, and from now on I'll be mighty busy.” His prediction was correct. Business became very brisk. Geraldine handed out has sandwiches at 5¢ each, and barbecues and wiches at a dime apiece.
“How about a barbecue sandwich, Geraldine?” asked a taxi driver.
"All right," she answered, "You like yours with hot sauce, don't you?"
"The hotter you make 'em, the better I like 'em,” he declared.
The man even added mere peopper sauce after the sandwich was handed to him.
A Negress received the bowl of hash that she had ordered. "Can I have a bottle of beer?" she asked.
"Yes, if you want it," she was told.
"But that man that's sitting over there in the comer is a preacher, isn't he?" she protested.
"That's all right,” Geraldine firmly stated, "He knows we sell beer, and if he don’t like it, he knows where the door is. Ye don't 'low no roughs tuff in here and he knows it. He ain't going to try to make no trouble."
The preacher overheard the two women, and turning to them said: "Sisters, you is right I is a minister of the gospel, and I hates to see these things gwine on. This good sister knows its wrong to drink strong drink. She knows it's a step to bring her nearer death and the devil.
"Yes, Brother Blank," Geraldine humbly answered, "we knows it ain't right to sell beer, but we have got to make a living, and we has got to find some way to make enough money to pay all them taxes the city has put upon us. Some of the money from the beer we sells we gives for the support of your church and to pay your salary, so you can teach the Bible, and our taxes Help to pay the teachers in the public schools where our children git their book learning."
"Well, Sister Long, you and your husband is all right folks; yet and still it is wrong for anybody to sell strong drinks and I sticks to what I says about it it works evil on the people, both in Bind and body." These words closed his argument and he left. The woman diner kept right on gulping her beer.
The surface of the wood burning store la the barbecue stand, was crowded with pots and pans of has, sauces, barbecued meat, cornbread, and a small amount of cooked liver.
Geraldine saw an opportunity to talk, and so she voluntarily began: I was born on a farm near Bogart, Georgia, about three miles from here. Soon as I was large enough they started me off at farm work, but I never done much of it for I soon got started helping a white lady with her work, such as toting water to the house, bringing in stovewood, and tending the food after she put it in the store, to keep it from burning. She learnt me to make my first cornbread.
"When the white lady, I was working for, died I stayed on to look after her children, and after bar husband married again, I kept right on working for them and looking after those blessed babies. They paid me 60¢ a week.
"I'll never forget the old colored woman, we called 'Aunt Liza,' that lived on the edge of the back yard there and didn't do nothing also but milk the cows and feed the chickens. I had to tote the milk from the cow pen to the kitchen at the house. Miss Fannie made me go to that cow pen and do it, dark or no dark. Old Aunt Lisa knowed how scared I was so she used to set the milk down where I could git it. I was on my way hade to the house one night and I saw something white flutter across the walk: and hide hack of the lilac hush at one corner of the yard by the walk. When I got near that lilac hush that white thing jumped out and said, I dropped both buckets of milk and fairly flew to the house and fainted dead away la the kitchen doorway. Miss Fannie was working on me when I come to, and I told her what I had seen. She blessed Aunt Lisa out, and I newer had no more ghost trouble.
"I left there and for 5 years I done cooking and maiding in Winder, Georgia. It was in Winder that I married and when my first husband died, I kept on working' there. He had been dead a little more than a year when I went to a ball game, and there I net Bill. After a hasty lore affair we got married and that's how I come to be living in this city.
"Soon after I come here, I got a job cooking for a nighty nice white lady, but she died not long ago. Her son's wife still has me to plan her children's meals. Me and Bill are proud of our good white friends.
We know that they would help us out if we ever needed them, and it makes us feel mighty happy to know that we are respected citizens of the city we live in.
The reason I stopped working out was to help Bill in our barbecue stand. We have put in a line of fresh meats sad groceries, as well as beer and soft drinks, and candies, cakes, cigars and cigarettes; and we are making enough to lire on, and we don't have to call on nobody for nothing. However, we do help lots of people ourselves.
"And the way we are beat out of money, but both white and coloredfolks, is a sight. That's exactly the reason I runs my "barbecue stand on a cash basis. We do charge lots of groceries, and we can't afford to hare everything going out and nothing coming in. Every once in a while we have trouble with drinking folks who want to hang around our store after they have had too much liquor. Once a white man that was on a drinking spree cone in here for something to eat, and we had done charged so much to him that we couldn't afford to give him any mare credit. So, when he asked for a barbecue sandwich, I said: 'Mr. Fields, we soil strictly for cash now, and I don't charge one penny's worth, not even to My own brother.'
“ ‘Do you know who you're talking to?' he asked.
"'Yes, Sir,' I answered right back to him, 'l she do know who you are. You're a man what owes us a big bill and won't pay us a cent of it. Therefe' we she ain't going to let you have nothing else on credit 'til you pays up for what you is done already got.'
"With that he got mad and cussed us all out. He told us he was going to have the lay sent out here to close us up.
“ 'Naw, sir,' I told him, 'You cain't do that, 'cause We ain't done nothing for the lay to close us up for.'
"Then he started in on Bill. Well, Bill has worked around white wen so much that he knowed just how to handle that old drunk. He said: 'Come on, Mr. Fields, gat in my nice new ear and let's go see how it rides. Maybe we can get you a sandwich sons place else if Geraldine won't let ns have nothing here.’ That pleased him and he got in our ear and quick as he could Bill took him hone and turned him over to his wife.
"We don't 'low no roughstuff pulled around our stand, and we try to conduct it our white friends will not be ashamed to come here when they want some she 'nough good barbecue. To serve our customers who prefer it delivered to their homes or offices, we keep three de-livery boys, and our deliveries range as far out as Five Points."
Bill had caught up with the rush of his work and there hadn't been a phone call for several minutes, so he took advantage this opportunity to join the conversation.
"Miss, this is one busy place, 'specially 'round the middle of the day," he said. "Me and Geraldine are mighty glad to see business so good and we don't care how busy it keeps us. We likes it. First and last, we have lets of experiences of one sort and another as we go about our business. Geraldine could tell you about them better'n I can perhaps. In good weather we do all our barbecuing out-of-doors, but when it rains and the wind is high we have to do all the cooking inside the stand on the stove you see over there. We try to keep our place mighty nice and clean, and even if we didn't do that because we like to have it that way, we'd have to clean up regularly anyway, 'cause the city inspects this place just like they does the places run by the white folks.
"I ain't never been to school much, and I wish I could have finished high school. I can talk better than I can write end figger, and while I may be a little slow at figgering up an account, there's one thing she, folks eain't cheat me and think I don't know about it. Geraldine here, has a good head on her shoulders, so betwixt the two of us, we figgers things out pretty well. It took lots of sacrificing on our part to pay for the stand where we do business, and it's taken a good deal more scrimping and saving to be able to hold on to our business after we once got it started, but it has been worth it all.
"Geraldine and ne belongs to the Baptist Church, and I reckon you'll find more Baptists among the colored race than any other denomination.
We goes to church as often as we can - mostly at night. We'se up se late ever' Saturday night that we has to spend a good deal of Sunday morning catching up with our sleep. During the week we open our stand around 9 or 10 o'clock la the morning, but on Sunday we just stay open a few hours at different times of the day.
Now, Miss, I 'spects I done told you'bout all I knows. As to how much I takes in ever' day, I couldn't 'zactly say, and I don't see no need to say nothing 'tout how much we paid for this corner lot. Course wouldn't mind you knowing the figgers, tout I don't see no need in talking 'bout that with so many folks coming and going somebody is bound to hear what I say to you and you know how toad folks is about telling all they knows, 'specially when it's something that ain't none of their "business. Now, if you'll 'sense me. I got to go to town and tony me some meat to barbecue. Good-bye Miss, if I can help you out with your story come on back and I'll help you all I can toward straightening it out. "I thanked him and he left.
"Miss," said Geraldine, "I know we's told you all we could think of, tout you know it's been such a busy time ever since you got here and we's had to atop to wait on folks so often, that we got off the track of what we was saying more'n once. When you go to git it all together, if you need us to ' splain anything, come right back and me and Bill will be glad to help you. I got to git busy now cooking dinner. I have tried this whole morning to git these here fishes cleaned and cooked, and I've had at least a dozen calls for liver at the lunch counter, since I sold the last piece of it I had cooked up. These white folks around here ore do eat up liver fast as I can keep it cooked for 'em."
In an otherwise identical version the last line on page 2317 is: "I thanked her and left."
I gathered up my note book and made my way to the front door. "Miss,” Geraldine solicited, "if you ever feels like you wants a good dinner don't want to cook it, phone me and I'll send it to you, and you'll find it as clean and nice as any food you could git any place also. Some of the nicest white people in this town sends us their calls for lunches to be sent out to their offices and hones, and to tell the truth the white folks buys more of our barbecue than the Negroes does.”
<text not clear>
