[North Carolina]
White & <text not clear>
January, 28.
I. L. M. [Ida L. Moore]
There's Always A Judas
"He preaches because he's got the gift of preachin, it's not from education for he never got none."
Molly Connley picked up a little blue flowered scrap, and a little pink-flowered scrap, and with minute attention fitted their edges together. She squinted her eyes, selected the exact spot for a beginning point, and plied her needle along the cloth edge. "He's out avisitin' the sick but I 'low he'll be in before long if you care to wait. This is what you call a double weddin' ring quilt. You can't get no idea of it from these little scraps, but here's how it looks when it's pieced up." She unfolded the half-finished quilt which lay on the nearby chair. "See, the curve on this square joins with the curve in this here square to make a ring. Flowered ring and solid center. Then these bigger squares makes a ring around the first. A ring inside a ring. That's how come they named it the double weddin' ring. Used to, I never had no time for fancy quilt piecin'. I just made cover. But this year, stayin' with Annie and the preacher they aint so much work for me to do like it was on the farm. Nothin' but housework and Annie does the biggest part of it. Course, hit's a big house but taint so hard to keep because hit's full of conveniences.
"The company furnishes a house for all its preachers rent free. Good ones too, good as bossmen's houses. We've got a furnace but we've not had cause to use it much this winter. The grate'll warm up this room where we set most of the time when the weather aint rough and hit's a sight cheaperin' usin' the furnace."
On this day a fire glowed brightly in the grate and furnished sufficient warmth for the big room. It was a pleasing room with a rich dark green rug covering the floor and heavy net curtains at the windows. A flowered studio couch occupied the space underneath the double front windows. On one side of the room stood a cabinet radio, and across from it a maple desk served as a filing place for many church papers, important telephone numbers, and notes of various kinds. Above the desk hung the Biblical promise, "I will supply thy needs." This room in which Molly and sat was the family living room and it opened through sliding doors into the heavily furnished parlor through which Molly had conducted me a few minutes before.
"Annie was the first of my children to come to the cotton mill," Molly was saying as she searched among her scraps for the color she desired. "I had a sister that had done give up the farm for the mill and when she come avisitin' us one summer she said to Annie, 'Since you've had that paralysis and can't stand no hot sun why don't you just come on down to the mill with me.' Doctors here said since, Annie never had no real paralysis; her trouble was caused from a nerve gettin' killed in her jaw when she had a abscessed tooth taken out. It left her mouth twisted and one of her eyes so it don't focus with t'other one. She was eighteen year old then and that summer she wan't a bit account for field work. Seemed like the hot sun would throw her into a spell if she went out in it for any time atall. We never had what you'd call a big farm up there in the mountains of Burke County and it took all hands aworkin' to make a livin'. I studied about what my sister said to Annie and I told her I 'lowed it wouldn't hurt her none to go and try the mill. So when Sister Ola went back to Hickory, Annie went with her.
"Annie done right well in the mill from the first. She'd worked there five year before her and the preacher was married. He wan't a preacher then, just a 18 year-old-boy workin' in the mill beside her and attendin' her Sunday School class of a Sunday. Annie said she'd noticed he could answer might nigh every question in the lesson and it surprised her some to find out after they was married that he could bare read and write.
"It was his good recollection that helped him out with his Sunday School lesson. A body could read it to him and he could tell it off of a Sunday like he was the best reader in the neighborhood. I noticed what a good recollection he had the first time I ever met him. I'd come down to Hicory to be with Annie when her first babye come and I said to her one day, "Hit wouldn't surprise me none to see you make a preacher out of him if you was to try. When I go back I'll send you the Bible story book we've got at home and you can read him them stories till you learn him to read 'em hisself. I done what I told her I would and the next time I seen him-that was when the second baby come-he was right well learnt up on the Bible.
"Annie says David was around twenty-three when he first commenced to talk about feelin' the call to preach. It disturbed her mightly because no matter how much she prayed she couldn't see no way openin' up for startin' him in the ministry. But she give him what encouragement she could and times come now and agin' when he was called on to do lay preachin'. Deacons begin to take notice of him and some said he had the power.
"David was might nigh thirty when a accident happened to him that made up his mind. The mill had been closed for ten days, short orders I reckin'-and David had held a meetin' of a nightime'. The tenth tight brought more conversions than air other and the folks wan't willin' for the meetin' to close, but David worked on the night shift and he never knowed how to go about askin' his boss for time off considerin' the mill had been astandin' for ten days. All day long he tried to get his own consent to lay out that night but he couldn't. He went to work. His job was up on the second floor of the mill and he'd started down the stairs to see a fellow on the first floor. He hadn't more'n put his foot on the top step when he got tripped up some way and fell down them steps, the basement steps, and right on to the cement floor. Hit broke his hip bone and when they carried him home the first thing he said to Annie was, "I ought to been at church.' He'll tell you hisself that while he lay up in bed with(broke hip he wrestled with the proposition, fightin' agin it, and finally one day when he was might nigh dead with pain he says, 'Lord, I surrender, I'll fight the call no longer.'
"As I said before he never had no education much but he's done a sight of studyin' since he took up preachin'. Then, ever year since he's been ordained he's got his congregation to send him off on a trip and travellin' helps him a whole lot. He'll go to the Association and hear big preachers talk and recollect might nigh everything they say.
"The first trip he took was to Washington, D. C. It was the year Annie's last baby, her fourth, was born and she was in bad shape. I'd been there with her for two weeks already and I knowed I was needed back home; But the Preacher, he had his mind so set on his trip-his congregation had the money ready for him-hit didn't seem like I could knock him out of it by leavin' Annie. I figgered the schoolin' he'd get from a trip like that would do him so much good I was bound to help out all I could. So I stayed with Annie and he went to Washington. He aint failed a trip air year since.
"Travellin's more common than it used to be anyhow. I was a middle-aged woman with a house full of children before I ever left Burke County. My man had done a right smart knockin' around before we was married. He was pretty Irishy. Now, Pa, he was a right smart Dutchy. There's the preacher now I think. Sounds like his step."
The doors slid open and I looked up to see the preacher standing in the room. Molly introduced him and he came foward with outstretched hand, "Sister, I'm glad to you," he said in a voice of oily smoothness. Walking with incredible lightness for his size, he made his way over to the couch and sat down.
The Rev. David Cooke was a big, ruddy faced man, neatly groomed in a dark blue suit, white shirt, and freshly-polished black shoes. His whole appearance was one of abundant vitality ill concealed under a subdued surface- manner which could be worn or removed as the occasion demanded. He was soon speaking with great readiness of his work as a pastor.
"Yessum, I'm pastor of the Baptist church right across the street, a church with a membership of five hundred and eighteen. After I baptize what was converted at a meetin' a few weeks ago it'll run us up to five hundred and twenty-five. That is the biggest flock I've ever been pastor for though in my years of preachin' I've seen hundreds of souls brought to Christ. We got our start in meetins and for many a year we fought against full-time service to the Lord. But we surrended after a accident that happened to us when we ought to been at church. We said, 'Lord, we are yours. We depend on thy promise, 'Follow me and I will supply thy needs.' We've been given the necessities though we haven't made the money we might've made if we'd stayed in the mills.
"I'der probly been a super some-where by now if I hader stuck to the mill. I'll be forty if I live to see June and at thirty-two when I quit to give my life to full-time preachin' I'd worked up to overseer of the weave-room.
"I entered the mill at fifteen and learnt fast. I'd seen hard times on the pore little farm where my father was strugglin' along with us six children and him ownin' nothin' but one little plug of a mule and a homemade carryall. I worked hard in the mill and they soon took me off sweepin' and put me to weavin'. From weavin' I went to fixin' looms. Durin' war times I worked in the company store of the Brookford mill at Hickory. When I went back in the mill it wasn't long till they put me on as second hand and in a few more years I was overseer. Yessir, I sacrificed to preach the gospel but the reward has been great. I was savin' many souls even before I was ordained.
"The first meetin' we held after bein' licensed was in a county schoolhouse between Mooresville and Statesville. The county commissioners had the partition between the two rooms removed throwin' the little schoolhouse into one big room. They built me a Bible stand out of a hickory log. 'We turn it over to you, Brother Cooke,' they said, and Sister, I'm tellin' you that was a soul-stirring meetin'. The opening night we had four preachers settin' in the congregation listenin' to us and at first we was a little scared. We stayed pretty close around the hickory log till we begin to feel the power and then we gained confidence. We preached a sermon that brought 'em to the mourner's bench. The whole entire meetin' netted some thirty-five souls for the Kingdom.
"Three years later we was ordained. Since then we've had a regular church, five years at Pamona and three right here. Of course we don't know how much longer the people will want us but they seem to like us mighty well. The newt brick church across the street has been built since we've been on this charge.
"This company is the most liberal in its gifts to the churches of any I know of. For buildin' a new church they put up four dollars to ever one a congregation can raise provided the church is put on the company's premises. And then ever year they give $500 on the pastor's salary, treatin' one and all alike. Baptist, Presbyterian, and Church of God. Then there's special times when they give too. If I was to go to Mr. Herman Cones and say, 'Mr. Herman Cones, the people of my church has sent me to ask you for fifty dollars. We need so and so and we don't feel like the church can get along without it but the congregation can't raise the money. If I was to do that I'd go away with fifty dollars. They don't let the churehes suffer. And our church, Sister, does what it can to keep the people from sufferin'.
"There's hardly a week passes we don't pound somebody in need. The deacons stand at the church door some Sundays and either take a special money collection or a collection of groceries. Sometimes the brothers and sisters meet here at the parsonage durin' the week, bringin' groceries to pound someone that's been out of the mill sick for two or three weeks.
"This company is awful opposed to any of its people gettin' help from the county or city welfare and that makes a big responsibility for the churches. Of course I guess you know the company has its own welfare department, a nurse that goes around and tells you when you need a doctor, and a social worker that reports any real bad needy cases she finds. If there's cases the church and the community club just absolutely can't take care of the company sometimes lends a little assistance. We've found it right strainin' in our church to look after all the calls we've had for help. Our church pays us a salary of $2060 a year. Maybe you're familiar enough with the gospel work to know that pastor's salary is only a part of church expense. But Sister, this congregation has never sent me to association with a backward record. And not once have they waited till Monday morning to pay thin pastor. $40 is put in my hands every Sunday night as regular as the weeks come and go.
"Not long ago we felt the need of new song books. We wanted 200. They cost $90. We said to our congregation when the service was over. Now all that will give fifty cents rise to your feet. Next; all will give forty cent stand up and lets see whose heart is right. We got the ninety dollars.
"Now we preach tithing to our people. We preach it because it's New Testament gospel and we believe in it. We think that a Christian should try to give a tenth of his wage to promote the Kingdom of Christ. But when we go to many of our people they say, 'Preacher! we don't have nothin' to give. We had to pay the furniture man, the grocery man, the insurance man, and there's not a brownie left.' We know it's true and we don't nobody out for it but we do keep after them to give. 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.' It's a idea we think should be kept before church people."
The Rev. David Cooke arose from the couch, strode across the room, picked up the coal scuttle and stood before the grate, scuttle tilted, gazing for a moment into the fire. With measured deliberation he poured coal into the grate, returned the scuttle to its corner, and brushed his hands one against the other. There was about the whole performance an air which made of it a ceremony enjoyed rather than a task performed. The Rev. David Cooke resumed his seat just as his wife came into the room.
The introductions over, Annie sat down in the chair close to her mother. "The Estes are in need," she said to David. "It means another poundin' I'm afraid, and the people have just about pounded out."
Martha who had been quiet for so long a time peered up over the rim of her glasses to speak. "In lots of ways these times is better to live in than the days when I growed up, but in a few ways the old times was best. Then, folks, home folks could manage to get along without askin' for help. We never knowed anything about unemployment, and now livin's hard on them without jobs in a time when they've got no manner of means of makin' a livin'. If I've got to be pore I'd rather been pore then way back on a little farm where I done nothin' but work to store back bread and meat and beans for the winter, than to be pore at a mill or any kind of industrial where my livin' ended when the wheels stopped turnin'."
The preacher cleared his throat. "I don't know whether you know it or not, young woman, but cotton mill people live a week at a time and always a week behind. From Thursday to Thursday is the way it runs here. This Thursday when they draw their pay they pay for what they bought last Thursday. That's why they get so scared when for one cause or another the mill closes for a week or more. They don't have nothin' to carry them over."
With a quick, jerky motion Annie adjusted her glasses. Then she began to speak in a slow, deliberate voice, her words, because of her infirmity, coming out of the side of her mouth and giving to them a muffled yet weighty sound. "That's why the people lost in the strike last summer. That's why after bein scared for a whole week they said, 'We'll go back to work. A half a loaf is better than no bread atall."
"Mother is right," the preacher said. "Of course we tried not to take sides in the strike, our work not bein' mill work but the salvation of souls, it was natural though, us bein' their pastor, that many of the bretheren would come to us and talk their troubles over with us. We give them what comfort we could." He was speaking in a new voice now, a voice emanating from a never disturbed belief in the wisdom of its owner. It was so sure of itself that the preacher talked on like an actor speaking his piece. "We stayed in our house and said nothin' that could be called takin' sides. We told the children not to talk and Mother, she said nothin'. But while that strike was goin' on we done a lot of thinkin'. We decided the South ought to be organized, but how? There's always a Judas to sell his people out. He'll get into the Union and find out its secrets. Then he'll go to the company man and whisper in his ear, 'They're organizin'. They're plannin' to strike when you cut again.' Why does he do it? I don't know and you don't know but gifts can be give at other times than Christmas. The people are cut, they walk out, sayin' among themselves, 'We can't live on no less. We won't let nobody go in that mill to work until we get our old wage back.' What happens? The mill owner with his foot on the head of the law asks for help to open up his mill to let his people work, or he asks for help to keep his mill closed if that be his will at that time. whichever may his fancy goes he gets the help. The law comes out and fortifies him against the people. Ah, Sister, it's a hard thing to do to get ahead of a power like that.
"What happened here last summer? When the cardroom struck the boss-men said, "All of you might just as well go home, the mill can't run without the cards.' Many folks that hadn't aimed to strike atall went home. The company could've found plenty willin' to work to run one shift but they didn't do that. They closed down all of the mill. The people begin to think, 'We'll just stay out till they promise not to cut, we'll join the Union, we'll be took care of. They was out a week and much talkin' went on. Groups met here and there and a speaker would get up and make a speech, 'Do you want Lewis or do you want Cones?' they'd say. 'The mill will open when the people answer.' At first the people didn't care to make a answer because they thought they had a chance of winnin'. Provisions would be give them by the Union or the unemployment compensation, they didn't know which.
"The week went by and all the stores except the company stores cut off their credit. 'We can't give you credit except when you're workin' they said. There was much excitement in the land and fear begin to creep in.
"Then while folks was still tryin' to get a little hope to hold on to a delegation went to Raleigh. They went down there and said, 'Mr. Hoey, the people of the Cones mills has sent us to ask you for aid and assistance in openin' the mills. The people want to go back to work but we don't want to have no trouble with the roughnecks that may try to stop us.'
"Now Mr. Hoey bein' a big industrial himself up there at Shelby- just like Max Gardner before him-said to the delegation, 'The government of N. C. will give what assistance is needed.
"The same day the delegation come home a piece come out in the paper here saying the people had stated their desire to go back to work and the mill would open up Monday. Scores of people had signed the paper they took to Raleigh without knowin' what was in it. Some of 'em even signed a blank piece of paper and was told by the fellow signin' 'em up it was just a way of seein' how many folks wanted their jobs back. They didn't actually know what was goin' on till they read the piece in the paper. But they knew then they was defeated. They tore up their cards, their Union cards, and they cried, 'Give us Cones.' And among themselves they muttered, 'A half a loaf is better than no bread atall.' So the company started their wheels again with the promise of a bean, a bean today, a bean tomorrow, but never two beans on the same day. Aye, Sister, it's a proposition. Bondage, slavery, a bean. The multi-million-airy is hard to beat."
The pause was dramatic, filled with power.
"Old Caesar Cones when he lived, cried, 'These are my people, my very own.' It His easy to cry, 'These are my people,' when you take the butter from the biscuits and give the people dry crumbs, crumbs, crumbs from Dives table.
"As the people went back to work that Monday mornin' I thought of a joke I heard at the association a few years back. This was durin' slavery time, a old colored man named <text not clear> belonged to his Marster John, Marster John beat pore old Daniel might nigh every day and the old nigger not able to help hisself no way took to prayin'. Late of a evenin' he'd go down to a big oak tree in the paster and he'd talk with the Lord. 'Dear Lord,' he'd say, 'Pore old Daniel is treated mean and beat like a hound dog. Won't you come, high Marster, and take old Daniel home.' Well, one day Marster John overheard Daniel at his prayers. The next day while the old man was still at work he clumb up in the tree and hid hisself amongst the leaves. Daniel come and prayed his same old prayer. And when he'd finished, a voice spoke soft-like from the tree, 'Allright, Daniel, I'll come for you and take you home if that's what you want.' And soon as the old nigger could make his voice speak he said, 'Lord, high Marster, can't you take a joke?'"
The preacher waited for each of us to grasp the significance of his joke. When he <text not clear> each of us had followed <text not clear> with a gesture of resignation he declared, "That's the people, that's the people." In a leisurely manner he indulged in a series of deep chuckles. While he seemed to be contemplating the reopening of conversation Annie spoke.
"Old Daniels prayer, and specially the end of it, was pitiful," she declared, "but while we was at Pamona I heard the most pitiful and the most beautiful prayer I ever heard in my life."
The preacher cleared his throat with considerable emphasis. He ran his finger around his collar and then straightened his tie. "When was that Mother?"
"Durin' the end of Hoover's time and on into Roosevelt's time, Annie remarked, turning toward me, "Me fed from two to three people a day that was passin' through Ramona, people that had been throwed out of their joke and <text not clear> their women. One day there come a crowd of six men, six jobless men. That was the day that the whole family cried. We took them in and fed them, they could hardly talk, only one man kept saying, 'I've got a Christian wife at home and three babies. I've got nothin' to give them. They seems to be no sort of job in the land for me.' He had old pieces of shoes tied on with a string. He was the one that stumbled in the door when he turned around to thank me. He stepped on the end of the string and it broke. I never have forgot how he looked when he asked me for a string."
Annie's voice was unsteady now and she paused for a long, unquiet minute.
"But what I started out to tell," she was saying presently, "was about the old man come by one day when David wasn't at home. I didn't make no pratice of askin' 'em in the house when David wasn't there, but this time I said to the children, 'He's old and I'm goin' to fetch him in to the table.' He set there in the kitchen lookin' while I fixed his plate, never sayin' a word, but when he set down to the table and looked at his food he begin to pray. Every word of his prayer has stayed with me like no other prayer X ever heard. I stopped right still in the doorway when he commenced and listened, feelin' like I never could move again. This is what he said, 'God in Heaven, it's good to be settin' at a table and eatin' victuals agin. I've got no work and I'm agettin' old. The mill's done with me. I'm weary and footsore, Lord, and I'm not knowin' where on the face of the earth I ought to go. I'd like yore guidance, God, and I'll try to listen. I'll ask you now to bless this kind woman that fixed these victuals."' He eat his meal while the tears streamed down in his plate. He never spoke no more till he got ready to leave. All he said then was, 'Thank you, kind woman, and God bless you.'"
Two tears dropped down on Annie's hand. She turned her head sidewise and looked out of the window. I directed my gaze toward Martha who at that moment pushed her glasses on to her forehead and wiped her eyes with the back of her hand. When I looked again she was with close absorption pushing the edges of two little scraps of cloth together. Annie, her voice slow and even was speaking again.
"The people have suffered, Lady. Many of the people are sufferin' still. Somethin' is going to happen and I don't think it's far off. You can keep pushin' people to the wall but when they get close against the wall they'll turn and fight. The pore man is beginnin' to think as I never knew him to think before that the law is against him and there's no reason for him to respect it. A man we knew in Pamona had to move away from the mill and finally he found a little shack out in the country but the country itself had nothing for him. He'd been a good man at the mill, a respected citizen. I was at his home a year later when his daughter lay dead. He said to me when the two of us was in the room talkin', 'I've done time on the road since you last seen me. My wife was sick and she was sick-pointin' at his dead daughter-and I sold liquor to buy them bread. There's a hundred men in Greensboro that's done worse but they're men of money, men that pushes me and the other little men to break the law, but the law'll never touch 'em. As long as I live I'll never have no respect for the law agin.' I was able to understand that man as I set there listenin' to him and I had only pity in my heart for him."
The preacher arose from his seat and in his ceremonious way replenished the fire.
"I am reminded now," he began on his way back to his seat, "Of what I told my congregation after I come home from Washington, D. C. They had sent me up there to the presidental inaugural of Mr. Roosevelt and I was relatin' to them what I'd seen and heard. I begin with tellin' 'em this joke on Hoover.
Hoover was out fishin and his boat turned over. A old fisherman was out there closely in a little bitty boat. He run his boat over to where Hoover man Diard Tugged him in. When Hoover found but he her safe and <text not clear> said to the man, 'You've been a hero and I'll give you a medal for this, a fine gold medal. I'll have it engraved, To So and So from Herbert Hoover. The fisherman looked at the president and he said, 'Near mind about the medal All the reward I ask of you is don't squeal on me and let the country Know I saved you.'
"Of course they got to laughin' at that and then I went on to say, 'We went on the Rocks with Hoover, folks, and lots of us might've felt just like the fisherman. But as I stood up there in that vast throng watchin' Hoover go out and Mr. and Mrs. Roosevelt come in, I felt like weepin', I thought, one man of big promises goes out and another comes in, and like always the people go on in need. When the people is helped, it'll be when they've waked up to their rights.'
"Not long after that I preached my sermon from the fifth chapter of James. And I'll tell you, Sister, when you get to foolin' around James you're tramplin' on everbody. It sets down hard on the rich-ah, what it says about the million-airy is enough to set the woods on fire-I'll say this much for the Cones: there's never been one word of complaint from the company about that sermon and it's got many a sting in it too. Let me get my Bible; I'll read that text to you."
The preacher secured his Bible from the desk, sat down in a vacant chair near the fireplace, and wit use strained eagerness turned the pages until he came Jo the gospel of James. His eyes were bright like two flames now and when he read his voice was a sonorous flowing sound. "'Go now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you.
'Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten.'" He read on for six or seven verses and then with great solemnity closed the Bible. "After finishin' with that scripture," he was saying, "I begin to preach. I say, 'Do the multi-million-aries of our country have a hard time now? No,' I answer, 'They have their palaces, they have their servants, they can write a check for a million dollars. But the day will come, Brothers and Sisters, the day will come. You run their looms, you run their cards, you keep their yards, and you live on a little weekly wage. And this is where I start to warmin' up, Sister. Then I say, 'But what does the holy Bible teach. Hell fire is waitin' to receive the rich man who gives no thought to his soul but spends his time fillin' his storehouses with earthly goods, and you, you, the faithful are storin' up treasures in heaven where neither moth nor must doth corrupt and thieves do not break through to steal. Yes mam, I preach hell, and I don't mean maybe, because it's there, it's all the way through that Book. That's straight talkin', Sister, but I've never been called down for it yet."
"I don't reckin," Annie said slowly, "they calculate a sermon like that'll do 'em much harm. It's time I was startin' supper. You just set on in here with the preacher. It won't take me long to fix what I'm going to have."
"I'll be in to help you t'rectly," Martha said, gathering up her work box. Think I'll go up stairs and see if I can't find some yellow scraps. I've not got enough yellow in it yet."
Martha and Annie had both gone about their duties and the preacher sat gazing into the fire. "Sister," he said presently, "a pastor sees and hears many sad things as he goes about the Kingdom's work. Not long before Christmas a man and his wife come to me, both of 'em cryin' soon as they commenced talkin', and they said, 'Brother Cooke, we want you to come and reason with our two daughters. They're not livin' right and the company has said unless they change their ways we'll have to move out of the village. It don't seem like we can pay big house rent out of what we make. It's just lately they've took to runnin' around and if you'll talk to 'em and reason with 'em maybe you can get 'em to give up their life of sin.'
"I went and talked with them girls, both of 'em nice-lookin' girls- and they promised to come to church. They haven't been there yet. About two weeks later the old man and woman come back and asked me if I'd try to persuade the super to let 'em stay on in their house. So I went to him and stated my business and his answer was, 'What can you do with the girls?' I told him I could go once more and read the Bible to 'em and pray with 'em but he said he thought it was too late. They moved out of the village a week after Christmas.
"Now, I'm not one to be hard on folks that goes astray because I know the flesh is weak. I'd do all I could to help a fallen brother back on the straight and narrow path, but so many folks, Sister, is just too willin' to give 'em a kick to send 'em deeper into sin. You take me, I'm a strong healthy man, full of blood, just full of blood, never been sick a day in my life, feel good all the time. Well, Mother, she's a weakly woman, and a pastor meets all kinds of folks, them up in society and them out of society. Sister, I resists temptation every day of my life, but I don't believe in bein' too hard on them that hasn't had enough grace to stand firm. A pastor's life aint a easy one, but we've been rewarded for all the sacrifices we've ever made for the Kingdom.
"Forty dollars a week may sound like a right smart money but it aint so much for a pastor. He's got more expense than a laborin' man. He's got to be dressed up. Who wants his pastor goin' around lookin' like a hobo? I've said lots of times I'd like to sit around home in my overalls but it wouldn't do. I've got to have three suits cleaned a week and then these shirts costes me sixteen cents apiece to have 'em done up. Mother, she's not able to wash and iron."
The loud buzzing sound of the doorbell broke the silence and David Cooke got up to answer the door. Presently his silken, shepherd's voice was floating into the room. "Come in Sister Michael, come in Brother Michael. Right on in here by the fire."
After introductions Mr. and Mrs. Michael seated themselves on the couch." He come down to build a fire in the church," the woman explained "and we thought we'd just stop by till time for choir practice."
"Glad you come, Sister Michael, glad you come," the preacher assured her. "I reckin you'll use the new songbooks tonight, Brother Michael?"
"Yes, I guess we will."
"Fine, fine. You'll see that they're gathered up afterwards and put in my study won't you, Brother Michael?"
"I'll 'tend to that."
"Brother Michael is sure a big help to a pastor. We've got as fine a congregation as you'll find anywhere here at White Oak. Generous hearted people, now is the collection for pastor's expense to the association coming along, Brother Michael?"
"A little slowern' it was this time last year, preacher. Course, the cut last summer has put most members behind. Then, we've had a lot of poundins lately, besides the money we had to raise for the song books."
The preacher smiled and looked at Brother Michael. "The White Oak Baptists will come across though. They've never failed us yet, not a single time, we reap so much from the association and we try to bring the benefits home to our people. The White Oak Baptists likes to keep up with the times."