LIFE HISTORY 3900 words
(Date of gathering of material) - 1 May and 17 May, 1939.
(Name of writer) - Jeanne deLavigne Scott, 532 St. Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Name and address of person written about) - Louis Huber, 3520 Parisavenue, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Profession of person written about) - Truck gardener.
“PEOPLE PLANT TOO DAMN MUCH …”
The first time we talked with LouisHuber, was at the Farmers’ Market Section of the historic Old French Market in New Orleans. Huber is a truck gardener, and he was bringing in a load of green stuff in his Ford sedan. The rear seat had been removed, and in its place was a great mound of green leaves --- eight dozen bunches of crisp spinach, he said there were, eyeing the massruefully; besides two great sacks of snap beans. They made an emerald heap on the banquette, but Huber shook his head at them.
"Trouble is," he sighed, scratching his head, "'people plant too damn much. The prices are low--- terrible low, what we git. Look at that spinach, now--- I'll git fifteen cents for a dozen bunches, and not much for the beans. Truck gardenin' don't pay now-days. It's terrible hard work, too. But I'd rather do gardenin' than anything else. I'm used to it."
He is German, and his small figure was enveloped in blue shirt and overalls. His pleasant, tanned face was puckered into countless wrinkles, and his hands bore evidence of many years' toil in the garden rows.
At his house, on another day, Mrs. Hubor welcomed us in her quiet, almost inarticulate way. She never has learned to be a talker. Probably she has been too busy. The phrases come slowly, little by little, as shes its on the davenport in the living-room. Her brown hair is done in a knot at the back of her modest head, and her reddened fingers worry her handkerchief. Her mouth is inclined to smile, and she looks straight at you with honest, level eyes.
"My husband," she begins, clipping her words a little, in the German way, "was born the fourth of March, 1881, here in New Orleans. His father was Frank Huber, and he died in 1922. Louis’ mother was Frances Reiser, and she died in 1924. They used to have this same truck garden, and I guess that's what givemy husband the idea. They lived fifty years on three-quarters of a square, in a house that still stands there. They never owned the house, though. When they died, the ground was divided up. Louis works part of the same ground now, but he doesn't own it. He works about six lots over there, and his brother-in-law works part of it. It's the brother-in-law that owns the mules.
"You can see the garden out there across the canal. You have to get down the canal bank and cross on a wooden beam, and then climb up oh the other side to the road. But that's easier than going two or three blocks to a crossin'. They've oiled the roads, and 0 my, they're a mess!You git your feet in it and you track it all over everything. Better than the dust? Yes, of course it is.
"Louis owns six lots a ways from here --- Shirley'll take you over there after a while. She's one of the grandchildren, and she's ten. Across the canal we raise looks, mint, snap beans, merlitons, thyme, sweet corn, radishes, spinach, mustard, (that is, when the lice don't eat it), beets, carrots, egg plants, and sometimes turnips, when the bugs don't git 'em. The bugs make it tough going ---they’s always bugs.
“My husband worked with the Sewerage and Water Board until 1929. Then he was laid off, and he rented the ground across the road for a truck garden. We were married in 1906. My name was Pauline Philebar, and I was born in New Orleans on October twenty-second, 1884. First we lived on Broad street, in town, and then on Orleans street. Then we moved back here, across the road there, at the back of the garden ground, in 1916. We built this house in 1928.
"We had two boys, and they’re both married now and have children of their own. William was born on May thirtieth, 1907, and Edward was born on the eleventh of January, 1909. William and his wife and family live in the other half of this house.
It makes it nice for all of us, and so nice to have the children around. We have a parlor, a bedroom, a bathroom, and a kitchen. No dining-room --- we eat in the kitchen. But across the whole back of the house there used to be a porch. When William got married to Edna Holzer in 1928, we thought It would be so nice to have them in the other side of the house, so they moved in there. They have two --- little Bill is eight, and Shirley is ten. When they came and began to grow up, we made the back porch into a big bedroom and playroom. Come and see it --- it's all green paint, and bright and airy and a good place to play when it rains. That was the trouble before --- when it rained, everything got all wet. Now it's tight and dry, and they have good times here.
"Edward married Gladys Thiel in 1931, and they live at 123 South Clark street, in town. They have two little folks, too --- little Edward is seven and Robert is three. It's nice to have grandchildren. We're all mixed, as to nationality. My father came from Germany. There were three children in my husband's family, but one died. He has one sister still living. In my family there was nine children --- I had three brothers and five sisters.
"We've got a good big yard here. You can see the big mulberry tree … and over there is a peach tree, and a good fig tree. We have about twenty chickens, and Shirley's got two baby ducks --- a yellow one and a brown one. There's the car in the garage … he uses it for taking stuff to market. He's got an old truck, too, but half the time It's broke. It ain't no good. Yes, we've got a telephone and a radio. But we don't play the radio much. Sometimes. I don't like the jumpy, squawky music they play mostly now --- toot-toot-toot, all the time. They ain't no music to it.
"Louis went to Gentilly School when he was small. He didn't go far --- about the Fourth Grade, I guess, I don't know. But he don't know much. After you make your communion, you don't have to go to school. I went to St. Rose of Lima school, to about the Fifth Grade. When I went to school you had to pass the book three times before you got out of that grade. If the rest was slow, you had to stay behind on account of them. We had one teacher for the whole school --- not a Sister. Louis said that if he didn't know his lessons, the teacher would chase him into a tree, and he'd stay there instead of taking a lickin'. They had one teacher for the whole school, too. If a child wants to learn, he’ll learn.
“We're Catholic--- all of us has been Catholics all our lives. We go to St. Leo's Church. Yes, I make all my own clothes. That saves quite a good deal. We don't go to shows. They make your eyes hurt, anyway, and they cost money. You go to a show and you come homs, and what have you got? Nothing. We go to church --- that's our entertainment. Sometimes we go to the lake and walk around --- just walk around; not any of those picnics --- they just wear you out.
“I don't never waste anything … but we don't keep track. Sometimes I guess we make maybe four-and-a-half a week --- sometimes nothing, by the time we git through If you could sell a hundred dozen bunches of leeks at a time, and git a good price, you could save something. My!---if we had fifte on dollars a week comin' in clear! Why, any two people could live well on that much, if they didn't waste anything. The trouble is that most folks waste too much --- they throw away more than they use. And that don't pay. But they don't know no better, I guess.
"When the Depression come on, we had one of the boys still single, so that helped out some. We felt it, but of course not like some people. Some poor people never had nothing at all. Everything went down so, and we couldn't sell it. He used to bring it back home and throw it away.
"Him and I work in the garden, both of us. We do the best we can, him and I. The sun's getting hot now; but if we hire, it takes away all the profits. Colored boys don't do very well in the garden. I heard of a neighbor who went to market and sold his stuff for a dollar and a half; and by the time he'd bought feed for his horse, he went home with nothing.
“You see, you've got to have fertilizer --- that's the main thing. You can plow and water all you're a mind to, but things won’t grow good if you don't have fertilizer. And that's what costs the most. Manure is a dollar and a quarter a load, just to have it hauled. We get it from the milk-man, and you have to buy the whole pile. That costs about seven dollars, usually, and you'd have eight or ten loads. That's too much. Last year Louis hauled it himself. His brother-in-law had a mule and we got hissen. My husband hauled it in a dumpcart, and they was about fifteen loads. But he usually uses yellow meal --- cottonseed meal, that is. He uses a sack on every patch that he plows up. It has to go an every time the ground is plowed, and that's whenever a patch is empty. He plows with his brother-in-law's mules, and we manage to keep planting something all the year round.
"Families? Well, small families, big families --- you have to take what comes. They don't have big families now like they used to, though. I guess they an't afford ‘em. Now-days they have to buy everything they have; but they used to raise and make everything we had. Big families was cheaper then.
"No, ma'am, I don't smoke! I don't like to see women smoke --- I don't think it's decent. When I was young, no woman except a fast woman smoked ------ and we didn't go with that kind. Now they smoke all the time ---all the women. Me, I think it's a dirty habit for women. Louis smokes --- Just little cigarettes, and he makes 'em himself. I think that if all these women have money to buy cigarettes with, they ought not to feel that they’re in need. It's different with a man --- men always smoke, and it's all right* But it makes women look tough. I don't like it, me.
"Yes, we manage tomake both ends meet. We try to save a little something ---sometimes we do and sometimes we don't. But they's one thing we don't never do --- we don't run in debt. If we can't afford something, we just go without. It ain't so hard. It's a good deal easier than owing money and have somebody chasin' you for it.
"No, I ain't never voted. But Louis he's voted ever since he was twenty-one. He's always voted the Democratic ticket. What do we think of the Administration? Well, I don't know as we think anything about it. We don't pay any attention to politics. When the time comes, Louis votes. And between-times, we just take it the way it comes. You can't change it any, anyhow. But we sure do like Roosevelt. He's a mighty fine man. They don't git men like him very often, and I hope they keep him.
"I get so mad at my husband … He likes the gardening so well that he'd do it if he didn’t make a cent. He always says, 'Well, maybe I'll make something next time.’ He likes to raise leeks the best. They don't freeze in winter. Sometimes it gits pretty cold, and the merlitons and the snap beans they freeze. But not the leeks.
About seven blocks down the road, and over a little ways, he's got another garden on his own ground. There's a little house over back, too, with colored people living in it; and we own that. Maybe we'd better go and see the garden across the road now.” We crossed the canal, as she had said we would have to, and the oily road. There is a fence all overgrown with older berry buches and vines, and a gate. There is a long bed of sweet corn … and a bed of luxurious, spicy green mint, thirty feet long and store then six feet wide. Crisp and thick it is ...
"It's a pity," Mrs. Huber remarks, "that you can't sell mint now, when it's the nicest. It's just as tender as can be now --- the leaves is little and thin, and it's the best it is any time of the year. But you can't sell a stalk of it now. They want it around Christmas ------ and it's big and coarse then, and a lot of it's gone to seed even. You have to scratch and hunt then for nice tender stalks. But that's when they want it --- when it's hard to git. Of course, it higher then --- and that's good. But you can't sell much, for all you have. They ought to buy it new when it's so nice --- I hate to see things go so, but you can't make 'em buy if they don't 'want to. He has a few private customers --- people in their own houses. They like it, and he takes it around to them. But that takes too much time to do much of. They ought to buy it at the market, and have it; there for folks as they come along. I don't see why they don't. Ain't it nice, though? Sure, I'll out you a bunch of it."
She hurries to the shed where the knives and other garden implements are kept, bringing out a strip of latanier to wind around it. The pungent smell of the out mint assails the nostrils like dewy incense. Oh, to take the whole bed! The elder-berry bushes are in blossom. A bunch of endive, here and there, is going to seed, the stalk bright purple with blossoms. The path is grassy.
"Grass!"Mrs. Huber sniffs. “We always have to fight it out --- grass everywhere! It makes so much trouble. And there's these holes--- them's made by crawfishes. They go down so deep you never can git to the bottom of 'em. They’s white ones --- 'dead-men crawfish,’ we call 'em. They're always makin’ holes. Snakes do, too, but not so much as the crawfish. We plant radishes and mustard together, you see --- they're all little, in that bed there. First we plant the leek seed, and then when the little leeks git big enough so you can tell 'em apart, we transplant ‘em all into rows like you see. They're about ten inches high then, and before they're transplanted, each one has to be snipped off short at the top. It takes a lot of time, I tell you! You have to plant 'em, one by one --- it's hard on the back. Then you have to git in there and pick the grass out of 'em all the time, too. For the-mint, we usually git about two-bits a dozen bunches. Yes, it's good soil --- but the grass grows good in it, too.
"When the ground is wet, you can pull the leeks up, when they're ready for market But if it's dry, you have to git in with a knife and dig 'em out. That's hard work. You put five-six-seven in a bunch, according to the size. That's our brother-in-law and his son plowin' with the mules over there now. One's a real old mule, and he's a wise one. Louis pays five dollars a month for his share of this ground here.
"We've got kohlrabis, too --- a few. They're nice when they're big enough, but they don't soil very fast. We've got seven big beds of leeks here. Sometimes we raise about ten dozen merlitons in a season --- sometimes none at all. The stinkin' bugs--- them green, three-cornered kind --- eat most of 'em some years. It all depends on the bugs, a garden does. I guess they's about an acre in all here. We use city water --- that's some help. They's four faucets in this garden, and a long hose. We'd never git nothing if we had to depend just on the rains. You see, things has to grow fast or they ain't tender. Sometimes if they grow too slow, anyway, he has to plow 'em under. That helps fertilize, but it ain't makin’ anything for marketin’.
The water-grass is the worst --- it's tough, and the roots are deep and they hang on. Then there's blood-weed. The weeds grow easier than the garden plants do, seems like.
There are mulberry trees and fig trues over here, too. The unpainted picket fence is high and sound. Birds are chattering in the elderberry bushes. Then we go across the canal and down the road with Shirley. She is slender and straight, and is fond of conversation. Her red cotton dress swings in the wind, and her brown legs hurry down the path. She is full of news of the neighborhood … the priest of the colored church-school which we pass … the priest who was lazy and took no interest in the children … and the new priest who built swings and teeter-boards and a new green garage. Shrley heartily approves of this industrious man of God, as she heads toward Grandpa's other garden. She approves of camphor trees, too, and all gay flowers … especially red geraniums, which are in her own front flower-bed. "Grandpa" is away back in the garden lot, but he comes hurrying down the path between the leeks and the beets. Huber is at home here. He eyes his leeks affectionately, and pulls out a dry beet as he comes.
“I guess I forgot those few beets there," he chuckles. "I've got to plow ‘em under --- they ain't no good now. Been above the ground, and they're dry and tough. There's that chickory, too --- all gone to seed. You've got to pull it while it's young and tender --- don't git nothin' for it, though. Don't git much even when they sell it retail --- three heads for a nickel, and such. What kind of a price is that! I like the thyme and the spinach and the leeks. You can always sell spinach --- only when you have plenty, everybody else has plenty, and they won't pay nothin’. That's the trouble --- everybody's got things plenty at the same time. Now, if I was the only one that had spinach some day at the Market. I could git rid of it for a good price. But it ain’t never that way. The thyme and the mint, they're mighty nice, and they ought to sell better than they do.
"Thyme always goes to market on Thursdays --- four to six dozen bunches of it. I git ten cents a dozen bunches for it now. Sometimes it goes up. Maybe around Christmas I get maybe twenty-five, thirty-five, forty cents a dozen bunches.
"I use cottonseed meal here mostly. If you can afford manure, that lasts sometimes two or three years. It helps make real good soil. But this cottonseed meal--- we call it yellow meal --- that only lasts for three or four months, and then you have to use it again. I generally pay a dollar and a half for a sack of a hundred pounds. I hate summer --- but you got to work when you can. It gits so hot you can't hardly stand it, and the sun burns the garden stuff when it gits too hot, too.
"Sometimes I make ten dollars a week ---- but not very often. That's a good lot. Sometimes I don't make nothin' at all, what with the fertilizer and all. I wish I could make fifteen hundred a year --- I'd be settin’ pretty. What can we make, without little bit of junk here?
"But I like gardenin' --- I wouldn't do anything else if I could. I've got city water, and I've got the old truck out there, and I've got all these beds of stuff --- I like it. I like the leeks best, yes --- I've always liked 'em best. I don't know why --- I just seem more at home with 'em. They're more likely to make out than the other stuff--- you can always depend on leeks. They've got more grit. If the weather ain't very good, they keep right on growin'. And they'll sell if anything will. You see, thecooks are always makin' gumbo and such, and they have to have looks for it. Gumbo's mighty good … especially with plenty of leeks in it.
"The mint and the thyme, they're right straight along, year in and year out --- it's a matter of roots with them. Once they're planted and growin', they're set. But the rest of the stuff has its season, and then its over-with, and you have to plant another crop where it was. It's all an awful lot of work… But then, what ain't?"