Rose Shepherd
March 10, 1936.
Interview # 28.
II - HISTORICAL- (Quincy and Early Jacksonville)
PERSONAL INTERVIEW
Mrs. Florrie Towers Martin (Mrs. William G.)
3723 Hedrick-st.,
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mrs. Martin's great grand-father, Robert Towers, was one of the early settlers of Quincy, and his wife was a Mrs. DuPont, of the Delavare fussily, before she became Mrs. Towers. She was quite an artist, <text not clear> Mrs. Martin has in her possession a beautiful and unique
PICTURE - 150 years old
We work of this talented great-grand-mother. It is a pastoral setting, <text not clear> hunter and dogs in the foreground, with the mansion house and trees in the back-ground, showing ladies of the family on the balcony. The front of the figures are painted with indelible oils, while the coloring clothing of the hunter and the ladies, is done in brilliant embroidery. The picture is expensively framed and in perfects state of preservation.
Mrs. Martin herself is an artist of note, and the walls of r home are adorned with many beautiful examples of her work. She has Florida trees and shore-line scenes in abundance, but her preference is animals, in the painting of which she undoubtedly excels. Among these are barn-yard scenes of horses, cattle, chickens, birds, etc., with cats, kittens, dogs and puppies - some of the latter of recent date - forming a large collection.
Mrs. Martin was born in Quincy, coming to Jacksonville when she was about five years of age. The home was located on Washington Street, in what was at that time the choice residence section. The house was rebuilt after the big fire of 1901 - the Towers' home being the first erected after this catastrophe. Mrs. Martin says from the front door they could look Hast thru the old City Cemetery, and from the back, could see quite without obstruction clear to Broad-St. A large collection of family history, records, letters, etc., and fifteen of her valuable paintings were totally destroyed by the fire.
With strong affection for her birth-place, Mrs. Martin says: Quincy, to me, is the most beautiful place in Florida. It is one of the elder towns of the State, the County-seat of Gadsden County, twenty miles West of Tallahassee. My grand-father has killed deer and wild turkey on the site of the present Governor's mansion in Tallahassee, on annual hunting trips through that picturesque section. The country is hilly the soil clay of the reddest variety.
"Before the War between the States, each plantation consisted of many acres, the owners of which had slaves in large numbers, plenty of money and entertained in a lavish manner. Many of, these lovely celeries homes still stand, and the section has always been noted for its beautiful flowers and beautiful women.
"The War came and the young man were cheerful and marched eagerly away to "<text not clear>hip the Yankees in three weeks." At the end of the fateful four years, they returned - a few of them - and with their families went through the reconstruction period. During this time a marriage ceremony, to be legal, had to be solemnized by a United States officer.
"Quincy was the home at that time of the WOODBERRYS, TOWERS, DAVIDSONS, LOVES, MONROES? STO CKTONS - and many others who have helped to make history.
"The Rev. Samuel Woodberry, (my maternal great-grand-father) when quite a young man, came down <text not clear> South Carolina on horse-hack, and became very friendly with some <text not clear> numerous Indians who lived around Quincy. One day one of the <text not clear> braves went to Rev. Woodberry's home and asked for the youngest <text not clear>ter to become his bride.
"My father left Quincy in 1872, to locate in Jacksonville, and <text not clear> my earliest recollections is going to Quincy on a visit and being given own soma of those very high hills after a hard rain. How the <text not clear> would slip and slide in the red clay, and how terrified I was <text not clear> fear we would slip to the bottom of the hill!
"Quincy now has good paved roads, and, to me, it is a perfect joy to drive thru the beautiful country, and to view from the top of <text not clear> of those high hills the beautiful country for miles around.
"The Quincy people are ell noted for their hospitality and extreme friendliness. So many of them are related or connected by mar<text not clear> that it is almost like one large family, but they are equally <text not clear> to extend the welcoming hand to strangers.
"Of course, it now has all modern improvements - electricity, telephons, water and sewerage system, an ice factory, etc. A new Post office had just been completed, it has a modern Court House and many beautiful Churches, a Grammar School, and high School, Womans Club, Masonic building, Country Club, etc.
"Some years ago "Fuller's Earth" was discovered near Quincy. and is mined in large quantities. This is one of the important industries, as this mine is one of the largest in the world.
"Very fine tobacco is raised in Gadsden County, and they have packing houses and factories in Quincy. Fine truck gardens are another industry - snap beans, especially, are shipped in large quantities."
II-<text not clear> Benjamin <text not clear>)
