August 22, 1939
John Lancaster
Newton, N. C.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Rutherford County	Rockford County
John Lancaster	Joe Lane
Louise Lancaster	Lula Lane
Miss Pope	Miss Pores
Ben	Bob
Jane	Julie
"I was born in Rockford County. My parents were tenant farmers and we didn't have it easy. The ground was poor and we had to give a third. We raised corn, cotton, wheat and vegatables. I tell you tenant farmers never can get enough to buy their own farm. It was hard sailing for us when I was a youngster. I ain't got no education. Never went to school a day in my life. Nary one of my brothers or sisters did either. I don't know B from bull's f’ot when it comes to reading and writing.
"I got married and have had nothing but trouble ever since. I've not been able to work a lick in seven years. My wife has got pellagra and she ain't able to do nothing. We had nine children, two of them is dead. Two of them is married and the other five stay at home. Lula is the only one working. She works in the sewing room and makes seven dollars a week. How much do you think we have to live on? I have to pay one dollar for house rent; seven people to live off six dollars. There ain't much you can buy for a dollar to do one person a week. We have bread of course, and a few vegatables. Now, what do you think we do for clothes? We do without, 'less I can pick up a little something to do. The welfare used to help us but they quit when Lula got work.
"I've got high blood pressure and heart trouble--My doctor told me not to work. I bought produce and tried to run a fruit stand 'till about a year and a half ago. There ain't much to be made at such business, it's too many people at it. I did manage to keep fruit and vegatables for the family.
"You can come in, my wife's around somewhere. She was over at Miss Pore's a while ago; this house belongs to them. It ain't nothing but an old trap." It was a big two story house standing near the street. The yard was shady and cool, but was cluttered up with a half a dozen old cars. "Do you run a garage?" I asked.
"No, we don't even have a car. Them's some old traps the boys picked up; they like to monkey eith them." Two grown boys and several children swarmed over them.
Joe took me inside where a peculiar odor assailed my nostrils. We walked through the bare hall to the back and entered a room that opened from the porch. We were greeted by a thin delicate looking little woman who was sitting in a rocking chair. An iron bed with soiled covers and filthy pillow cases stood in one corner. A young woman in a dirty print dress with untidy hair lay across it.
Joe said by way of introduction, "That’s my daughter-in-law on the bed; this is my wife.”
"Sit down," said Joe's wife. "I've been sick. I ain't able to be up now; you'll have to excuse the way everything looks."
Standing in the door that led to the kitchen was a girl of fifteen. "That's my daughter," Joe's wife informed me, "she does the cooking." About that time a flaxen-haired boy and girl, apparently about four years old, came in.
"Are these your children?" I inquired.
"No, that's Bob and Julie. One of them belongs to my son who lives upstairs; the other belongs to my boy who has a room across the hall."
Their hands, face and clothes were dirty. Their hair looked as if it had not; been washed and combed since they were born. Ben took my umbrella and used it for a horse, while Julie grabbed my pocketbook and ran to the kitchen. I followed and found her with the contents spread out on the dirty floor. After considerable effort, and with no assistance from the grandparents, I finally retrieved my possessions and held them out of their reach while I continued the interview standing.
I finally sat down again, and held my umbrella and purse firmly in my lap as the children continued their efforts to snatch them away.
Joe said, "Now Bob, if you don't behave, I'll have to tie you in the back yard."
"I ain't skeered of you," said Bob Failing to get my umbrella again, he got on the back of my chair and tried to throw me over. While I was steadying myself to keep from falling, Julie unfastened my shoes and was rolling down my hose.
"Julie, don't pull off the lady's hose," said grandma. In desperation I stood up, held my bag, note book and umbrella over my head while Joe and his wife finished their story.
I went into the kitchen and found it even more unsavory than the other room. A long table with a torn oil cloth, from which remanants of the noon meal had not been removed, stood in the center. At one end was a large plate filled with corn bread. A big bowl of pinto beans; a molasses pitcher, with the syrup running down the sides and covered with flies so thick you couldn't see the pattern of the pitcher; soiled dishes, scraps of food on the floor; an old wood range and a three cornered cupboard completed the picture.
"How do you manage without screens?" I asked.
"We just have to do the best we can, "Joe replied. "We ain't got no money to have them put up. The ypunguns would keep them open all the time if we had them. Old man Pores owns this house; he's so darn stingy he won't put out no money on it."
"Now look here Joe," said the wife, “you know we can't pay more rent. If he'd fix up the house you'd have to pay more."
"That's the truth. I'm gonna move though, soon as I can better myself. I can't get a mill house because we ain't got nobody working in the mill. I spent fourteen years of my life working in the cotton mill. We've moved around a lot and I've worked in several different mills. I worked myself up till I made two dollars and a quarter a day. Now all I can do is piddle about."
We went out on the porch. The floor was so rotten I was afraid I would fall through. "Be careful," said Joe's better half, "we had an accident here last week."
Joe began to laugh, "That was funny. The man come from some insurance company. He was sitting out here leaning back against the old rotten rail. First thing we knowed, the rail broke and he fell backwards out in the yard. He got hurt bad. We had to call an ambulance and send him to the hospital. It's a good thing he had insurance for his shoulder was broken.
They invited me to go upstairs but I declined and suggested we go into the back yard. It was littered with refuse, and just beyond the semblance of a vegetable garden was struggling with the weeds.
"I vote for President Roosevelt 'cause he's so good to the poor. My folks was Republicans though. If my parents woulda sent me to school, maybe things woulda been better for us. As it is I got a poor chance even if I was well. Mother was so sickly all the time, I had to help do the housework.
I'm only forty nine years old; I feel a hundred. I don't feel resentful at nobody, I just feel it's our lot."
