Concord, N. C.
The Concord Tabernacle
Camp Meeting
September 23, 1938
October 2, 1938
A banner near the sidewalk read
I. A. E. M. Asso.
Camp Meeting
3 Services Daily 10 A. M.
2 P. M.
7:45 P. M.
The tent that sprawled over the vacant lot on Depot Street was ablaze with white light from the strings of bulbs outside and inside. By 7 o'clock men and boys stood in silent clumps on the space in front of the tent, watching the cars drive up to park and gazing at the crowds that wandered up from the maze of streets down near the mills.
Groups of children, women with babies in their arms, men, earnest looking young girls, and whole families walked down the aisle which was covered with sawmill shavings, and found seats on the plank benches which were marked "NO SPITTING." Almost all of the men and boys wore overalls; the women had on their everyday cotton dresses under drab coats nor did they wear hats. They carried coats for the children and had the babies wrapped in blankets because October nights get cool when you're out in the open.
On the platform at the front of the tent a pianist and a drummer beat out gospel hymns in a lively syncopated rhythm. Other musicians wandered in and joined them so that by 7:45 an orchestra composed of four guitars, an accordian, several violins, trombones, trumpets, and a saxaphone was setting the tent poles aquiver. On the other end of the platform a large choir, mainly of women and girls, waited expectantly for time to sing.
Brother Meyers, founder of the association and leader of the revival, rose from a bench on the platform. He was a slim, neat-looking man with gray hair, a broad smile, a remarkably mobile face and an unfailing comedy sense. Any time he chose to make the people laugh he could do so by twisting his face, raising his hoarse voice to a falsetto, and mincing about. How he sustained his amazing energy no one knows, but he was just as lively at the end of the two weeks as he had been at the beginning.
"Amen, thank God," he began cheerfully. "You know, friends, God always provides me with somebody to lead the singing -- I-I-I guess he knows my failings (laughter). There's been just one time he didn't; the very first time I held a meeting -- he didn't then, because he wanted to test me. Well, when I went ahead and done the best I could on that occasion, he saw I was willing anyway and ever since he's provided someone for me. Now tonight God has given us brother of Florida to lead us."
The orchestra, the choir and the brother from Florida burst enthusiastically into song. Four or five gospel hymns poured forth in the same fashion and they seemed to be inspirations of the moment as no numbers were announced and there was practically no pause between. The audience was at a slight disadvantage because it did not have books, but when a familiar tune was played the people followed the choir as well as they could. While the singing went on Brother Meyers walked back and forth on the platform repeating loud amens, answering the ideas in the hymns with exclamations "That's right," "Yes God, we do," "Oh yes, that's the truth," and the people who were saved raised their hands.
A quartet of girls sang "I'm Your Child, Lord, Your Child I am Lord," in hillbilly style. Then the testimonials began. For over an hour people stood, one by one, and in voices taut with emotion told of being saved.
Representative Testimonials
1. A young woman in the choir stood. With her head thrown back and tears on her face, she spoke in a wild, shrill voice.
"Oh, I want to thank God tonight that I'm saved and that I know when he saved me. Last year I was talking to a sister and she said 'I know I'm saved, but I don't know the time nor the place.' Well I told her, I said 'Sister whenever you're saved, you'll know the time and the place.' The other day she came to me and she said 'Oh you was right, I've been really saved now and I thank God I know the time and the place.' Now that's the way it is; when you're saved you're going to know it and you're happy. I'm so happy since God give me faith, I don't need anything else in this world now."
2. A withered old woman in the choir stood. Her high, thin voice cracked with feeling as she spoke.
"I thank God tonight for saving me many year ago. I'm not a-goin' to be here on this earth much longer and while I'm here I jest want to tell the world what havin' faith has did for me. Oh I've had troubles and hardships till sometimes hit looked like I couldn't keep on, but then I'd go to God and put my faith in him. Friends, that's all you have to do. I've not got much of the world's goods, but that don't fret me none because I've got faith and believe."
3. A tall, thin man on the back bench of the choir stood, Bible in hand.
"I want to praise God tonight for saving me and helping me. Friends, I've got my Bible here tonight and if God tells me to I'll preach you a sermon on his word. I always carry it with me so I'll be ready if he suggests a text. I don't never plan or study what I'm a-goin' to say, God jest puts the words in my mouth when the time comes.
"I jest want to tell you about a incident that happened to me when I was at Oregon. I was in to the meeting in Portland one night and I had two dollars that I was aiming to give, but when the collection plates was handed round, I held back that tithe. After the meeting, the preacher even named the matter of finances to me and I still didn't give him the tithe -- I reckon the old devil was working on me, keeping me from it. Well friends, I didn't sleep very well that night because of what I done and the next morning early I walked into Portland -- hit's six miles from the farm where I was working -- and gave in my tithe. I lost a whole day's work by doing this, and I lost the two dollars I would have made working, but my heart felt better after that.
"Another thing I want to thank God for tonight is for curing me of the sinus trouble. After he cured me, he sent it back sometimes jist to test my faith, but if I would pray to him and believe, hit would go away right then.
"Friends when I left Portland, Oregon, to come here this summer, I didn't have but $6.00 in my pocket to git here on, but I had faith and I come through with money to spare. Right now I don't have nothing and don't know how I'm a-going to do, but I'm not worrying. I know the Lord will care for me jist like he's always done. It's wonderful, friends."
4. A prim girl in a neat black dress rattled off her testimonial like a child who has memorized a piece.
"I want to thank God tonight for curing me of cancer. I was sick, but after I was saved and had faith he healed me so I could go out and work for him. If I hadn't had faith and been cured, I guess right now I would be lying in the hospital in Portland, Oregon or else down in Los Angeles, California."
5. A bedraggled-looking woman with stringy hair and a weather beaten face rose slowly from the bench where sat her mother (wearing a large black sunbonnet) and three wan children. The woman spoke in a low, deliberate voice.
"I'm a-praisin' the Lord tonight fer savin' me on the 27th day of June this year. And I want youse-all to pray fer me and my family. Hit's a hard pull in this world, but when you've got faith there hain't nothin' more to worry about. There hain't been nar' bit of sickness in my family since I was saved and I thank the Lord fer that too. We'll be lookin' fer yer prayers to hope us out."
6. In the front row of the choir, a young girl arose quickly, threw back her head and was silent for a moment her face lighted with emotion. When she spoke, her voice was almost a sob.
"Praise God tonight for saving me and the rest of my family. I know there's been talk and they've said all kinds of things about us, but we've got Jesus now and it don't matter what they say. Someone told my daddy if he didn't quit religion he was going to lose his job. Sure enough, today my daddy was laid off. We've not got anything to eat in the house and no clothes to wear hardly except what we've got on our backs, but God will take care of us. I'm not worried; I've never been so happy in all my life before and I'm ready to do anything Jesus tells me to. Oh, I thank God for giving me this wonderful faith -- I'll say it anywheres too. I'm not ashamed of nothing anymore."
7. A small blonde girl with a faint thread of voice thanked God for calling her to preach his word. This seemed rather unfortunate since she was undoubtedly the worst speaker of the evening.
All during the testimonials Brother Meyers, walking back and forth across the front of the tent, kept up an obligate of "Amen," "Yes," "Hallelujah," "Thank Jesus," "Thank God," "That's right, sister," "Oh my." Or sometimes he laughed, in a dry, mirthless way, to express his extreme happiness. The preacher of the local congregation and people in the audience contributed comments too so that a constant undercurrent of sound accompanied each person who testified. Sometimes this undercurrent became so loud it completely drowned the voice of the person speaking.
Between testimonies there were musical numbers by members of the orchestra. The quartet of girls sang an almost endless hymn, "Blessed Jesus hold my Hand," and other hymns in their same shrill hillbilly style, while a trio of flashily dressed girls rendered the old favorite "Life is Like a Mountain Railroad," in the current movie short style. (The audience seemed to prefer the quartet.) Best of all were the duets sung by a guitarist and her husband. She played the accompaniment and sang alto to his lead in "I'd Rather be on the Inside Looking Out than to be on the Outside Looking in," "Forty Years Ago," and others.
The song that was repeated over and over again between testimonials and many times during the evening was
(To the tune of Drink it Down)
If you're saved and you know it, say "Amen"
"""""""""
"""""""""
You're not ashamed to show it
If you're saved and you know it, say "Amen."
Even the babies piped along on this song.
At collection time Brother Meyers again displayed his wit. He watched two men walk up the aisle and as they stood before him waiting to get the plates, he cocked his head on one side, wrinkled his face, looked roguishly at the audience when he said,
"You know there's always been something that puzzled me – why in the world do we use these great big men to carry up the money we get. Why a tiny baby could carry all we've been a'getting. Last night how much do you think we got? Besides tithes (money in envelopes), friends, we got exactly 42? -- that's all."
Then he burst into fervent prayer for a good collection because "Oh Lord," as he said, "thou knowed the incurred expense for this revival."
When the collection plates returned, he carefully counted the contents, holding the audience in suspense meanwhile. He looked pleased, "Eighty cents tonight, friends, not counting tithes. Oh if we could just make it a dollar."
Then he cocked his head and winked at the audience saying "I've got an idea! How many are in the choir?" And he made a great display at counting the people on the platform while they giggled. "There's just twenty, so we'll pass this plate up here." Great was his joy when the amount was increased to $1.04.
The sermon seemed an incidental part of the meeting and although Brother Meyers said it would be a few words, it lasted over half an hour.
As he walked (with occasional leaps) back and forth across the front of the tent or up and down the aisle, he berated other churches for their formality, conceit, and unchristian conduct. "Why them old Holiness people, I don't even consider them fit to wipe my feet on," he said before launching into several long, involved stories about Holiness preachers in Florida. "And these Baptists and Methodists and other churches that think they're so fine and wonderful, they all fight and scrap among themselves -- it's awful, awful, I tell you."
Here the voice of a woman in the audience broke in. "That's the truth, Brother Meyers. You know at the Baptist church I come from they got after one another with the fire shovels."
"Yes, sister, yes." He agreed, delighted, and proceeded to mimic the grasping, self-centered members of other churches to the great delight of his audience. He could make them laugh; he could also convince them that this religion of faith which he offered was the best they could possibly have.
At 10:35 after a last hymn had been sung, the people gathered up the sleepy children and started home.