Raleigh, N. C.
East Davie Street
Dr. Charles A. Dunston
DR. CHARLES ALEXANDER DUNSTON
"I was born at Raleigh, N. C. on May 28th, 1872, the son of Charles H. and Eliza Taylor Dunston. Prior to the War Between the States, my mother was a slave, but my father was not. Mother was born in Yadkin County, North Carolina, and she was first owned by the prominent and wealthy family Taylor of that county, but she later becamethe property of the equally prominent and wealthy Busbee family of Raleigh. Members of the two families taught herand she had a very good education.
"My father was a barber and he earned a very comfortable living from his trade. I was the only child. Like everyother kid, I guess, I thought my father was the greatest man in the world, and to me he was. He worked in shops thatcatered to the white trade exclusively. He and mother were great church goers, and they sent me to the Episcopal
Church and Sunday school early in my life. My parents were members of that church.
"There were very few, if any free schools for Negroes when I camealong, so I received my early education at private schools. I first attended Tupper's Memorial School, which was located at the corner of Cabarrus and Blount Streets; then I went to a Presbyterian School at the corner of Davie and Haywood Streets. I graduated from high school at
Shaw University, corner of Blount and South Streets.
"I made up my mind early in life that I would follow in the footsteps of my father and become a barber. All the timethat I was in high school, I had jobs in barber shops as shoe shine boy. Then I worked as lather boy. In those daysshops did not work as many barbers as they do now and it was the duty of the lather boy to get the face of a customerready to be shaved while the barber was waiting upon another customer. You never see these boys in the shops of today. While I was serving as lather boy, I was carefully trained in the art of honing and stropping a razor. The nextstep in learning my trade was to practice shaving the faces and cutting the hair of the barbers. Boys had to work four to six long years as shine and lather boy before he was given a job as a barber. I don't know that we were betterbarbers then than the barbers of today, but naturally I think we were.
"Nearly all barber shops in the South were operated by Negroes when I came along. A Mr. Kimball, of Washington, D. C., opened the first shop employing white barbers shortly after I learned my trade about forty-five years ago. Other white shops opened within a few years, but the Negro shops continued for years to get the very best white trade. Manyof my customers refused to go to a white shop, because they told me they felt that the barber's trade belonged to the Negro in the South, and they did not like the idea of white men coming South and displacing him in a business thathad always been exclusively his. Conditions have changed since then and of the twenty-five or thirty barber shops in Raleigh, there remain only three shops operated by Negroes and catering to the white trade.
"Barbering was considered a very fine trade for a Negro and only the luckiest of boys could secure jobs as bootblacksin barber shops in order to learn the trade. As compared with other work done by Negroes in those days, barbersearned a fine income. I used to make $15.00 to $25.00 per week at the trade. Living expenses were low and I always saved some of my earnings. We received fifteen cents for a shave and twenty-five cents for a hair cut. We did a good business of shampooing at twenty-five cents per head. Proprietors of shops made a neat income from bath tubs, charging twenty-five cents a bath. Only the most modern homes had bath tubs in them and nearly all men dependedon the bathing facilities of the barber shops for baths, especially mechanics andgentlemen engaged in work that caused their bodies to get very greasy and dirty. Needless to tell you that then, as I guess it is today, there was more bathing on Saturday than on any other day in the week. We had only a very few customers who came in for a nice hot bath more than once a week.
"Nearly all white gentlemen kept their private shaving mugs and brushes at their favorite barber shops in those days. Many of them also kept their fine razors at the shops. Some of the old shaving mugs were beautiful things. They had the names of the owners burned on them and woe to the poor barber who mistakenly used the wrong mu on a customer! We had a large cabinet to keep the mugs and brushes in. After we had shaved a customer, the brush and mug were carefully cleaned and put back in the cabinet. In this respect, I believe we were a little more sanitary inthose days than we are today, because a customer was reasonably sure that the brush that lathered his face had never been on the face of another man. We always looked for a crop of new mugsthe day after Christmas. It was the custom of young ladies to give their boy friends mugs and brushes for Christmas presents as soon as the young men got old enough to shave. Today, the girls send the boys safety razors, soap, powder and after-shaving lotion on Christmas, so they can shave themselves! That is not so good for the barbers.
"I worked in several shops and finally went to work for Dunston and Davis, where my father worked. This was thefinest shop in Raleigh, and my uncle, Nelson Dunston, was one of the owners. I had worked there for ayear so, when Mr. E. C. Fuller, a famous lawyer of his day, suggested to me one day while I was shaving him that I should go in business for myself. He said he would help me get started if I needed any money. About the same time, Mr. William R. Tucker, son of Mrs. Florence P. Tucker, came into theshop to get a shave and told Ferry Noble, his regular barber, that he was going to erect a fine five-story office building at the corner of Fayetteville and Martin Streets. He told Ferry that, if he would go in business for himself, he would build one of the finest kind of places for a barber shop in the basement and lease it to him at a unusually reasonable rental. Ferry and I were the closest offriends, so he talked with me about going in with him. The upshot of it was that Ferry told Mr. Tucker that he and I would lease the shop in the new building. We kept our plans to ourselves andcontinued to work for Dunston and Davis.
"About two months before the Tucker Building was completed, my uncle, Nelse, heard that we were planning to go in business and he and Davis fired Ferry and me. We were in a pretty pickle then and hardly knew what to do, because we needed every cent we could get our hands on to buy equipment for ournew shop. We wanted it to be the finest barber shop in North Carolina, and that is exactly what it was at the time. Ferry and I rented a couple of chairs and opened up a place under the old Capitol Club Building. Our customersstarted to coming around to trade with us as soon as they heard we had left Duns ton and Davis. One of my customers was the late Col. A. B. Andrews, Vice President of the Southern Railway, who made his home in Raleigh. Whileshaving him one day, I told him of our plans to open a new shop in the new Tucker building. 'Well,' he said, 'if you need any money, go over to see Joe Brown, Cashier of the Citizens National Bank, and tell him I said to let you havewhatever you need.' And that is exactly what I did. We stayed in the Capitol Club Building for about two months andopened the Tucker building shop on September 1, 1898. We bought five of the very latest barber chairs and employed five of the best barbers in Raleigh. Mr. Tucker had fitted out the place beautifully with everything except the chairs.
"Ferry and I began to make money fast and I developed into a, great Beau Brummel. I always had liked fine clothes and now I could have them. I had my clothes hand made by the best tailors in Raleigh and I paid a pretty penny forsome of my suits. I wore a top hat, Prince Alber, striped trousers, patent leather shoes and spats on Sundays. I spent money rather freely in other ways, but I saved some each week. Our business grew so fast that we had to add four more chairs. We did the largest barber business in Raleigh for many years.
"I had received just enough education to make me want some more. There were several Negro lawyers in Raleigh then, but there were only two or three medical doctors and dentists. I became interested in the subject of dentistryand decided I would enter college and take a course in it. So, in 1907, I sold out my interest in the shop and went to Nashville, Tennessee, and matriculated at Meharry Dental College, a branch of Walden University. I was thirty-five years old at the time. I graduated at Meharry in 1911 and returned to Raleigh to practice my profession and I have been here since.
"Shortly after my return from college, I married May Alice Jackson of Wilmington, North Carolina. We have had one child, a son, Charles F., born to us. Charles was born in 1917. He attended the public graded and high school at Raleigh. Since he finished Washington High School, he is what I call a 'college tramp'. He has been to severalcolleges, including St. Augustine, Shaw University and Normal College. He has always been interested in recreational work and is now employed at a park, but I guess this fall will find him in another college. It appears that he can't find the right place for him. He is a good boy, but just flighty like nearly all young- men of today.
"I am a member of the National (Negro) Dental Association and the North State Dental Association. I have servedterms as President of both of these organizations. This reminds me to tell you that our national association is against the Wagner Free Medical Law, now pending the United States Senate. The bill, you know, proposes free medical and dental treatment for citizens of the United States whoare unable to pay for it. Such a law would be all right, maybe, if the chiselers could be prevented from receiving free treatment, when they are well able to pay their doctors and dentists for such treatment. It appears to be part of thenature of some people to want to receive something for nothing, whether it is money or medical and dental treatment, and I am sure this type of citizen would take advantage of the Wagner Medical law to the impoverishment of themedical and dental practitioners of this country. It appears that there is no way to keep the chiselers out and for that reason I, personally, am opposed to the law.
"What would be the best method of establishing better relations between the Negro and white races? I think one wordis the answer to the question and the solution of the problem. That word is education. Education establishesunderstanding quicker than anything in the world. If you should meet a Chinaman on the street and neither he nor you could speak the language of each other, you simply would not understand each other. If you had been taught to speak Chinese, you would understand what the Chinaman said to you. Therefore, you would understand each other. When aman is educated, he has a keener sense of understanding. Ignorance among members of both the white and Negro races has been responsible of much misunderstanding between the races. You never hear of an educated Negro and an educated white man having any trouble for the simple reason that they understand the rights and limitations of eachother.
"I think the races in North Carolina get along together much better than they do in many other states, because here in North Carolina we have a compulsory education law and it is vigorously enforced against both races. I do not thinkall prejudice against the black man will ever be wiped out completely, but I think education will do more than anything else to do it. Negroes here in North Carolina are the subjects ofdiscrimination just like they are in other places. I have never been able to understand why a white man should be paid more for doing the same work that the Negro does. Cost of living is about the same for both of them.
"I think President Franklin Delano Roosevelt is one of the greatest men of all time and that he has done much to help the common people to a better living standard in this country. Yet, I think this relief business is hurting many members of my race by causing them to lose theirinitiative for doing things for themselves. Many hard working Negroes who formerly would gladly work in the hot sun of summer and the freezing temperatures of winter, will notdo that kind of work now. They feel that the Government is going to take care of them and that, if they should die, thatthe Government will bury them. The relief system has made many Negroes dependent on the Government for a living, whereas they formerly depended upon their initiative to find work and earn their bread and meat. I can't speak for the white people, but I suspect it is the same way with many of them.
"I take very little interest in politics, merely exercising my right to vote. I always cast my ballot for the man I thinkwill do the most good for the largest number. Parties mean little any more. They are all about the same; that is, the purely American parties. One will advocate a thing this year that the other will oppose. Next yearit will be just reverse. Therefore, I try to select the right man for the right place."
Dr. Charles Alexander Dunston Negro N. C. Excellent
Dentist - an only child - learned barberbusiness - opened own shop with white backing - had largest shop in city - decided for dentistry - seld out and went to school - against government plan for free medical attention- believes education best aid to race relations because it promotes understanding - resents racial discrimination - votes but ain't got much faith in polities.
