Two other versions of the interview "Guess We Had Moving Fever," with the same title, can be found on pages 1505-1531.
Powder Springs, Georgia
R.F.D. #1
M.D. Rice
A.G. Barie and N.C. Browder
GUESS WE HAD MOVING FEVER
Dave was busy scraping on a new hammer handle of fine-grain hickory. Ha had several of them on the floor beside his chair and would pick up first one and then another and give them a little trimming, as if to be sure they were all exactly alike. I asked his if he sold than. "Never sold 'ary one; couldn't git enough to pay to bother, but I sure like to have one around, when a feller needs one ha needs it ‘right now.’”
Betsy, who is sixty-seven and her husband's senior by four years, shifted a pile of magazines from the floor near her rocker to the top of Dave's large home-made tool chest. “We both read lots," she said, “don’t know what we'd do without the magazines and papers the neighbors fetch us."
Here Dave interposed with, "Don't know where I learned to read --- jest seemed to glow into it. I only got three months of schooling when I was about nine years old, and all I got out of that was how to scratch my name on paper. But sometimes we git tired of reading and jest set and think. We are so for off the big road we can't see any cars go by and sometimes it gits aorta lonesome. Week-ends sometimes Betsy's kin come for a visit and then we all talk a heap.
“My young'uns are all growed up and gone by themselves long ago. Don't see them often since times got bad because we can't afford a car. Anyway we move around so much sometimes maybe they don't know where to look for us.
"I had two girls and a boy by my first wife, and two girls and a boy by my second wife. They're all living. Think it makes any difference how many you git? Don't think thataway myself. We all seemed to git along somehow, always had about enough to eat and wear. Guess maybe I was doing a little better then cause I did see to 'em getting common schooling. We not been so as to lay by anything last few years, but Betsy and I don't eat much 'cept garden 'sees,’ so it don't take much to keep us going.
"I and my daddy and about all our kin I knowed about was always renters, or share croppers, or worked on somebody else's place for wages. Reckon us never found say place we wanted. Seems like come next we'd find the right place to suit us, but we never did.
"Was my folks Georgy folks? No, sir, leastwise before I was born they come over from north Carolina and rented a place in Pickens County. Course it was a long time after I was born before I come to remember moving so much, but I reckon I got things all straightened out in my mind from the time I left daddy, so I can tell you how many times we’ve moved and if you want to ask no any questions I'll try to answer them.
“No, I wasn't the only kid in the family. Oldest of seven, all living. Don't know much about them --- scattered here and yon. Seems like folks now-a-days don't hang together like when we was boys and girls. I remember I was always strong for a kid and laid off corn for daddy when I wasn't but twelve years old. Wasn't long after that I was doing a man's work along with daddy and I stayed pretty close around them parts where I was borned.
“Yes, my first wife was borned and raised close around there too. Her folks was tenant farmers like mine."
After pausing a moment to part his voluminous mustaches and spit is the fire, he straightened back in his chair and resumed, “That was in '96. Reckon we was like most young folks, wanting to get away from things, so we want a piece further south and I got a job running drill in a gold mine. After I'd been there about two years, pay dirt played out and the mine shut down, so we moved a few miles south of there and worked in an ochre nine. Went a driller there; did most any king of work. Reckon we stayed there two years more. Yeah, that's right, because it was in 1900 we want back near where I come from and got a job as handyman on Mr. Shield’s fifteen horse farm. Suppose you hoard tell of Joe Brown, used to be Gov'nor? Wall, he lived not far away, and folks sure liked Joe Brown. That's Joe M., I mean. Don't remember much of Joe E., but I do remember seeing the big WELCOME sign painted on the front of his big barn. Folks used to tell about him feeding all the folks around those parts, because he had so much corn he didn't need it and just handed it out to anybody who'd ask for it. I never have saw nobody turned away from Joe Brown's place neither. While I was with Mr. Shields he loaned some of his hands to Joe Brown to help survey the place and build a fence around it.
"Man, that was some farm; seemed like a thousand acres. And that was a fence too let me tell you. The postes was all concrete and jest miles and miles of wire. Reckon Joe Brown kinds took a liking to me, cause several times he borryed me from Mr. Shields and had me haul big loads of corn down to Hariotte where his home vas. Our first boy was horned there (the first one was a girl), so we calls him Joe Brown. Guess we had moving fever all the time, cause we went back to the ochre mine section, but couldn't get ary job. That vas nineteen-two and my first wife died. Worked on a small farm at day wages not for from the mines for nigh two years. Spring of nineteen-four we went over into Spaldin and got a job at a sawmill.
Met a gal from over in Milton County and took a liking to her --- guess the kids did too, anyways we got married. Her kinfolks was farmers too, so she vas used to it. We stayed there nigh four years and had three kids horned there."
Here Dave paused long enough for each of us to take a good big chew of "home-made twist" with which I am usually supplied, and Dave remarked that it was "mighty good chewing tobaccer." Having again manipulated the mustaches to his satisfaction he quietly resumed.
“I got tired of saw-milling and in the spring of nineteen-eight we went on a farm a short peice west of the sawmill and worked on halves for three seasons. Didn't do bad there, but you know how it is --- when time comes to move about all you got is a little furniture and maybe a little corn and fodder and mighty little cash. Anyways, we moved back over nigh Sulphur Springs in the spring of nineteen-eleven, and cropped on halves two seasons. Didn't do so good there, so we went back to Spaldin in the spring of thirteen and took a leetle bigger place on halves for two seasons. Didn't do so bad them two seasons, but late in fifteen my wife died, and we jest didn't feel like staying on there, so come the spring of nineteen-sixteen we went back over by Sulphur Springs and I bought a small team of smiles and a few tools and paid standing rent on twenty-five acres of good land. That’s where Betsy and me got married. Didn't seem like we wanted to stay too close to her folks right then, so I sold ay stock and went to a big fair, about seven miles futher north nigh the mountain and worked a one-boss crop on halves. That's in seventeen. Made party good that season and felt like I could do better by myself so I bought stock and worked a one-hose crop over by the Springs two seasons --- that was in eighteen and nineteen. Didn't do so good that last season so in the spring of twenty we moved over to a small place not far away. I still had my stock and I worked a two-boss crop. We staid on just the one season that place. Done party good though and in the spring of twenty-one we moved to the Lawrence farm, not for from the Springs. That's a fifteen-boss farm and I worked forty-five acres with my own stock. Didn't do so bad the first season but we staid on in twenty-two and didn't do so good so next spring, that's twenty-three, we took a smaller place, a two-boss crop, and settled down that till late twenty-six. We'd come clear that season and maybe a leetle batter's that. Bout decided to try a real crop and bought more stock and tools and moved back onto the big place I cropped onct before near the mountain. I had a five-boss crop there three seasons, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, and twenty-nine.” Here Dave paused and studied for a moment, which gave me an opportunity to refresh our supply of "twist," and after throwing a fresh chunk of wood on the fire he sat down and continued.
"Don't know as you know about things in the farming line, out seems like things started going down hill fast about that time. The first season I didn't do so poorly, out guano and feed-stuff was getting high and it jest seems like there wasn't anything left. Second season I jest about broke even. In twenty-nine the boll-weevil jest about eat us up, and cotton didn't bring more nuff to pay for guano. I was sure nuff cleaned out. Stayed on till crops was gathered, and Betsy and ma moved in with daughter Nell over to Oaktown. We staid on that place till spring of thirty-one. Had a few little piddling jots around town, but jest couldn't find ary steady job ary place. That spring we hearen tell bout good farming down in Dalton County, so Betsy and me want over there and found a likely looking place and ranted a twenty-five acre crop on thirds and fourths. Staid there through thirty-two, and gin we got ready to move off, all we had to move was our furniture. Seemed like there want ary place fit to crop on, where it wouldn't take more than cotton’d bring to pay for guano. Betsy and I moved to a leetle house over in 'Socktown,’ a short piece from where her folks used to live, and I got odd jobs around town. We jest about managed to eat that year. I went to the relief folks one time and they gimme twelve pounds of flour and a little sack of dried milk but I didn't take it. Guessed we might as well starve to death all at once as to teeter along on the job. We haint been on relief yet. Well, in thirty-four I got a farm-hand job not for off and we staid in Socktown till spring thirty-five. Got back farming --- rented a three-boss crop --- and it didn't pay out. Come spring of thirty-six we moved to another sawmill town and I worked two or three months. Bout time we got settled there I put an ad in the Farmers Market Bulletin asking for work on a big farm. I-graanies, I got a stack of letters a foot high! Betsy read ‘em all and she writ for a job bossing farm hands on a big orchard, farm up in north Georgy. It wasn't long fore we was sent for to go up there, and I got the job. Nice place and I liked it fine. Got fifteen dollars a month and keep for both of us. The feller that owned it lived in Savannah. He come up frequent and he acted like he was pleased the way I done things. We was getting along fine til come spring of thirty-seven he come up and we traded for another year and he said he was pleased at the things I had done and planned, but after he want home I got a letter from him cussing me out for the way I done things. Made me mad so I quit. That was July, thirty-seven, and we moved back to where I used to work in a sawmill. That mill had been moved a long time, but a small mill was there and I got work in it. There was a small farmhouse off a little piece from where the mill stood and the man what owned it let us live in it for clearing a place of land. We staid there til March, nineteen-thirty-eight, when Mrs. McDonough, the lady you met up on the hill come after me. We bean here ever since.’ --- And with these words Dave relaxed in his chair with the air of one who had finished a job, and considered it wall done.
Thinking perhaps Betsy might be feeling slighted I asked her if they attended the church not far away, up on the big road. She said, "No, we aint been to church yet. You know we kinda got out of the habit long time ago. Like enough it's cause we was allus on the move. Didn't live long enough in ary one place to git acquainted with folks. We like it here though, folks jest seen like home folks. Gin Spring gets here maybe we’ll git to go to church."
I asked Dave if he had a car and he said, "No, I only had a couple of cars in my time. Warnt ary one no good. The last one I had jest disinteegrated under me, and I warnt no mechanic. Disgusted me so I didn't try to fix it up."
I asked him what he thought the prospects were for farmers in the future. After studying for a moment he began: "Well, I reckon it's about all some of us kin do. Haint ary chance to git on at a mill nova-days. Seams-like we have allus got some kind of a living off the land, and I reckon it'll allus feed us if we tries hard enough. Some folks blames owners and sons blames tenants for the way farms is gone down nova-days. I reckon they're both to blame. Leastwise, some folks seems to be able to build up the soil on places that's got tenants, and some places that's got no tenants is let go down the branches as if it didn't make ary difference. I've always tried to git folks to plant cover crops. Some of 'em tries it one season and jest cause it don't do wonders they say hit haint no good. Worst part of tenanting is atter laying-by time. Landlord’s looking for a new hand and the tenant's looking for new land. Ought to be so's a landlord could aford to keep tenants all year and then like enough they'd git more fall plowing done and maybe more covercrop and winter pasture tended to. If I ever git me air not her place of my own I jest don't believe I'd plant ary stalk of cotton. Like enough I'd starve, but look at that foliar nigh the top of the mountain; he's made a living this year on two and a half acres of tomatoes and the land's so steep a male kin hardly stand up. Us Georgy farmers never lamed to rotate crops like in other parts. We've jest cotton'd and corned the land to death. No wonder the government has to pay us fer cotton. But I don't want to git started on politics. Reckon I'd better go up the hill and feed the widow's mule gin it gits dark. You going back that-a-way, I'll go along with you."
After saying "good-by" to Betsy, I went out the door to the porch and we were about to step down to the yard when Dave said, "Wait a minute,” and went back into the house. He returned almost immediately and handed me one of the hammer-handles, saying, "Like enough you need one of those for your hammer. If you don't right now maybe you will later and you can lay thissen by to season, it sure'll be a good un."
We tolled up the hill to the widow's place and I went with him to the barn so he could show mo a new bed and box which he had built one rainy day for the "converted Ford" wagon. The workmanship was so fine that I had to compliment the maker. Visibly pleased, he replied, "Aw shucks, taint so good a job. That's one trouble with lots of farmers. Don't take care of their tools and things. I've went onto places in the spring and had to hunt around in the fields to find a plow to start with.”
The Widow McDonough was approaching with her milk-pail and evidently caught the drift of our conversation for she immediately said, “I’ve ordered a gallon of good paint for him to point that wagon box and the plow stocks and a few more things around here. Dave is the first man I've had around here in a long time that took an interest in anything but the regular work. He’s sure done things to this place in a few months." This seemed to be more of a compliment than Dave could stand, for he blurted out. "Aw shacks, here it's plump dark sad I gotta git down the hill. Pleased to uv met you, and any time you around these parts glad you'd come in and see us agin."
"Dave sure is a good man," said Mr. McDonough, "He has patched up a let of the old buildings here when the weather wasn't fit to do other things, and when the ground was too wet to plow good, he moved a lot of rock piles that had been out in the fields for years. Put then in the washes and gullies where they'd do some good. I can't afford to pay his more'n fifteen dollars a month, but I got a good old cow; I'm going to let them have her for her feed. And sometimes we have a little something extra in the way of victuals. They don't care much for most so they didn't have a pig this year. I've some kin folks in New York that send me some real good children’s clothes they get from folks in the big flat where they live, fine clothes that sometimes are just a little soiled, so I'm going to be able to fix up his daughter's children with some real good things for Christmas. Sounds as if that cow was about tear the barn down so I’d better get busy and milk her. Glad to have met you; drop in when you are in the settlement."
Guess We Had Movie’ Fever	Ga.	Excellent
Share cropped – son of share croppers – ability to read gained outside school – handy with tools – moved from one place to another all his life – moved twenty-one times since first marriage – worked in mines, <text not clear>, did add-jobs, but generally farmed – shows aptitude for learning improved methods of farming.
Features the evils of the one-crop system.
