Project #3613
W. W, Dixon
Winnsbboo, S. C.
MRS. GABRIELE C. HARRIS
90 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
Mrs. Gabriele C. Harris, a widow, lives in a substantial two-story residence at 1604 Senate Street, Columbia, S. C. She owns this home and rents the upper story as an apartment. She possesses an unusual amount of energy for one of her years, and is fully capable of attending to her varied property interests in Columbia. We judge that she will be able to continue doing so for the next decade.
"I was born February 17, 1848, at Batesburg, South Carolina, then a small village. I went to school in Batesburg. It was a school that charged tuition, two dollars and fifty cents per month. I began in the old blue-back speller and continued in that blessed old book all the time that I was in school. I went through McBuffy's Reader and Robertson's Arithmetic. We studied geography, grammar, and history. We learned to write on our slates, from copy set by the teacher.
"When I was sixteen, I married a man older than myself - Oliver J. Harris, a druggist in Batesburg. We moved to Columbia the following year. I was seventeen when the Yankees came through, and I remember very vividly the burning of the city, the fear, the grief, the suffering, and the horror of the inhabitants at that time. Preceding Sherman's army, the Confederate army came through, under Wheeler's command. These soldiers broke open stores and took whatever they wanted, saying they just as well have them as the Yankees, who were just behind them. The city was bombarded by the Federals all day, on the 16th of February, from across the Congaree River.
"Our mayor was named Goodwyn. He warned the people of the approach of the Yankee army, that it was useless to resist. Then began the excitement of hiding money, jewels, and other valuables.
"The next day, the 17th of February, was my birthday. And what a birthday I was awakened by an explosion that shook the whole city like an earthquake. The warehouse and buildings of the South Carolina Railroad were blown up. About 9 o'clock the Confederate army departed. An hour later, the Yankee army came in, and mayor Goodwyn surrendered the city.
"The liquor shops and barrooms were among the first places visited by some of the Federal troops. Soon the streets were full of drunken soldiers, who were plundering, yelling, throwing goods from stores to the pavements, and falling over each other pell-mell to get what they wanted. This want on all day, and, at 10 o'clock that night, they began robbing fowl houses. We could hear the squawks of the chickens as they were being carried up the street.
"The wind was blowing very strongly that night. The houses on Washington Street were burned. The streets were lit up as bright as day and were filled with men, women, and crying children; some standing and some sitting down by the things they had saved from burning homes. Then came a night of horror. Soldiers came by and plundered and took away or destroyed the things saved from the burnt residences. The fair city was destroyed in a night, the night of my birthday. The fire started about sunset and, with the aid of the ill winds, did its havoc before sunrise the next day.
"I have borne three children, two girls and one boy. You must excuse a mother's pride in her dead boy. My son, Malcolm Paul Harris, entered the South Carolina College, now the University of South Carolina, at the age of fifteen. He was graduated in law before he attained his Majority of twenty - one years, and, since minors were then and are now prohibited from practicing law in the State, the South Carolina General Assembly passed a special bill permitting him to practice in the courts of South Carolina. Paul died in 1904, just before he reached the age of twenty-two years. He was an handsome a boy as ever lived.
"Folks want to know how I have managed to live so long and be as active in business as I am. I can't give any special reasons. Stirring around attending to affairs doesn't bother me at all. Worry is the only thing that can wear me out, and I shall strive hereafter to be 'anxious about nothing,' as St. Paul says.
"I have a good many houses, which I rent to families in the city of Columbia. When the depression of 1929 came on, some of my renters would get behind with the rent. Here's a laughable case! One of my tenants got so irregular and so far behind in his payments that, actually, when he did make me a payment or two, he thought he was in advance.
""I am very proud of the city of Columbia. I have watched its rebuilding and growth since Sherman burned it, and the next census will reveal, I am sure, that it is the largest city in South Carolina. It has a wonderful opportunity for expansion and rapid growth, provided something is done about the heavy tax burden levied upon business enterprises that are contemplating coming here and investing money and increasing the weekly pay roll of industrial employees. People should be careful about whom they send to the legislature, and whom they elect to the city council. Much harm has already been done, and is still being done, by imposing heavy taxes on corporations. Business is being attracted away from Columbia and South Carolina into North Carolina, Georgia, and Florida by high taxation. And another thing, if they would make the Congaree and Santee Rivers navigable, Columbian's growth would be phenominal. Have you noticed that all the big cities in the interior of our country are located on navigable streams or at the mouths of rivers? Take St. Louis, Kansas City, Louisville, New Orleans, and Memphis as examples of some southern towns that have rapidly grown into large cities.
"Oh, no! Although I am a lone widow, I never get lonely. I do a lot of work and a lot of reading, as old as I am. I prefer history and biography. Old people do not require as much sloop as young people. Six or seven hours is enough for me; therefore, I read a great deal at night.
"I am a life member of the South Carolina University Library, and I would not take a pretty for that honor. Lonesome? Gracious, no! I never have time from my work and reading to get lonesome.
"My husband died twenty-four years ago. He left me some real estate, which I have improved and added to, from time to time, in the past twenty-four years. I tell my friends that I am a real estate agent, but the only property that I handle is my own. I am kept pretty busy from day to day. I work with my daybook and lodger during the day, and, after that, I am content to spend the evening reading. Oh, yes, I keep all my books. My husband taught me how to do that. That is one reason that I get along so well. He acquainted me thoroughly with his business and how best to conduct it. Ever since his death, I have had confidence in myself, and have been able to carry it on alone. Book- keeping and statements of accounts are very simple, really, when you learn how.
"At my death the estate goes to the Foreign Missionary Board of the Southern Baptist Convention, in trust, to establish and maintain two schools in foreign fields for the purpose of giving a Christian education to boys and girls of the area in which the missionaries reside.
"Now you newspaper reporters and writers have flattered me with your attention for quite awhile, but remember the advice of Mr. Weller to his son, Samuel, in Piclwick papers: 'Samuel, beware of the vidows, my son! Beware of the vidows!'"
