Federal Writers' Project
Room 36, Federal Building
Greensboro, North Carolina
Date:	March 12, 1939
Person Interviewed:	Norman T. Banks
Address: 311 East Market St.
Greensboro, N. C.
Occupation:	Proprietor, second-and tore
Writer:	Pitts Cobb
Reviser:
SECOND HAND MERCHANT
By Pitts Cobb
Original Name	Changed Name
Norman T. Banks	Norwood D. Parker
Larry Stone
Mr. Kuhn	Mr. Spoon
Mr. Maxie	Mr. Massie
Professor Borentz
Interviewer	Tom Bobbington
Sonny Boy	Browny Boy
Negroe's names fiction
SECOND-HAND MERCHANT
In a small brick building bordering the Negro section of Greensboro is housed The Bargain Center where its proprietor, Norwood D. Parker, deals in second hand material.
Mr. Parker is tall and corpulent, in his middle sixties. His iron gray hair standing in a ruff about the temples and thinning toward the crown. Deep furrows at the corner of a slightly drooping mouth, give him the appearance of being the stem, aloof type. However, at second glance one sees sympathetic, dreamy eyes behind old fashioned chromium-frame spectacles which argue in eloquent silence in behalf of his deeper, kindlier, and more sociable nature. His voice is deep and resonant.
During the winter months he wears one style of dress; dark trousers and an old dark gray sweater. Summer and winter a green eye-shade invariably adorns his forehead.
A native of New Orleans, he has, during his very active life, lived in nearly every state of the Union. He is by nature a lover of people especially interested in the social life of the lower classes, and of the underprivileged. This led him many years ago, to spend 3 years in settlement work in the world's most conjested area, the East Side of New York near 2nd and 3rd Avenues, Houston Street, and the Bowery where it is said there live a million persons to the mile.
Later he operated an animal farm in upper New York State, selling fur hearing breeders and pelts from the culls. Business prospered until through a bank failure, he lost the farm and all his savings except $200.00 deposited in another bank.
Blow followed blow. His mother and his sweetheart, to whom he was secretly engaged, died during the same year. Suffering from a mental and nervous shock, he lapsed into a size and was found later wandering about a small New Jersey town.
His friend, Professor Borentz, of Columbia University, persuaded aim to take a trip to Florida in an effort to regain his health. To break the monotony of the long trip he stopped in Vass, North Carolina, for a short stay with another friend, Larry Stone.
A Mr. Spoon was at that time operating the Bargain Center in Greensboro, under the name of The Hosiery Shop, buying second and third grade hose in job lots from nearby mills, and reselling them to the gullible public at the bargain prices of from 5¢ to 50¢ a pair. He now wished to devote his time to another line of work and was looking for a manager for his Hosiery Shop.
Mr. Massie, a mutual friend of Parker and Spoon, learned that Parker was in North Carolina, and recommended him to Mr. Spoon. The two reached an agreement and Parker cancelled his trip further south. Three years later he bought out the stock and changed the name of the store to The Bargain Center.
He laid a wooden flooring above the concrete floor in the rear of the building, walling it up with beaver board, to form a room, which he uses as sleeping quarters. A partition separates these quarters from the store.
Between this improvised room and the opposite wall of the building, is a space to which Mr. Parker refers factiously as his living room. Here he has two rocking chairs, an old model radio, and a second hand desk. Adorning the outside wall of the bedroom, which is the west wall of the living room, is a series of pictures of girls illustrating the title; "A Girl in Every Port". Beneath these are photographs of prominent movie actresses, in color, collected from the Sunday editions of the New York Daily News.
The sleeping quarters are lighted from one rear window, and two glass windows in the upper part of large double doors. The partition separating the sleeping quarters extends within a few feet of the ceiling, cutting out much of the natural light from the store. The only other light is that from the two front show windows. Even on bright days, Mr. Parker snaps on an electric light in the front of the store each time a customer enters, promptly turning it out again after the customer has gone.
To thwart any attempt at forced entry into the store, wide iron straps reach protectingly across the doors and the rear window. In the front of the store, between the show windows and the store proper, iron gratings mounted on hinges, gate-like, offer further protection. On the front door, a flexible cable with an intricate looking device is used at night. The cable is run through a hole in the door, and through another hole in the door casing, and is locked. This is used in addition to a standard yale lock and a pad lock.
One day when the sky was overcast and business had been slow, Mr. Parker sat in his living room smoking and reading. Presently two Negro youths entered. One carried a sizable bundle which he placed on the glass show case at the right of the entrance.
"What for you?" Mr. Parker asked snapping on the light.
"Want to buy some overalls?" one of the youths asked opening the bundle. "Got half dozen I'll sell you for $2.00."
"No", replied Mr. Parker, without inspecting the proffered merchandise.
"Dat's a good buy, mister," urged the second boy.
"Too good", Parker replied.
"What you mean"?
"I mean I never buy anything that's hot."
"Dees here ain't hot," the first youth defended.
"Maybe not", Parker said, "but I don't want them. I don't buy hot merchandise".
One of the boys hurriedly rewrapped the bundle, all the while insisting they had gotten the overalls in a deal up in Virginia. Before Mr. Parker again reached the rear of the store another boy about fourteen entered and met him midway the store.
"How 'bout buyin' a fountain pen?" he asked.
"I can't use it."
"Dat's er good un - look here," he indicated the pen point. "It's writ right dare: gold point."
"Yeah", said Mr. Parker unimpressed.
"You see circus posters all around town, too, snowing pictures of wonderful tricks and stunts, but when you go to the circus you don't see those tricks on the inside. Bring in something else sometime.
I don't want that."
A small dark skinned Negro woman wearing a large dress that waved and wrapped about her as she walked, entered and hurried toward the rear of the store. Although she was alone she talked aloud as if to an interested companion.
"He had a pretty blue dress here t'other day. Jes fits me ef he ain' done and sol' it."
"No Jenny, I haven't sold that dress.
Do you want it today?"
"Where it at?"
Mr. Parker looked through the dresses hanging on the rack.
"Here it is."
"Umph-huh," Jenny admired, taking the garment from him. "I got some blue shoes what'll go good wid dis here. How much it?"
"Fifty cents."
"I sho comin' in an git it Sat'day, ef yo' don' sell it."
"Pay something down on it and I'll hold it for you. But look at it good first. See right here. There's a small hole; looks like a moth hole."
"Sho do. I kin fix dat dough. How much down?" Her face puckered monxey-like as she awaited the answer.
"How much you got?"
Jenny took a handkerchief from her bosom and untied a knot in one corner of it. She had several small coins.
"I kin' pay you twenty cent."
"Let's have it. I'll hang the dress in the back and you can get it Saturday."
"Now don' yo' go and sell dat dress, white folks. I sho' be back fo it Sat'day. Dat jes goes wid my blue shoes." She handed over the 20¢, "I gonna wear 'em t' meetin' Sunday."
This time Mr. Parker aid not return to his rocker in the rear of the store. Instead he placed a chair between the front snow case and the display window, where although he was concealed, he held a commanding view of the entire store. Knocking the ashes from his pipe, he picked up a magazine and continued his reading.
Presently a middle-aged Negro peered through the door, opened it, entered, and walked toward the rear. Seeing no one around he stopped beside a stack of overalls and fingered hurriedly through them. Glancing furtively around once more, he rolled a pair of them into a cylinder, shape, stuffing them under his coat as he started for the door.
"Do you want to pay for those overalls?"
Mr. Parker had gotten to his feet and stood beside the show case. His right hand was in his sweater pocket. The startled Negro was unable to answer immediately.
"I've seen you try that stunt before", Parker continued, pulling a pistol from his pocket. "Now that I’ve caught you I can send you up for 12 months. Don't move or I'll shoot your toes off.
If you run I'll put a bullet in your stomach."
"Don't send me to jail, mister. Shoot me but don't git me 'rested. Here yo' overhalls."
"Now get out of here before I fill you full of lead", Parker threatened.
The Negro ran for the door and disappeared down a nearby alley. The later recollections of this incident always brought a laugh from Mr. Parker.
Toward the middle of the afternoon a small crippled man greeted Mr. Parker cheerily. He was Rev. Webster D. Johnson, pastor of a popular Negro Holiness Church.
"How are you today, Reverend?"
"Very well, Mr. Parser. I was told you would like to talk with me."
"Yes. I am glad you came in just at this time, too. I'll, no doubt, be able to illustrate my point with concrete examples a little later on. Come on back and have a rocker."
"I have been observing the children of your race very closely", he continued when they were both seated, "and I believe I can offer a suggestion or two that you, and the ministers of the other churches here, will see the wisdom of carrying out."
"Have you presented them to any of the other ministers?"
"Not yet. I want you to be the first to know the conditions. If you approve my suggestions, I'll feel encouraged to present them to the others."
Parker knew Rev. Johnson's feeling toward the other ministers and that it would be useless to try to interest him unless he should be the first consulted.
"What is your proposition, Mr. Parker?”
"I have had a wide experience in social work. (I tell you these things to show why I feel justified in suggesting that something he done for the local children). My own childhood education was a limited one. When very small I attended 3 different schools within 2 years, dividing my time between New Orleans, where I was horn, and Pensacola, Fla., where my parents moved later. The first school was French, the second Spanish, and the last was an English school. This was the extent of my classroom schooling. That was in the days before the public school was popularized. In fact, there was an antagonistic feeling toward the public school which was just being introduced. The first two were parochial free schools. In the English school we had to pay.
"My sister and I were the only children. My father was a Protestant and my mother a Catholic. Instead of agreeing that all the children should be reared as Catholics, they had an understanding that the boys should be Protestants and the girls Catholics. I am not a member of any sect today, but I can see more in the belief of the Theosophist than any other faith.
"My father and I didn’t get along well, so when I was just a slip of a fellow I left home and traveled about, absorbing what knowledge I could. My experiences were colorful, but that is beside the question.
"I spent three years in social service work in New York. Later I enrolled in a night school specializing in political science, social science, history and similar subjects.
"All this helps me to understand social problems, and leads me to what I want to say about the children in your part of the city."
"We have very good schools here, Mr. Parker", Reverend Johnson defended.
"This is not a matter of schooling, Reverend. It is about the after-school hours that I want to talk to you about. Do you know you have no place of recreation for the younger children after they leave the school room? They crave recreation and entertainment, so they go to the movies."
"We have a very good theatre here in our section, too, and two of the five theatres for the white people have a Negro section. All the pictures are passed on by a board of censors, so I see no objection to their going to a movie. It keeps them off the streets and out of mischief."
"All very true, but they must have money to pay their way to the movies. So where do they get it? They prowl through the 5 and 10 scores, take things from the counter then come to my store, and to others like it along here, and try to sell those stolen trinkets to us. I've had them to offer me seventy-five cents or a dollar's worth of merchandise for ten cents. I usually recognize the goods and refuse to buy them. Some of the boys will be along here soon and you can see for yourself. I'll offer one of them 5¢ for what he has, and you'll see him buck like a steer. They want that 10¢ because they can't get into the movies for less.
"What I want you and the other preachers to do is work together in an effort to get the city to furnish a place where these children can gather for recreation. They should have a gymnasium where they can form basketball teams, have a punching bag, bars, rings, and games so they will not be dependent on just the movies for their recreation."
"I see what you moan. But what about this recreation center we have now?"
"Too out of the way. It's hard to get to, and functions primarily for an age group far older then this group of youngsters. You tell the other preachers what I have suggested and ask them to come by and discuss the idea with me. In the meantime, I’ll work out a plan for you to use in approaching the city council.”
"I think you have a splendid idea and I’m whole heartedly with you. Sunday, I am going to mention the matter from the pulpit and ask the parents' help in keeping the children off the streets as much as possible after school.”
The door opened arid six children, from about 10 to 12 years of age, pushed into the store. Their pockets bulged. Each child piled his offerings upon the counter. They had flash lights, pocket knives, small tools, shoe brushes, and other smaller items.
"How much yo' gimme for dese here?" asked one chubby, black faced boy indicating his pile of a dozen or more items.
The preacher had walked slowly from the buck of the store and stood just back of the group of children.
"Oh, I couldn't use all that little stuff," Mr. Parker said in feigned disinterest.
"Look dare," urged the boy anxiously. "Dare’s a knife, a shoe brush, and------".
"I see them", countered Mr. Parker. "If I bought this junk I couldn't give you more than 5¢ for it."
"Gimme a dime, mister."
"No. It's not worth over a nickel to me." He looked at the preacher who winked knowingly.
"Hey mister," the largest boy broke in--"Dare's heap's of good things here. Git us a dime apiece and we'll leave 'em all wid you."
"No", Mr. Parker said, walking toward the rear of the store. "I don't want them at any price."
After the boys had gone, the preacher said, "I see now what's going on. I think if we can get the other preachers interested we can get together and work out some tiling."
A little later Mr. Parker was cleaning two iron wheels at a table in the rear of the store when a well dressed white man entered briskly, "Well, well, well, I did find you," he greeted, extending his hand.
"Tom Bobbington!" Mr. Parker's surprise was genuine. "What brought you from New York?"
"Just motoring from Florida. Joe told me you had gone into business in Greensboro, so I stopped over to see you."
"After 19 years in business in New York, this is not such an impressive set-up," parker said apologetically.
"There is money to be made in this line, Norwood."
After talking of old times in New York and what each had done during the interim, they discussed further Farmer's bargain store and its patrons.
"This business wouldn’t appeal to a young man", Parker explained, "he'd be more ambitious than to settle down in a cheap place lime this; but at my age, it gives me a nice little income. I'll tell you now I manage.
"The junk I sell pays the rent, lights, license tax, and my personal expenses. What I sell in the merchandise line is clear profit.
"Take these wheels for instance. If I put them out there the way they are, I couldn't get any more than I paid for them. But when I clean them up and put a coat of that green paint over there on them, I'll get $3.50 or $4.00. They cost me 50¢".
He stopped to wait on a customer.
"Is yo got any second hand overalls?" she asked.
"No, but I have some new ones; they're good ones, too."
"How much is dey?"
"Ninety-seven cents". Mr. Parker held up a pair for inspection.
"Dats too much for de Kind o' wurk my old man does".
"Where does he work?"
"He wurks ober in de acid place".
"What you ought to do is get a pair made of buffalo skin."
"Yas, suh", she agreed, as she sauntered to the door.
Returning Mr. Parker took up a pocket knife and began scraping layers of dirt and grease from one of the iron wheels.
"I see you sleep here in the building", Tom said as he peered through the doorway into Parker's bedroom.
"Yes, but as soon as I get about $1000 saved I'm going to tear out this partition, rent a room somewhere else, and put in a larger merchandise stock. I am gradually enlarging that end of the business now, when I can get some tiling at a good price that will turn quick. For instance, I have a gross of men's undershirts coming in next week that I can retail at 10¢. These Negroes down here want things at the lowest possible price. They are different from---"
A man came in and stopped at the front show case. Parker snapped on the light.
"I'm back again," a slender quardroon greeted Parker.
"What you got this time?" Parker asked.
"How about a .22?" the young man placed the pistol on the snow case. "It's in good shape. Me and a white fellow's been shooting it today."
Parker inspected it closely. It was an old model.
"How much you want for it?"
"Two and a half", the man said promptly.
Parker laid the gun down as though it had suddenly became very hot.
"I wouldn't give you that for it." He picked it up again and worked the barrel to and fro. "See, it's loose. It would cost me 25¢ to get it tightened; maybe 50¢ if he has to re-bore and re-thread the hole for a new screw. You couldn't pay me enough to fire it the way it is. It is likely to clog and explode."
"I told you where I work at", the man said confidentially, "I got a sewing machine drawer full o' pistols. Fellows come in and get drinks and ask me to hold their gun for pay, then they don't come back. I soon have a collection of guns, and I’m out the price of the drinks. Six weeks ago I delivered a half gallon to a man and he gave me a brand new automatic pump gun to hold till he could bring me the money. He hasn’t showed up yet. I’ll bring it over tomorrow and see if you can use it.
"About this .22", he picked it up and held it toward Parker "What will you give me for it?”
"I can’t give you what you want", Parker said emphatically.
Parker deliberated a few seconds; "Not over a buck".
The man picked up the gun and walked toward the door. Parker started back to where Tom was sitting.
"I’ve got so many guns," the man reasoned, valuing back to the show case--"I’ll just let you have this one for a dollar."
When Parker returned to his work on the iron wheels, Tom said:
"That cost you a dollar and you’ll pay 50¢ to have it tightened. What will you sell it for?”
"I'll get $3.00 for it. But, of course, I'll change screws in it myself."
"You were saying a while ago, the Negroes here are different. What did you mean?" Tom asked.
"The North Carolina Negro, especially in this section, is different from the Negro in South Carolina and the other states farther south. The Negroes from those states consider these in North Carolina more of the northern type. On the other hand, the Negro in the east doesn't like the North Carolina Negro," Parker explained.
"There are three distinct types. The Deep South Negro who still retains the attitude of a menial; the Northern Negro who takes his social privileges as a matter of course; and the North Carolina Negro, who, because of the educational advantages offered him in the state, has been (individually, rather than as a race) accepted by the white race on his face value.
"In spite of this fact (or maybe because of it) when a North Carolina Negro goes to New York, he becomes, as their own race will tell you, pompous and self-important, and will seek every opportunity to assert social equality. You remember Tom, when some of the New York Cafes, for instance, put up signs, For White Only? We found out later that there was a group of Negroes from North Carolina up there who had made themselves offensive to the public.
"There are some straight-shooters here, though", he continued, "When you begin to understand them, and they gain confidence in you, they'll trade with you and treat you square. These are what I call the home type Negro".
A boy about 14 opened the door slowly, stepping inside uncertainly, as though entering into some place of danger.
"What do you want?" Parker stood erect and called from where he had been working.
"How much dem fly-aways?" the boy asked.
Parker advanced and snapped on the light again.
"Those what?"
"How much dem fly-aways in de winder?" repeated the boy.
Parker looked inquiringly into the window. "Where are they?" he asked.
"Dem, right dare." The boy indicated a pair of roller skates.
"Seventy-five cents to you."
The boy started to leave the store, then turned and asked:
"Why seventy-five cents to me?"
"Because, I know you. You never have any money." Parker reached under the shelves, behind the show case. "Here's a pair I'll sell you for 40¢."
The boy looked wistfully at the skates. "I ain't got but 30¢". His gaze wandered about the store. Across the building was an odd collection. On a show case smaller than that on the right, was a wrought iron stand on which hung two second hand hats that a lady from an exclusive part of town had left on consignment. Mr. Parker would make 20¢ commission when they were sold.
Next to these hats was a rack of men's shopworn ties. The homemade counter beside the show case held two snake plants; an electric hot plate; several old oil lamps; a tall floor lamp; a bridge lamp without a shade; three electric lamps, (one had a faded silk shade from edge of which hung threads of glass beads); and a radio with seperate loud speaker. Back of the counter against shelving that was no longer in use there was nailed a kind of wall board. On this wall was displayed a set of flat wrenches of various sizes; a bicycle tire; a mirror in a round mission frame; electric wire and electric sockets; and a varied accumulation of odds and ends.
"I can't sell these for less than 40¢", Parker was saying.
The boy turned toward the skates again. He spied a set of skate wheels on the shelf back of Mr. Parker.
"How much dem wheels?" he asked.
"Ten cents apiece." Mr. Parker placed the set before the boy who inspected them, placing each one back on the show case.
"How much dem ear-phones, Mister?"
"Thirty-five cents," Parker said, making no move to take them from above the shelves where they hung on a nail.
"Lemme see 'em".
Parker took them down and passed them over the counter of men’s socks to the boy who tried them on. He adjusted the head band and tried them on again. With the ear phones dangling across his left forearm, the boy searched the depths of a pocket in his ragged vest with both hands. Presently he was fingering through several coins. He counted out 35¢, asked for a paper bag and placed the earphones in it himself. Before he reached the door he turned to Parker and said:
"You oughter gimme one o’dem fly-away wheels, Mister."
Parker picked up one of the skate wheels and handed it to the boy.
"Here you are; but they cost me a dime apiece. I was trying to get my money back out of them."
"Thanks, Mister."
Parker returned to cleaning his wheels.
"He said he had only 30¢," Parser said, "but he had probably 75¢. Those skate wheels didn't cost me but a nickel", he added with a broad smile, "but he thinks he stuck me for a dime, so he'll come here from now on to do his buying.
"You know, I like to study the local Negro; he's interesting," Parker continued, filling his pipe from a tobacco pouch. "When a new customer comes in--Negro, I mean--I have found several ways to impress him and cause him to come back.
"I have learned that the first thing he asks the price of is not the thing he is going to buy. He is just finding out how your prices run. I always quote cost price, or below, on the first article. He'll not buy it. When he asks for a certain other article (he usually intends to buy this one) I tell him I don't know if I have it or not. Then I look about and find it, and price it to him. Before he can make up his mind to take it, I tell him that this is the only one I have now, but that I might have a cheaper one tomorrow, I'm, not sure. I tell him, I don’t know when I'll have another one. This seems to confuse him, and nine times out of ten he will buy the one I'm showing him.”
"I have always wondered about the Southern Negro, and have wanted to know more about him," Tom said. "Tell me of some of your experiences with them."
Parker left the table on which he had been cleaning the wheels and seated himself in one of the rockers.
"Well, let's see. Oh yes; the other way of making friends with him is to-----"
A small brown-skin Negro stopped at the sock counter. Parker had never seen the man before. He picked out a bright checked pair and asked; "How much"?
"Ten cents", parker said although the real price was 20¢.
"You got a good suit?" the man asked, replacing the pair of socks.
"Not your size. That is, I have a suit that would fit you all right but I'm holding it for another fellow. He paid 75¢ on it and will be back Thursday to get it. Here it is.” Parker held up a dark brown suit.
"You are not from around here, are you?” Parker asked, as the man inspected the coat.
"No sir, I'm from New York," the man replied promptly. "How did you know?"
"Oh, you don't talk like these fellows in town," Parker said casually. "I knew you were from somewhere else as soon as you spoke."
"Yes, sir," the man confirmed. He tried on the coat. "It's a good fit. When will the other fellow call for it?”
"Thursday; at least he's suppose to."
”I'll be in Friday and if he ain't come back for it, I’ll take it."
"Well, Tom,” Parker said after the man had left. "That illustrates what I was about to tell you just as he came in. The other way to make a friend of a Negro, and cause him to come back, is to ask him if he doesn't come from some other place. He'll always say yes, if he is a stranger to you.
"I've sold one woman here, (sallie they call her) around a hundred dollars worth of merchandise since I opened up, just because I asked her that question. She said she was from New York. (They always say that!) Just about a month ago she came in with another woman. I said:
"'Sallie here, is a good customer of mine, she's from New York, you know.'
"The other woman laughed heartily and said:
"'She's from Gaffney, South Carolina; de same place I'se from.'
"Of course, I knew all the time she was not from New York, but I didn't think her friend would show her up like that."
"Pretty good, pretty good," laughed Tom.
A black, dudish Negro walked pompously into the store. Parker met him.
"Do you want your wine barrel?", he asked.
"I tell yo, Mr. Parker, I jes' can't git dat barrel today".
"I'll hold it till next pay day if you will pay a quarter more on it," Parker offered.
"I got too much to pay out on pay day.
I sho would like to have dat barrel though."
"Can't you pay a quarter more today?"
"Naw suh. I'spect yo' better put it back in de winder. Jes give me a couple pairs o' socks and we'll call it even."
"All right Sam, pick 'em out."
When he had left Parker took a miniature wine keg with facet, from back of the counter.
"I've made more money with this than anything else in the store", Parker laughed, showing it to Tom. "When I display it in the window it soon attracts some Negro's eye and he comes in and makes a deposit of 75¢ or $1.00 on it. Later he finds out he can't afford to pay the balance. I give him socks or stockings for the amount he had deposited and display the barrel again."
After arranging the keg in one of the windows he returned to the rear of the store.
"I understand the Negroes are a very religious people, aren't they?" Tom asked when Mr. Parker had seated himself again.
"On the surface, yes, but with the majority," Parker answered, "their religion has no influence on their morals. They really do not understand religion. God, to them, is a King--a wrathful King who punishes severely any disloyalty. Therefore, they try to make a display of their religion to show their loyalty. Even the church leaders believed this. What the average Negro knows of religion is what he has heard; by that I mean someone else has read the scriptures to him and he more or less memorizes it, but does not attempt to understand what is meant by it. Their preachers who lead them are crude and lack experience in life.
"A Negro will belong to a certain religious denomination simply because his parents were of that faith. On the other hand, there is the shiftless class who is the ultimate in opportunism and is very easily persuaded. For example, he will be a Baptist in Greensboro, but should he go to some other community where another denomination is the predominant one, he becomes a member of a church of that faith.
"I will agree with you that as a whole, the better element of the Negroes are church goers; but as I said a few minutes ago, it has little or no effect on their morals. The Negro believes if he goes to church and shouts that he is being redeemed. He has a right to that belief, of course, but the trouble is, he does as he pleases when he leaves church, and thinks nothing of it. The Negro really sees no harm in stealing, so long as he goes to church and makes a show of his religion. They feel they are just so much ahead if they can take something from you without being caught.
"A woman who works across the street tried to get a new pair of hose from me because a run came in one of the pairs she bought here.
I told her she caused the run through carelessness. She said; 'I'm a Christian, mister. I wouldn't try to put nothing over on you that a-way.’
"'Oh, yes you would. In fact, you have already tried,' I told her.
" 'Naw suh, I tells yo' I'm a Christian.
Yo' ask de preacher ef I ain't!' she said vigorously.
"'How does he know whether you are a Christian or not?’ I asked disgustedly.
"’He knows me; he knows I goes to church ever’ Sunday, and he’ps keep up de church,’ she defended.
"Well, she didn’t get another pair of hose and she didn't stop trading with me either. Her attitude and conception of being a Christian is typical of that of the Negro. In other words, they don't know what it's all about."
"I would like to have more time to stay around here and see some of these interesting characters you have spoken of, but I am planning to leave town in a sham while Tom said. "There's a customer, Norwood," he added as a very black, robust Negro man entered.
"Hello, Bob. What you want?"
"Hawdy, Mr. Parker, you got any good dice?"
"Yes, I have. I'll make you a good price on them, too." Parker opened the iron gate of the show window and produced a pair of large red dice. Bob scrutnized each one separately. He smiled broadly.
"I don't want dem."
"They are good ones," Parker urged, rolling them across the show case, "and I'll give you a good price on them. I've had them for some time and I want to get my money out of them."
"You might sell 'em to somebody passin' through, but won't no Greensboro Nigger buy 'em," Bob said knowingly.
"Why?" asked Parker.
"I knows whar yo' bought 'em. Dey belonged to "Hard Time Harry" didn't dey?"
"Yes", Parker admitted, "but what of it?"
"Dat's de hardest luck Nigger in de world. I wouldn't have no dice what belonged to him. Dem all you got?"
"Yes, but you better take them."
Bob made for the door, wagging his head,
"I got nuf bad luck ‘thout payin' fo' mo'."
"Well, Tom, there's another slant on the Negro. He is the most superstitious being I ever saw. I might as well give those dice away, I'll never be able to sell them. Time after time I've shown them, but they always refuse to buy and ask to see some other pair".
"Are all Negroes superstitious like that?" asked Tom.
"Yes. But of the 5 or 6 different classes of Negroes there are 2 types that interest me most. These are the Home Negro and the Riff-raff Negro. I know them both. In a word, the Riff-raff Negro is harum-scarum. The Home Negro is conscientious, will pay his bills, is strict with his family, and is fanatically religious."
"Does that contradict what you said previously about the religious life of the Negro?" Tom asked.
"Not at all," Parker resumed. "He is religious in the sense of church attendance, not because he understands it, but because he recalls the sternness of his own parents who went to church regularly and forced him to do so, too. He understands the workings of the church, its expenses, and so on, and he contributes to them.
"Now, the other classes go to church when something attracts them to it. With the man a woman may be the attraction, and with the woman it may be a man. If they feel they have committed any transgression they rise before the congregation and say; 'Forgive me!' The congregation clap their hands and say; 'Hallelujah, Glory Be! we forgive you!' They them feel forgiven. They never consult their preacher for advice.
"The new generation is more educated; have the same feelings and wants and imagination as white people and try to keep up the same appearance. They are more of a problem for the white race than the older Negroes."
Parker and Tom walked to the front of the store and stood in the doorway.
"Norwood, you have always been active in politics and the cause of labor. What's going on down here? How does the laborer rate in North Carolina?"
"The unskilled laborer will average $8.00 or $9.00 a week; $10.00 is a big wage. He will get about 200 days' work in a year, at $1.50 a day, this averages roughly around $300.00 a year. He should get 25¢ an hour, but he doesn't around here. There is a private agreement between the Negro laborer and the boss for $1.50 a day. The garages pay $8.00 to $9.00 a week and require them to work on Sundays. This affects the wages of the white laborer too, because he must compete with the Negro, or the white man will be without work and the Negro will get it all.
"The skilled laborer (carpenters, brick layer cement worker, and others in the building trade) seldom averages a whole week's work. About 20% of the skilled workers have regular employment with the contractors. One skilled laborer is employed to a crew of helpers, who are used only as needed. They hang around a job all day and get only about 3 or 4 hours' work. When the job is completed, they begin coming in here to sell their tools in order to get cash to go on until they can land another job. This applies to the white and Negro laborer alike. Later they will come in and buy the tools back if they have not been sold.
"There are a number of Negroes on WPA but they don't understand it to be an emergency measure. They feel that someone, or some condition, should assume the responsibility to feed them, and they don’t care where or how it comes. They seem to think WPA is some business concern employing them.
"The Negro women, regardless of their class, have a craze for good stockings when they dress up. I sell 10¢ and 15¢ hose for work, but for the better wear they buy the 48¢ to 79¢ hose. When the WPA checks come, a lot of the Negroes will ask me to cash them. The check will average about $5.00 or $6.00 and I can count on selling a pair of full-fashioned hose at 79¢ to 9 out of 10 of them. If I don't sell them, the other stores will, so I cash their checks in order to get their trade. The Negro hates to pay taxes particularly the sales tax. (And I don't blame them a bit.) I have to price the article to include this tax because they just won't buy where they have to pay the tax extra.
"The riff-raff with their $10.00 or $12.00 checks will spend $5.00 for whiskey. When money gets scarce they go to the Brown House, a cheap bootleg joint, where they can get bigger drinks for a dime.
"The Negro puts half the money he makes into the things nearest his heart. For the women the first thing is stockings, for the men, whiskey; next, they want cigarettes, and third; movies. If the men have any money left over, they will take a girl friend up to The Brown House and get her a 5¢ or 10¢ drink.
"The other half of their wages go for necessities; house rent, groceries, and so on. There is a Negro boy who works for me after school and on Saturdays. We call him Browny Boy. I asked him what they usually have to eat at home. He said for dinner they had 'grits, molasses and grease'-- by grease he meant the lard that had been rendered from fat back which they had had for breakfast. They pour this hot lard over the grits and molasses. He said they had that continuously for two weeks because they were practically without money. I sent them some groceries that week; selected some wholesome food that they should have. Sven when the Negroes have plenty of money their diet is of the rough, 'com beef and cabbage' type.
"The riff-raff element skip many a meal. Those working on responsible jobs have credit at the Greek Cafes. Most of these are employed by the city or some large business house. When a Negro becomes very hungry and is without money, he will steal a wrench from a garage, or some other small item, and sell it for 10¢ or 15¢. With this he will buy a large cake, bananas, or something else filling.
"The housing condition among the Negroes is very, very bad. So many of the places are overcrowded and full of vermin. They should be forced to take a coal oil dip to rid themselves of body lice, just as the cattle raisers run the cattle through a sheep dip preparation. But there is one condition they don't have to contend with here, and that is dope. Very few Negroes use opiates of any kind.
"Perhaps I have rambled too much in telling you what I have observed about the Negroes, but. I have found them so interesting that I enjoy talking about them. I want to do something to help them. Already the smaller children have stopped bringing in stolen goods from the 5 and 10 stores since I brought it to the attention of the preachers a few weeks ago. I have talked with several families about diet and other subjects that should benefit them.
"You asked me about politics. You remember when I was in New York I told you how active I had been in New Orleans with the Democratic party? Well, I may get into politics here as I have already been solicited by a city official. I have spoken only of the Negroes, but I have many friends among the better classes of the white people in the city. I can control a large number of these votes. If I should become active, (which I'll do if I don't return to Florida) I'm going to see that something is done for the local Negro--if possible."
