Sam and Mary Hite (Colored)
Warren Plains, N. C.
J. B. P[John B. Palamer]
February 26, 1939
AN ESTATE BY ENTIRETY
Neighbors and acquaintances know this old Negro couple as "Uncle Jack" and "Aunt Suzy." Jack says he is eighty-eight; Suzy says she is eighty-six.
"We didn't have no buth tificates when we wuz born," said Jack, "but I wuz twelve years oldwhen I wuz freed in 1863, and Suzy wuz ten. We wuz born on plantations near each other in de same township in Virginia. I belonged to Cap'n Holt who had about 3,000 acres of land and 100 slaves; Suzy belonged to Sam Holt, Cap'n Holt's brother, who had about 2,000 acres of land and fifty slaves."
The old couple had a well-thumbed family Bible, but it contained no records of family births and deaths.
The land records in the courthouse show that Jack and Suzy own their place together in common as husband and wife, or what the lawyers call "an estate by entirety." (Only a husband and wife can own such an estate in North Carolina. It is based on the unity of husband and wife and comes down from the days of King Henry VIII, Blackstone, and Lord Coke, when, by Common Law interpretation, the husband and wife were considered one. A legal wit has appended, "the husband is the one!")
Jack, though neither he nor Suzy can read and write, said that a lawyer who helped them in legal matters told them that in North Carolina such an estate could be held by husband and wife, and that if legal judgment for debt were obtained against either one of them, it could not be collected out of the indivisible parts of either, and that in case of divorce the law would give him and Suzy one-half each, and in case of death without a will, the survivor would inherit the whole.
Jack is not liked by certain members of his race because he has outwitted several of them in legal tilts.
"De man is de boss of de house, and de wife should 'tend to de babies and look after de cooking, " Jack remarked.
"My marster, Cap'n Holt, won't so cruel to his slaves," said Jack, "but de overseer whupped me once with a cowhide lash, and my shirt off. I 'spec I served it, though, •cause I started a fight with another slave boy. We wuz never taught to read andwrite, but sometimes a young white 'oman read de catechism to us."
"My marster, Sam Holt, let his overseer whup his slaves turrible," replied Suzy. "I often seed the slaves whupped so bad that their backs run blood. We wuz sho' glad when President Lincoln freed us during de War, but most of us still stayed on de old plantation where we wuz slaves 'cause we had nowhere else to go. Sam Holt's plantation, where I wuz born as a slave, wuz in the same township as Cap'n Holt's and Jack and me met and fell in love. We wuz married when I wuz twenty years old and Jack wuz twenty-two. We stayed in de old neighborhood awhile after we wuz married, and den we come over to North Carolina and rented awhile from Mr. Mike Sanders near our home here. We den bought dis little place of seven acres from Mr. Sanders 'bout forty-five years ago and have lived here ever since."
"We come down here ' cause we heard dat tobacco raising wuz very profitable, and cotton, too," explained Jack. "We didn't raise no cotton before we moved, but I jest love to raise bright tobacco.
"I used to plant three acres of tobacco, but dis here government control mighty nigh ruint me. I usually has a little left over after paying all my bills, but dis last year I didn't pay out of debt. I still owe $60. I tell you, dis here control is about ruint de farmer. De committee in dis township cut de nigger and de pore white farmer down to where he didn't have nothing left. But de committeemen had more tobacco den dey ever had before, Dey wouldn't let niggers be on de acre committee, so we had no chance."
"Oh, hush your fuss 'bout de committee, Jack, "interrupted Suzy. "Let me talk some; let me tell him 'bout all dem chillun you caused me to have. Yes sir, I'se had thirteen, and I ain't never had no doctor yet. I wuz a midwife, so I got another midwife to swap times wid me. I 'tended to her, and she 'tended to me. But having younguns, dat's a job. Dey come nigh working me to death. I shore wish I had knowed 'bout buth control."
"Buth control!" exclaimed Jack. "Why Suzy, ain't you 'shamed to yourself? Don't you know dat de Scriptures says to 'multiply and 'plenish de earth?' Dis here buth control is a sin and against God's word.
"What is we got to worry about anyway? All our chillun done pretty good. Dey all went Noth and got good jobs, except Lorena, and we wuz able to give dem all good common school eddications. Dat's good enough for anybody. "
Jack and Suzy are more comfortably fixed in their declining years than many other families of their race. Lorena Jackson, one of their younger daughters, a neatly appearing young woman about thirty years old, now lives with her aging parents and gives them devoted care. For several years Lorena was a capable house servant. Lorena had a seventh-grade education, and her work was done in cultured homes.
"After my husband and I separated about two years ago, I decided it was my Christian duty to come back home and wait on Mama and Papa," she said.
Their six-room house gave ample proof that Lorena is a good housekeeper. She pointed out improvements she had made for the parents since she came to live with them, then she commented on the supper she had prepared, which consisted of well-cooked biscuits, steaming hot coffee, crisp bacon, milk, butter, and pear preserves.
The "company room" as they call it, contained a big iron bed with clean white linen and counterpane, two comfortable chairs, a bureau, a washstand with an old-fashioned bowl, pitcher, and a clean towel, a neat oil lamp with shade, and a small table.
"We folks in the country need electricity more than anything else," Lorena remarked, "We can get along without a phone and waterworks, but we certainly do need the conveniences of electricity. It is especially needed in country homes to help housekeepers with their burdens. We do hope a rural electric line will come out our way. Our Government is certainly helping farm folks when it helps in putting up rural lines with cheap rates.
"I read to my parents often, especially from the Bible, for they seem to enjoy my reading to them so much. Colored and white neighbors also drop in to see us occasionally to help break the monotony.""De Lord will provide for folks who do right," Suzy remarked.
"Lorena wuz always our best child," added Jack.
Tommy Beak, a grandson who helps Jack and Suzy on their little farm, entered, with a cheerful greeting.
"Kinder wet weather, ain't it? Too wet to farm much; ain't fixed nothing but a tobacco bed. We expect to plant between three and four acres in tobacco, some corn, and a very little cotton. It looks like there ain't much for us farmers in cotton now. We're going to have a better garden this year than we had last year, for a good garden saves a lot and helps our health. We're going to plant some cabbage, tomatoes, snaps, salad, okra, sweet potatoes, onions and early roas'n ears. If our tobacco crop turns out good, Grandpa and I are going to pay the sixty-dollar balance we owe the Government on seed loan for 1938; won't owe anybody.
"Since I've been with Grandpa and Grandma, I've helped them pay off a small mortgage on their little home which was put on when Grandpa had to pay 100 percent profit to a crop lien merchant for his supplies. Now we borrow from the Government, at five percent, the little money we need, and we buy our supplies for cash at a much lower price. We sure do think the Government's helping us small farmers is a good thing.
Tommy has a steer, two hogs, a cow now giving milk, and a heifer. He uses the steer as a work animal.
"We need more chickens and eggs, " he said. "We haven't got but three hens and two roosters. I am trying to get Grandma to have a big flock of chickens so we can sell some and have more to eat."
The conversation drifted from this to that. First one subject came up for discussion, then another.
"We niggers feel that we ain't treated right, " commented Jack. "We pay taxes like white folks, and even if we can't read and write we ought to have de vote. I know white folks who can't read and write and dey vote. We fought for de Government in de World War; four of my grandsons fought in de World War."
"I don't believe in wimmen voting; dey ought to look atter de house and chillun and let de men run de Guvment," Suzy interrupted.
"Me and Suzy is been a member of de church for about sixty years, and I is been a deacon about fifty," Jack boastfully said. "All our chillun went to dis church until dey went noth. None of my chillun ever did any crime. Dey learnt good morals at de church. Younguns dese days don't go to church and dey is always drinking, gambling, and fighting. If dey went to church dey would be better folks. And I'll tell you another thing I don't believe in and dat's sprinkling. I believe baptism is going down under de water; Christ wuz dipped down in de water and not sprinkled. De Bible teaches dis, and we Baptist believes it is de only safe way for salvation."
N, C. --Very good
An Estate By Entirety
Negro farm owners for forty-five years -- government control nearly "ruint" them -- control committee unfair he is agin "buth" control -- feel need of electricity father had to mortgage place to repay one hundred percent crop lien -- can now borrow from government at five percent resent, as taxpayers, not having the vote.