Frances L. Harris
GREEKS IN WILMINGTON
Of the forty foreign-born and the forty native Greeks in New Hanover County forty-eight live in Wilmington, all of the foreign-born and eight native. These Greeks are loyal to the Greek Orthodox Church, although they have no church building nor a resident priest. When they have their occasional services they bring the priest from Raleigh. He also comes to them for weddings, baptisms, and funerals. There are now being made efforts to organize a congregation, and when this is done they will select their "President."
The Greeks feel much more securely married if a Greek priest performs the ceremony. They do not interfere with the religion of an American wife and will allow her to bring up her children in her faith, as far as attending Sunday School and church services are concerned; but the sacraments of baptism, marriage, and other ceremonies must be in charge of a Greek priest. Without exception they express amazement and disapproval of the American divorce habit. They practice careful training and instruction for matrimony, making of marital ties a serious partnership and life work.
In the fifty years that Greeks have been coming to Wilmington there is a record of one trial of a Greek in the courts for an illegal act, and that was proved to be ignorance. This is the story: Angelo Zandistis operated a cafe there.
His wife was a maternity case at a hospital in Wilmington. When time came for her dismissal Angelo gave a check in payment of her hospital bill. In his excitement he forgot to be sure that he had funds sufficient in the bank to cover the amount of the check. When the check was presented and the hospital was informed that it was no good they immediately had Angelo arrested. The other Greeks in the community came to his rescue by paying the check. The situation was explained and the case disposed of out of court. Angelo is quite successful now, carefully observing the law and operating his business under an Anglicized name.
All children attend the public schools and are generally good students, but the colony maintains a Greek school to which most of the Greek children anda good many adults go during hours which do not conflict with the regular school work. This school is for males only and is conducted by a young Greek who attended the University of Athens and New York University. He holds no degree but is read in both the Greek and English languages.
An outstanding characteristic of the Greeks in Wilmington is their generosity, a generosity prompted by sympathy for those in need. This generosity does not only extend to theirown people but to the other people of their community as well.
A conspicuous example of this generosity is found in the will of Mr. T. Pappademos, and in the report of the Associated Charities of Wilmington, North Carolina, for the year 1916. Quoting from the report: "The gift of $500.00 by the late Mr. T. Pappademos to this Board, deserves more than passing attention. Those who knew the donor intimately, speak most highly of his kindness to those in want, and that the deserving never went away hungry from his place of business. His gifts to individuals and to the James Walker Memorial Hospital give further evidence of his sympathetic heart to the sick and distressed. If the example of Mr. Pappademos, not native born, but who adopted this country as his own, would be followed by some of our own people of means, larger and better things for most of the applicants could be accomplished by this Board. May the Lord move the hearts of some to emulate the above example."
At this time, the New York Cafe, owned and run by the Saffo family, principally George Saffo, give to the Associated Charities one meal a day. This means 365 meals per year. If a client needs food for several days or a week his three meals are given and the number deducted from the aggregate. It is said that all the Greek restaurateurs in Wilmington are equally generous with individuals, but no record is kept of their kindness.

