H. V. Waldrep
Roberta. Park
Birmingham, Alabama
IT'S HELL TO BE POPULAR
"See here, Roberta, we're making interviews; and, see here, Roberta, we want an interview out of you. But none of that soft-soaping business. We want the goods, we gotta have the goods. If you won't speak straight- out and tell me the truth, not a damn thing more than the truth, it's all off. You can suck up that Coca Cola and we'll forget the matter, but if you will speak out honestly, without holding, we'll talk for quite a while. We want the goods, remember?"
Roberta was told, and she sucked her Coca Cola bewilderedly. She was frozen in self-consciousness; for the idea of having an ear nailed to every¬thing she said was discomfiting.
Roberta is a school girl at Bamsey High School, out in Five Points. She is not particularly a bright girl, not particularly a dumb girl. There is something weak-kneed and vacillating about her. Her code of conduct is not strong; she can be bent by a stronger will, which isn't hard to find, in her case. Not that she is immoral, and she certainly isn't a-moral. In her young mind, she is fitted with conventions, stuffed with the oughtness of things. She wavers; she fears. And unfortunately her body is sensitive, passionate, and neatly healthy.
The interviewer knew that if an honest interview could be tom from a girl of this type, it would he in an emotional spasm; he knew that the reins must be torn from her hands.
"I don't know what you mean," she replied as expected.
"Of course, you do. You are a girl. You think, you have prejudices, you have troubles. You can talk anyway you want to. Just day-dream aloud, and I'll listen in. The first thing, for God's sake, loosen up. I'm not a bear. You've known me for years. Bust loose, he natural! Say it! you don't need to fear a critical attitude. If you say something that isn't good, o.k.; I'll leave that part out. Just talk!"
Roberta tasted her drink, and was a little embarrassed yet. So a bottle of beer was called for each of them. They were, by the way, in a booth. They poured the beer into frosted glasses, and she sipped uncertainly. The feminine movements of her slender fingers wavered over the bosom of her dress, as if her hand was wet and she didn't want to soil anything. She said:
"This is the second glass of beer I've drunk." She took to lying like a fish takes to swimming; it was a cold-blooded lie she was saying. The interviewer knew that Roberta was accustomed to lying, and that was one of the things high school girls, and perhaps other girls, do regularly. They lie in casual conversation, they lie in the arms of lovers, they lie to mother, dad, and brother.
"You lie, and what I want to know is why?"
Her eyes brightened, a little, and she carefully brushed a painted lip with a handkerchief. Her lips were full, her teeth even, and when she smiled too much gum above the upper teeth was displayed. Her hair was cut short in the back, and barely touched the jacket that came close around her neck. The jacket was of a red, white, and blue stripe, stuffed in a white, flowing- bottomed skirt. On her wrist, she wore a tiny watch.
She was a lithe girl in the clothes she wore, slender, and almost lean. Her face was of a thin, delicate cut; the nose was small; and the eyes small, a little demure or coy. She could be called a weak girl, temperamental, passionate, and sense-dominated.
"Yes, I lied. I lie all the time." Now, she was getting somewhere, and she detected the interest in her interviewer's eyes, for she began to play on the subject, building up her small success. He knew it was her policy to play apparent success, snatching at a good point. "We have to lie." She fluttered her eye-lids, pouted her lips. "The boys don't have any mercy on a girl. If you don't lie you'd be like something stopped on. If you don't lie, why, they think you. don't care anything about them, that you're two-timing them, and that you're making suckers out of them. How they despise being suckers!"
"You lie out of dates sometimes?"
"Yes. I tell the hoys that I am sick or I can't go out because my mother won't let me."
"What is the real reason?"
"Sometimes you go with a boy nearly all the time. He takes you out to Shades Mountain. Or he takes you to the Ritz Theatre every week. He never thinks up something new and exciting. You get dreadfully and awfully tired. You want to scream when he comes up the steps in the same way, with his package of chewing gum, and his cigarettes. When a new boy comes along, and wants to date me, he may have something fresh." She giggled and batted her eyes; for she has reached the conclusion that that makes her more attractive.
Every moment, every tone of her voice was calculated, the parting of her lips, the movement of her little finger on the rim of her glass, the innocent, absorbed way she listened to what was being said.
Just now she was trying desperately hard to please. It was pitiful to watch the strain she was under, the held lightness of tone, the agony of eternally reaching for gaiety.
When a woman came into the place, when a waitress passed, Roberta's small, coy eyes followed with an intenseness that was startling. Her mind was tied up in male-capture, her soul was in mating, and she never ceased to act the flirt.
"Isn't it a little dirty to treat a boy in that manner, substitute another fellow when he has been faithful?"
"Yes, yes," she snatched at the suggestion,
"In God's name be honest!" The anger struck her, and she recoiled, obviously disgruntled, not understanding why her technique of agreeableness had failed; her yes-ing had always worked, or she hoped it had. She could not at this moment realize she wasn't out on a date. The interviewer wished he was a woman, but was afraid if he had been a woman she would be a spot of cattiness. Tor he knew this girl as nothing; nothing but a bundle of vanity, a flirting have-your-a-date-tonight-darling and Bob-and-I-had-a-gorgeous-time- at-the-Green-Hut. He knew she ran to the phone at the slightest tingle, ran to the window to watch every automobile. She was like an Indian collecting scalps in her date collecting. Every spark of feeling, honor, and esteem for herself was wiped out in her chase. She had to be popular.
"You can't expect a girl to go with a fellow that sits on the divan, when a fellow comes along with a car? I just love to go riding. What kind of a car do you have, darling?"
"Never mind!" He asked. "How many dates do you have a week?"
"I have oodles." She looked from lowered lashes over her beer. She pretended innocence when he let out an oath, as if she didn't know the mean¬ing or significance of what he said, when he knew very well on many occasions she had used filthier and more profane exclamations.
"How many?"
"Everytime mother will let me..." She dropped her eyes and put her slim hand on the table so you could see her new manicure, and her wrist watch, which was evidently new. "I'm lying," she conceded glibly, seeing that the interviewer liked to catch her in characteristic lies, and she was bound to please. "I really don't have many. I get so lonely I could die. I'm changed since yon saw me. I used to be so happy and everything." A hurt, forlornness settled on her. "Sometimes I want to jump off Lover's Leap and kill myself. I just hate myself! You know? this is a cruel old world." It was a line--God bless her little soul!
"Now, let me ask you some questions..."
"Okie-doke."
"What year of school are you in?"
"I need another semester before I'm graduated."
"How old are you?"
"Sixteen." She is nearly eighteen, in fact.
"Were you born in Birmingham?"
"No." She was sitting as if she were on the edge of the chair, her slim elbows on the table, her hands laced over the alight rise of her bosom. Lips slightly parted, eyes opened wide, she was engagingly frank.
"Here take some more beer." She did. And, "Have you ever been drunk!"
"No," she responded, then bowed her head: "I mean, not much drunk. I've got giggly, but I hate myself. I hate myself all the time. I just do anything for people I love," her voice was creamy, "and I just hate my¬self for it."
"Do you ever get afraid to go on those lonely mountain roads with boys?"
She tossed her head: "I can take care of myself." The interviewer could see her curling in a far corner of an automobile seat with that same toss of the head, when a boy had made some remark she felt she ought to resent.
"You have to play up to the boys so much, make them think they are kiggs. Boys are awfully conceited." She crinkled her thin brows, as if she were trying to scold a child. "They try to get you drunk. They jump out to open the door for you to make you want to kiss them, and they want to kiss all the time." Her face shaded pinkly, and her eyes sparkled with the memory of a thousand open-mouthed kisses, a thousand embraces that choked her very heart with sensation. But she made a little face like a lady. And meanwhile she was getting fluttery and starry-eyed with beer.
"They paw," she said leaning forward confidingly, "and they want to neck until you want to scream. It's hell," she said giddily, which betrayed the lie, "to be popular. If you don't hug and kiss they think you don't lov-v-e-e " her little pink tongue came out---- "don't lov-v-e-e then.
The boys come on you like they're carrying the ball for a touchdown. They argue; they plead; and they lie." She turned accusing eyes on the inter¬viewer, "You think girls lie. You ought to have heard what I have heard and with a STRAIGHT face, mind you.
"When you want to drive, they won't let you. You're a woman, and I--" she pounded her bosom humorously---- "and I am a MAN. If they let you, and you do, it is on a country road, and pretty soon," she said in her arch way, "you don't want to drive, the way they get to acting!"
She became troubled, the maiden-in-distress attitude: "You go with a boy for weeks and weeks, and then he just quits coming. He doesn't tell you, mot a word. And yon have been cutting dates with other boys, cutting acquaintances, and you have to start all over again."
"What are your hobbies, Roberta?"
"What's that?" She knew, but wanted to play dumb. She saw the pain on the disillusioned interviewer's face. But she didn't know what to say, and it was evident that her life was nothing but dates and some more dates.
"I go to shows all the time. I saw "Sweethearts" at Five Points."
"Do you make good grades?"
"I am awfully dumb." She said with her most disarming affectation, "I just hate myself because I am so dumb. I want to di-see!" She went on; "You think woman are awfully dumb?" She didn't wait for an answer, but be¬gan to sing a song about you're the only star in my blue heaven--she sang softly.
 "I just hate books, don't you?"
"Hare take some more beer."
"It'll give me a tummy."
She pushed her glass away and cocked her head to one side, and any¬body could see she had practiced that pose before the mirror a million times.
“Just one more thing, Roberta; what about religion."
She sobered: "Gosh, I am afraid not to believe!"
It was a damn unsatisfactory interview.
7/20/39
MS
