THE RED, WHITE, AND BLUE BARBER SHOP
Written by; Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by; Mrs. Sarah E. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
April 7, 1939
March 30, 1939
Mr. Henry T. Bremblett (white)
138 Thomas Street
Athens, Georgia
Barber S. B. H.
THE RED, WHITE AND BLUE BARBER SHOP
This establishment derives its name from the small red, white, and blue signs which are placed on either side of the entrance.
As I answered the greeting of the middle-aged proprietor and told him of my mission, I realized that here was a person willing and eager to relate the story of his life and experiences.
"I can talk to you right now,” he said. "Just take a seat on this here bench." When he was comfortably seated opposite me, he began: "That shore is funny, you asking for my life history. Just this past gone Sunday I thought about doing that very thing myself, but I didn’t have no paper, and then too, the old lady had a passed of women to come in to see her and by the time they left I had plumb forgot it. Now, I don’t care a bit if you write it up. What do you want me to start my story?"
"Just as far back as you can remember," I told him.
"Thar now! Ain’t that gittin’ it all?" he exclaimed delightedly. "Now, if I went and told you all that’s happened to me from the time I can remember up ’til now, you’d be here ’til slap night, more days than one, takin' it all down."
"Hello, Whiskey Fill! How about a little service? Make it snappy," was the noisy greeting of a man who came in for a haircut and shave.
While Mr. Matthews was attending to the needs of his customer, I observed my surroundings. The three barber chairs took up practically all of the space in the small shop, and behind the door a green and cream-colored water cooler rested on a green stand. Benches, for the waiting patrons, flanked the doorway and a long mirror extended along the side wall parallel with the three chairs. Under this was a cabinet holding towels, aprons and other barbering accessories.
Gay calendars lined the walls, and above the long mirror three placards read respectively:
"Please refrain from vulgar or profane language, Gentlemen."
"Rules for the Day"
"Do nothing that you would not like
To be doing when Jesus comes.
"Go to no place where you would not like
To be found when Jesus comes.
"Say nothing that you would not like
To be saying when Jesus comes."
"Please Pay Now
We don't want to chase you all over Hell!"
Pinned to the bottom of the last placard is a card which reads:"Keep smiling, Gentlemen."
On the beaverboard partition at the rear of the shop hang two more placards, one of which reads:
"Gentlemen will behave,
Others must."
The other card advertises his prices. Haircuts 25¢ shaves 15¢, and shampoos 25¢. On the side where I was sitting, there was a lavatory under a small mirror.
The barber is about five feet, six inches, quite stout, and has a remnant of snowy white hair. He wore dark trousers and vest, a blue shirt and tie, and high-topped, laced tan shoes.
Mr. Matthews' assistant operated the first barber chair. He weighs at least three hundred pounds. He wore light gray trousers, and his green and white shirt was open at the neck. The man paid close attention to what Mr. Matthews said, and did not hesitate to break into the conversation frequently. When the customer had paid for the services rendered, Mr. Matthews came back and resumed his story:
"Well, now, let me see. I was born up yonder on the line of Gwinnett and Hall Counties, on September 9, 1875. You can look at me and tell I ain't never done nothing but work ever since I got big enough. I shore has had a hard time all my life if anybody ever did. Father was a one-armed school teacher. He had lost his arm in the Civil far in the battle of Sharpesburg, Virginia. He was educated after the war at the school in Oxford, Georgia.
"We moved from the place what I was born end settled tuther side of Lawrenceville and lived that off and on 'til I was thirteen. Then we moved here to Princeton Factory.
"Soon as I was old enough I had to work in the fields doing everything that come to hand. When the time to go to school came, I went some, but I didn’t learn like I oughta. The first school they sent me to was Nazareth Church, at a place called the Cross Roads, in Jackson County, It's in Barrow County now. Then we moved off into the County Line settlement. Father taught school at County Line Academy, in Gwinnett. When we were on our way from County Line to Princeton Factory, Brother Jim walked along beside our wagon with a rifle on his shoulder. One day while we were on the road my little dog that was trotting along at brother’s heels, lit out across the fields after a rabbit all of a sudden. Brother took out after him, and I’ve always believed that when he shot that rabbit he must have killed my little dog for I never seed him no more. It most killed me to lose my dog. I was crazy ’bout ’im.
"I was nigh fifteen year old when we moved to Princeton and I went to work sweeping the floor in the mill at 25¢ a day, and did I feel rich on pay day in those times? I know 25¢ sounds like a mighty little bit to you, but for a 15-year-old boy that was a heap of money then. I recollect very well what I done with my very first money. Thar was a pewerful crowd of us chillun, and it was hard for my father to make a livin’ for all of us. One winter before then I hadn’t had no shoes to wear, so I never took no chances on not having shoes that first winter I worked. Soon as I was paid enough, I bought myself two pairs of shoes, one pair to wear everyday and the other pair was for Sunday. Them was mighty tight times then, but one thing shore I ain’t never had to go barfooted from that day ’til this.
"My next Job at the mill was doffing and that paid me 35¢ a day. I worked at that about four years. Then I shore did get a raise, when they changed me to work as an oiler and bander at 75¢ a day, oiling the spindles and putting bands on the cylinders. They have a contraption to hold the hands on now, so they don’t have to hire banders.”
His fat associate interrupted, "Lady, has you ever been in a cotton mill?" I admitted that I hadn’t had that experience. "Well, t’aint no use for Mr. Matthews to try to ’splain it to you then, for you wouldn’t never Understand. Folks hasgot to see a machine in operation to take it in. Why; I could take you down to the old Check Mill whar I used to work and show you that machinery and then when I ’splained it all you could Understand what he is talking about when he tells you of oiling spindles and banding cylinders. Go ahead with your story, Mr. Matthews."
Very patiently Mr. Matthews made a new start:"After I married I took a job as second hand in the spinning room, making $1.25 a day. I worked at that Job for a year. My wife died and I quit work. I didn’t have the heart to work no more after she died.
"She was 15 and I was 16 when we got married. She lived one year to the day from the time we married, and would have been living yet if the doctors had been up on their jobs like they are now. I stayed a widower six year before I married Miss Libby Aderholt." There were tears in his eyes as he continued his story:
"My first wife was the finest woman that ever lived, and it most nigh killed me when she died." He was silent for a moment, then added, "This woman I'm married to now is all right too. She's just as good as she can be, in her own way."
Here his assistant interrupted with a sly grin, "Ain't it funny how folks will brag about how good thar first mates was, but they wait ’til etter they're dead to do it."
"Well," Mr. Matthews solemnly answered, "I. said my present wife is all right, in her own way, didn't I?
"After Libby and me was married I went back to work, in the weaving room this time, at $1.50 a day, and I worked there in that weaving room about five or six year." He was silent so long that I wondered what he was thinking about. I soon found out, when he began:
"I was just trying to think what I done with the first money I made besides buying shoes. I don't recollect unless it was that I bought clothes. I always did believe in wearing good clothes if I could get 'em. As the Negroes say, I was 'stepping out in high cotton,' for them was my first courting days.
"I was a fool about straw hats in my young days. I can even remember the first one I ever owned. We got paid off Saturday at dinner, and all that morning I had kept saying to myself, 'I'm going to buy me a straw hat this evening.' I got my pay envelope, went home, cleaned up, changed my clothes, et dinner, and went stepping it off downtown to buy my new hat, and when I got home with it that night I shore felt big. How my mother did fuss at me for buying it. She needed that money for something else that was probably much more important. Anyhow, Sunday afternoon I dressed up in my best clothes, put on my hat, and started out with a crowd of boys to the Bobbin Mill. One of the boys picked up a stick, hit me on the head with it, and broke in the crown of my nice new hat. I never did know how come he done it unless he was jealous of me having a straw hat and he didn’t have none.
"I went to work fixing looms when we moved over here to the Southern Mill. They give me $11.40 a week to begin with but it wasn't long before they had advanced me on up to $18 a week. However, I have never depended entirely on what I made in the mill to live on, as I've followed the barber trade as far back as when I was first married. I learned the trade in my brother-in-law's shop in Princeton. In them days we done a haircut for 15¢ and a dime would pay for a shave.
"The first person I ever shaved was a crabbed old man, named Jim Dykes. He come in our shop and said, 'Boy, do you know how to shave a man?' Now I thought I was just about the best barber that ever come down the line, so I said to him, 'Yes, sir, Mr. Dykes, have a seat and let me show you just how good I am.' Back in them days we didn't have regular barber chairs. Anyway, the old man set down, and I lathered his face and started shaving. I hadn't taken more than a few strokes before he began to fuss. 'Say boy, why don't you sharpen that razor?'
"'I did sharpen it, Mr. Dykes,' I told him.
’"Well, sharpen it some more. You're pulling my beard out by the roots.’ "
"By this time I was gitting sorta nervous, but I sharpened it again the best I could and went on shaving him. Just as I had 'most finished, he jumped out of the chair, and shaking his fist in my face, he said, 'God-a-Mighty, God d--n, you've took all the skin off my face. You'll pay for this.' I told the old man how sorry I was about not being able to please him, but it didn't do no good. My brother-in-law had to finish the job, and I was scared to death for fear I had caused our shop to lose a customer, but he kept coming on back regular just the same ’cept he never would let me do any of his work no more.”
Two men came in for haircuts and shaves. One of them was clad in overalls and dress shoes, and he hastily took his seat in the first chair, the one presided over by the fat barber. The other, a much older man, wore a gray suit and hat, and black shoes. Addressing Mr. Matthews, he said, "Joe, how 'bout lending me your razor?"
"All right," was the reply, "just set yourself in that there chair and let's see what we can do with the razor." The man removed his coat, took the proffered chair, and Mr. Matthews cut his hair.” "How about a shave?" he asked, when the haircut was finished.
"New, I ain’t going to let you shave me," the customer said with some emphasis.
"Why?"
"’Cause once when I come in here and asked you your price on a haircut and a shave you told me 100. Then when I let you shave me, end handed you 50¢ you never gave me back but a dime for change. No, sir! You cheated me once, but you ain’t going to have no chance to do it no more."
"You must have misunderstood me," Mr. Matthews replied. "I have had the same price ever since I’ve been in business. I’m sorry if you think I did such a thing on purpose." The customer finally consented to be shaved.
The young man in the first chair had a haircut, a shave, a shampoo, and a shoeshine. The barber asked him, "Don’t you want some good smelling tonic on your hair?"
"Yes," replied the customer.
"I betcha going to see your girl tonight," the fat barber teased.
"I am," was the reply. "But, even if I wasn’t, I’d have to have this job done anyway, for hauling coal is a nasty job.
The coal dust just gits all over me."
Soon after these customers departed, a middle-aged man came in and the fat barber began:"Hello, Pal. Come in. It'll cost you 25¢ to git shaved today."
"You won’t git it," the customer retorted.
"Oh, yes, we will, for your beard is a week old.”
"Is that so? Well, you have nothing to brag about. Your own beard is an inch long, and you a barber too."
"Well, its like this," the barber argued, "we are so busy shaving others that we don't have time to shave ourselves."
"Oh, shut up," snorted the customer. "Who asked you to shave me anyhow? I never have let you cut my hair or shave me either, and I ain't changing now,"
Mr. Matthews spoke up, "Come on, Mr. Davis, I'm ready for you now end the price is the same as always."
The customer took his seat, Mr. Matthews proceeded to cut his hair, and then struck a match and singed the ends of his hair. I was curious as to why he did that, and Mr. Matthews explained:"You see, hair is all hollow, and the oil runs out after it is cut unless you singe it. That closes the pores and the oil is retained in the hair. I believe in doing a job right, if I do it at all." He combed the hair briskly after singeing it, and when he had completed that task to his satisfaction, he took a razor from a case, sharpened it on a whetstone, and shaved the man.
Six other customers were waiting by this time, and realizing that Mr. Matthews was too busy for further conversation, I closed my notebook and got up to leave. "Not going, are you?" he asked. "Yes," I replied and asked when it would be convenient to finish the interview. "Come over to my house tonight, and I'll finish telling you my story then,” he said.
I reached his residence about ten minutes early and as he had not returned from his downtown shop, his wife chatted with me until he arrived. She urged him to eat his supper before containing his narrative. She said to me:"I would ask you to eat with us, but we ain't got nothing fitten to eat now since we et up all our hams. I've been building a hogpen today and my arms are sore as boils.”
When supper was finished, Mr. Matthews unlocked a battered old steel trunk and took out a sack of smoking tobacco. He filled his pipe, lit it, took a few puffs, and with an air of content-ment and general well being, he started his story again:
"You know I’ve always heared that if a woman goes into a place whar thar ain't nobody but men, it's bad luck, but that shore wasn't the ease today. We hadn't done a thing all day up 'til the time you went to my shop, then we got busy and never did have no let-up before closing time. I locked my shop so I could finish with them that was already waiting, and that's why I was sorta late gitting home.
"I believe I done told you about my mill experiences, and that the lest thing I told you about was when we left Princeton and moved over here and I went to work fixing broken-down looms. I worked on that job nigh eighteen year. I was known as a section hand. At least that's what they usually call the man that does that sort of work. All that time I was doing barber work at night and on Sundays sometimes.
"When I bought this house and lot, thar wasn't but twelve houses on this here hill. I've been sorry since that I settled here, for it don't suit me at all." His wife broke in, "Thar now, you is talking plumb foolish. I ain't narry bit sorry we lives here. I likes having a heap of folks 'round about me, and ther's plenty to do helping folks that can't help themselves. You ought to be ashamed of yourself."
"Well, I ain't," he retorted. "'I'ain't no need to lie about the way you feel 'bout a thing. If anybody had told me I'd have lived here this long, I wouldn't-a believed 'em. If I had my time to go over I woulda bought in the country. In town is no place to raisechillun. Another thing, taxes in town will mighty nigh eat you up. I Just naturally-born like the country best anyhow. When I was a chap living in the country I used to make partridge traps. Did you ever see one? Well, I'll declar’! You takes two pieces of plank a foot and a half long, and you round the ends and nail slats over 'em, then dig a trench about a foot and a half deep, and put the trap over it. You sorta tilt the trap so the birds can git under it, and you sprinkle corn on the ground. A partridge will see the corn and start picking it up end the other partridges will follow. Then they git down in the trench and stick their heads up through the cracks, and don't seem to know how to git out. All you have to do is pull thar heads off, lift up the trap and take 'em out. Them traps is agin the law now, but I got many a partridge whilst we could still operate 'em.
"I never was in no trouble but once, and that didn’t amount to much. A man tried to run the hog over me in the mill. I stood it long as I could before I told the super about it; he told me to beat the fire out of the fellow that was imposing on me, and you can just bet I done it.
"If I hadn’t kept up my barber trade, I don’t know what would have become of us after the mill work played out for me. I opened up my shop in a room here by our house and done a good business all through the war. When the depression come, I couldn’t do no good with it no more, so I give it up and got me a job on the police force.
It didn’t take me long to git tired of that and me and another man opened a barber shop on Clayton Street, and we stayed in business thar for a little over two year. Then that fellow we was renting from leased the building right out from under us. We couldn’t find a place to suit us, so I brought my fixtures on back here to my own shop and run my business here next to my home for several months.
"Then I opened a shop in Normal own, but expenses thar was so high I had to give it up. I hated to give up that place for it was a nice location and had a bath and all other conveniences. After that I worked for awhile for a Clayton Street barber shop, but they never had no business at all, so I couldn’t make a living thar.
”I began looking around for a building where I could open up for myself again. At last I come across that little hole in the wall whar you visited this morning, and I've been doing business there about fifteen months, I'm making a living, but if I had a bigger place I could do better. I could fix it up nicer, I'm after the folks I rent from now to enlarge the place and paint it up nice for me. One thing she I ain't spending none of my own money on it. My shop costs me $16.40 a month, or $4.10 a week, and that includes light and water.
"I have followed this trade pretty regular since I first started out with my brother-in-law; and Clarence, my son, is as good a barber as ever stepped in shoe leather, but he just won't follow his trade. I need somebody to help me now, and just can't find a good helper, and I can't risk taking in no jackleg. The barber that helps me now would be all right if he didn't butt in on my conversation so much, no matter who I'm talking to, or what we are talking about.
"I ain't going to tell no lie about myself, but it has worried me to think that I've worked hard all my life and just can't seem to make no headway. One of my brothers opened a grocery store soon after we moved to Princeton. He started out on just $1.50 and that was borrowed capital. His business growed 'til at one time he was worth $10,000, but he lost it all from sickness, doctors' and hospital bills. Another of my brothers accumulated a right smart, and one day he was knocked down and killed by a wagon in sight of his own home, whar he had lived for 13 year. It's right down disheartening to try so hard and never git nowhar. One thing. sho, I'm pore, but I'm honest.
"Once a man that I know right well come to my shop and borrowed $16 from me. I let him have it and do you know he has never paid me the first dime of it?" Mrs. Matthews chimed in, "That's what you gits from being so easy."
"Yes," her husband replied, "if I hadn't been so easy, you wouldn't-a had sich a easy time gitting me." Turning to me he asked, "Did I ever tell you how my wife got me?" I shook my head.
"Now, you look-a here," his wife protested, "don't you start that. When you want to tell a black lie, you always start that. One thing, I've been married all my life."
"Well, you ain't got nothing on me," Mr. Matthews grinned. Both of them laughed good-naturedly.
"I ain't never been sorry about being married," Mr. Matthews continued, "for I'm a man that loves a home, and I ain't never drunk no liquor in my life. I never was a man to carouse around, and when I close my shop I comes straight on home.
"The only trouble I ever had in my shop was when I was finishing up a customer's haircut, and a great big rough fellow came in and grabbed him by the arm before he had time to pay me. That big bully led my customer outside my shop and I saw him pull out a big pocket-knife and start stabbing the man. Before I could get the police thar he had cut that pore fellow to pieces. It was one awful sight.
"I've lost a sight of money from time to time. Once I took my wife and young-uns for a ride in the country, and they got out and went in the woods to git some blackgum branches for tooth brushes. A band of gypsies stopped about twenty feet away. One of the women came up to whar I was standing on the running board of my car and asked me for a match. I reached in my pocket for it and she got to fuddling about me and put her hand on my hip. ’Oh, you have some money!’ she exclaimed. ’Please let me see it.’
” 'How do you know I’ve got money on me?' I asked.
"'I felt it on your hip,’ she said, 'it’s tied in a tobacco sack. Please let me see it,’ she begged.
"Well, I thought surely there wouldn’t be no harm, so I untied the sack and let her peep in. I’m not lying when I tell you she never touched that sack, and I never took that money out of it, just let her peep in it. I whistled for my wife and the young-uns to come on back, and the gypsy got in her car and drove off with her tribe.
"When my wife got back to the car I told her about the gypsy woman and she said, ’You’d better stop right now and count your money.’ Just to please her, I did. There’d been nearly a hundred dollars in that sack and in with the paper money I’d had three silver dollars. When we checked up the paper money was still thar but the silver was all gone. The only way I could figure it out was that she must have had a lodestone up her sleeve and when I opened the sack and she peeped in the lodestone drew the silver money up her sleeve. I was plumb mad. We jumped in the car and it didn’t take us more’n five minutes to git to the next town.. I found some gypsies thar but I couldn’t find the one that had peeped in my sack of money. The other gypsies said she must have been with another crowd that had gone on ahead of them. Gypsies are slick, sho as you are born, they are.
If I'd caught her, she wouldn't steal money from nobody else, or if she had, it would have been because some policeman never done his duty.
"Anyhow, we still eat three meals a day, all my taxes ere paid, and I don't owe a cent to nobody. I don't have to call on nobody for nothing. That's what the barber business has meant to me.
"Times are better now than when I first started in business. I've got better trade than I ever had before.
" I joined the Methodist Church and was sprinkled in Princeton Church over thar on the hill, but I'm a Baptist, too, far as that's concerned, but I ain't never been baptized. We try, in this family, to lead good Christian lives, and I'm proud to say that not a single one of our folks has never gone wrong. My father had only one real bad habit: he would take a drink. Now I think I've told you about all that I can imagine you'd care to hear."
<text not clear>
