G. Riley Swindell
335 W. Fearing Street
Elizabeth City, N. C.
November 25, 1938
W. O. S.
"WHEN A GOOD COFFIN COST ONLY $4.50"
His first name is Hezekiah but every one calls him "Ki" for short. It was after dark when I called at his modest home on a third rate residential street in Elizabeth City. I called at night because I knew that in fair weather he was out on his odd jobs of carpentry all day and night was the most likely time to find him at home.
There was no response to my knocking at the front door. Waiting a reasonable length of time, I went around the back way, following a neat board walk to the kitchen porch, opened the screen door to that porch, stepped onto the porch and knocked at the back door of what I assumed was the living room.
Hezekiah Spruill, for that is his full name, opened the door and greeted me with some surprise. Evidently the Spruills have few visitors, and certainly it was not usual for visitors to be prowling around their backway after dark.
But Mr. Spruill greeted me cordially, invited me into the living room, introduced me to his aged wife and invited me to be seated in a rocking chair near the sheet iron heater that was giving the room a temperature of not less than eighty degrees. It was bitter cold outside, but in their living room, with all doors closed and every door and window carefully weatherstripped, the Spruills were very comfortable.
Two oil lamps, their chimneys polished to crystal clearness, burned on a table in the center of the room. I knew that two lights burned to enable the old man to read his evening paper without straining his eyes, and that when bedtime came one of the lamps would be put out and the other taken upstairs to guide them to their bedroom and to give them light to undress by.
Aware of my interest in those oil lamps, Mr. Spruill explained: "Somehow we've never got around to electric lights. When I was able to put 'em in I just kept putting it off and didn't do it, and now when we ought to have 'em it just seems that I can't afford 'em."
"I don't go in debt for anything that I can do without. I'm seventy- nine years old and don't owe a dollar in the world; went down town and paid my taxes today while I could get a discount on 'em; been saving money to pay my taxes all summer."
"Now if everybody paid me what they owe me, I'd have something ahead and maybe could put in electric lights."
"How much is owing to you?" I asked.
"I reckon as much as two hundred dollars. I been carpentering for more than forty years and a lot of folks I've worked for never paid me. I did some repair work for a woman right after the war. I put out about fourteen dollars of my own money for materials and my labor come to three or four dollars. About the time I finished the job, the woman lost her house and I've never got a cent of my money. That's the biggest bill I ever lost."
Mr. Spruill was born on a little farm in Gum Neck, Tyrrell County, where the roads were impassable in winter, where the high waters of the Alligator River under pressure of northeast winds would often overflow the lands, sometimes marooning families in their homes for days and weeks. The only connection with the outside world was by boats. A number of families owned sailing vessels, and a little steamboat made semi-weekly trips between Gum Neck and Elizabeth City.
Mr. Spruill's father owned a small farm in Gum Neck from which he could never make a living. He supplemented his income by making and selling shingles, for which there was a steady market on the mainland. But when Hezekiah was seventeen his father was crippled for life by a falling tree while cutting timber for his shingles and was "not much account" after that. He died at the age of fifty-two.
"I got mighty little schoolin'," said Mr. Spruill; "I went for one quarter when I was between six and seven years old; after that I never got more than a week or two in a year." He explained that a "quarter" referred to the prevailing three months term in his day.
"After my father got hurt I helped put the crops by that fall and came to Elizabeth City. I got a job with a fisher man who had a stand of nets at Cedar Point. I worked for him through the spring and when the season was over I fell back on odd jobs. I did a little farming, steamboating and clerking as well as fishing.
"I was married in 1882 and bought a little farm in Tyrrell County where I took my wife. I bought it on time. Never could make a living on it. I raised cotton, picked my cotton in the fall of the year and brought it on the steamer to Elizabeth City and sold it for two and half cents a pound. Couldn't make anything at that. I had paid all but about $225 on the farm when I sold it in 1899; had about a hundred dollars left from and moved to Elizabeth City.
"I got a job as a carpenter in a shipyard at a dollar and a half a day. It wasn't long before they raised me to two dollars, and I went on up from that to as much as six dollars a day, and I've made eight or nine dollars a day on some contract jobs I've had. The highest wage I ever got was seventy cents an hour. That was in war time."
"Well, how did you learn carpentry?" I asked.
"Everybody that lived on a farm had to be a carpenter when I was a boy. When the house or the barn had to be mended we turned to and did it. We built boats, we built houses, we built horse carts. Why, my brother and myself all the coffins that were used in Gum Neck when we were boys. And we made good coffins."
"The materials for a coffin for a grow-up, including the lumber, the padding and the cloth cost $2.25 to $2.50. My brother and myself could make a coffin in a day. We dressed the boards by hand; we didn't paint 'em -- we covered 'em with black alpaca cloth. We charged a dollar a day apiece for our labor. A coffin for a grow-up cost about four dollars and a half. Less for a child. And you can't buy as good a coffin for hundred dollars today."
And then Mr. Spruill told me how he had bought the two storey frame house consisting of four rooms and kitchen, where he now resides, back in 1907, for 850. "The place was run down when I bought it, but I fixed it up and have kept it up, and it's a better house today than when I bought it.
"I played fool by not buying real estate sooner. Back in 1881 I could have bought one of the best business sites. in town for $800, and paid for it to suit myself. The man who owned Chesson's corner begged me to buy it; said I needn't pay anything down; just keep up the interest and taxes. The Norfolk Southern was just coming through, but when it was learned that it was going to go on through to Edenton everybody said Elizabeth City wouldn't be anything more than a way station and that the railroad instead a helping us would hurt us. They had a notion that the railroad would be a great thing for us only if its stopped here an didn't go on any further. They talked that way so strong that I was scared off from buying real estate then.
"Well, the railroad came, it went on to Edenton, everything boomed and real estate began to go up. But I had missed my chance."
"Are you getting an old age pension?" I asked.
"No, the welfare officer says I ain't entitled to it as long as I own my home and am able to work. The only way I could get a pension would be to tell 'em I ain't able to work any more, and I'm not going to do that; I expect to work as long as I am able to.
"I'm not as good as I used to be. I am hard of hearing and ain't always sure of myself when working on a roof. Still, I and a helper just finished shingling a roof today and I held my end up when it came to totin' bundles of shingles up the ladder. Didn't get dizzy either.
"About all I get is odd jobs now; no contractor wants to hire an old man. I just pick up odd jobs where I can find 'em, but I manage to find something to do almost every day in the week when its fair weather. Sometimes I don't make more than seventy cents a day. I keep pretty busy most of the year from April until around Thanksgiving. If I make fifteen dollars a week I call that pretty good money. It takes a lot of time getting to and from jobs and I don't have many full days work.
When I get a full day I usually put in ten hours to make up or a lot of rainy days. I get thirty-five cents to forty cents an hour and most of my customers are old customers who like my work. Of course, when winter sets in, jobs ain't so plentiful and there's many a week when I don't make enough to buy our flour and lard and eggs. But me and my wife can get along on mighty little when we have to. I don't drink and I use mighty little tobacco. Used to drink some when I was younger, but quit forty years ago and haven't tasted a drop since. I smoke one pipe full of tobacco after supper. That's all; just one pipe a day after supper.
"I guess I have lived long and enjoyed good health because I've always practiced moderation. I always push my chair back from the table before I get enough to eat. I believe that's a good rule to follow; you can eat anything if you don't gorge yourself. Yes sir, I never eat as much as I can hold. And I get eight or nine hours sleep every night. Never been sick but twice in my life. Had typhoid fever once and was laid up for seven weeks; had pneumonia once and it kept me down for two or three weeks. Outside of those two spells of sickness I never had anything to ail me except a rising in your head that left me deaf in one ear and hard o' hearing in the other. Funny thing; my wife had a rising in her head that left her the same way.
"That's why we don't have a radio, I reckon; wouldn't get much out a it if we had it.
"I've been to the movies only twice in my life. Used to enjoy 'em before they put the talk in 'em; but couldn't make much out of 'em now with the talking, on account of my being hard o' hearing. And I think the movies are a bad thing anyway; put a lot of crazy notions in young folks heads end teach 'em a lot of things that ain't good for 'em. Just look at the little boys you see running around the streets with toy pistols, pointing them at you, making believe they're outlaws, bandits, or somethin'!"
"Did you ever own an automobile?" I asked.
"Yes, and that's where I played crazy again. Right after the war I bought half interest in a second hand Buick. When it finally played out I was glad of it. I've stuck to my bicycle ever since. It gets me where I have any business going, don't need any gas or oil and ain't always breakin' down on me just when I need it.
"Another thing about an automobile: when you own one it just seems to be rarin' to go somewhere, when you'd stay home and save your money if you didn't have one of the things."
"How many children have you?" I asked.
"We had four in all, three girls and a boy. The girls are all married."
"And the boy?"
A faraway look came into the old man's eyes and he removed his metal rimmed spectacles, wiped the lenses and readjusted them on his nose before speaking.
"I'll tell you about our boy," he said. "He got in trouble over a girl about ten years ago and they sent him away. I'm not upholdin' him in what he did, but there's a lot of them that have done a whole lot worse and not been sent up for it.
"While he was waitin' for trial, a relative of the girl slipped up on him and shot him and crippled him for life. They indicted the man that shot him and sentenced him to the penitentiary, but he was a rich man and the governor pardoned him and he never served his sentence.
"I think my boy took that pretty hard and it made him powerful bitter. Anyway, it wasn't long after he served his sentence before he got in bad company and was in more trouble. They sent him away again."
"And he was a bright boy, had a diploma from an automobile school and was one of the best mechanics in our town. Everybody liked him too.
"My wife there is just livin' now for to see that boy again. Can't get her out of the house, can't get her to even go down to get some glasses she needs, because she doesn't want to see anything or anybody except the boy."
"I've seen the day," she says now, coming into the conversation "when I could sit down to my sewing machine and make a dollar any day; but I ain't no count any more; I can't hardly see and my backs gi'n out. I just hope I'll go before my man does, because I don't know what'd become of me if he dies before I do. I only thank God there's a poor house where I can go if he should be took before I am.
"It gits mighty lonesome here sometimes when I've got the house cleaned up, the dishes put away and he's away from home. My eyes are so bad I can't read my bible any more; just sit and rock and think.
"I don't reckon I'll live to ever see my poor boy again, but I am a hopin' and a prayin' that we'll meet up yonder where they ain't no trouble any more."
In spite of her age, her impaired vision, and her backache, <text not clear> is still a model housekeeper. The sitting room was a model of orderliness and cleanliness. The chimneys on her oil lamps were crystal clear, the linoleum floor covering shiny from scrubbing and polishing, the cheap muslin curtains at the windows fresh and crisp, her little cotton frock clean and neat.
I had entered the Spruill home by the back door. When I arose to say goodnight old man Spruill picked up a lamp and showed me to the front door.
"It's good luck," said Mrs. Spruill, "to come in one door and go out another way."
As I paused in the hall doorway I saw a double barrel shotgun resting on a pair of antlers over the back hall doorway.
"Do you ever use that shotgun?" I asked the old man.
"That's my weakness," he said; "I always liked to hunt; me and my brother were great hunters when we were boys; kept the family in meat all through the fall and winter; many a night we stayed out all night hunting coons and 'possums. I killed a bear when I was only thirteen years old. Went huntin' yesterday with another fellow; traipsed all over a field all afternoon and never got a shot. Saw plenty o' signs o' quail; they'd been feedin' and roostin'; but we didn't see no quail; they'd gone to the woods I reckon. Come to think, about' it, there was a fellow in an airplane who as circling all over the field, diving all around, almost skimming the tops of trees and houses. He was over and all around us for as much as an hour; maybe he scared the quail away.
"They say there ain't so many quail as there used to be. Now I have an idea there are more quail than there used to be. When I was a boy we counted not more'n a covey of quail to every twenty cleared acres. It took just about two acres of cleared land for one quail to get a livin' on. Nobody planted soy beans in those days. Now almost every farm has soy beans onto it and there ain't been a bean harvester ever made that will pick all the beans. The fields are full of waste beans on the ground. A partridge can go in most any field at sun up and get his craw full o' soy beans before the sun gets good and up. After that he's off to the 'woods where he's hard to find and where you couldn't get a fair shot at him if you found him. Used to be, he would be out in the fields almost all day when he had to live on bugs and weed seed and it took a lot o' foragin' for him to get his food."
I wish that I knew the name of that birdman who spoiled old man Spruill's shoot the other day; I would call on him and suggest that he go around to old man Spruill's home some evening and apologize for his thoughtlessness.
