Date of first writing:	January 5, 1939
Name of person interviewed:	H. O. Summey
Address:	West Hillsboro, N. C.
Occupation:		WPA Worker
Nameof writer:	H. O. Summey
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:		About 2,800
THE JAMISON FAMILY
Although a victim of tuberculosis for the last seven years, during which he has undergone much suffering and manyhardships, L. S. Jamison has not lost his optimistic outlookon life.
There are at present six members of the Jamison household, including the father and mother, three daughters, and a son. Another son is a patient in a tuberculosis sanatorium, and one is married and has a home of his own. Two of the girls, although not twins, are seventeen years old. One, Lora, is Leonard's daughter by a previous marriage, while Elsie is hiswife's daughter by her first marriage. Both expect to finishhigh school this year. Another daughter, Harriet, twelve, isin the seventh grade, and the son, Bolling, works in a cottonmill.
The house in which the Jamisons live is a six-room, frame structure with a concrete and rock basement. There isone tree in the small grass-covered yard, also a bit ofshrubbery and flowers which give the place a pleasingview. The house is in a fair structural condition, but the splotchedwallpaper shows evidence of a leaking roof.
The furnishings of the house were simple yet sufficient. There was a linoleum rug on each floor, and there was oneheatrola to heat the entire six rooms. The living room hasa living room suite, and the bedrooms are furnished with ironbeds, washstands, and bureaus. A few pictures have been hungon the walls.
The one large room in the basement is used as a kitchenand a dining room. It is furnished with a cabinet, refrigerator, oil stove, and table and chairs. The room has a largefireplace.
"Each person in this house does his part," staled Leonard. "Our income is rather small for a family of thissize, but we manage to get along. Only two of us can beclassed as wage earners--the boy and my wife who have worked since I became ill in 1932. My case has been termed 'arrested' for several months, but the doctor will not allow me to goback to work.
"Those of us who work have always followed the textileindustry. We were, you might say, raised up to that kind of work. My father followed it all of his life up until hisdeath in January 1938. He was overseer of spinning in the Uno Mill for thirty-one years. We are all proud of thatrecord, for very few people have held such a position for solong a time.
"At the age of seventeen, just after I had finishedhigh school, my grandfather, a resident of Greenville, South Carolina, offered me the opportunity of working in his grocerystore on a partnership basis. My mother just couldn't standthe idea of such a thing as her son leaving home at that age, even if it was with her father and mother.
"By the way, I was raised in South Carolina, so naturally I am a Democrat. I am a staunch supporter of the Presidentand think he has tried very hard to improve the conditionsof the working people in this country. I think all the peopleshould be for him, for he is the people's friend.
"Soon after my grandfather made his offer I went to amill and worked as a learner for about eight weeks in theweave room, for which I didn't receive any pay at all. Atthe end of that time I was given work as a spare weaver. My first pay was, to the best of my memory, $5.40 for a week ofsixty hours, and did I feel big? I was a real man now, or so I thought. After a bit of experience I was able to make around $12 a week.
"I believed that I could do better elsewhere, and having a desire to get work outside the mill, I accepted a job with a printing company in Greenville, South Carolina, at a salaryof about one-half what I'd been making. This did not suit mefor long. Every young man has a desire for more money than I was making, so I quit and secured a job in the weave roomof a mill in Greenville.
"In 1913 I married a Greenville girl. We didn't have enough money to take a regular honeymoon, so we decided tovisit my old home for a short while. There I was made anoffer to work for my old employers again and accepted.
"I returned to Greenville in December 1917. Aboutthis time young men were being examined for military service, but as I had two children I was not called. I made goodmoney all during the World War, and even though my familycontinued to increase my income was sufficient to care fortheir needs as we didn't have any sickness to amount toanything.
"When our second little girl was about ten months oldshe had pneumonia then became infected with diphtheria whichcaused her tonsils and adenoids to rot. The doctor said they had to be removed. But so much poison was in her systemthat she didn't live very long, and my wife was never the sameagain. Although we had one other little girl my wife neverseemed to recover enough from our loss to take the same interestin life. When our baby girl was about two years old my wifehad a spell of influenza which seemed to leave her without anydesire to live.
"I decided that there must be some other cause for thisand had our doctor give her a thorough examination. He foundthat her right lung was diseased but said it was so slight hefelt confident he wouldn't have any trouble clearing it up.
But it soon became evident that she was growing worse, and in April, 1927, she had a hemorrhage which resulted in her death.
"The people of the mill village in which we were livingat the time surely were among the best on earth. All of themknew that my wife had been sick, but for several weeks beforeher death it seemed that she was decidedly better. She diedso suddenly that there were only a few of our friends who knew of it until the next day.
"When the news of her death became generally known the house was filled with friends and neighbors. One of the mengave me about $75 or $80 which had been made up for my use inthis emergency. I was very thankful for this aid.
"I made every effort to stay at the same location after my wife's death, but it seemed impossible to keep a cook whowould try to help me in keeping my family together. Aftereighteen months of this, trying to stay in Greenville, Idecided that I would have to make a change. My mother andfather were at home alone, and as they had already asked meto live with them I went back to Hillsboro.
"While in Greenville, my doc tor had checked over meregularly. I was told that the best thing I could do, as Iwas run down physically, was to rest for a few weeks and stopworrying about my family.
"After getting settled in Hillsboro once more and restingfor several weeks, I went to work again for the same people Ihad worked for before.
"Within two years I was married again. My second wife is a girl I have known all my life. At this time state lawsrequired everyone who planned to get married to take aphysical examination before the license was issued. But wehad no trouble in that direction; the lady was in the bestof health, and I had continued being checked over regularly.
"As we had been married before and had some furniturewe began keeping house with what we had, with the additionof some new stuff we bought. As my wife worked, too, and asour combined salaries amounted to more than $50 a week, wesoon decided to buy a home of our own. We had bought about$700 worth of furniture, and as we were not having any trouble making the payments on that we believed a home could be paidfor just as easily.
"It looked like for awhile that we were going to get along fine, but my health began to fail again. I began to lose weight and couldn't sleep or rest at night. I tried my best to keep on working but had to give up in December 1932 andgo to bed. I had tried all the young doctors in town withoutany good being done me or getting any information as to whatmy trouble was. I called in the oldest doctor here and hetold me I had a good-sized spot on my right lung. He said I ought to go to a sanatorium for an examination.
"I was told at the sanatorium that I had a cavity aslarge as a quarter, but that if I would come there fortreatment I would have an excellent chance of getting well.
I was discouraged, believing I had only a short time to live, but I filed anapplication for entrance as soon as room couldbe found for me.
"On my return I gave my wife all the money we had left, telling her to give the children a good Christmas with it as I felt it would be the last one we, would spend together. Christmas came and went, and I enjoyed it about as much asany of the children did if not allowed to leave mybed. Mywife had a different view from what I did and failed to spendall our savings for the children, for she felt that there wasgoing to be other days when it would be needed more than it wasthen.
"After three months in bed at home, I was notified toreport at the sanatorium for treatment. As I had been doingso well at home I felt that I was almost well and wouldn'thave to stay in the hospital but a short while.
"I was soon to receive lots of information which I feltwould be of great help to everyone if they would only studythe ways of preventing tuberculosis.
"I was entered as a patient at the sanatorium on March 5, 1933, and in about fifteen days I was told that I wouldget my first injection of air the next morning and to beready for it. The next morning the nurse came by and gaveme a hypodermic to keep me from being unduly nervous when Ireached the operating room. Naturally I was very curious to know just how they were to stop me from using one of my lungsand yet live on the others. As I feel that others might liketo know of this treatment I will do my best to describe it.
"All cases cannot be treated by this method as somehave too much trouble in their good side to place the entireload of life on one side, and others have had so much pleurisythat their lung had become stuck to the pleural wall tootightly for the air to be put into the vacuum between thelung and pleural cavity.
"Those who can take this treatment are first placed onthe operating table, lying with their good side down and theaffected side up. The doctor then picks out the place hewishes to enter and has it prepared for his work. After itis ready he places a towel, with a hole in it to work through, over the side. This is to avoid any danger of infection. Then the needles are brought from the sterilizer. He is nowready for work.
First, the flesh is deadened with an injection ofnovacain. Then he's ready for the air needle which is aboutthe size of the lead in an ordinary pencil. It is hollow to permit the passage of air and has a cup on the top to which asmall rubber hose is attached. To the other end is fasteneda large bottle which holds about 2,000 c. c's. There are twoof these bottles, one of which is empty. The other is filled with a mixture of water, carbolic acid, and bichloride ofmercury. The bottles are attached by a rubber tube. The fullbottle is raised slightly higher than the empty one. This makes the mixture flow from one to the other, causing the airin the empty bottle to pass through the tube and needle intothe chest wall between the flesh and lung. The result ofthis is a gradual pressing-down of the lung which is called a collapse.
"This treatment is repeated every day for awhile, andthen every three or four days until a partial collapse issecured. Then it is repeated once a week until there is acomplete collapse. After these, 'refills' are given as oftenas they are needed. In some cases they have to be takenweekly, while others are able to wait a month for a refill. This allows the infected lung to rest, and causes it to heal more rapidly than any other type of treatment yet discovered.
"After this method had been used in my own case forfour months I had a negativesputum, and at the end of fivemonths I was given a meal in the dining room. However, Ihad to stay in the sanatorium fourteen months before I was pronounced ready to go home without endangering those withwhom I would come in daily contact. I am still under thecare of a doctor and taking treatment every ten days. I'munable to do hard work of any kind, but I am making everyeffort to be of some service to my fellow man and my communityand to make myself an asset instead of a menace.
"'At the time I went to the sanatorium my eldest son wasat work, and his and my wife's combined salaries were notsufficient to meet the needs of our family and pay my hospitalbills also, so the next eldest boy was forced to stop school, much to our regret, and go to work so as to be able to meetthe expenses of the family. With their combined earningsand some aid from my father they were able to get along nicely but had to deny themselves many things they actually needed.
"This is still true today, but we try to bear with each other and make out on what the two able to work can earn; andwe are thankful that we're not in any worse condition thanwhat we are. My wife and the one son at home are all thatare at work now. She is still weaving, but wages are notnear as good now as when I was able to work. They can only make about $15 a week at present, where in 1932 I made $25 on twoless looms. Then the mill has been running an a short schedulefor sometime, and this of course cuts the earnings a great deal. The boy works in the spinning room and only makes thirty cents an hour. He hasn't made a full week in quite some time, so theaverage weekly income is less than what I formerly earnedmyself.
"With our limited income we do the best we can to havea balanced diet at all times, and so far we have managed wellenough in keeping our resistance built up that there haven'tbeen any doctor bills other than those for myself and the son who is in the sanatorium for a period of five years. But these are enough without any more.
"We are all members of the Baptist Church and attendregularly. Our lot is such that we can't be of much financialhelp to this great work of spreading the Gospel, but we dothe best we can and always give as much as one-tenth of ourtime to this work. I sometimes feel that there should be a barrier placed across life's pathway that would cause allmen to stop and reflect upon the gift of life and the goodnessof the Master who is so thoughtful of them. How different life would be if He should become as careless of us as some of usare of Him.
