SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE:  DELMA TODD CULCLASURE
Date of First Writing December 16, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed  Delma Todd Culclasure (White)
Fictitious Name Susan Jones
Street Address  1202 Ashley St.
Place Columbia, S. C.
Occupation  Textile Mill Worker
Name of Writer  Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser State Office
DELMA TODD CULCLASURE (white)
TEXTILE MILL WORKER
1202 ASHLEY ST.
COLUMBIA, S. C.
Mrs. Culclasure, a woman of medium height and weighing possibly one hundred and fifty pounds, simply but cleanly dressed in a neat cotton print dress and apron, opened the door in response to my rap. In a well modulated and pleasing voice, she invited me to come right into her kitchen where she was making a dress for her youngest daughter and, at the same time, attending to the cooking of the midday meal.
"You must excuse the appearance of the room this morning, for I am so anxious to finish Doris's dress, I haven't put things to rights. We want to go to my son's wedding on Christmas Eve.
"My life story? I've often told the children I'd like to write it myself but I couldn't write it interesting enough for anybody to want to read it.
"Well, to begin at the beginning, I was born in South Carolina, about twenty-one miles from Conway. But we always said we came from North Carolina. Father's little farm was nearer Mt. Tabor, just over the line in North Carolina, and that was our postoffice.
"I don't remember so much about the country, though. Our home had five rooms with a wide passage through the middle, and it had never been painted. We had a big family - ten of us children. Father couldn't make a living on our little place, with only an ox to plow. All he planted in those days was cotton and corn, and cotton wasn't bringing much.
"Father and mother didn't got much education. They grew up during the war, when there wasn't many schools. Mother could read a little but couldn't write. Father went for a short time to a 'hired school' and could both read and write. And us children didn't fare much better. I went through about the fourth grade.
"When I was thirteen, pa decided it would be better to move to a mill town where us children could work. We came to Columbia, and I got work in a weave room at fifty cents a day. But even with us children at work, we had a hard time. And pa wasn't satisfied. He loved to farm and wanted to go back to the country. Then his aunt died and left him a little money. That decided him to go back and start farming again.
"But I had a different mind, and when they had things all set to move, I told them I wasn't going. I was going to marry Charles Culclasure, a boy who worked in the same room with me at the mill.
"We went over to the Lutheran parsonage one Sunday afternoon and was married. Charles said he didn't think it would be nice to live with either family. So we boarded at the same place he had been staying. At that time I was making twenty-four or twenty-five dollars a month, and he was getting thirty. And with our board only five dollars a week for both of us, we could save some money. When our first baby was coming, I stopped working at the mill. Now we have eight children, four boys and four girls.
"And I'm proud of my children. It was only this morning that I wrote Raymond that no one sees him so fine as I do. My husband is proud of them, too. But we have a different view of what children mean. He thinks that, as soon as children are old enough, they should work for their parents. But I think they should be fitted for their life, and I've done all I could to push them along and encourage them, and I've tried not to require too much help from them. The most of our lives is gone, and we should show them, the best we can, how to live theirs to the best advantage. Charles and I didn't have much chance to get an education, but we're sending our children to school and helping then, all we can, to get the advantages we missed.
"Each of the boys had a paper route and made his spending money. Each one sort of handed it down to the next one as they finished high school and went off. Rudolph, my youngest son, kept the paper route until he was ready to go to the University of South Carolina, and then he was promoted to district manager with the Columbia Record. In this way he paid all of his expenses at the university, and we didn't charge him any board. He made preparation to teach, while he was at the university, but he is keeping books for the State Welfare Department now.
"Two of my sons, Harry and Raymond, were good football players and had athletic scholarships at college. Harry finished at Newberry College. Now he is an operator in the card room at the Olympia Mill and was elected manager of the boys' football team."
Just at this time the two younger girls came in from school, and Mrs. Culclasure interrupted her story to ask Alice to look at the rolls in the oven, while she fitted the nicely tailored suit on Doris. Alice, a tall slender blonde of sixteen, is in her second year of high school. Doris, two years younger, is this year completing the grammar school. Both of them are bright attractive girls, both make excellent marks at school and take an active interest in church work.
"My girls have very little time for recreation. They are studying hard at their lessons this year. But they enjoy the moving pictures and go occasionally. I do not care for the shows. While sane of them are educational, so many of them are not. I rather stay at home with my knitting or a magazine or a good book. I have knitted four dresses, three for the girls and one for myself. Then I knitted a slip-over sweater for my husband. The girls and I read together a lot and then discuss the stories. We tell the things we like or what we would have different. Alice says people nowadays went the truth shout things; and I like to get down to the real things. Some things are so shallow.
"It seems like older girls had a worse time than my boys. Mary learned a trade in the mill. She works in the card room. When she was eighteen, she Married James Green, and they both kept right on working in the same room. We have a skeleton in our closet, just like so many other people, but I don't mind telling you about it. James is a good looking boy and likes to use his looks to attract young girls. After they had been married twelve years, James fell in love with one of these girls. And she told him if he would get a divorce, she would marry him. Then he went to Mary and told her that she had gotten too fat and he didn't love her any more; but, if she had had any children, he would stay with her for their sake. He left her and went to Augusta, Georgia, and got a divorce. She grieves all the time, because she still loves him and she feels the disgrace of the divorce. Rudolph, her younger brother, lives with her.
"The next daughter finished high school and, after taking a business course, she did stenographic work. She got married, too, but lived only two years, leaving an infant. And it died in just a little while."
The outside door opened and a slender little man with keen blue eyes and graying hair came in, and I was introduced to Mr. Culclasure. Realizing it must be his dinner hour, I offered to came another day for the remainder of her story. But she assured me that there was plenty of time, as Mr. Culclasure had the whole hour and could eat in the last thirty minutes. While Alice and Doris finished getting the meal ready and set the table. Mrs. Culclasure continued with her story.
"After Charles and I had been married a few years, he felt that he wanted to preach. We were both members of the Baptist Church, but the Presbyterian Seminary gave him a scholarship for two years. While he was studying, getting ready to preach, I stayed at home and sewed for other people and sold milk and helped all I could to bear expenses. He preached in the Missionary Baptist Church for twelve years. There were four churches in his charge. All of the members were poor people and about all they could pay was produce from the gardens and poultry and hogs. But all this time our family was growing and we needed some money; so Charles had to go back to work in the mill. He works in the card room and gets eighteen or twenty dollars a week. Sometimes he preaches now, but not regularly. He takes lots of interest in church work and teaches a class in Sunday School. About nine or ten years age, he and I joined the Pentacostal Holiness Church. Do we talk tongues? Well. we did when we first joined the church, but we don't use it very often. We both feel that we are living a better life, as the rules of living are so strict."
One of these many rules, and one that they make a particular part of their creed, is that they must not speak evil of the absent, nor listen to those who do. Mrs. Culclasure is president of the Ladies' Aid Society. They do a great deal of good among the members of the church, helping the needy with food and clothing.
"My pastor thinks that anyone who is a Christian should be able to make a speech in public. He says I should get up in meeting and make a talk. And I do have the most beautiful thoughts. And when I am here at home, I can plan out things to say. But I just can't deliver it. Not when every one else is sitting down and just me standing up. Now, I don't mind praying in public, and he frequently calls on me. But I don't see the people then. I always kneel, and I'm not talking to them. Some woman at the church told the pastor that ay testimony sitting down was worth more than others standing up. I've had people to say that I always seem so pleasant. And they ask me if everything is always pleasant at home. I tell them no, not always pleasant; but my husband and children always respect my views and I respect theirs. And we have cooperation in the family. I feel that we get along better at home than most families. There are some women so bossy they want to manage what doesn't concern them. I let my husband manage his own affairs.
"Yes, I vote now, but I didn't at first. I was against women voting. I thought it best to let the man be the head. I felt that women had their own place to fill, that a mother's first duty was to the home and the house work. In later years, I saw that some women were more capable of voting than some men. And I began to vote, not because others did, but because I felt we were given the privilege and we should accept it.
"Are there any changes I'd make in living my life over again? I don't know if I'd have any more knowledge about managing. Maybe I would be a wiser woman. But I think I'd not get married so young. I've been happy, but there's such a chance not to be. I think girls should have their teens without minding babies. I've always advised my girls to wait for the twenties. Alice says she wishes I'd pick out a good boy for her. I tell her I can't pick them but I can thin them out.
"The children tease me; tell me that Raymond is my favorite child. They are all my favorites. But he is such a good boy and shows his appreciation for all that his daddy and I have tried to do for him. He had an athletic scholarship at Furnas University, and the president wrote us this letter about him. 'We had no finer boy in Furman than Raymond Culclasure. Because of his character and attitude toward life, and his cooperative spirit, he takes with him the esteem and respect of the faculty, of the administrative offices, and of the entire student body. I congratulate you who are the parents of such a fine outstanding boy. Raymond Culclasure will be heard from out in the world.'
"While he was a student at Furman, he joined the Pendleton Street Baptist Church of Greenville and taught a class of small boys who fairly worshiped him. How he is in the insurance business in New York City. On Christmas Eve, he is to be married to a young North Carolina girl who finished at G.W.C. This week he wrote us a letter telling us how much he appreciates the sacrifices we made for him and gives us credit for giving him such a good start in life. When I wrote him I told him that I felt that I was only doing ay duty and that When I get in a hard place and can't see my way out I just pray.
"I surely am sorry it's time for you to leave. There's some people come in who I don't enjoy talking to, but I have enjoyed your visit and want you to come again."
