In an otherwise identical version, the following additional information is given on the top of page 4556A: "Date of first writing: February 13, 1939." and the handwritten comment, "Very good."
Durham, N.C.
708 Pine Street
John Lee White (Negro)
Omar Darrow, writer
Edwin Massengill, reviser
TRUSTING TO GOD
It was on April 20, 1879, that James Monroe Tufts and Becky Tufts welcomed into the world a child whom they named Joe Lathan.
He practically grew up in a schoolhouse, but as he looks back into those earliest years he says: "I remember that I used to like more than anything, when I was quite little, to slip away to myself, all alone. I liked to figure out my childish problems myself in my own way, and most of my earliest playing was of the nature that I could enjoy it alone. For instance, I liked to jump rope. That was about the first thing in the way of amusements that I learned to do, and then came an idea to jump fences. I started jumping them when we had a low fence around the hog lot. The rails were very heavy and the fence was only about five rails high. I soon became so proficient as a jumper of this los fence that the thought of the bar lot fence and the cow pasture fence presented itself to me as being the proper height for my solitary jumping contests. So I would get a long running start and leap neatly over them. That was great sport to me in those days.
"Sometimes I would get out on the side of a gully on the farm and dig mud. I would shape the mud into small bricks, and then after having made quite a lot of them I would fashion them into a house. I'm not joking when I say I built some very nice looking buildings, and in my kid days they were marvels to me. They stood out in my mind as resembling some of those old castles that my mother had told me about.
"I would then get busy shaping pieces of furniture from mud. Some of the pieces looked very well, as best as I remember, but I guess there were grotesque sights among the lot, too. But, all the same, I would furnish my house down to the last room, making, shaping, and beating the mud into some sort of submission to my will.
"When I had my structures finished and furnished the thought of food rushed up and replaced the ambition to build that had been consumated and then I'd get busy --- again with mud --- and prepare mud bread, mud pies, and mud cakes.
"I left my mud building behind me when I was ten years old, or about that time, but my liking for jumping fences, or what have you, continued on through high school. I was also --- fond of horses --- still am as to that matter --- and my father gave me a colt from one of the mares on the farm when I was about twelve years old and allowed me to take care of him in my own way.
"I never tired of school. I felt a great elation when I would walk into a chool room the first day of school, and I sadly walked out the last day. I never failed to have a passable lesson but I was punished several times for other misdemeanors, such as getting into arguments on the school grounds. I never did much fighting, for I never saw the need of it. I found that the most enjoyable way of using up what excess energy I possessed could easily be expended in grooming my colt or playing croquet, although I never had a great deal of time for any of these things.
"I went to these country schools until I was about eighteen and then I begged my father to let me go to Kester School which was a grade school and located twelve miles from my home. I went to Kester, but while I was there I had no clothes like the other students and was made sport of. I lived in the cheapest room I could find, did my own cooking, and even my washing and ironing. Although the other students laughed at my poor clothes, not one of them could say that they were not clean. It was either that I went that way or not at all, and I chose to go to school.
"I was home again in the spring. My father guessed that I would want to go some place to school the following fall, so he gave me a little cotton patch. I worked my cotton and at anything else on the farm that was to do. That year my father had seventy-five acres in cultivation. Fifty of them were in cotton and twenty-five in corn. My little cotton patch drought me just a little more than $24. After I sold it I made an application to Fosgrave University, now Berman University.
"At that time there was a, preparatory school in connection with Fosgrave.
In those days when an application was made one had a letter from the president asking how much money one had to be used for his schooling. I replied to his letter, telling Mr. that I had $24. I had not considered that I had no clothes again and that I had to use some of that money for a railroad ticket end to buy books also, so by the time I had bought me a very cheap suit of clothes for which I paid around $9, deducted the price of a railroad ticket and some books, I had only $10 to turn in on the promised $24.
"My third year at Fosgrave I was a freshman. I worked my way that year and won a scholarship which enabled me to complete my education. In the meantime, I had gotten a small elementary class of my own, whereby I was able to make a few dollars to help me along. I kept this class until I received my A.B. degree.
"I shall never forget the dark cotton suit of clothes that I wore on my entry there, and often now it comes to my mind about how those boys there who had money end everything they wanted made such sport of it. It hurt in a way and I felt awfully poor in that crowd when I would allow myself to think about it, but I was so happy to be going to school and getting the educational advantages that they completely outweighed it.
"After I had gotten my A.B. degree I went back and took my master's degree and went through the Theological School on the same scholarship. During these last years at the University, I met the girl who was a few years later to become my wife. With Shreve being a sort of twin sister to Fosgrave at that time, naturally circumstances brought it about that we boys met quite a lot of the girl students. There were many ways in which opportunity brought us together. Lots of Shreve's students would come to our graduation exercises, or one thing or another, end we students would go to theirs.
"To me, at that time, she represented everything I ever wished of a woman. She was pleasing to look at, wore her clothes nicely, was very neat, and as full of ideals as a right kind of girl could be, and the more I saw of her the more I wanted to see of her. It so happened that she was just as fond of me, and we were together every chance we had.
"She graduated from Shreve in 1909 which was the same year that I graduated from the Theological School. She went to her home but not without a complete understanding between us. We agreed that it was not for so long that we would be separated.
"I made the baseball team in prep school and I really felt proud of myself. When I went to bat the boys almost forgot the old suit of clothes of which they were eternally making sport." He smiled, shoving a full set of nice, pearly teeth except for the one which has a part crown of gold.
"Now to go on with the story: I served as pastor of a church near Bangor during my student days and continued serving after graduation. I served that church four years but, in the meantime, while I was still pastor, I married the girl I had learned to love in school.
"The following ear, during March 1911, we bought a little home in Condor, but I kept preaching around where I began.
"I have served several churches before coming here. Here I have organized a church. My wife taught school until one of our children became sickly and required the attention of one or the other of us. We have three children, one boy end two girls. Two have finished college, and the youngest is now a freshman.
"I have more or less taken things as they came, trusting to the mercy of God. There have been times when money was scarce and other times when it was just a little scarcer, still, in all, I have been very fortunate. I have never lost any money on any sort of financial deal except one. I tried to help my sister-in-law retain her home and loaned her $1,000, but she eventually lost it and I lost, too.
"I have accumulated a bit of property. My home here is valued at $4,000. We are very proud of it. My first wife was very proud of it and so is the present wife. I have another house that is valued at $3,000 and two others valued at $1,600 each. I own my car which I value at $1,000, and, of course, my house furnishings. I am very content with my lot in the world. Come, I'll show you over it if you'd like."
The house is perched on an embankment, end concrete steps lead up to the yard which is planted to shrubbery. It is well kept. It has been covered with tobacco stems for the purpose of trying to produce greener and more abundant grass. A concrete walkway leads from the street steps to the porch.
"I take great pride in my yard and flowers," he explained, "but with them I connect one of the saddest experiences in my life. My daughter was ill in the hospital, and my wife asked me to cut same flowers for her. When my wife got in the car she asked me if I had cut them, and those were the last words she ever spoke."
From the front porch a door leads into the living room which was furnished with an imported rug of a very neat pattern, a three-piece living room suite, a large radio and bookcase combined, a mahogany piano, an end table at the arm of the davenport, a table beside the window on which was a lamp, and a large reproduction of a famous landscape view directly over the piano.
The front bedroom is entered from the living room. It was furnished with a dark maple suite and a small bookcase with a radio. Two overstuffed chairs were in this room and a rug of tan and brown block design. A baby crib was beside the large double bed, end a door to one side opened into a private bathroom.
The room behind this one was another bedroom and occupied by the mother of the present wife. This room also was furnished with a dark maple suite but of an older design than the one in the front bedroom.
Directly behind this room was a small room that is used as a study.
The kitchen is entered from the back bedroom and was equipped with an old-fashioned wood and coal range and a large electric stove. There was a kitchen cabinet and a breakfast room suite, the floor was covered with inlaid linoleum. There is no dining room.
Throughout the lower floor, except for the kitchen, venetian blinds are used in combination with window drapes, and throughout the house hardwood flooring has been laid.
"If it might be of more interest to say so, our marriage was one of those rush affairs," his wife said. "Near the beginning of the year of 1933, our school board passed a rule that would come into effect April 1, of that year, to the effect that no women teachers who were married after that time would he employed. Of course, the issue would not throw out those who were married at, or up until, that date. In other words, a teacher who was employed at that time forfeited her job by getting married after April 1. Joe and I had been going together only a short time, but we had a sort of understanding and both of us knew that I wanted to retain my teaching rights. So that condition rushed our marriage up at least six months."
Joe sat holding their young daughter. "I have four children now and that is enough for me."
"I want one more, a boy," his wife interrupted. "I want one other to bring up with my daughter, for it is better that one not come up alone. They know too little of cooperation and I certainly do not want her to grow up to be self-centered or unresponsive to the things so necessary to develop her personality and temperament. A little give and take does help, find I have an idea that a brother would supply that. Yes, we must have one more."
"I am a Presbyterian in faith but I am more or less a liberal one," Joe continued. "I do not feel that it is necessary to be a Presbyterian in order to be saved, nor do I feel that from an order of divinity that I am better than anyone else. To be able to choose one’s faith in religion is the privilege of all men. I, for one, am deeply grateful to my God for that privilege, not only for myself, but for all mankind existing with us today. And as for politics, that doesn’t bother me. I vote for the man."
<text not clear>
