"HOLD, HELL! I'VE GOT TO HAVE THE MONEY NOW"
The Life Story of Horatio S. Seymour, Star Route, Camden, N. C.
By: Frank L. Overton
Edited and approved by W. O. Saunders
We found him at the store trying to sell his soy beans to pay his store account. The merchant told him what he could give and suggested that he hold his beans until the first of the year, when he was sure that the price would be better.
"How in tarnation can I hold them when the landlord wants his rent and wants it now. Then too I owe everybody that would trust me and they are hollerin' for their money. Hold, hell! I got to have money now, not next year."
So John Holliday sold his beans and corn as fast as they could be harvested and marketed. He told me that, after paying up, he would have a few dollars for Christmas, then be broke to start the next year.
This planting in the spring, plowing in summer, harvesting and selling in the fall has been his procedure for 28 years and in all these years he had never prospered enough to buy his own farm or keep out of debt from one year to another. His story told in his own way is as follows:
"When I was seventeen or thereabouts I started going with Florence, that's my wife. In them days they had a lot of dances at first one house then another and I would always take Florence. She got stuck on me and I on her, so we decided to get married. I was just twenty one and I had a chance to pull Lamb's ferry and tend a thirty thousand cut of ground.
"Nights Florence and myself, when I wasn't pulling the ferry, would sit there and plan the kind of house we would have on the farm we would buy, when we had saved enough money to buy a little place. We saved a little money and were very happy the first two years, then Boyd, thats my oldest boy was born and Florence had to go to the hospital. Then followed days of worry and fear until Florence was better. This was made up for by the fat little baby. Money or farms were not on my mind then, only to get Florence well and she and the baby home.
"When she came home not only my savings were gone, but I was in debt. Somehow we managed to get along. Got enough to eat such as it was; mostly cornbread, sow belly and black strap molasses. Mr. John Sykes got after me to move to his farm and we decided that we could make a better living with more land to tend, so we moved and I borrowed money to stock up. My stock has had to be mortgaged every year since before my crop was finished. Younguns kept coming and I kept paying until there was no need to dream of ever owning a place of my own. We took our lot as it came and made the best of it. A few years later Uncle Joe Cartwright let me help him build a house and taught me something of carpentering. I bought a set of tools and in my spare time worked with them when I could get anything to do.
"It looks like we ought to get ahead a little, but it takes all I make with my tools to keep the farm going, get something to eat and a few rage for myself and family.
"Some years ago the Irish potato crop was good and sold for a fair price. I made over nine hundred dollars and bought an automobile to go about my work. The dern thing is about worn out now, and boy, talk about an eating cancer, that thing is one! It costs more to keep that thing running than it does to feed my family. Day before yesterday I put in five gallons of gas and went to Doc Perkins funeral, whose home was about eight miles away. A tire went flat and had to be fixed and while I was working on that I noticed something making a puddle under the car. I looked under the hood and, instead of water leaking as I had supposed, the carburetor had sprung aleak and almost all of my gas had run out on the ground. It does look like I have the darndest luck."
At this juncture in his narative his grandson Bill managed to straddle a calf which had been grazing in the yard.
"Hey Bill! let that yearling alone; the first thing you know he will kill you."
About this time Bill was astride of the yearling with legs locked around the front legs of the beast and it was bucking to beat the band.
"Get off him I tell you," yelled John. And then: "Aint that just like a dam boy. He will mind his ma but when he comes over here he does to suit himself.
"Get off him Bill! Oh, my God! He's going through the back fence."
The calf with B ill still astride her did go through the rotten wire fence at the rear of the house and into the field of soy beans, which were ripe and ready to harvest. About fifty yards down the field Bill lost his hold and fell headlong, rooting up peas and dirt as he tried to catch himself. We found him unhurt except for a few bruises and scratches. The calf continued on her wild run, kicking with her hind legs and switching her tail from side to side, scattering peas in every direction.
"Just look at that yearling," said John, "She's knocking out more peas than a threshing machine could get in a whole day's picking. Well the price aint nothing and I'll fatten my hogs on them and save the picking bill." And then to the grandson: "Bill run that yearling back into the yard and prop that fence up."
Turning again to me he said: "Come on and let me show you my pigs. I've one sow, a litter of nine pigs and three shoats to kill for my next year's meat. I'll tell you, if you don't raise some meat and have a garden with plenty of turnips, greens, collards and such, a farmer is in a mess. If you have to go to the store for every little thing, I'll swear you will never raise enough corn, cotton and soybeans to pay your bill. Now last year I had eleven head of hogs to kill but the sickness got in them and six of them up and died and I was skeered I'd lose the rest but I didn't. I'd quit the dam' farm if it wasn't for the wife and boy. We've lived here twenty years and Florence don't want to go anywhere else; and Herman wants to farm, so I guess I'll be here when I turn up my toes and kick the bucket."
The pig pen was about fifty feet from the southern end of the barn and the stench from it was noticeable fifty or more feet away. The pen was about ten by twelve, four boards high, with a tin shelter over one and under which was a bed of straw and a watering trough. The remainder of the pen was a muck of filth, so oozy that it was almost impossible for even a hog to walk in it. The sow was so poor that you could count her ribs. How she could take care of those pigs was a physiological mystery. However she was doing it in an admirable manner, as they were very fat, which probably in part accounted for the poor condition of the mother. The other reason was given by John. He had run shy on corn and tried to make what he had last his stock until harvest time.
Turning from the pig pen I had an opportunity to view the general conditions of the outbuildings. The barn was two storeys high with an aisle through the center. On each side there were three stables or stalls, two of which had doors hanging on one hinge, all in a sad state of repair. The upper part was the hay loft. On each side of the barn was a lean to or shelter to store the farming implements. One housed a cart, harness, several hand plows, hoes, rakes, shovels, and a general assortment of both discarded and slightly used plow points. A bucket of bolts, nuts, and washers stood on a work bench built on the side. This also held an array of wrenches and large and small machinist's hammers.
Under the other shelter was a riding plow, a Jennings plow and a section drag. All these were cleaned and in fair condition. The barn as well as the smokehouse, woodhouse, privy, and dwelling all needed repairs and paint. Boards were loose on all the buildings. The dwelling is what John called a storey and a jump, meaning that the upper part was the attic, which had been ceiled and partitioned off into two bed rooms. This was reached by a stairway coming up from the hall below. You entered the house from a porch, which extended the length of the front, into a hall running through the center of the house.
The room to the left was the parlor, with an open fireplace at one end. The furniture consisted of three chairs, an oblong oak table and a couch with a sag in it that would have almost let you down to the floor had you dared try sitting on it. The floor was covered by a rug, much scuffed and worn, especially around the hearth where there were three holes burned by sparks from the fireplace. In one corner stood a cabinet phonograph. On the table were several magazines, farm journals, a Bible and a family album. The pictures in the album were an interesting collection, ranging from tintypes of their grandparents to studio photos and kodak snapshots of their children and grandchildren.
There were several pictures on the walls, one particularly noticeable. It was of a man probably thirty five years of age. He had a broad face, low brow, heavy eyebrows, high cheek bones and a black walrus looking mustache that came to fine points well below the corners of his mouth. This was John's Uncle Peter, who had gone West and married a wealthy widow. Florence said, "The Lord only knows what a woman would want with a man with a face like that. He sent John the picture and I hung it up. I look at it sometimes to take my mind off my troubles."
The front room on the south was the sitting room, the floor covered with linoleum, a wood stove flanked by four rocking chairs, a table opposite the stove with an oil lamp upon it and two magazines, one a true story and the other a western magazine. To the right and just beneath the mantel four almanacs were suspended from a nail. They ranged in date from 1935 to the present year. Dr. Miles, Wine of Cardui, and two Turners, the latter evidently being the favorites, judging from their soiled and used condition. About the mantel hung a framed sampler with the inscription "God Bless Our Home" embroidered in it. The room had three windows in it and afforded a view of the highway from two, and of the barn from the other.
To the rear of the parlor was the dining room. Its furniture consisted of a sideboard of the plainest kind, a table and six hard bottom oak chairs, all the worse for wear. Across the hall was a bed room containing a bed, washstand, and a bureau, which had a broken glass in it. To the rear of the house was the kitchen, with a wood cook stove, a tin safe, a table, and two kitchen chairs. On the south side running the length of the kitchen was a porch with a pump and sink. The sink had a wooden trough under it to carry the overflow to a trench about thirty feet away.
As we had gone through the house Florence was apologizing for John's letting me come in and find her with her hair not fixed and an old house dress on. I told her what John had said about wanting to buy a little place of their own.
"Yes, there was plenty of talk of it when we were first married, but you can't buy homes, when you smoke and drink up everything you make", she said, "It's true we don't make much on the farm, but John could get all the work he could do with his tools in his off season and spare times, and he does, when he lets whiskey alone. He will get a house to build or repair, get about half through with it then get nigger rich -- blow up and go on a bender, never stopping until he has spent his last cent and all he can borrow. Then he'll go back to work. Everyone likes him and he is a good carpenter, but people get tired of the way he does. Look at him now. He just came back from a drunk. His clothes were clean when he went off. Now he's dirty, needs a bath and a shave, the worst in the world.
"It's a wonder he hasn't killed himself driving around drunk. He mighty nigh did one time. Did you notice that big scar on the side of his face? Well, he dove through the windshield when his car hit a tree and just about killed himself. It don't seem that he will ever learn any sense, and I have just about given up hope that he will. Now take this week, he's gone off and sold all the spare corn and peas and I'll bet he hasn't got twenty-five dollars of the money and the Lord knows whether he has paid any debts or not, and we owe plenty. He wants to quit farming and move to Norfolk but I won't do it. Neither does Herman want to quit farming. I have lived here twenty years, if you can call it living, and here I'm going to stay. It's home to me and I have neighbors and friends who come to see me and I go to see them. I don't know nobody in Norfolk and don't care if I don't, so here's where I'm going to stay. We'll make out somehow. We always have.
"Then too there's two married girls (and they married good steady, providing husbands). They have children coming along, who like to come to see us. We have plenty of room here for them and it's a sight of comfort to have younguns around when you've raised five of your own. Bill's here now, have you seen him?"
I assured her I had and told her about the calf.
"He's a blister aint he? You have to keep your eye on him or he mought kill himself. He's Mary's boy, the only one she's got so far.
"Lucy's little girl, five years old is coming next week to stay a time with me while her mother has another one. I wish I could keep her all the time, she is so comforting. Land sakes alive! when she gets in the kitchen helping me cook dinner, its just like I've gone back the years and she is one of my own growing up again. I give her a piece of dough and tell her to make the biscuits and when she gets through dropping it and working it, you should just see it. Black is no name for it, but to please her I put it in the oven when I am through with it and she never thinks of it again and I'm glad she don't. By this time she has something else to take her mind from her biscuits."
Declining to remain and have dinner, I joined John at the barn and noted that despite the generally run down condition of the rest of the place, his corn crib was well stocked and his three horses in good condition. I commented on the excellent condition of the horses, which brought forth the following remark:
"You can't expect them to do good work for you unless you keep them fit."
The yard covered approximately three acres, on a hard surface road and an electric line. The house was not wired, however, and John still used oil lamps.
The dwelling stood in the center of the yard, the outbuildings to the rear, the barn and stables to the right. Approximately half way from the dwelling and the barn was an open well and watering trough for the stock. Four large elms stood in front of the dwelling. There were no flowers of any description as far as I could see.
We next went into the field, which had a cartpath running through the center to the woods. The soil was a black loam and judging from the looks of the crops the best land was to the right and near the house.
There was a deep lead ditch cut through the center of the farm running parallel with the path. Small ditches emptied into the larger ditch, cutting the farm into slips, as John called them, ranging from three to eight acres.
"I always plant irish potatoes back of the barn and on the road as that is the only land that is well drained enough and not too sour to grow them. Just before I get ready to dig them I throw a furrow in the center of each row and away from the potatoes and plant corn on them. This does not hurt the potatoes and the corn gets the benefit of the fertilizer used on the potatoes and generally gives in the best corn I raise.
"I generally put lime on most of the land every two years. I have to do it especially after a wet year as the whole farm is stiff land and don't drain well. The land gets sour and you have to sweeten it up if you expect to raise anything after a rainy year. On this middle strip I plant corn one year and soybeans the next.
"Over to the left and on the other side of the house I've been planting cotton, but I think I am through with that. Rainy years I get nothing but stalks; dry years the land is so stiff that it don't grow, and in between, the boll weevil gets it, so I think I am done with cotton.
"Over there next to that other farm fence is the worst part of this farm. It's so low that you can't raise nut grass or broomstraw on it, and if I fenced in the whole twenty acres, a cow would starve to death grazing on it. I keep it chopped down to keep it from being an eyesore.
"The rest of the farm I rotate; one year where I have corn, the next year I plant soybeans and in that way keep the land up.
"When we started planting soybeans around here we sold them for from one and a half to two dollars a bushel and made some money, but you can't make money the way they sell now, from fifty to seventy five cents, and pay twenty cents for picking them."
We went on back to the woods and if seemed the further we went the poorer the land.
John said that he was allowed to cut all the firewood for his own use that he wanted, but could not sell any.
I bade him goodbye and wished him luck for the coming year. My thought then and is now that the life of a tenant farmer is anything but an enviable one, but it has its compensations even for the farm wife.
Lamb's Ferry was a rope and barge ferry across Pasquotank River just south of the Norfolk & Southern R. R. Bridge, until 1910. A heavy rope cable ran from shore to shore and by pulling on this cable the barge carrying vehicular and pedestrian traffic was ferried across the water.
