A NEGRO FUNERAL DIRECTOR
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth.
Area Supervisor Federal Writers' Project Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Ga.
March 23, 1939
March 9, 1939 James Mack (Negro)
Mack & Payne Funeral Home 185 W. Washington Street Athens, Georgia Undertaker G.M.
A NEGRO FUNERAL DIRECTOR
The funeral home of Mason and Phillips, located in the center of Athens' Negro business section, is said to be the oldest Negro undertaking establishment in town.
The door was opened by a well dressed young Negro who, at my request, pointed out the senior partner of this enterprise.
"Yes, mam," he said, "That’s him over at the desk."
The old man heard us, turned around and stood up. I saw a well dressed slender man and noticed his carefully groomed white mustache and slightly graying hair. His calm, clear-cut features seemed stern until he spoke. "I am will Mason," he said. "Is there anything I can do for you?"
I asked if he would mind telling me something of his experiences as an undertaker.
"What for?" he tersely asked.
As I explained, a merry twinkle came to his eyes, and he said, "But you just want the best side of our experiences, don't you?"
"Well, I had hoped that you would tell me about both sides," I replied.
The young Negro placed a chair at a table near the heater, saying, "This will be convenient for you to write on." After my assurance that there was nothing else that I needed, he retired through a back door.
He returned almost at once accompanied by another Negro, There was marked contrast in the appearance of this one and the two I had seen earlier. This man was almost white.
"Good morning," he greeted me in a very polite manner. The two of them sat down on a large over-stuffed settee at one side of the room.
The old man began, "Do you live here in town? It seems as if I have seen somebody that you favor," Then laughing before I had time to answer, he said, "I know now. I bet I knowed your father. Wasn't he one of the older police officers hare for years?"
"He was," I answered.
"Well, he has done me many favors back in the past," the old man said, "and put lots of business my way in the days that I was struggling 'long."
As he said this it seemed that I could sense the cold feeling that had prevailed change into friendliness, and even the two younger men on the settee seemed to thaw out. One of them got a chair and sat down on the other side of the heater. Then as if he had been waiting for their approval, Will Mason began talking in a clear tone and straight forward manner.
"I don't remember how many years I've been in business," he said. "Of course, I could go back to the books and tell, but it's been a mighty long time hack. I was raised on a farm, and I didn't like that so, as everybody else does, I came to town.
"Me and Frank Phillips went into the undertaking business with a capital of two hundred dollars." As Mason chuckled over this memory it seemed that the feeling of constraint was obliterated. "You know, we didn't even have that two hundred dollars. We went to the bank and borrowed it. Each one of us borrowed a hundred dollars.
"We rented one little room over across the way and that was the beginning of Mason and Phillips’ undertaking place, for we didn't call them funeral homes - not then - but we didn’t have all these State laws either that we have now. I ain't kicking; I knows they is all mighty good laws.
"It was a tough go. We just done 'most every way, and it was about 6 months before we had a call. But wasn't we proud of that first call! We just outdone ourselves on that job, only to find after it was all over with that it was a pauper case." Both of the young men laughed at this. "What did you do about it?" one of them asked.
"Do?" Mason grinned, "What could we do? It was done, but yes, there was one thing it done to us. It learned us to look ahead the next time. Still we didn't loose our faith and I still have that faith that if you try hard enough, you can manage to come up, and I do love my work.
"I’ve made it a practice never to hurt anyone's feelings and never to dun my customers. I've stuck to these rules and by careful management I've succeeded to where I am now.
"At first it looked like every case we got was either credit or pauper cases, but late one night the police called me and said that they had a body down there. They wanted us to come and take charge of it. One thing I've always done is to answer all my calls promptly. When that bell rings, we go.
"Well, when I got there I found a dead woman. Her husband was waiting to see what I had to put the remains in. He was a very sorry looking sort of man, had on dirty overalls and old run-down shoes. After looking him over I showed him my cheapest coffins. He didn't like 'em and said so.
"'You know dat's my wife and I wants her put away nice,' he said.
"I told Frank to slip out and see if they had an insurance policy. He came back and said there was a five hundred dollar policy on the deceased, but that we would have to hurry because he had done seen another undertaking place lit up and knew they was after that body too.
"There was a firm of white undertakers here that put away colored folks too. Course, they had a colored undertaker. He had done found out 'bout that body." The old man laughed heartily, noticing that the two other men and I were almost holding our breath, so anxious were we to learn who got the body.
Finally he said, "That was some race that night. First, I talked to the husband and then the other undertakers got hold of him. I cut prices and they cut. It just went that way because I had done found out about the policy and the other one hadn't. Finally, I landed the business and made three hundred dollars on it. I really had worked for that job.
"After that it seemed like we just climbed right along and, as I told you, the police helped us many a time. They knows when they calls us that we are coming and that we don’t lose no time. I still feel like they have helped me to make good, and I really do appreciate it.
"I had a very good white friend that was in the undertaking business here too. He was, I guess, about one of the oldest ones in this town. Of course, he has been passed out for a good many years now. He sure helped me. He recommended me to the wholesale casket dealers and they just fell in love with me right away. I could git anything I needed at any time. I tell you that credit was a powerful big help to me back then.
"We hadn’t been in business no great while ’til I got a call one night from one of the richest white families here. Their butler had passed away and they wanted me to come and git him. Well, when I got there them folks was talking about what a good man he was, how honorable he was in all things, and how he would be missed. He had done been with that family since before slavery was over.
"When I started off with the remains, the white folks said: ’Now fix him up nice, but try to do it as cheap as you can, ’cause we can’t pay much.' They said that after all that talk about how honorable they had always found him, but I done the best a bill I could and when I gave the man a bill for $50 I thought he was going to have a fit.
"’What! That’s outrageous, just out of reason,’ he raved. ’Why, I didn’t think it could cost over $5 for you to put him away. He was just a servant.’ 'But did you want that good and honorable man who had done served your family faithfully all these years put away that cheap?’ I asked. He just paid that bill with never another word.
"'Long about this time, Frank took a notion of going away out in California and I paid him a thousand dollars for his part in our business. of course, that was a little more that it was worth, but he needed the money and I wanted to help him. He didn’t never come back ’cause he died out way out there.
"This is pretty hard work. It means going out at all times of night in all kinds of weather. When the phone rings we have to go. We never hesitate, whether it is a stranger, friend, or someone that is near and dear to us; we answer the call. I takes pauper cases and credit cases as well as good ones.
"Sometimes I lose and sometimes I git it all, but with the help of my assistants - and they are just as prompt to answer a call as I am - I has now got the business to where it will take care of itself and I don’t have to worry.
"Why, just a few days ago I had a letter from the Bradstreet Agency saying that I’m the only colored undertaker in this town that has a rating with them. I don’t know how they got it that way, but that's what they wrote.
"I gits lots of business from a radius of 50 miles around here, and many’s the time I git calls from New York. They calls me when they wants to ship the remains here, or near here, because I am prepared to take care of them and I can handle the bodies from coast to coast without any trouble at ‘all. I have worked hard to build up that reputation, but I have always tried to treat everybody nice and make it as lovely for them as possible.
"Time has changed our work as well as everything else. From the barest necessary equipment to the latest, is what we have accomplished. Back years ago I don't know what folks would have done if we had asked permission to bring the remains to our place to fix ’em for burial. It just wasn't done way back then, and all our means of traveling was in horse-drawn vehicles.
"Of course, we used baskets for moving the bodies when we finally had a place in our office to embalm 'em. By that time we was using the open motorcars or automobiles. Then we just set the baskets across the back of the car. Coffins was delivered in the same way, and at that time it was just plain old coffins that we called ‘toothpick coffins', on account of the way they were shaped. They were long and narrow, almost pointed at the foot.
"I've seen them come in here with the remains in the basket across the top of the old wheelbarrow. Now, we have better and more convenient ways, and, then too, it's against the law to move a body in anything except a closed car. My first hearse was drawn by horses, but now I have the most modern motorcars, as well as an ambulance.
"When I started out there were no ambulances and the first one used ’round these parts was a covered wagon pulled by horses and owned by a white undertaker. That hasn’t been so many years back. It was called on every emergency that occasioned such transportation. Just think of that old wagon and then look at the ambulances of today. They’re even heated and have cold and hot water. Can you beat it?
”Yes, we have come to the top fast and we’s still learning new things. It took me a long time to git started, but I have climbed mighty fast and almost put one of the white undertakers out of business, that is, with their colored trade, and in fact I do really more of the business among colored people than any of the other undertakers.
"I get very few calls for wrecks, for when any of our folks gits hurt they just puts ’em in a car or anything else handy and brings ’em in to the hospital. It’s the same way in case of sickness, unless they's mighty sick.
”I remember one time that I was in a wreck myself. I had been to take my family to another town for a visit with kinfolks. It was a bad night, just pouring down rain. I was in a hurry to git home. Yes, I was not driving fast for it was raining so hard I couldn’t see. I came around a curve and right into a car that was parked in the road without any lights. I learned later that the lights had gone out on the car and the man was trying to fix ’em when I hit his car. They brought me to town in a car, and I was in the hospital for a month from that wreck.
"After that I opened another undertaking place in a small town near here. I kept it for a year, but it didn’t pay so I closed it up and since then I have just kept this one. Yes, I have been here for a long time, ever since I moved out of the small place across the way. That soon grew too small for my business.
"My helpers are all of a high order and love their work. We work together, as well as with the white undertakers. If we gits in a tight place and needs something we can git it from them, and they are the same way with us. We try to help each other out in any way that we can, whether its with cars, hearses, ambulances, coffins, or just chairs sometimes when a large funeral is on hand.
"One thing I don’t do, and that is hang around the courts, for I never has had no case in court and I don’t expect to have none.
"All the salesmen in our line of work come to see me every time they hit town and they are always anxious to get an order from our place for they know that we are good pay. They come from Atlanta, Birmingham, New York, South Carolina, and just from everywhere.
"Some of our worst experiences have been in getting over the roads. They are not so bad now, but, Lord, them old roads! It was nothing then to start out and get mired up to the hubs in our old horse-drawn vehicles. Then too, after we had our first motorcars many’s the time that we have had to use wagons to bring the remains across some of the old crossroads to the main highway where we had to leave the hearse. That hasn’t been so many years ago.
"I think I've told you all I know. Now, I'll show you over my place. It's not so large, but I have it arranged so that I can use it for funerals too, for I have no regular chapel. When one is needed I can manage that."
He stood up and I realized that my interview was over for, courteous as he was, his decisive manner forbade further questioning.
He opened a door and waited for me to enter a small but very clean room, wallpaper featured small, delicately-tinted sprays of flowers against a cream-colored background. The floor was covered with a linoleum square of a tan background bordered in blue. In one corner a tall flower basket was filled with artificial roses and there was nothing else in the room.
"This is my lay-out room," he explained, "where we put the remains after they have been embalmed, and if the relatives wish they can leave ’em right here until time for the services. That's being done very much in the last few years. Of course, a few years back that wasn't thought of unless it was somebody that had no relatives or had to be sent out of town to their homes. I think it's much easier on the family."
Going out a side door, we entered a narrow hall that extended from the office to the rear of the place. Opening a door next to the lay-out room, he turned a switch and lit up another room. Standing back for me to enter, he said, "This is my display room for caskets. I have all kinds, as you can see. There are cheap ones on up to these expensive metallic caskets." As I looked around the room, I saw caskets of almost every kind and many of them were very handsome.
"This is what I use for a chapel when I need one," he said. "I just move all the caskets out and put in an altar that I keep for that purpose, move in a piano and chairs and you would "be surprised at how many people I can git into this room. It's the largest room I have."
As we went back to the hall, he said, "The room back there is our embalming roam. It's modern and up-to-date in every way. We'll go back to the office, for I'm sure that you wouldn't be interested in an embalming room." Again that courteous but decisive tone of voice forbade my asking to see that room as much as I did want to see it. I wondered if it was being used at the time.
As we walked back into the office, the two young men stood up and I knew I was dismissed. So thanking them for their kindness and for giving me so much of their time, I took leave of them. Will Mason walked to the door with me and said, "I was very happy to tell you what I could because I have such pleasant memories of that fine man who was your father."
