David Mitchell,
319 <text not clear>
Care W. H. <text not clear>
Lawyer,
Jacksonville, Florida.
<text not clear>
VILLA ALEXANDRIA and JACKSONVILLE
IN 1870 – 1880.
Mr. David Mitchell, the grandson of Alexander Mitchell, Florida’s first multi-millionaire, and Mrs. Mitchell, who <text not clear> Ville Alexandria, (now the Swisher estate) in South Jacksonville, was interviewed in the office of his Life-long friend, Mr. William H. Harwick, lawyer, 319 Law <text not clear>Building, Forsyth and Market-sts.
Mr. Mitchell is a slight, this man, of probably <text not clear>of age, having been about eight when his grand<text not clear> first brought him to Jacksonville from Milwaukee <text not clear> the city where Alexander Mitchell founded his <text not clear> fortune through the medias of banking railroad pre<text not clear>, stacks, bonds and securities. According to re<text not clear> file in the museum of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad, in Chicago, which road he founded and of which he was President, Mr. Mitchell was of America’s foremost financiers.
David Mitchell’s <text not clear> has dwindled until <text not clear>, he states, he is supplied with small funds for his slight personal needs from a trust fund administered by Bion H. Barnett, of the Barnett National Bank. He makes his home at the Burbidge Hotel Annex, takes his meals at the National Lunch, and spends his days in the offices of his more prosperous friend of the 1880’s and his evenings at the Jacksonville Public <text not clear> He is found of reading and especially interested in <text not clear>
Mr. Mitchell was neatly dressed in a white lirem suit and talked with vim and eagerness, his blue eyes twinkling as he interspersed his interview with homely philosophy and a few choice slang expressions, current fifty years ago.
“I landed here first in 1883, when I was about eight <text not clear>of ago, but I do not remember much about the prominent <text not clear> of Jacksonville of that period. I was sent abroad, went to school in different places, traveled ever the world, and <text not clear> turned permanently to Jacksonville in 1893. These days ate <text not clear> as the ‘gay nineties’ and the ‘mauve decade said’ David Mitchell.
“The people I know, and with I most frequently associated then were not the ‘nice people’ but racetrack followers, gamblers, etc., and I can give you chronological data an <text not clear> -fighting which was one of my chief interests.
“I did know Bion H. Barnett, Colonel Cockrell, and other <text not clear> prominent in those days, who have become the ‘first <text not clear> of defense’ for our fair city, as time has tested their <text not clear> and understanding. But I seem to be living now in a world of my own, as most of these with I associated are now dead- at least a great many of them.
“Where was I educated? Say, I went to more schools in were different places than anything who ever lived in Duval County. You see, there were lots of things I would rather <text not clear> than attend schools, so three months was about as long as I ever lasted at any educational institution. I would either <text not clear> or would get so ‘sick’ that the old lady - (Mrs. Alexander Mitchell, his grandmother, by when he was reared) – would have me brought home. I went to Barnes University, to the University of California at Berkeley, and to various schools in Washington, D. C.”
POLO PONIES:
“Through various associations with young men in the North and west I learned to play polo and was my favorite pastime.
“ I got other young men interested and we used to <text not clear> great games in a field at Hanson town - a <text not clear> adjoining the plot owned by the Cleveland Fibre factory other the big of May 3,1901, started. It was not then <text not clear> city limits, and is in what is now the West Beaver street section of Jacksonville. It was a nice level piece of flat woods land, and made a splendid polo field.
“The young men who used to play were E. B. Dell, W. A. Dell, Montgomery Corse, an Englishman by the name of Curtain, and two other Englishmen - Harry White and a Mr. Sudlow. Harry White was the first agent for the Clyde steamship Line, and Worked in the office on the river.
“Our polo ponies were not blooded stock, neither were they trained. Any likely looking pony served our purpose - Some were small race horses from ‘scrub’ tracks. One of the best once I over had I found one day hitched to a huckster’s cart on Bridge Street. We looked like he would be quick in turning and fast on the field – ideal for polo. I said to <text not clear> owner: ‘I wish to buy that pony; how much?’ ‘You pay me fifteen dolls, and you take’ said Dominico. I claimed on the cart and went home with him and the deal was closed. I had to most half kill him before I broke him in. The pony was tough, quick, and ran like lighting. I christened him ‘Bug’ because he darted here and there with such fury. He was a delight to ride on the polo field. But one day I had a ball spill- no, not from Bug- which closed my polo activities, and the horse was cold.
“The last time I saw old Bug was one day out on the Fernandina road. He was hitched to a little road- wagon and was engaged in the business of running away- all by himself, tearing down the road and running like the <text not clear> his polo training had re-assorted itself <text not clear> was going nowhere in a hurry. He was a great gift to polo in our days, and was the <text not clear>mest little horse I ever say. He just would not quit, no matter how stiff the pace<text not clear>”
FIRST COUNTRY CLUB:
“The first Jacksonville Country Club was established by W. A. Dell, Bion Barnett, Montgomery Corse, and others of the old polo players in Fairfield where the A. C. L. R. R. yards are located, just this side of the municipal Docks, in 1893. It got off to a good start, and everything went very well from the beginning. We had a small clubhouse first, about 40 x 60 feet in extent. We played golf, and once a week had field days, when we served tea to the ladies. Iko Brereton was another of those interested, and James Spratt, whom I have known since I was knee high to a duck.
“Bion Barnett was the ‘star’ polo player, and also golfer. We - that is, this same crowd- established a special Golf Club in south Jacksonville in 1895.
“We had an option on the farms in the section near the municipal Docks where the first Country Club was established, which we sold when the A. C. L. R. R. desired to locate in that section, and established the Florida Country Club in the Riverside section. The Florida Country Club was more or less plebeian always, and later on Mr. Walter Mucklow, the English Consul here, Mr. Montgomery Corse, and Mr. Angas, organized the Ti<text not clear> Country Club, ‘ritzy’ from the beginning.
“One of my boyhood friends here was Allan Greeley, son of old man Greeley, superintendent of the old Newnan Street Presbyterian Sunday School, who had been sitting on his stumps waiting for something to happen in Jacksonville for many years. Allen was a little white pony and I would lock up to him like he was a little tin god.”
CHICKEN FIGHTS:
“One of the biggest chicken fights, or cock fights, we ever had was in 1904 right out in the middle of what is now the Avondale residence section. It was high hammock ground, and we went out there because it was far removed from the city. There was an old cracker by the name of Brevaldo who had his home and a country store out there, three miles from the nearest house. We fought a game of cocks for a fat purse of a thousand dollars to the winners. On our side was old man Wilson, Major C. D. Boyloston, an officer of the 2d Carolina Infantry from Sharlosten <text not clear> during the War between the States, Clarence Doty and I. We were quite young. Jerry SIC Smith from across the river was also in our crowd. It took place on the 20th of July.
“In these days there was hardly a week went by that we did not have a cock-fight or a horse race, with pretty stiff stakes and lots of betting.”
SEMINOLE CLUB:
 “About that time the Seminole Club had moved down on Porsyth Street. It was first on the corner of Hogan op-opposite the Windsor Hotel. The members of this club were the ones I used to know the best, because every day at noon you could find the same bunch there. They were old Major Dur<text not clear>, (Dr. Durkee’s father), Major Coffin, who was in charge of some northern land syndicate, with an office in Jacksonville, who always had plenty of money, Dr. John D. Fernandez, Dr. Frank D. Miller, Frank Leslie, the first agent of the Clyde Line, R. H. Liggett, who married Lura Ambler, daughter of the banker, who used to own this building - (the law Exchange Building). These young men were the main support of the bar in the Seminole Club, and the bar-ran the Club.”
LIVER SABLES:
“Some people I used to know and like very much were Mr. McGinnis who owned <text not clear> fine livery stable located where the Park Hotel now is, with fire heroes and carriages for hire <text not clear> when came home McMurray, and engaged in the same business.
“McMurray was the first united States Marshal hero after the war between the States. He went out and single-hand <text not clear>captured the last Ku Klux in Florida, about a hundred miles from Palatka. We brought him into Palatka and down to <text not clear> by beat in the latter 1860’s. There were no <text not clear> those days, and all traffic was by boats up the St. Johns River, served by several different lines I forest their names now. But there were several enormous packets tied up at the Jacksonville wharves.”
LUMBER MILLS:
“There were big lumber mills, too, - John Clark, Henry Clark, Cashen’s, Buckey’s, Fairchild’s and after them came the Cummers in the early 1890’s or the latter <text not clear>, putting in at that time the biggest mill in the States at Milldale. The Cummers established a record for themselves in financing. They are the old people who over came to Florida with a bank roll and got out ‘alive, <text not clear> to speak. But they invested at the right time, sold at the peak of the lumber industry, and retired with their <text not clear> high, the bit in their mouth, and their tails over the dashboard.”
MEMORIES:
“In Jacksonville’s history, there are four things which will always stand cut in my memory:
“First, was in my early boyhood the trip by <text not clear> up the St. Johns River and landing in Fairfield at the old State Fairgrounds - and they had good fairs in these days, with lets of entertainment and horse racing.
“Second, the great fire on May 3, 1901. I had been over in <text not clear> in the morning, and as I left to catch the boast cross the river where a dray awaited me to make the trip to <text not clear> villa, I passed the fire station where the central fire station <text not clear> is on Adams and Ocean Streets. The alarm sounded and chief Haney streamed out in the big red go-devil of fire truck, drawn by the two handsome bay horses of the fire department. <text not clear> just 12 o’clock. It was a hot day, and I remember <text not clear> to myself, Well, Chief Haney has picked out a <text not clear>, with boat rising layers from the streets, for a <text not clear> and I hope it does not last long.
“I went on home - four miles from the Jacksonville <text not clear> and as dinner was being served, I said to the butler, ““Pearson, what makes it so dark? Is there an eclipse of the sun.”” He went to the north window and looked toward Jacksonville, and rushed back with tense face - “Fore God, Master David, it such looked like the end of the world! Come, look: There was a clump of imported bamboo at least forty feet high growing on the lawn just about twelve feet from the north window, and above that was a sheet of flames from the burning Jacksonville, lurid and roaring, fanned by a high wind, and above that <text not clear> pall of black smoke that obscured the <text not clear> and make it dark as night at our place. I shall never forget that picture - the sheet of flames above the bamboo and the black smoke rolling heavenward.
“By 2 o’clock I was again at the ferry slip and took the last beat across to the Jacksonville side. My third memory is the picture of that wharf - filled with precious belongings of Jacksonville citizens, who hoped in vain us gain transportation to the south side of the river. There were family portraits, clothing, bric-a-brac, baskets of silver, trunks filled with heirlooms and precious. <text not clear> and papers, and the people with their panic-stricken <text not clear>the fire leaped by bounds to the water’s edge, destroys the wharf itself: No, I shall never forget that picture.
“I had a Sunday School teacher by the name of Mrs. <text not clear> who kept a boarding house at Monroe and Adams Streets. I fought my way to the Root house and from there saw my <text not clear> picture - two big hotels - the Windsor and the St. James flames shooting from every window, flames high in the <text not clear> from the roofs, a million dollars going up in flames, but what a magnificent sight the two big building made as they yielded their greatness to the fire!
“I some way managed to make my way to the west side or LaVilla, section and got home late that night.”
INTERESTING PEOPLE:
“The most interesting people I have known in Jacksonville were Tom McMurray, Major Boyleston, a South Carolinian, mentioned above, W. B. Barnett, who established the Barnett National Bank in 1877, Dr. J. L’Engle, and Arthur <text not clear>, who had charge of the Aster estate holdings in Jacksonville.
“The first bank of the Barnett’s was known as the National Bank of Jacksonville, and was located where the west Building new stands on Bay Street, corner of Laura.
<text not clear> ANCESTRY:
“When the first Gordon of who there is any record at all, one of the companions of William the Conqueror, came over from Normandy with him to England, there was with him a Huge de Michell from a little town in Normandy. When I was in Scotland in 1889 I saw the document giving the names of William, the conqueror’s company – the gentlemen who were entitled to coronets – and remember the mention of de Michell, the first Mitchell. The Sheepskin record locked Like a piece of wrapping paper, and it was difficult to decipher, but others who have since seen this document bear the same testimony. When William had been in England six or eight months, he himself indicated the ones who were to be the Knights of Scotland. He appointed King David, who was the first King of Scotland. David was looking for a wife, and Duke William made a deal by which his sister, <text not clear>, was to be married to King David, and with her he sends a great train of followers – the Gordons who were given land in Scotland, (Aberdeen), and Huge de Michell who also went to Aberdeen to settle on the land he was allotted./ He was given the title of ‘Earl.’ The DeMichells or Mitchells, as they later became known, have been land-owners in Scotland ever since. They did not emigrate from England, but came from France- the province of Normandy.
“One of the last to live on the Earl’s land was my grandfather’s brother, George Mitchell, who had fourteen sons. They scattered over the world - Africa, Australia, India, Egypt, and goodness knows where. A grandson of Uncle George’s, Mitchell Mackie, married my half-sister, and they went over to live right where the George Mitchells lived in Aberdeen, Scotland.
<text not clear> MITCHELL:
“At the time my grandfather, Alexander Mitchell, came to the United States in 1838, Fort Dearborn, later known as Chicago, was a more hamlet. His friend, George Smith, never live in Chicago. He ran a bank in Peterhead, which carried the business of four States – Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois, and Michigan. As I said, he had this small bank, when my grandfather graduated from Aberdeen University in 1837, and Smith sent my grandfather to the United States, to that new section of the country, to take charge of this bank which had just been chartered, and was doing a business of probably fifteen <text not clear> twenty-five dollars a day. <text not clear> him came other Scotchmen - <text not clear>, McGeron, and with my grandfather became the first settlers of the city which later became Milwaukee. Eere it was that Alexander Mitchell started his great financial enterprises.
“John D. Rockefeller ruined the great Chicago, Milwaukee and Saint Paul Railroad, but it cost him a pretty penny in the end, for he had to pay as high as $5,000 a share for some of the stock.
“Josophsic Randall was another Seetchman who early lo<text not clear> in Mil<text not clear>ukeo, and when Harrison Rood, who was my grandmother Mitchell’s brother was appointed the first Territorial Governor of Florida after the War between the states, he made Joseph Randall the chief justice. I was over in Tallahassee the other day talking with the chief justice Whitefield, and he still that Judge Randall had the greatest knowledge of law of any chief justice who over lived in Florida.
“When he retired from the office of chief justice of Florida, in 1893 he came to Jacksonville and formed a law partnership with a Mr. Walker(sic) and Stephen E. Faster, who had been a law clerk and former office boy, but was so bright he was taken into the firm, which was known as Randall, Walker and Foster. I remember Randall very well as a child, because his long white beard reminded me of a billy-gpat.
“From the beginning, Alexander Mitchell exerted a great influence ever the State of Wisconsin. He had always been a Democrat, but when the War between the States came on, at his own expense get raised a company of militia, of which my father, Alexander Mitchell, Jr., was Lieutenant, and a nephew from Scotland, Robert Chaves, was Captain. It was known as the 22d Wisconsin Regiment. Bob Chaves was killed in the battle of Missionary Ridge.
“My grandfather, Alexander Mitchell, had a big pull in Washington with Lincoln and when peace was declared and it came time to deal out the ‘pap’ he used his influence with these influential in Government affairs at the national Capital to have his brother-in-law, Harrison Fred, appointed Territorial Governor of Florida.
“Harrison Reed was editor and founder of the <text not clear> Sentinel, one of the early influential newspapers of the north, and had written the Manifesto of Fond du Lac, (French, and of the lake) which became the platform and was the beginning of established principles of the Republican Part.
“The Republican Party in 1856 ran Freemont for <text not clear> for congress, and had his famous debate with <text not clear> Douglass, his fame swept the country like wildfire, and Uncle Harrison simply worked his head off for Lincoln, which made him well known nationally.
“Grandmother Mitchell came to Florida to visit Uncle Harrison in 1867 she was so taken with the state that she decided to establish a winter home here, and bought the land in the South side from D. G. Ambler, who was the funniest old thing and very disagreeable, but also very smart.
“Up to the time my grandmother built her well known Alexandria Villa, there was not a sewer south of Charleston, South Carolina. But she had sewers put in over considerable local advice and objections in favor of the long used cesspools, even before the house was built. The house, a ranbling frame structure, faced the St. Johns River. She could not so the lumber was ordered from Baltimore and brought down <text not clear>. She also brought down expert builders and mechanics, so that every item was properly taken care of.
“The artesian wells for water supply were also her <text not clear> The first man that came down here drilling wells found her eager to experiment, and they sent down a 2-inch drill twelve hundred feet, but they did not even got a heavy ‘dew,’ but grandmother told them, ‘You are not to stop. Here is some moneys try again,’ but they had he success. About 1886 there was another outfit who asked for some land, and <text not clear> gave whom two acres, on which they built a house and <text not clear> drilling another well. That is the one on the road north of the house, which had only two or three pounds pressure, ant <text not clear> to make it of much value in piping.
“In 1889 a Mr. Wade came and drilled a 6-inch well, which proved satisfactory, furnishing plenty of water for the <text not clear>, the grounds and the stables.
“Right after that the wells for Jacksonville’s water supply were drilled.
“But then, very few people used water for anything except bathing; it was not good form, and is the same now!”
HENRY M. STANLEY:
“The first time Henry M. Stanley was heard of, he was a reporter for the old Jacksonville News-Herald in the 1870’s. Then he went to New York and worked as a reporter on the New York Herald, and when that paper undertook the search for the explorer, Dr. Livingston, in Africa, Henry M. Stanley was sent as their representative. But he made his start right here in Jacksonville.
ALEXANDER MITCHELL, my grandfather, died in New York City in April, 1887.
“I do not remember <text not clear> when his friend and <text not clear> Smith, of Aberdeen, Scotland, died, but it was when <text not clear> Churchill was Chancellor of England. I remember <text not clear> on his death, he referred to the fact that George Smith’s death tax was sufficient to pay for a whole how battleship. He passed away after my grandfather, I remember that, but I do not know now what year it was.”