April 1, 1939.
Mrs. Suresh Louisa (Pearson)
Richardson, (60)
2611 Iroquois-st., Ortega,
Jacksonville, Florida.
Rose Shepherd, Writer.
HULBERRY GROVE PLANTATION.
Mrs. Richardson's home is a small green frame bungalow, location on the extreme southern boundary of suburban Ortega, Where she and her husband took up residence thirty-five years ago. Mr. Richardson died a month ago.
The rooms are small and the house is simply furnished. The door from the living room opens into the kitchen, which on this Saturday afternoon is spotlessly clean, the stove and kitchen utensils in view are shining with a recent polishing.
Mr. Richardson's son, a tall blend young man of probably twenty-<text not clear>, invites me in and says his mother is resting, but will see<text not clear> a few minutes as soon as she dresses.
A hour the rapid movement of feet on bare floors in the rear, shortly Mrs. Richardson comes in, a thin woman with large brown eyes, her black hair showing bands of gray across the crown of her head, and dressed simply in a black skirt and orange satin blouse.
I apologize for disturbing her afternoon siesta, and she <text not clear>. "It's quite all right. I am an Adventist and this is my Sunday. I do no work on this day, as little cooking as possible, just <text not clear>and meditate. But I do not mind talking, and shall be glad to <text not clear> you all the information I can.
I was born on the old Mulberry Grove Plantation of my grandfather, Arthur M. Reed, sixty years ago, and lived there until I was about twelve.
"My further was William Tell Pearson and my mother was Louisa Burritt (Reed) Pearson.
Before locating at Mulberry Grove during the War both <text not clear>, my grandfather Reed had a bank - the Bank of St. Johns at Bay and Ocean Streets, also operated a mercantile establishment or <text not clear> store. I do not know the exact location of this. The <text not clear> some was just back of the bank on Forsyth and Ocean <text not clear>ets to the Palace Theatre now is.
"Grandmother Reed had the first melodeon in Jacksonville. A <text not clear> boy used to carry it to St. johns Church to furnish music <text not clear> the congregation's singing.
"The plantation house was a rambling two-story structures fac-<text not clear> the river which runs north and south there. A wide porch length of the east front and around the south end of the <text not clear>se. There was a long living room and three bedrooms on the <text not clear>, with a dining room and sitting room to the south. <text not clear> ran through the center of the house, with stairs loading the second story. In the front were two large bedrooms with <text not clear> windows over the front porch looking cast towards the <text not clear>. The back part was a large attic or storage room, with <text not clear> leading up from the back porch.
"On the ground floor an "L" back to the west contained two three more bedrooms, and at the end of the hall, off which these rooms opened, was grandfather's library. This consisted of two rooms formerly used as bedrooms. The first was a kind of sitting room or reading room. It had a large desk in the center, with comfortable chairs all around. The end room had shelves on which the books of this library, rather extensive for that period, were <text not clear> big desk occupied the center of this room <text not clear> led to a porch, and you crossed this to a smaller porch with steps leading down to the ground.
"You see the house was built on an old Indian mound, sloping towards the river, but the buck part was high, so that it was necessary to go down a number of steps to the back yard.
So the north from the back porch a board walk led to a building known as the "Lodge." There were two bedrooms in this building <text not clear> the second floor. Here my brothers, Reed and Charles Pearson used to sit and entertain their company.
"A brick walk went straight south to the little brick kitchen <text not clear> the cooking was done. Steps from the end or the porch <text not clear> with this walk.
"Mother brick walk went to the greenhouse in the west <text not clear> yard, through the garden. My mother was a great hand with <text not clear>, and she had charge of the greenhouse. She experimented with rooting plants from cuttings, and had quantities of roses <text not clear> then some she called 'tea plants' - and geraniums. These <text not clear> raised in a little fenced off yard to the south of the house, <text not clear> the dogs from scratching and <text not clear> up the beds - we always had a large number of dogs; the boys had trained hunting <text not clear> and there was one especially fine-bred collie called 'P<text not clear> with compartments for the big dogs and puppies, <text not clear> a long line of kennels just beyond the flower garden.
"In the greenhouse mother had one pineapple plant which bore <text not clear> in the garden besides roses and geraniums, she had <text not clear>, and rows of the old-fashioned shall hearts, <text not clear> hearts' as they were known, cock's comb, or princess<text not clear>, and zinnias.
"The old workhouse in the <text not clear> was made of <text not clear> shall and Time. In it the hams and bacon were smoked and pushed away; else <text not clear> and mutton were dried and hung to the ratters.
"<text not clear> planted in a big field of 100 acres west of the <text not clear> was raised at one time, so I was told, but few <text not clear> reason there was none planted within my memory or the <text not clear>.
"Other crops besides corn, were oats, peas, beans, potatoes, and quantities of sugarcane. A regular vat ever a long <text not clear> fired with slow-burning wood, furnished the sugar and syrup-<text not clear>equipment. The surplus, over what was Necessary for the family the large number of n<text not clear> on the place, was sold. The old sugar house where this vat was installed and the ladies and other things uses. <text not clear> and sugar-making was on the south side of a <text not clear> southern side of the house down to the swimming <text not clear>.
"There were a few trees remaining of the large mulberry groves planted <text not clear> fifty years before our occupation of the place. <text not clear> tree was in the horse lot about a block to the west the house, and just outside were two more. There was a <text not clear> well under the big tree with a hand operated pump, turned <text not clear> that supplied water to the horses.
<text not clear> the first floor of the old 'carton house', as it was <text not clear>, wooden trays and racks where the silk <text not clear> on the mulberry leaves, when silk worm culture was <text not clear> to gain a foothold in this section of <text not clear>. If<text not clear> been stored there, it had been in years gone by. The building, as I remember it, was used to store grits and other cow food. This attracted rats in great numbers, and we children used to have great fun chasing the rats in and cat and up the stairs. On the second floor was a ceiled room, kept locked, in which was stored the family's supply of shelled peas. The darkies would shall these after they had been dried in the hulls, by placing quantities of them in gunny sacks and boating with a stick. The contents was poured out on the clean flow and the <text not clear> from the dried hulls.
"An artesian well was right in front of the house, and water was piped through the place and to the bathroom which had running water at all times.
"From the front porch to the docks at the river nearly block <text not clear> was an avenue of water oaks, their large limbs over <text not clear> while the ground beneath was carpeted with St. <text not clear>. They are all gone now. There were immense live <text not clear> around through the fields, and they are nearly all gone, too.
"The private docks at the riverfront were quite extensive. The river steamers- 'Mary Draper', 'City of Jacksonville, Manatee, and others used to dock often to deliver supplies or take on <text not clear>.
"I would be delivered in 100-lt, blocks. The colored <text not clear> boys had a hand cart on which it was transferred and carried to the <text not clear> under the old house where Aunt Nancy Reese and Uncle George Reese and their family lived, and there it was slid down<text not clear> over the steps. There were two compartments in the cellar: In the front was a large box and here the ice was stored, the fresh meat and other perishables being placed in nice clean cloth bags on the ice and covered in sawdust. In the back compartment of the cellar, canned fruit, Jellies and preserves were stored. The cellar had an outside door which was kept locked.
"This old frame kitchen is all that remains of the building on the place. We always called it the old kitchen because the big fireplace had cranes for cooking and hanging the old-time pots on, and it had a wide hearth where the live coals could be raked out for cooking and baking bread in the old Dutch ovens.
"The cotton house was built of extremely thick weather boarding, evidently the thick clapboards were hand-hewn.
"The dwelling house was destroyed by fire many years ago, the little brick kitchen where old Nancy held away and did who cooking in our time, has been torn down. The bricks used for this building and the two long walks around the house were not made on the place, but most probably bought in Jacksonville and delivered by Steamer.
There were two lanes - one which led from the house to orange park and the railroad, while the other turned and went <text not clear> the cotton house.
Grandfather erected a platform and shelter whore the Atlantic coast Line Railroad cut through at the nearest point to the house, a mile and a quarter away and for many years it was a railroad stop called "Reed's Station," where we used to take the train and also where freight from Jacksonville was left. This is gone now, the nearest railroad station being Yukon. I do not know how it received this name, but it is settled, for the most part, by negroes who used to work on the old plantation, and their descendants. Uncle Morris Moore, a hoary-headed old negro, living at Yukon, used to work on the place as an extra, and should we able to tell a great deal about life on the old plantation.
"In the boathouse at the long dock on this riverfront two long rowboats were stored -Fanny Perry and John Perry - requiring two rowers each, in which grandfather sometimes came to Jacksonville, and also used to convey Dr. Henry A. Coleman from Mandarin across the river two miles wide at this point. These boats were always well taken care of, kept leak-proof by being let down in the water frequently to swell up the seams.
"Uncle Joe Reese, a brother of our uncle George Reese, lived on the point down the river, and had a very fine canoe which he had made himself by hand, and sometimes he would be asked to go for the doctor, if he were urgently needed, as the canoe was light, safe and swift: in fact, Dr. Coleman preferred to trust himself to uncle Joe rather than the two rowers in the larger boats.
"There was a great deal of sickness, especially in the summer, when we used to nearly die with malarial fever. Screens for the doors and windows were unknown. The mosquitoes were a terrible rest. <text not clear>ong not canopies were over all the beds, and before retiring it was necessary to have someone get under the nets and beat the mosquitoes out, then let the canopies down carefully to the floor all round before we could obtain any relief. The colored people suffered from malaria, with its chills and fever. My mother was the only one I ever knew not to be subject to it; she seemed immune.
"A big orchard surrounded the house. There were grapefruit trees, orange of different kinds, tangerines, lemons and one lime tree; also peaches, pears and plums. In the latter part of the 1880's a terrible freeze killed the citrus trees; they froze to the ground and split open. Uncle George had a strawberry patch, and there were quantities of dewberries in the woods about.
"Uncle George and Aunt Nancy Reese had six grown sons when I can remember. Abram, the oldest one, looked after the cattle which were raised in large numbers to supply beef for the household. He also did the milking. We children used to go to the <text not clear> in the evening at milking time with our little tin cups and fill up on fresh, warm milk. I remember one time I had climbed up on the fence awaiting my turn, when one of the mean cows with long horns charged at me, and I fell off in the briars Some of the cows had ugly dispositions and would hook if they got a chance.
"The milk was carried to the dairy house in the back yard. There it was strained into pans which were then placed on the shelves in the rear room for the cream to rise. In the front room were the stone churns and jars for the butter and sour milk.
"Just behind the dairy house was the laundry - two rooms - where the family washing was done. Clifford Brown, Aunt Nancy's sister, and charity Lyles, a woman from the settlement nearby, were the laundresses. Maria Lyles, charity's daughter, a house servant, sometimes helped also with the laundry work.
"Jack Reese, another of Uncle George's sons, learned the carpenter's trade and did all the building and repair work on the place. After we left, he went to New York, where he died.
"Frank and Joe Reese helped in the fields with the farming, and Sam and Ike, the two younger boys, worked around the house and waited on the table, bringing the food up from the little brick kitchen at the back of the house. Sam's duties also included attending to the chickens. There were lots of chickens, geese, ducks and guineas.
"The Reese also had a little girl, Jenny, but she died when a very small child. I remember I was taken to see her and this was my first experience with death."
At this time, Mrs. Hanson, daughter of Mrs. Richardson, came in from the kitchen, and said, "Tell about Florence."
"Florence was the child of Cornelius and Clifford Brown. One day Cornelius gave her a terrible whipping, and it so frightened her that she was afraid to go home. We girls felt so sorry for her that we took her up to our bedroom, making a pallet on the floor, where she spent the night."
When asked about educational training, Mrs. Richardson said: "When we were small, mother taught us at home, as there were no schools. When I was ten years old, a country school had been established on McGirt's Creek, a short distance away, am I attended that for two years.
"About brother that time Grandfather Reed died, leaving the place to my elder brother, Reed Pearson, and we came to Jacksonville. When I was about fourteen, we went back for a short time, am then we had a private teacher. The boys each went to college, but education was not considered so important for the girls.
The negroes all called my grandmother 'Miss Harriet.' My brother Reed was called 'Captain,' and brother Charles was "The General". The children were all called by their first names until they grow up, then they were 'Miss' and 'Missy.'
"The horse lot and barns, with stalls for the horses, were all on the north side of the lane to the west of the house just outside the big yard. The buggy and harness house was on the west side of the lane beyond the yard, and a little below it was the <text not clear> shed and several more horse stalls.
"The floors in the big residence were all of hard opine, and severed with wool carpets in the winter, tacked with carpet tacks on all four sides of the room. The hall that went from the front to the back had a strip tacked down in the center. These carpets were all taken up in the summer, carried to the docks in a hand cart where the dust was beaten out by some of the younger darkies, then carefully wrapped in canvas to the back porch and carried to the garret on the second floor. The floors were then carefully scrubbed and covered with matting for the summer months.
"The living room or parlor, as it was called, contained a big black walnut grand piano which took up almost one whole side of the room. The rest of the furniture was the old style horsehair and overstuffed sofas and chairs.
"In the dining room were two immense glass-front cabinets, called secretaries, which reached almost to the ceiling, in which were kept the dishes and other table service.
"For heating purposes there were big fireplaces in which legs were burned in the living room and in each of the east bedrooms. In the north bedrooms were small coal heaters, with a large heater in the dining room.
"As to food, all the meat was kept in the smokehouse. There was always plenty of corned and dried beef, smoked hams and bacon, and salt pork.
"Then there was fish in the greatest abundance. My! how we enjoyed fishing from the dock. Grandfather Reed fished until he was real old, and of course, they did not allow the children on the dock alone, as there was danger of our falling in the river which was swift and deep there. Poles and lines were used for fishing, and the most popular bait was shrimp, crabs, and cut fish.
"There was bass, broad, trout, sheepshead, crabs and shrimp. We often saw the snouts of alligators in the shallow water along with the shore.
"For breakfast we had fried beefsteak, bacon or pork, with hominy or grits, corn muffins and biscuit, tea and coffee. The children were not permitted to drink tea and coffee and grandmother gave us what she called 'lace tea'-milk with hot water and sugar, which we thought was delicious. We had all kinds of fresh fruit in season-oranges, grapefruit, peaches, pears, strawberries and blackberries.
Dinner was the noon-day meal. It consisted of roast beef, fried chicken, or different kinds of meats, baked duck, guinea, goose; lightbread or biscuit, and different kinds of vegetables, peas, beets, turnips, cabbage; lots of rice, also pies and puddings. In cold weather we had roast young pig, pork sausage, hogshead cheese, scrapple. There was a great variety of canned fruit in glass jars, jellies and jams, kept in the cellar; pickles of large and small cucumbers, and pickle-lillys of green tomatoes, onions and cabbage, spiced and put up in sweetened vinegar. No <text not clear> re kept in gums, but every once a while one of the dar<text not clear> would locate a 'bee-rce in the woods, which would be robbed, and we would have big jars of honey in the comb and strained honey. Dewberries and blackberries abounded in the countryside, and would be gathered in July by the bucketsful and made into jam and jelly. There were also long grapes arbors, and this fruit was made into jelly, jams, and wine.
"For supper we had could roast beef or roast chicken sliced, cold baked ham, sardines, honey, biscuit, and the best cornbread, made like cake, with the sugar left out, and baked in yellow earthenware bowls. Then there were cookies, and the loveliest cakes, yellow cakes, white cakes, and angelfood - all home-made and delicious. And of course there was always an abundance of butter, sweet milk and buttermilk on the table.
I like to think of the good times we had and the fun we enjoyed in simple ways. Uncle George always had a raft of cats around his house, which he fed at the end of the porch. Just beside the porch was a large barrel on wheels in which swill-di<text not clear>ater am left over food and scraps from the table - was poured to feed to the hogs. It was always kept covered. At night, after the <text not clear> were fed, it would of course be empty, and one of our stunts could be to run the cats into the swill barrel and clamp the lid on. Suen a equalling and cat-scrapping as there would be! We would scamper out into the bushes around the yard, and uncle George would rush out and release his pets, yelling-'what you younguns doin to mah cats.
"Grandmother had a number of cats as pots, and these were fed after the back porch where it was high off the grou
"I do not remember any of the <text not clear>egroes telling us stories, but there was one negro woman from the settlement whore Yuken now is, She used to come in once in a while to help with the work, a short, dumpy little old woman, very black, who claimed she could see ghosts all about, and the other negroes. all looked up to her. Her name was Aunt Clara Jackson.
"When we first located in Ortega it was a wilderness. We came over in a wagon. We built this house here and had to carry water from a flowing artesian well near the road. The first electric light plant was a small one operated by Mr. Horne, and we used to have to pay our bills to him.
"This was the property was originally an English grant to Colonel Sanderson. Just recently we found one of the old stone <text not clear>undary <text not clear>ors with peculiar numbers on it. There are two cemeteries on the point, one where the sadlers are buried, and another a colored cemetery. There is an old magnolia tree in the cemetery over a hundred years old.
"There is a Mrs. Snead, now about eighty-five years of age, living on Ogram Street, just off Edison Avenue, who used to visit the Sadler family when they lived on the Point. She has a remarkably Koch memory and should be able to tell a lot about that period of this section. Mr. Horne, too, knows a lot about it.
"We feel very citified now that Ortega is part of Jacksonville the two city busses pass in front of the house, but across the street there you can still see ridges where the old corn rows used to be.
"No, I do not vote. My husband used to be interested in local and national politics, but now he is gone and only the three of us left, my daughter, Mrs. Hanson and my son, Read, and myself. It <text not clear>s seem to me that we are fulfilling all the prophecies of the Bible day by day, and that the end of the world, according to the 5th Chapter of Mark, is not far off, when the Lord of the world wild come to meet his chosen in the sky and carry them here."
