October 17, 1938
Ned Daniels, (Colored)
616 Union Avenue,
Knoxville, Tennessee.
Writer, Dean Newman
Revised by Edwards and Aswell
Corrected copy from team March 29
EASIER WAYS
"You see, my pappy killed hisself with hard work. Hard work and exposure. It ain't good for a man to git out in all sorts of weather, no matter how good he feels. Well, Pappy worked like a slave in that saw mill. Made good wages. But what happened to Pappy? Hit killed him, that's what!
"I jest don't care nothin' about a stiddy job myself. Ain't cut out for hard work. I gits by in easier ways. I's nobody's fool. I make hit good enough to suit me. why, they ain't a time in the year, or mighty few of them, that I don't have plenty somethin' to eat. Usually find me a place to sleep and clothes enough to git out on the street in. I jest tends to the wants of white folks. Colored folks is made to give a hand to white folks. And I does hit. I don't see where schoolin' could git a nigger like me. Niggers ain't got enough money for more than a half-way education. When they git hit, hit jest messes them up to where they won't have the jobs they can git once they's out of school. Hit takes money, plenty of hit, to turn out a doctor or a lawyer. A preacher now--from some' I's heard in the pulpit hit takes less for turnin' out a preacher.
"Well, the schoolin' I got is plenty for me. I can write my name to anything put up for me to sign. I can read enough to git a heap of pleasure out of newspapers. You ain't goin' see no newspaper left on the sidewalk if I's around. Don't have to be that day's paper. Any old paper will do. They's a sight in the old ones that's new to me. I's glad folks that's got money enough to buy papers and magazines ain't got sense enough to take keer of them. Most every room I's had I' bee able to pretty up with magazine pictures. I moves right smart but hit ain't been a time hardly when I didn't have some good ones tore out to cheer up the walls. Flower and tree pictures rest a body jest to look at them. They ain't never had to work hard.
"Why, I've never had more than two stiddy jobs in my life. But like I said, I don't want for nothin' the year around. Only thing frets me is when I don't have no 'baccy money. Then I has to git out and sharp-eye the gutter for some cigaret and cigar buttses. Anyhow, in winter I gits a dollar a week for keepin' up furnaces. They's five or six white folks here in Knoxville thinks I knows all they is to know about keepin' they houses temper'tured. Some that don't git me to fire calls me in to tote out ashes. Spring come along, then I gits first one job and another of house work. Washin' windows and helpin' out with cleanin'. House work ain't too hard for me. Least ways, that I gits paid for ain't. But come to workin' for yo' food or a place to sleep and women folks goin' to work you 'twill yo' tongue hang out. In summer I gits a run of lawn mowin' and weed hookin' off lots that's growed up. Now, that's right hard work. Don't let nobody tell you weed hookin' ain't hard work. Ain't goin' to take them jobs no more 'less hit ain't no other thing in sight. When hit's gittin' late for grass cuttin' and too early for firin', things gits pretty scarce with me. But them times is few. Could be fewer and suit me better.
"Oh, white folks always takes keer of me pretty good. They ain't going to let a nigger starve when he mind his manners and keep his place. Some niggers Nowadays ain't got no manners, nor no sense, neither. White folks work hard to git where they's got in this world, I mean work hard with they heads. Them or they Pappies and Mammies has had to do that sometime or other. I tell you I knows when a man is more than jest Mister. And I ain't goin' to be callin' him Mister if he served in the army or up to the courthouse. Times when I's short of work I's extry particular about doin' some of them things I ain't got no notion of askin' pay for. Why, I's had Jedge Matthews and that Captain Potter give me a dime many's the time jest for gittin' them in they coats. Hit holps out when jobs that you is strong enough to do is scarce.
"Now they's one thing you got to be mighty keerful about when you is doin' for white folks. Don't never tell them nothin' that they don't want to hear. You hear some bad news about yo' white folks. Maybe somebody say for you to tell hit to them. Well, don't never do hit. Keep a shut mouth on that bad news, no mind if hit most chokes you tryin' to git out. Let them find out they own bad news. But if hit's good news you hears, why jest bust a leg tryin' to git hit to they ears. They mostly will give a man a dime for good news. Suppose you don't hear no kind of news about them. Then you makes up somethin' nice and tell them. Don't make up nothin' big that they's like to find out ain't so.
"Jest sort of say, "Mister Granger, dog if I didn't hear a man say somethin' good about you today.'
"Mister Granger say, 'That so? What was hit?'
"You says, 'He say you is a comin' man around here. He say you don't let no flies light on you. No sir! That what he say.'
"Mister Granger say', 'Who say that? '
"I say, "Well sir, I couldn't see the man's face. Jest saw his back of the head. He looked like a mighty big somebody.'
"Mister Granger laugh. He don't really believe me but hit make him feel good jest the same.
"Yes, I git along. I makes hit pretty good in the easier ways. Well, where I sleep ain't always all I want. But I moves around. I tries to git the best folks has to offer me. I ain't never paid a dime out in ray life for a place to sleep.
"The room I's got now is warm in the winter and nice and cool in the summer. They's things about it, though that I ain't goin' to put up with much longer. It's in the basement of the house where I does the firin' in the winter. Ain't really no extry room there for me scrouged between the furnace and the coal pile. Miss Ann always gits the coal put in in June because hit's cheaper then. That means both me and the coal is there all the time. The worst part about it is that roof leaks. Even hear of a basement roof leakin' before? This one do. Hit's a leak in the top roof and hit runs down through the walls. Keeps that basement messed up and wet more than half the time, Mighty bad on a man with the rheumatics. Well, I's woke up many's the time and found the whole place plumb flooded. I's had to lay planks to git dry footin' from the bed to the furnace. And that water hit's loosenin' them bricks in the walls, too. Hit can't go on always. Sometime I's goin' to wake up mashed to death. I's spoke to Miss Ann about hit time and time again. She say the landlord's been promisin' her he'd see to that leak. Well, he better! I ain't goin' to put up with no place like that to sleep in. I can be independent as a hawg goin' to the wars when I wants to.
"The air down there ain't none too good, neither. Dust from the coal in the summer and smoke from the furnace in the winter. Hit near stifles you. I has trouble with my broathin'. Doctors says one reason is all this aparo weight to my height that I carries around, I's five foot two and I weighs some over two hundred. Well, ain't nothin' I can do about that. Lord made me that way. All I's goin' to do is try to rest myself somewheres I ain't goin' to choke to death. A man made the wrong shape like I is ought not to work too hard, neither.
"I guess hit's a good thing I never made enough to support no regular woman. She'd jest married me to git her livin' and then laugh behind her hand at me for bein' potbellied all over. Another thing, women wants so many things these days. They ain't never satisfied with nothin'. Hit's gimme gimme, gimme and more, more, more with the women. Some of them that picks at they vittles when you is courtin' them is goin' to eat you out of house and home once they got you where you is hitched. Only thing a woman is good for is cookin' I ain't never had to do my own cookin', nohow. But I ain't got no woman and hit's boardin' houses and restaurants and more folks with homes than I could count up that's glad, more than glad, to give me a little somethin' to eat when Idrops around. Ain't always leftovers, neither, though them's fillin' if you is really hongry. I washes up the dishes and gits the kitchen in some sort of shape for them that puts out extry for me.
"White folks about keeps me in clothes. Shirts, underwear, pants, and coats. When I gits a spare supply, I trades them off or sells them. I jest takes anything anybody want to give me.
"Now, with all them good clothes they give me, one time I took a notion I'd git me a new suit so I'd shine at the frolic up to the dance hall. And I done hit. Hit dug into what I had saved up but I figgered hit was worth it. I don't take no part in the dancin' but I git a right smart fun settin' there on the side of hit makin' the girls have a good time. Lot of them figgers they can have more fun settin' there chewin' the rag and outtin' up with a man with a head full of sense than shakin' around with some of them young bloods. They's all fools, the young bloods these days. A new suit can trim a fat man down to where the woman won't pass him up whether he's dancin' or not. Mine done hit for me. Women buzzes around me like bees on watermelon rinds when I's got on my new suit.
"I put that money back I had to pay for my suit. You see I saves most every cent I make firin' furnaces. Gittin my food and my clothes and a place to sleep without costin' me nothin' holps out. A man jest has to think about them things when he ain't cut out for hard work. And I ain't. The Lord cut me out in the shape of a man that's naturally made to have a good time. But he didn't give me the money to have that good time. Still, I gits by and hit mighty few times I want for anything."
<Text Not Clear>