Socio-Ethnic Study
The Greeks in America
January 31, 1940
Cora Mae Taylor
Mabel B. Francis Editor
MRS. GEORGIA CAPTAIN
627 Northwest Ninth Street
Miami, Florida
The interview with Mrs. Captain, age 30, took place at the counter-restaurant which she and her husband operate at the Table Supply Company on West Flagler Street.
Mrs. Captain is of a modest, retiring disposition with dark eyes and hair, but a fair complexion. She wore a fresh yellow uniform and greeted the customers with the sweet smile and patronizing manners usually acquired by one who is trained as a waitress. In size, she might be considered a perfect "36." Her voice was gentle and her speech as well-modulated that it was difficult to think of her as not being an American-born citizen.
Although she was interrupted quite frequently, she talked freely and did not seem to care how long I stayed. This is her story:
"I was born at Cloonario, Laconia, a province of Greece. As I was the youngest of a family of eight children, I often wished that my turn might come to go over to America. We came over here, a few at a time.
First, my father and oldest sister came and both got good jobs in a bakery in Lowell, Mass. Then my father sent money for my mother, brother and another sister. After a while all the others came, but I was left behind, because I was too small to work in a factory and earn money. I had to stay with my grandmother until she died so that there would be a near kin at her funeral.
I went to school some and learned to read and write the Greek language very well. I used to go to church with my grandmother. It was about the same as the Greek Orthodox church here, only instead of money, we gave bread, wheat or other things to the priest.
"During Lent, we were allowed to cook with olive oil only two times a week. That was the only luxury we were allowed to have. We couldn't eat any candy, but we could eat fruit and wheat. We drank no milk and were not allowed to eat any eggs, meat or butter. Then when Easter came, we killed the best sheep we had, not at church, but in the home. We'd invite our kin and have a swell time. Oh, we'd be so hungry that we'd really fill up.
"Everyone took two red eggs and two white eggs and gave them to the priest. The red eggs were cooked while the white ones were raw, so that he could sell them, if he got too many. We'd bake our own bread at home and take some of the nicest loaves to him. My grandmother used to cook some wonderful dishes, but I was too little to know how she prepared them.?
"I remember the awful times we had during the World War. Some of us nearly starved. We had to do without wheat or bread three days out of a week. On other days, we didn't dare to have bread, yet we could eat raw wheat and we happened to have goat's milk and cheese.
"About the only superstition I know that we practiced was when we dropped a comb or a lead pencil out of our pocket or let something like that fall when we didn't intend to let it fall, we'd step on it before we would pick it up.
My grandmother used to tell us so many queer stories that I used to be quite a story teller when I was little, but I have forgotten them. I remember she used to make me believe that the little elves would come and get us, if we didn't fry something for them. So we'd fry some cakes and throw two or three of them out the window so that they would come and get the cakes and not get us.
"I used to work harder than most little girls. I had to take care of the goats. We had so much milk that we would make cheese out of what we could't use. I like goat's milk, but I think ewe's milk is so much better. I used to go over to out neighbor's and drink milk and play with the little lambs. They were so cute and so much nicer than little goats.?
Clainos. He won the rank of Lieutenant in 1933. There had been other Greek students, but he was the first one to complete the course.
"It was through this brother that I met my husband. Nick visited at West Point and got acquainted with Peter and when he saw my picture, he made arrangements to come and see me on his way home for he was working in a factory in Casco, Maine.
"We soon became engaged, because a Greek girl can't go out with a young man unless she is engaged. He came to see me three times during the six months we were engaged.
When his brothers went back to Greece to enter the Balkan War they left their cameras here and Nick went into the photograph business. He had studios in New York, Brooklyn and Newark, N. J. As I had one sister in Miami, we came here to go in business with her husband who had a fish market.
"Our baby was about a year and a half old then. We call him Jimmy, but his name should be Demosthenes, for that was his paternal grandfather's name. My father's name was James, so the godfather gave him the name James Demosthenes. If we should have another son he should be James.
"I often talk Greek to my boy, because I want him to speak both languages and it might come good to him some day, but I like English so much better. I like America and want to become an American citizen. My husband is a citizen and we might get along alright, but if he should die, I know I would get along better if, I had taken out papers.
"How I wish I could have gone to school like my brothers and sisters I did not mind it at first, but now I see what I missed. That's one thing I'll do. I will work hard and save money so that my boy shall have a good education and be fit to do anything he likes.
My husband came from Gytheon (Jitton). It was not far from my home in Greece, but we did not know each other there. His mother died in Greece a long time ago. He has two brothers and two sisters here and one brother in Greece. He did not do so well in the fish market and then opened this place. He has never been in the restaurant business before.
"I don't go to the Greek church very often. My husband goes to the Pentecostal Church at Seventh Avenue and 36th Street. I often go with him to his church, but he has no faith in our church anymore. He is so fanatic. He won't hire anyone here but a member of his church. He says he can trust them, because they are praying folks; they never lie and never steal.
"He reads the Bible so much and talks so much religion to the customers that he neglects his business and sometimes drives folks away. When girls come here in their bathing suits, he tells them they ought to be ashamed to go around showing their legs and they go out mad and never come back again.
"Look through the serving window and see what he is doing right now. See, he is painting the lower part of that calendar all over with black paint to cover up that girl's legs. If he don't want to see her legs, I don't see why he don't tear off the calendar and throw the picture away. Oh, he makes me so ashamed of him, I don't know what to do.
"If it wouldn't be for Jimmy, I guess I'd leave him. My friends say that I should leave him and get another father for Jimmy, but I wouldn't do that. He is so good. He don't drink and smoke nor swear and he is good to me. He does not break our marriage vows and it would not be right for me to leave him.
"I have Jimmy's life insured for $350 and I am insured too for $2,000 if I should die in an accident, or $1,000 if I die a natural death. I want him to have his life insured, but he won't do it and doesn't like it that I carry insurance. He is so headstrong about such things.
"He doesn't even think we should have a big bank account. He gives me money and lets me take it out of the cash register, but he always wants to know what I spend it for. Once I collected as much as $200 by little dribs and put it in the Post Office. He said that I had no right to do that and then I asked him what I was supposed to do, if he should die. I wouldn't want to go around and beg money for his funeral and I wouldn't want to bury him by the county and I couldn't sell this place right away.
"He didn't like it at all. I felt so sorry. I didn't know what to do about it, so I asked him if he would be satisfied, if I drew it out and gave it to him. So I did and he put it in this restaurant.
"Some people say he is going crazy over religion. He wants to get someone else to do the cooking and he wants to go out to the homes of our people and tell them about the great blessing he received from the Holy Ghost. He would let me stay here and try to keep the place going. Sometimes I think that would be better. I believe we would have more trade, because he drives so many away."
Just then he waited on a customer who called his attention to the wall motto: "Jesus Never Fails."
"You'll not find a motto like that in any other restaurant in Miami," he remarked. "You see, I am letting that motto preach for me all day."
The customer asked him if he thought it would do any good for him to pray to have his cold cured, for he felt almost too, badly to keep out of bed. Mr. Captain replied:
"Not if you are a sinner. The Lord won't hear any other prayer from a sinner, but a prayer of repentance. If you say, 'Lord be merciful to me a sinner, 'He will hear you, and, it you come over to "pray meet" tonight, we will pray for you."
I ordered a bowl of soup to take occasion to ask him: "How does it happen that you do not attend the Greek church?"
"It's this way. I am a very religious person. I have always held high offices in the Greek church and was a good worker every place I went. Four years ago when I was secretary of the Board of Trustees, a Greek friend of mine was reborn from heaven. He came to our church and asked permission to give a talk, but I knew the rules and asked him to come into a side room and tell me all that he had to say. I saw tears in his eyes and I saw that he was a different man than I was. I was interested in him, but I could not let him tell us anything that might break up our church. Then he came here and told me that I should read my Bible more. I read it and found that all he said was true. I told my folks that everything he said was in the Bible, but they said they would not believe it was in the Greek Bible. I said that it was in our Bible, too. Then I paid $15 for a very old Greek Bible. It was the first Greek Bible ever written and I found the same things in it.
"I prayed some nights for hours and kept praying and studying for six months. God showed me that I was a sinner and I asked Him to help me to repent. I felt the Holy Spirit working in me. I had been a very good dancer. I was a lively one and was very popular when I went out. I drank some and smoked and did all those things. Now I care nothing about any of these things.
"On December 5, 1938, the Lord filled me with the Holy Spirit. No body needed to tell me. I knew I was saved from my sins. Now I feel that I want all my people to know what the baptism of the Holy Spirit means. Then last Monday night, I went to the altar and prayed that if it please the Lord, I should like to have the gift of healing and I got such a blessing that I was all filled up and like a voice, it said, `You have it.' I may have had it before and didn't know it, for when my boy had fever, I prayed and he got well.
"The Lord has been protecting me all my life so that I can be a missionary to my people. Not for money. God forbid that I should ever get greedy for money. One time I would have been shot with a bullet by accident, for I ran in front /of a man just as he pulled the trigger and the gun did not go off. The man tried it out the second time and it drove a bullet into the tree. I've been spared from other accidents like that. Oh, I can't tell it all, but I'm so glad that I've found this church.
"My boy wants to be a preacher. I tell my wife; 'Listen, do you realize what it means to have our boy a preacher?' Well, she just thinks it would be all right, but she does not feel the same about it as I do. I promised him a nice Bible with his name on as soon as he is old enough to read it and he can hardly wait until that time comes."
