August 7, 1939
Violet Freeze (Textile Worker)
Kannapolis, N.C.
Ethel Deal, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
Original Names	Changed Names
Violet Freeze	Viola Freeman
Kannapolis	Millville
Cannon Mills	Knapp Mills
Jackson Park	Jefferson Park
Concord	Friendship
Viola Freeman was a lovely picture, as she sat in the deep-cushioned chair by the living room window. Spots of sunlight danced among her natural curls of chestnut hair and cast flickering shadows across her large blue eyes, looking intently at a thrush nervously feeding her young in the lilac bush outside. "My life is as full and busy as that little bird's out there," she remarked, as she rested her elbow on the chair arm and dropped her chin into the palm of a well-kept hand on which she wore a diamond studded wedding band and a sparkling solitaire, "but seriously I like it that way.
"I'm only twenty seven, but it seems like I have lived a century. Three children, one of them dying a horrible death from brain tumor, when still an infant; two serious operations, the doctors despairing of my life both times; besides many smaller trials. That is why I'm glad my life is full and busy, it's easier to forget when you are busy with the present and full of plans for the future. And there are not many places where one can find as much to do as we have in a big industrial center like Millville.
"I work in the finishing room at the Knapp towel mill, it's the largest mill of the kind in the world, you know. I could work in the office if I cared to, but I sometimes make as much as five dollars a day wrapping up bundles of towels-much more than the girls make in the office. The Knapp mills own the whole town; appoints the mayor, employs the policemen and all the other officers. Here you rub elbows with preachers, school professors and college graduates from every part of the state. It's population is over twenty two thousand. The offices alone employ a small army.
"I have a housekeeper and she's a jewel; forty years old and a lady by birth. She takes a great interest in the children. I keep her even when I don't work, so she will not go to work with some one else, she runs my house like a clock.
"I belong to the Lutheran Church, have charge of the junior choir; am a substitute teacher, and for the past three years I have been president of the P? T. A. I was elected again this year, but had to refuse because my doctor said I was doing too much. I decided to take his advise and rest up for a year.
"My husband is a mechanic. He and I are great baseball fans; we don't miss a game often. We have some good theaters in Kannapolis; I like a good show and am crazy about swimming too. We all have our bathing suits and go in about twice or three times a week. Millville is a good place to live and make money, but you sure can spend it here. We don’t own a car, but we do go a lot. My youngest brother lives here; he’s married and has a new oar. My husband and I furnish the gas when we all go together, I’d like to have a home, even if it didn’t have but two rooms, just so it was mine. Since the mill owns all the land you can’t buy a place in town. Jefferson Park, about two miles from town, is a pretty place; it’s been built up in the last six years. My brother and two of my uncles have nice homes out there. I’d like to live there too, but my husband won’t agree; he’d rather pay rent.
”I was born and reared on a farm. Dad started out with nothing, but with the help of mother and the children we soon owned a fairly good farm and a good house, it burned down when I was a child. Dad sold the land and bought another place and built a nice home. About the time it was paid for he started drinking. After that mother had to take things in hand. She sent us all to school, and I took four full years of high school work, specializing in music and home economics, I’m proud I know how to do things.
"You’d never take me for a working girl, would you? I owe the art of neatness to my mother. She was a lady. She explained it to us this way-a lady isn’t necessarily a person dressed in costly clothes. You can be a lady even if you have only a calico dress and brogan shoes; gentelness, she said, was within, not without. She taught us to keep our bodies clean and lovely. I’ve tried to obey all her teachings and have passed them on to my children. Kindness, courtesy, cleanliness and charity was the practice of my mother’s daily life and I’ve made it mine.
"Babies are the most adorable things in the world to me. Since I can't have any more of my own I just let my love go out to the two I have and others. There’s nothing I can't make when it comes to sewing. I like to do dainty hand embroidery on children’s clothes. Often I sit up late at night to make a little dress, slip, or bonnet to give to some baby. The mothers appreciate such things, especially if they can’t afford them.
"Yes, I vote. I not only think all women should vote but they ought to be well read and know what they are voting for. We are both Democrats.
"At Millville, we have a Y.M.C.A. This building has an in-doors swimming pool. The reading rooms are spacious and the library has a large collection of reading material. The fee is only a dollar a month. In the Knapp mill they weave sheets, towels, wash cloths, dish cloths, table cloths, draperies, bathing suits and many other things. The payroll there is large, exactly how much I don't know. It must be over a million a year. They pay off every two weeks. As Knapp owns the town, they get most of it back. I buy most of our clothes in Riverton, lot of other folks here do the same. Friendship is only seven miles from us, it gets a share of the trade. I've got to say this of the people here, they are always ready to help the sick. When a person gets sick and can't work the neighbors take them food, clothing or money; anything they need. If there are any on relief, I don't know it."
