"I'VE TOOK IN SEWING FIFTY YEARS"
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Field Superviser
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
July 20, 1939
 
July 7, 11, 1939
Mrs. Sarah Frances Fellows (white)
173 Barrow Street
Athens, Georgia
Seamstress
S.B.H.
"I'VE TOOK IN SEWING FIFTY YEARS"
Mrs. Moon was sitting by her sewing machine creasing a seam in the blue and white striped cotton dress she was making. "My life ain't been no bed of roses," she said. "I ain't never done nothing but sew ever since I could lift the top off the sewing machine for ma, and that's been a long time ago. You better come back some time and git my daughter to tell you her story. She's a dressmaker too, and she used to sew for the folks in a circus. That was when her husband belonged to Sparks Circus. Her'n oughta be a whole lots better'n my story. She's in Atlanta this week with my niece, but she'll be here next week. There ain't nothing I could tell you that I'd care to see in print."
We began a discussion of the advantages of various dress designs and patterns, and she showed considerable interest in comparing styles of yesterday and today. "I ain't got no real new patterns here right now for my daughter took 'em all to Atlanta with her the other day," she apologized.
Mrs. Moon stitched a long seam before she spoke again. "Well," she said, "I reckon everybody, rich and pore, has their ups and downs, and I don't guess my life's no worse'n lots of other folks, so here goes: Have you ever been to Social Circle?" I nodded assent. "Well, I was born about 4 miles from there. My folks lived on a farm, and we stayed in the country till I was 8 years old.
"Pa was killed in the Civil War, and ma was left with two daughters, my older sister and me. I was born just a few weeks after he had to leave for the war, and soon as I was old enough ma took me to Charleston for him to see me, and then she took me to Augusta once when he was stationed there. Them's the only two times pa ever did see me. I was born in 1861, and you can figure out for yourself how old I am now. After pa didn't come back from the war ma took us to live with grandpa and grandma. Grandpa was considered a well-to-do farmer.
"You know during the Civil War when soldiers were killed in battle they never took up time burying 'em or sending word to their folks. They just dug one big long old hole and piled the dead in it and covered 'em with dirt. Now that's the way we was told they handled 'em. Anyway, we never could hear nothing about pa after the war was over, so ma just thought he musta been killed.
"Not so many years ago I was doing a heap of sewing for a Major's wife, and one day he come with her to git the things I'd made for her. He told me he knowed a man that looked exactly like me in every way. His wife agreed with him, and she promised to get a picture of that man and send it to me but she never done it. Now wouldn't that be funny if he won't killed and went off to Texas and maybe that man was his son by a second wife. It could be.
"When we was living on grandpa's farm, now and then he would give us a nickel or a dime for picking cotton, drapping corn, or for picking off groundpeas on rainy days. Grandpa was the best old man that ever lived. One of his sons never come back from the war neither and so he kept his daughter-in-law and her little girl who was about my age. One day grandpa told us if we'd pick 25 pounds of cotton by dinnertime he'd buy each of us a china doll. Lord, I never worked so hard before in all my young life. When the cotton was weighed it was just a few ounces over the amount we was supposed to have. Grandpa bragged on us and that good old man walked all the way to town with us that evening to get our dolls, Walking them 4 miles back home totin' them dolls we was just about the happiest little girls you ever seen and it won't Christmas neither.
"I won't what you'd call a mean child, but our grandma was so strict that it really did seem like she loved to beat on us. One day I'd done something she didn't like, and my cousin just teased me. 'Goody, goody,' she said, 'grandma's goin' to beat you good for that.'
I made up my mind this was one time she won't goin' to beat me, so I went out in the kitchen and put everything I could find to eat in a market basket. I had bread, preserves, coffee, and a coffeepot even, and a hunk of butter, a slab of meat, and I think I had some matches, but I'm not sure about that. I set out for the woods where I could hide, but I was careful not to go out of sight of grandma's house. My cousin had promised she'd come where I was hiding, so I sat down and waited for her. A few years before, an old crazy Nigger had died close to the spot I chose for my waiting. While I was setting there thinking about him, I thought I saw old Tom as plain as day. It scared me so I jumped up from there and made for the house as fast as my feet could take me. The first person I saw was my cousin. 'What'd you come back for?' she wanted to know. 'You knowed I was coming soon's I got my basket full too. You went off without no frying pan. How was we going to cook without a pan?" I told her about seeing old Tom's ghost, and we decided we didn't have no more business in them woods that day. I didn't git no beating neither.
"My cousin and I had to walk 5 miles to school as long as we lived with grandpa and grandma. That was 10 miles in a day, so of course we had to take our dinner with us. Our aunt went along with us, for she didn't think it was safe for such little girls to go that far by ourselves. We used to have what we called exhibitions at the school- house. One time when I needed a new pair of shoes if I was to play my part in one of them exhibitions, good old grandpa went to town and bought me a nice pair of black cloth, high-top, laced shoes. They was called gaiters then. When I tried 'em on they was three sizes too big for me, and grandma tried to git him to take 'em back, but he said it was too far to walk back on such a triflin' errand. He stuffed them shoes half-full of cotton, and I wore 'em and felt mighty dressed up. I had a little sweetheart then and that day he told me, 'Mary, you look awful pretty.'
"I was 8 years old when ma decided she'd go to town and take in sewing. She done beautiful work with a needle. While she was looking around for a place for us to live she stayed at the hotel in Social Circle. The old woman, Mrs. White, what run the place told ma if she'd bring us and live there at the hotel all the time she'd give her the rent on the two rooms next to her'n, and she'd let us have our food free. She said she'd do this because she'd feel safer with some other woman living in the hotel, for strange folks was coming and going every day, and besides she was mighty old and she was afraid she might git sick in the night and there wouldn't be no other woman around to wait on her. Ma moved in, and fitted up one room for her sewing room, and we slept in the other'n. Ma was mighty lucky that our rooms and what we et never cost her nothing. She done good too for them days. Folks done more of their own sewing then than they does now. They hadn't got so lazy then, and nobody but the very rich folks hired their work done after the slaves was freed. Stores won't so full of ready-made clothes as they are now and 'most all the clothes folks wore had to be made up for 'em, either at home or by some dressmaker.
"Ma took in from 12 to 15 dollars a week. Folks couldn't turn out sewing nigh as fast as they does now, for most of it had to be done by hand. She charged from $2 to $4 for what was known as plain dresses then, but for graduating dresses she got $5 apiece. She made lots of 'em for the girls that graduated from Lucy Cobb, and if I do say so myself, them was beautiful dresses she set down there in Social Circle and made for folks to wear at graduation in Athens. My sister was a mighty good hand with a needle and she done all the fancy work on them dresses for ma, but she won't strong and couldn't hold out to sew long at a time.
"A lady that lived across the street from the hotel took a liking to my sister when she was about fourteen, and she begged ma to let her come over to her house and live as her companion. She and her husband didn't have no children. The lady told ma she was sure the reason sister looked so puny was that the sewing didn't agree with her. Ma let Katie go live with them folks and they was mighty good to her.
They give her a good education and she married a well-to-do farmer and had every comfort of life known to farmers. Kate was good about giving ma and me food, things to wear, and even money. "Ma and me lived in the hotel till just before I got married.
I reckon sewing just naturally runs in our family, for I've been sewing ever since I was old enough to reach the machine pedal. I stitched all the straight seams for ma and she often called me her feet and hands. We turned out some pretty clothes in our time, and I've been sewing really more'n 50 years.
"When I was 19 years old I never had been to Athens, and ma promised me if I worked real hard that fall she'd let me come here to visit my uncle. The real reason I wanted to come so bad was my cousin that had got married that year had wrote me that she knowed a nice young man to interduce me to. She said if I wanted a sweetheart and a nice husband he'd be just the one, and she begged me to come on over to Athens and see how I liked him. After I got her letter all I wanted to do was just to git to Athens. Folks had done told me what a big pretty place it was. I worked real hard for ma and got to make my trip at Christmas time.
"The first night of my visit my cousin interduced me to the man she had wrote me about, and 5 weeks later we married. He was 30 and I was 19 years old. His ma and pa was dead and he lived with his two old maid aunts. I wouldn't consent to git married unless ma would come to my wedding. She come a week beforehand and made up my wedding dress. It was garnet trimmed in canary. I'd give anything in the world if I'd kept it. We just had a mighty simple little wedding at my uncle's house.
"About 11 months after my marriage ma married her brother-in- law. He was older'n her, and his first wife was her youngest sister. After her sister died and left seven little children ma said she married him simply to take care of them little nieces and nephews for fear some other woman would be mean to 'em. One thing sure he made ma a good husband and she never had to sew no more.
"I didn't take in no sewing the first 8 or 10 years after I got married, but when it began to look like we was going to have a big family and I needed money real bad, I picked it up again. Most of his life my husband didn't make but $30 a month, and $50 was the most he ever did make for a whole month's work. He stayed at Hughes China House. He was practically born and raised in that china house.
That store was all he knowed. He did work in a grocery store for about 4 years. That's where he made $50 a month. When the grocery store went broke he went on back to his old job at the china shop. I've made $30 a week many a time. That was because there was plenty of money them days. There's still plenty of it, but pore folks can't seem to manage to git none of it. Now I do well to make as much as $5 a week.
"My husband's pa left him and his two sisters seven acres of land, and there was a place in his will that said that if either of the three children married and wanted to sell the property it was agreeable, provided the one who married invested his or her part of the money in a home. My husband built us a house, but it won't long before the Niggers begun backing up on us. Finally they even built a Nigger school on the corner in front of our house. We sold that property and built this 7-room house. I'd say our house is a gift from my good old father-in-law. When we first built over here it was a new section and there won't so many houses; now the houses are so close I can hardly breathe.
"After my children growed up, got married, and left here, I sold 'most all my furniture and rented out three rooms. I used to have several nice pieces of real antique furniture, but I had to let it go to git money to live on. The nice young couple that's living here now has been with me 3 years. They pay me $20 a month. Them being here makes it nice for my daughter for I don't stay here in winter. My daughter in North Carolina has a nice steam-heated brick house, so I go to see 'em about the last of November and visit there till the first of April.
"I'm gittin' a dollar and a half for this dress I'm making. Look how I'm making the blue stripes stand out on the belt, and the cuffs, and around the neck. Ain't stripes mean to work with? I've done many a ten cent job. That's my price - a dime - for turning a man's shirt collar. A lady called me the other day saying she had a halfdozen shirts that needed the collars turned. Now for hemming up a dress my price is twenty-five cents. Surely that job's worth a quarter if its worth a cent.
"I've been sewing more'n 50 years - about 10 years before I married and over 40 years since then - and in all that time I've never lost but a dollar and a half on my customers. One woman got me to make her a dress and before she could pay me for it her husband hit a streak of hard luck and they had to leave town. But I never got mad with her for I've been in tight places, many's the time, my own self.
My customers knows my work is done for cash because I needs the money. However, some of 'em do take their own good time to pay me. One thing I do despise is to have to ask people for what they owe me, but when they wait too long I have to do it. These days I charge from a dollar to a dollar and a half to make a dress. I have made a real plain dress for as low as seventy-five cents, but it has to be mighty plain at that price. My daughter charges about the same as I do usually. Sometimes she askes more than I think she oughta, but that's up to her and her customers.
"What hurts me now is I can't sew as fast as I once did. I have to go slow, sewing awhile then laying down on that cot awhile. Several years ago my doctor told me, 'Mrs. Moon, if you don't give up sewing you won't last 5 years. I never stopped, but I did have to slow down to where I do well now to finish up three dresses in a week. Next week is petticoat week. I can sew the whole week through on petticoats and nothing else and not finish all of 'em that's been left here for me to make. That's just a happen-so. Maybe it'll be weeks before anybody brings me another petticoat.
"My daughter here sews so fast that she can finish a dress in one night after it's fitted. Sewing used to be harder'n it is now. Then every dress seam had to be boned, the sleeves puffed up with thick paper, and the whole dress lined throughout with crinoline. That sleeve paper was so thick you had to make holes in it with an auger to poke your needle through. The dresses were mostly hand-made then. They didn't machine-stitch 'em like they does now. And them dresses had to fit like paper. Women laced themselves down in corsets so tight they could hardly breathe, and you had to fit the dresses so smooth over them corsets that they wouldn't have a wrinkle in 'em. Them days dresses had to drag the floor and we sewed what was called protectors on the bottoms of 'em. A protector was made of a long piece of velvet, doubled over like for hemming. One part was stitched on to the lining, and the other part was turned back and blind stitched down. If a dress was worn often it was necessary to renew the protector every one or two weeks. It took from 8 to 10 yards of cloth to make a dress. Them days they wore 'em too long; now they're too short. However, I do think they are more sensible short, especially when I think back yonder of the botheration and expense them old long dresses was.
"Them days it was very stylish for women to look bunchy, and a woman was considered coarse and common if she didn't wear at least seven starched petticoats, and each of 'em had to be at least two and a half yards around. One day a cousin of mine said to his wife, 'Emma, you look bunchier'n usual. What's the matter?' She replied, 'Why, Ed, I just have on seven starched petticoats, as usual.' Now, instead of wanting to be bunchy, women want to look like snakes.
"Now, if you don't mind, I'll have to stop talking with you, for one of my good customers is supposed to be here any minute. Come back some other day and we'll talk some more. Don't come on Saturdays though, for I always spend the week-ends out of town, and as a rule I don't git back home till some time Monday. I might come back Sunday this time, for next week's going to be such a full one for me."
Mrs. Moon is a very large person, but she is low in stature. Her graying hair was piled nigh on her head in a huge knot. Her black and white print dress, black slippers, and gray silk stockings were as trimly fitted as her excessive weight would permit. All the furniture appeared to be of a period just preceding the beginning of this century, and while it was battered and scratched it was well- arranged and thoroughly dusted. The various shades of green that are stippled over the plastered walls are almost hidden by the many pictures that line the rooms. Some are calendars, many are framed photographs, and others are paintings featuring a wide range of subjects.
"I enjoyed having you, even if I did have to sew right on as we talked," Mrs. Moon said as I took my departure.
Through the open front door as I arrived for my next visit, I saw Mrs. Moon's daughter at the telephone. I could not avoid hearing her say: "Tell Jim I'm back in town if he wants to see me." She hung up the receiver. "Come in!" she greeted me. "Nobody ever knocks here. Just go on back in the dining-room. You'll find mama back there sewing."
Mrs. Moon was pressing a garment when I entered. "Good morning," she said. "Have a chair, and we'll talk as I work, for I've got to finish that slip you see on the machine before my customer comes after it, and she'll be here 'most any minute. She told me she'd stop by on her way home from the curb market to git it and ell the other things I've finished up for her. I have sewed steady for her as long as 2 months at a time, and she's one of the few customers that ever tips me. She's always giving me 50 cents, sometimes 75 cents, and even as much as a dollar extra over what I charge for my work. She's got a big farm and is always bringing us nice vegetables. She had lots of money at one time. That was before the banks closed."
Her daughter came to let her mother know that a huckster was nearing the house with vegetables for sale. "Now Mama," she said, "don't you buy everything the man has. Just get a little corn, some tomatoes, - if they're nice and fresh, - and some okra. It's too hot to be doing much cooking or eating either." Mrs. Moon went to inspect the vegetables, and the daughter remained to ask me questions. I invited her to add her life story to the one her mother was relating.
"Oh, you'll have to come back another time for that," she said. "I've got too much to do today. If it's sewing experiences you're chiefly interested in I can feed you plenty of them, for I've sewed all over the United States and Canada too. I've sewed for some devils in my life. Just wait till you come back and I'll tell you all about my circus life when I trained elephants. Can't you just see me riding an elephant now? I didn't weigh but 90 pounds then. Look at me now! I'd hate to have to admit how close to 200 pounds I weigh now. That's all I'm going to tell you now. I've got to get to washing. I might want a take a trip the last of this week and all my clothes are nasty." She left the room as her mother returned.
Mrs. Moon began talking as she resumed her work at the sewing machine. "I had seven children, four girls and three boys. All of 'em had done got grown and was married when my husband died 14 years ago. He was down sick with neuritis more'n a year. Oh, it was terrible the way he had to suffer, and the expense we did have! Our children was as good to us as they could be. I couldn't do much good sewing them days for it took all my time to wait on him, and he wouldn't let me leave him a minute. About 2 years ago my oldest son died, and that almost killed us all. He was the pet of the family. I've never gotten over his death, and if I didn't keep busy all the time, I'd lose my mind grieving over him.
"One of my sons is an insurance agent in Jacksonsville, Florida. I don't know how much he makes for I've never asked him. Another son in Stephenson, Alabama, owns a lumber mill. He wrote me lately that he was working on a thirty thousand dollar order that'll take at least a year to fill.
"One of my daughters lives in Charlotte, North Carolina. She's bookkeeper in the store where her husband is manager. It's the largest grocery store in that town. They've never said nothing to me about how much they makes, and I ain't going to ask 'em nothing about it. I will say they seem to be gittin' on all right. Their three daughters are grown and married. Two of my children work in Atlanta. You know it sure takes a heap to live in a big city.
"No, mam, my children don't help me. It takes all they can make to help themselves. Of course, they do send me a dollar or so in a letter just now and then - no special amount and no regular time to send it. It just comes on rare occasions. Me and Mary Sue - that's my daughter you seen this morning - gits along the best way we can with our sewing and the 8 dollars a month I gits from the old age pension. In all, I've got eleven grandchildren; six of 'em's girls and five's boys.
"March and April's our fullest months for sewing in all the year. Everybody's getting ready for spring then, and it picks up again in September when they start thinking about fall and winter clothes. My daughter says she's been awful busy this last gone June. That's unusual. She says she had all she could do, and that's very unusual for June. Mary Sue, she don't do no sewing in July and August. She says the weather's too hot then. It don't bother me none. Mary Sue just visits around and has a good time, but it makes me nervous as a cat to have to set around holding my own hands, doing nothing. I'd almost be willing to sew for nothing during them two months, just to be working. 
"I don't do no more sewing at night. I stopped that years ago. One time I was making a coat for a woman, and I'd promised to finish it in time for her to wear it the next Sunday. I knowed if I didn't do some powerfully good work on it Friday night I'd never finish it up on time. So I sewed on it till after 1 o'clock that night. My husband had been asleep for hours in that front bedroom you see yonder. I went in there to undress for bed, and he yawned and was sort of half awake when he said, 'Mary, what in the name of God are you gettin' up so early for?' That's the latest I ever did sew at night. I usually stopped about 9 or 10 o'clock.
"I still makes coats and coat suits, when I can git 'em to make, but of course summer clothes are the easiest for me to handle now, but its the winter ones that brings me in the most cash. I don't think I ever got over $6 for making a suit or a coat. Folks would have a fit now if I asked 'em that much for making coats and suits. Everything's changed. You needn't expect nothing else from what they was 50 years ago. I mean by that, that if they hadn't changed folks would a gone plumb crazy from living in that old rut. Yes, mam, I'd sure a lots rather live in this age than 50 years ago. It looks like folks has got more sense in every way, but most especially about their clothes and looks. They used to wear them big old bustles sticking out behind 'em, and those thick old rats in their hair, and don't forget them seven petticoats starched stiff that I've done been telling you about.
"There's as much money in the world as there ever was, and plenty ways of making an honest living. The reason folks don't have jobs now is because they're holding out for more money than other folks are going to pay 'em. One thing I do hope is that I'll never have to go on relief. I'll not do it as long as I'm able to sew a stitch. I wouldn't even have a job of work on relief why, if I took one of them jobs - and they do hire sewing women - folks would criticise me and say, 'Look at that old lady Moon. She's working on relief as much as she's done for this one and the other.' I'm pretty sure I couldn't git a Job nohow, for folks would just call me a bossy, meddlesome old woman.
"One woman that gits her victuals from the government said that she couldn't eat what they give her, for she didn't like raisins and cabbages, and things like that, and that the biscuits she tried to make from the relief flour won't fittin' to eat. She said she biled some of that government celery 'most all day long and it never did git done. She declared them dresses they made up and give her hung on her like mother hubbards." Mary Sue looked in the door long enough to interpolate, "Who in the hell ever heard of boiling celery for greens?" she snorted, "No wonder she was griping about what she got for nothing."
Mrs. Moon ignored the interruption, and continued, "Folks oughtn't expect the government to give 'em jobs. They ought to git out and find their own jobs."
Again Mary Sue chimed in. "Mama," she called, "you oughtn't to talk that way. Why I'd do any damn thing to make a dollar, and wouldn't give a damn how I made it either."
"Mary Sue," her mother began, "that may be the way you look at it now, but I don't. I think President Roosevelt is a fine man, and no other living person could have done what he's done. You can read it in the Bible that people criticised Jesus Christ when he was on earth and they done worse to him than just stop at criticising him. You can't expect folks to do no better talking about Roosevelt than they did about Christ. Yes, mam, I think our President's a fine man, but I don't fool with no politics. They'll come around here asking, 'Mrs. Moon, I want you to vote for me.' I tell 'em quick enough, 'No, sir, I ain't going to do it for I ain't got no time for politics.' One thing I ain't never done is vote a ticket, and I don't never intend to neither. It don't make a speck of difference to me who's in office and who ain't. Politics is the men's job. I sew right on and 'tend to my own business and don't pay politics no 'tention.
"I sure do believe in education, but there won't but one of my children stuck to their schooling till they got a diploma. That was my oldest daughter. After she finished high school I sent her to a business school in Atlanta. She's got a good job now. One of my sons would have graduated, but he quit school in December and got him a job. He often says to me now, 'Mama, why didn't you beat me half to death and make me go ahead and finish school?' That boy's smart, and his daddy and I would have strained a point to send him through college. He could have worked some to help out with the expenses. The rest of our children are like me when it comes to what education they got. I didn't git no further'n the seventh grade and my children stopped at the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades. You know it's mighty hard to talk great big children into doing what they don't want to. I sure do wish all my children had at least finished high school.
"It used to be called stylish for couples to have big families, but just to tell you the truth they didn't want lots of children no more than folks does now. Back then, when I was having my children, folks won't on to the smart ways to keep from having 'em that they know so much about now. They might as well go on and call it stylish then to have a heap of children, and most of them did. Years ago you stood a better chance to raise a big family successfully for there won't so much to spend money for. Now it takes so much for folks to keep up with their neighbors that they can't afford to have more'n two or three children. I'm proud of all of my children, but I'm glad they ain't having to struggle to raise no big passels of children themselves.
"Me and my husband tried to live good Christian lives, and we done the best we could to raise our children to be good, honest, straightforward men and women. If they don't turn out right it sure won't be because we didn't do our best to learn 'em the right way to live. If they do go wrong I'm sure the Good Lord won't hold us responsible.
"I wasn't but 16 years old when I joined the Methodist church at Social Circle. I brought my letter here after I married. My husband hadn't ever joined the church but the Sunday I put my letter in here in Athens he joined with me and we raised all our children in the Methodist church. Since none of 'em but Mary Sue lives in Athens, I can't tell you just how well they are living up to their raising about going to church. I hope they do go and that they live up to the way our Lord demands of us."
Mary Sue came in from the kitchen and addressing her mother, she said, "Mama, are you going to have them buttons covered today for that bathrobe you've finished?"
"Now, not today," was the response. "I ain't got no money."
"You won't need to pay for 'em today, for I ain't going to town to take 'em before 4 or 5 o'clock this afternoon, and you can't git 'em till tomorrow nohow," Mary Sue informed her mother.
"That's so," said Mrs. Moon. "Well, I'll have the money then, 'cause them folks'll bring it when they come by for their sewing today."
"How do both of you manage to take in sewing with just one sewing machine? Do you have another one in the house?" I inquired.
"Now," Mrs. Moon responded. "We just have the one. When I'm basting, cutting out, or pressing, Mary Sue stitches. While I sew on the machine, she does her handwork, cooks our meals, cleans house, and things like that. She has to do all the housework, even to the washing and ironing. I ain't even able to sweep the floor. Setting and sewing don't seem to hurt me long as I can take my time about it and stop and lay down to rest as often as I feel like I need to. We can't afford no Nigger to do our work. Anyway, I just despise the nasty things around me. They'll steal your eyes out if they get the chance. Very few of 'em are good cooks, and they stink so it makes me sick to smell 'em.
"I don't have nothing else on hand to sew on now, so if you come across anybody that wants sewing done, please send 'em to us. We sew as cheap as anybody and we try to do our work just a little bit better than others. Clerks in some of the stores downtown where they sell dress materials sends us lots of customers, and we sure do appreciate it too."
The old woman asked to be excused from further talking as she declared her story was finished. I hunted for Mary Sue to make an appointment to return for her story. I found her in the kitchen preparing green corn for the noon meal. "You're not going now, are you? Stay and have dinner with us," she hospitably urged me. "We ain't having nothing but vegetables, but you're welcome to take potluck with us, and what we can eat, anybody else sure ought to be able to. I'm a good cook whether you know it or not." Perhaps I made a mistake when I declined the invitation. Her manner had changed when she again spoke. "Look here!" she exclaimed, "I've decided I ain't going to fool with telling you the story of my life. I just won't have time unless I can git good pay for it. My time's too valuable for that." Her mind was firmly made up. Persuasion was of no avail. "It ain't that I don't want to tell it to you," she said, "but it would take up my time when I could be doing something else that would be worth cash money to me. It's the money I'm after and I'm not donating no free service to nobody. There's heaps of lazy folks around that ain't out hustling after the money like I am, and I'm sure they'll be glad to set and talk to you. My life story's too valuable to give away anyhow. Why, it's worth a hundred dollars of anybody's money, and besides it would take a whole day to tell you all the things I've had to do to make money enough to raise my 24-year old son. I had two boys, but the youngest one died when he won't but 11 years old. I'm sorry, but I just can't be bothered."