STATE DETTORIAL IDENTIFICATION FORM
STATE FLORIDA
RECEIVED FORM____STATE OFFICE JACKSONVILLE
MS PEDRO BARRIOS WORDS 3.014 QUOTA______
STATE GUIDE____LOCAL GUIDE____NON-GUIDE YES
TABLE FOR THIS SECTION______WGAT PERCENTAGE REMAINS__
PREFINAL REVISE NO.____ WASHINGTON CRITICISM______
PREFINAL REVISE NO.____ WASHINGTON CRITICISM____
PREFINAL REVISE NO.____ WASHINGTON CRITICISM____
PREFINAL REVISE NO.____ WASHINGTON CRITICISM____
PREFINAL CONSULTANT: NAME_______
VOLUNTER CONSULTANT. Name____
Position______
Address______
____________
By <text not clear>
Position State Director
Date Jan.9, 1939
1935
Pedro Barrios (Cuban mulatto)
Ybor City
Tampa, Florida
(Cigar-maker and reader)
F. Valdes, writer, FERA
Sociological Survey of Ybor City
<text not clear>
PEDRO BARRIOS
I was born in the Cerro in Havana in 1881. That is to say that I have 54 years. I was brought to Key West when I had 3 years; and came to Tampa from Key West when I had 13 years. I learned the trade of cigar-maker from that time; and with the exception of a season I had as reader, I have done nothing (na maa(1)) else but cigars. From four years to this part I have worked two or three months during the year. From there to here, I worked one month in the water line, and now I am loader of bananas when the ships come in.
"My childhood and youth slipped by peacefully. I had a father who loved me very much; and died when I had 21 years; and a mother who was very affectionate with me.
"From then till now, I have done nothing but enjoy myself with baseball and fishing; two of my favorite sports and I find myself at the age of 54 years "the life very hurried(2)-----tight"(3) With sufficient years and ability, and "I do not find"(4)
(1) This is an apocope of nada. Nearly everyone in Ybor City uses this form of apocope before the word "mas", as in the above case. Also when asking anyone what is the matter with him, he will invariably answer "na", meaning nothing.
(2) Muy apurada la vida. An expression meaning that he is having a hard time.
(3) Apretada: In trying to further impress what he has said, he adds: "apretada", meaning that it is difficult. This is a very common form of speech.
(4) This form of shortening the speech is very common. It means "I do not find work".
"I have very good friends, whom I esteem, and who value me.
"During the time I was a baseball player there was not what there is today. They were "ninths" (novenas) of pure sports between cigar-makers, and there were many players from Havana. Among them was Alfredo Montoto, who helped me considerably. The "Red" of Ybor player, of which Martinez Ybor was president. The "optimo," our "ninth" which was the "San Francisco" Afterwards, I have devoted myself to fishing. I always go on fishing trips every week.
"I was also and am an amateur of ballads. I composed a ballad to the ice-creams "Tropical," and "by the low"(2) I glimpsed ten "canas,"(3) but it was a failure as I lacked putting on the tone to the time of the guitar. I did not occupy myself with finishing it. The first part of the ballad was thus:
Ya se acabo el malestar
Ya tengo lo que queria
Pues tomo todos los dias
Pues tomo todos los dias
El helado Tropical.
(Translation)
Already my. anxiety is at an end
Already I have what I desired
As I drink every day
As I drink every day
The ice-cream Tropical.
But I was "twisted,"(4) and I neither took the ten "guayos,"(5) nor anything.
The "stroke of the sabre"(6) gave me no result.
(1)This word is used to mean baseball team.
(2)Por lo bajo. This is an expression very much used in Ybor City. It means "at least".
(3) Canas. This is a saying of Cuban origin, meaning dollars. In a way it is equivalent to the word "bucks". The word "canes" is only one of several ways of calling the dollar; such as; the "sweet potato,"the Guayacan (the lignumvitae tree), maracas" (Cuban musical instrument).
(4)Arrollaron. This idiomatic expression is very much employed here, and is equivalent to "foiled". When there is a discussion (and there are many) and one declares himself defeated, he will say me arrollaste. (You have defeated me).
(5)Guayos. This is another name for the dollar.
(6) El Sablazo. This is an expression equivalent to the idomatic American word of "touch".
As to the customs here: This was once a small Cuba. "All the world"(1) aided each other, but Tampa "began to cosmopolite itself,"(2) The Italians and Americans began entering here, and now it is a mixture. There were the Cubans and Spaniards. The customs were "almost almost"(3) alike to those of Spain. But there were also the typical Cuban customs. You could eat arum (malanga), yam ("name"), sweat potatoes. Everything came from Cuba, and nowadays you cannot eat it.
"In the feasts of Christmas-day, there were many "rhumbitas"(4) on the atreets. I remember that we formed rhumbas in the house of Puebla. We were one whole week "rhumbaring,"(5) We would come out of the factory and go to the house of Puebla to continue the rhumba, and thus day after day. The hubbub was so great that we even drew out a "cantico" It was thus:
"La casa de Puebla se desploma"(7)
(The house of Puebla collapses.)
"Christmas-eve was celebrated with much merriment. The Three Wise Men bring the toys in Cuba on January 6th, but it was never celebrated here in this way. They have always come on Christmas Eve.(8)
(1) Todo el mundo. This is an expression equivalent to "everybody,"
(2) Cosmopolitando. This is a misuse of the noun cosmopolite. Here it has been used as a verb.
(3)This is another idiomatic expression very commonly used here, and means "very nearly ", (casi casi).
(4)Rumbitas. Diminutive for rhumbas.
<text not clear>
(5)Rumbiando. This is a verb of the noun "rhumba". It is very much used in Ybor City, but is not used in the sense of a rhumba dance. Practically everyone in Ybor City will say (when the occasion arises) "me fui de rumba, meaning "I went on a spree"; or me fui a rumbiar": "I went to have a good time,"
(6)Cantico. Diminutive for song.
(7) This line is repeated several times with a little shade of tone different every time.
(8) Here he refers to the Reyes Magos (Three Wise Men.)
"They were also accustomed to burning the old year here". The people would get together in many groups, and they would symbolize the old year with a puppet so that the coming new year would be better. As the puppet was being burned, they would say:
"Veta ano malo, a ver si el que viene es mejor".
(Go evil year so that the coming one is better.)
There was a Congo, who on Thursday before "asueto" (Sunday Holiday) would say:
"Manana "viene" (Viernes) el otro
se va, y el. otro, maravilla "ta"
la matra".
(Tomorrow Friday, the other goes, and
the other, marvelous is the tree.)
He meant that "he was going to give it to himself in big".
There is also a custom among the children, and that is when they begin to play jumping the rope, they sing this.
"El patio de mi casa	The yard of my house
Es particular.	Is particular.
Llueve y se moja	It rains and is soaked
Como los damas.	Like the other ones.
Agachate nina	Squat little girl
Vuelvate a agaeharr:	Squat again
Que si no te agachas,	If you do not squat
No Puedes bailar". (1)	You cannot dance.
(1)Se la iba a dar en grande. This idiomatic form of speech is very common in Ybor City. The equivalent in Engliah would be "He was going to have a big time".
(2)There is also another game which all the children in Ybor City of Spaniah or Cuban parents, play.. When they are play "hide and seek", in order to see who will be "it", they go through this sort of jargon:
Tin marin de does pingue	Tin marin of two pingue
Cucara macara titiri fue	Cucara macara titiri was
paso la mula, paso Miguel	Passed the mule, passed
Mira a ver quion fue.	Michael See who is "it".
There is also another similar to this one, and goes like this:
Pito pito colorite	Pito pito colorito
Donde vas tan bonito?	Where are you going so
A la acera verdadera	pretty?
Pin pan fuera.	To the true side-walk Pin pan out.
There is also a little song, which many of the children in Ybor City sing:
Estaba. la pa jara pinta
Sentada en su verde limon
Con el pico recoge la rama,
Con la rama recoge la flor
Ay Dios: cuando vere mi amor?
Ay Dios: cuando vere mi amor?
(Translation)
The spotted hen-bird
On its green lemon was sitting.
With her bill she takes the twig,
With the twig she gathers the flower.
O God! when will I see my love?
O God! when will I see my love?
"I do not go to church ever since I found out that the money-lenders took over the temple(1). So notice if I have gone to church(2). This does not mean that I do not have religion. My religion is the following: do good to others. If I know of someone who has nothing to eat, I cannot ait at the table(3). The anguish of anyone is my anguish; I feel it as much as the one who is Buffering it(4). I do not believe in doing harm to anyone. Neither do I feel animosity against anyone.
"This is my religion and the one which I impressed on my children. I am not believing in the preachers, who with their little book in the hand, and giving himself many "strokes of the breast",(5) "and if it comes to hand"(6) they will do harm to the "most Holy Mary".(7) "They are all life enjoyers"(8) of religion.
(1) This is a humorous way of stating that he has never attended church.
(2) Fijate, is a sort of idiomatic expression, and it is used to further impress what follows.
(3) This is a shortening of a sentence. The meaning is: "I cannot sit at the table and eat".
(4) This is somewhat similar to one of the doctrines of the witch doctors in Ybor City. They will (so they say) feel the same pains and sufferings of the person they wish to cure. By transmitting the spirit of the sick person into their own body they will go through the convulsions, pains, etc. suffered by the patient. They hold that the person will be cured in this way. Several people believe implicitly in this as they say they have witnessed these cures with their own eyes.
(5) Golpe de pecho. As expressed here it refers to the manner in which a priest pray a while gently striking his breast and says: "Through my fault, Through my fault, through my most grievous fault". It is an idiomatic expression used, more or less, by all the Spanish speaking people in Ybor City. It has not the same meaning as above as it is uaed to show that a certain person is very boastful.
(6)Si viene a mano. This is an expression commonly used to mean "handy". In the above case it means "if necessary".
(7)This saint is very much invoked or named in Ybor City. Due to its continual usage, it has now come to mean "everybody".
(8)Vividor. Although the correct meaning of this word is a thrifty or economical person; in Ybor City it has lost its original meaning entirely, and is used in a contemptuous manner. Its meaning is a human parasite.
"I remember that at the corner here a poor negro died "who did not have a place to fall dead".(1) Among several we made a collection, but the preacher did not give "neither a bit".(2) We were all at the place where he was buried, under a sun that cracked the stones. The preacher stayed at a certain distance under the shade of a tree. When the negro was already buried, he came and said: "ashes you are, ashes you will be, through the centuries of the centuries, Amen". He only said these words. At the same time he clapped on his hat and left "open for Hiers".(3) If it had been for a rich man, he would have said a sermon of two hours, which would have put one to sleep.
"My amusement is fishing. "Now that"(4) each one has his amusements. There are those, who by throwing a stick up in the air, amuse themselves.
"I have only "thrown one or two gray hairs to the air", but nearly always I have led a very tranquil life.
"I remember that I and several more would go to Port Tampa to fish, and every day we would catch a shark. At 5:15 on the dot they would come in troops.
(1)Tras de que caerse muerto. This is a peculiar saying used here to de-designate a very poor or needy person.
(2)Ni pizca, as used in Ybor City means "nothing".
(3)Abierto por Hiers. This expression came in use when Hiers was running for sheriff. When a person wished to express how strong he was for Hiers, he would say: "Estoy abierto por Hiers". This expression was afterwards changed somewhat, and came to be "abierto por 'high'" (wide open). Although he used the former expression of "open for Hiers", he has given it the latter meaning, which means running very fast, or "left in a hurry".
(4)Ahora que. This expression is used to mean although or however.
(5)Tirar una o dos canitas al aire. This expression of Spanish origin, means to have a good time. Whenever a man has an affair or is going to have an affair with a woman, he generally says: "voy a tirar una canita al aire" (literally: "I am going to throw a gray hair to the air".) This expression is used in a humorous manner.
It really seemed that they had a clock, as they did not vary a single minute. One would entrap himself every time. I would wrap the rope around my arm, and would pull, holding on to a pole, until I would draw his head from the water. Then my companion would "sledge-hammer his head with an iron bar"(1) that "not even the Chinese doctor"(2) could revive him. But one day when I caught a shark which was as big as this porch, he pulled so hard that he "almost carried my arm".(3) The rope remained marked on my arm for one week. The pull he gave "was not for play".(4) "For the matches"!(5) Since then I do not catch any more sharks.
"I also remember a fox which we started to hunt. You can ask this of any of my friends. You may laugh at this story, but it is true. Every time we stopped to rest, the fox would stop also and would look at us from afar. It really looked "like he wanted to take our hair".(6) Finally at nightfall we were able to corral him in a rabbit's cave. We closed up the cave and left. The following day we came back, and my friend fired with his gun, and a rattlesnake came out; and when we. thought that the fox was coming out, a rabbit came out. Finally we were able to take the fox out, which we placed in a box. It seems that the rattlesnake, the rabbit and the fox lived there in the greatest harmony.
(1)Mandariazo. This is a word that has been changed so as to give more force to the original word of "mandarria" (a sledge hammer). This is a local expression, and is equivalent to: "My companion gave a terrible blow on the head with an iron bar (similar to the blow given by a sledge hammer.)
(2)Ni el medico chino. This expression as used in Ybor City signifies that a man or animal is past all cure or help. It was originated in Cuba because of many good cures effected by a Chinese doctor. In Ybor City it is used very loosely.
(3) Por nade me lleva el brazo. The equivalent for this is: "Almost wrenched my arm".
(4) No fue para jaego. This is a colloquial expression which by its contrast with the word "play" means "Was very terrible".
(5)Para los fosforos. This is another colloquial expression which is used in this case as an exclamation to give extra force to the thought that has gone before. Its equivalent in English would be: 'To the mischief with him!"
(6) Nos queria tomar el pelo. This expression, as used here is equivalent to: He wanted to get our goat".
My friend then placed a copper necklace around the neck of the fox. But the fox was too clever, and after reaching the house, he broke the box and escaped.
"Some time later, while I was hunting with several friends, I saw the same fox. I knew him immediately because he had the copper necklace. We gave chase until he entered the same cave. We fired inside the cave; the fox came out and we killed him. At the same time the same rabbit came out. "By my mother(1) chico",(2) I knew him because of a small black spot (pintica)(3) that he had on the tail.
"I also remember a very large lagoon which started in Grand Central and took all this part back here. They had taken that as a dump pile, and all the shore was filled up with cans. It seems that an alligator had the custom of coming there to eat the refuse.
"One day I went to this large lagoon, but it seems that the alligator saw me first. I had my back turned to him when I heard a terrible noise among the cans.
I looked backward and I see "that piece"(4) of alligator who was after me. I dropped the gun, and ran as I have never ran before in my life. I did not stop running until I had reached home. "When I say to give"(5) "Long strides"(6) there is no one who can beat me. I do not know if it ia true, but they say that those animals run very much.
(1)Por mi madre. This is an oath employed more or less by everyone in Ybor City. Its equivalent in English would be something like "my goodness" or "By Gad".
(2)Chico. The literal translation of this word is "small boy"; but as employed in Ybor City it is similar to the American way of saying "Old Chap". This is one of the most common words used here.
(3)This is a diminutive of the word "pinta". In true Castilian the word is spelled "pintita".
(4)Eso cacho. This colloquial expression means "very large".
(5)Cuando yo digo. This expression is used at times to mean: "When I commence taking" long strides.-----
(6)Zanca jadas. This word was originally "zancadas", however, it is hardly known by its true name, as practically everyone uses the word "zancajadas" (long strides.)
Here and in Ybor City there are many slang expressions. As an example: one will ask another how he is, and he answers: "If this situation continues I am going to "jolapear".(1)
The people who are very poor and have nothing to eat are called "empty house rats". When they are very bad off, they are called "hardware house rats". (If they want to eat, they must eat nails.)
Also 'when one meets a friend and asks him what is he doing, he answers: "I am in the air, old chap, like the President," because the President is always talking through the air (the radio).
Jolapear. This comes from the American words of "hold up".
