Jesse Grant
Factory Worker
Gallatin, Tennessee
R. F.
IT'S A CHRISTIAN FACTORY
"I like my work. I like working for Christian people. Mr. Jarman owns the General Shoe plant here in Gallatin and he sure is a Christian man. Do you know why he's made such a big success in life? It's the Christian way he lives. They tell me he gives a tenth of all he makes to the church and the Lord made him successful. It makes you feel good to work for a Christian man like that.
"My work is hard all right. It's hard on me because I ain't but only seventeen and ain't got my full growth yet. It's work down in the steam room which they call it that because it's always full of steam which sometimes when you go in it you can't hardly see. You steam. leather down there and that steam soaks you clean to the skin. It makes me keep a cold most of the time because when I go out doors I'm sopping wet. Another thing that's hard about it is having so much standing up to do. My hours is from seven o'clock in the morning till four in the evening. And it's stand on my feet the whole time. When noon time comes and I'm off an hour, why I just find me somewheres to set and I sure set there. You couldn't Pay me to stand up during lunch time.
"I'm on piecework now and I can't seem to get my production up to where I make just a whole lot. You get paid by the production hour and it takes fifty pair of shoes to make that hour. You get forty-two cents for the hour. Highest I ever made in one week was eleven dollars and the lowest was seven dollars and forty-two cents. I usually hit in between and make eight or nine dollars.
"Now and then somebody will say, "We ought to have us a union here of some sort." That kind of talk just makes me mad all over. Mr. Jarman is a Christian man. He brought his factory here to give us some work which we didn't have any before. We do pretty well, I think, to just stay away from that kind of talk. All but the sore-heads and trouble-makers is satisfied and glad to have work.
"I don't blame Mr. Jarman a bit the way he feels about the unions. The plant manager knows Mr. Jarman mighty well and he told my foreman what Mr. Jarman said. Mr. Jarman said, "If the union ever comes in here and I have to operate my plant under a union, why I'll just close the plant down and move it away from Gallatin so quick it'll make your head swim." That's his word on it and I don't blame him none. I'd hate to see a union try here. No plant and no jobs for anybody. They just operate these unions out of Wall Street, anyhow, trying to ruin people like Mr. Jarman. Man told me that and he knows. He worked in Detroit during the War. Wall Street set some unions on Henry Ford and tried to put his back to the wall. But did they do it? Don't make me laugh!
"Next to the unions, this new wages and hours business of the government's is bad, too. Some people that had been getting as high as thirty-five dollars a week was cut to only twenty-five which is about ten dollars a week less than they'd been getting before. They didn't like it because it meant their salary wasn't as much as it had been. Then some that hadn't got but five or six dollars got to getting as much as I get. They liked that, but it don't seem fair to me. Why should a man that's not worth as much to the plant as me get as much money as me?
"My money has to go a long way. I've got to Pay eight dollars a month rent and I have to buy coal and stove wood. I got to buy clothes for the family and something to eat for them. Then twice a month there's that five dollar ambulance bill which it's to take my brother that's got the T. B. to the Vanderbilt Hospital in Nashville where they take one of these X-ray pictures of his lungs. Red Cross takes care of that but it's up to me to Pay off the ambulance. Sure charge you for an ambulance, don't they? Now, Some people say if you just take one trip in an ambulance, the undertaker won't ask a cent for it. Figures he'll get your custom if you pass on. But they sure charge me for my brother.
"Well, I'm always glad when it's quitting time. I like to work there, but you can't help getting tired. I go on home. I walk four blocks and I'm there. Usually I have to wait a while for supper so I just set at the window. I like to watch and see if maybe something will come along the street and I can watch it. Sometimes there's a new funny paper there and I will look it over -- specially if it's Tarzan. That's the best thing in a funny paper, the Tarzan part. Nobody ever gets it over old Tarzan, do they? Most times, though, I like to just set there and watch.
"That's one of the best things I liked about working in the filling station that time -- alway something to see. Cars coming in and out. I used to keep count of the out-of-the-state license plates and how many people wore straw hats. It was the first job I ever had. I waited on customers, such as selling gasoline and patching tires. I got a dollar ninety-eight a week there, but sometimes there were tips, and anyhow it was fun. I'd have worked for nothing almost if they'd let me.
"Well, I got another job after that. My brother which he's my married brother is just about the best man to paper a house or give it a coat of paint in Gallatin. They say around here that if you want a good job of painting or paper hanging, just call in the Grants. Lots of other men will work cheaper, but it's not a high-grade, a number-one, first class job like my brother's. So I painted and papered a while. But I got to the place where the smell of paint didn't agree with me. I took painter's colic. I was afraid I'd get down sick like my other brother, so I quit and got a job in Jarman's shoe plant in the steam room which I'm still there in it after a year.
"I work steady but I'm most always financially in need of money. It takes a lot to keep a family going. My little sister needs glasses but they cost too much. All of my family has weak eyes but we can't afford to wear glasses.
"So I haven't the money for running around. I wouldn't if I had the money, either. The Bible is against running around and playing cards and seeing the moving pictures. People should study their Bible more and we'd have more Christian men like Mr. Jarman and more jobs. So me and a young lady I know of go to church and Sunday School instead of running around. My family belongs to the Baptist Church, but this certain young lady is a Nazarene and that's where we go.
"You know, when you're blue and down at the mouth and don't see any use anyhow, a good sermon just lifts you up. You haven't got a thing to lose by living a Christian life. Take Mr. Jarman. He lives it and look where he is now! And if you don't make out that way, if you're poor all your life, then you get a high place in the Kingdom. Just do the best you know how and the Lord will take care of you either here or hereafter. It sure is a comfort."