ZACHARIAS MAVRIKIS
A Greek of Wilmington, North Carolina.
Zacharias Mavrikis, who has Anglicized his name to Jack Morris, is part owner of the Dixie Cafe which has the best patronage of any cafe in Wilmington, North Carolina.
He was born in 1901 on the island of Nikaria, in the Aegean Sea about midway between the Greek and Turkish shores, in the village of Agios Kiricos. Jack describes it as a very beautiful, mountainous, rocky country, but for many years a shadow hovered perpetually above the dwellers, the shadow of Turkish rule. Fortunately, in the fighting between Greece and Turkey in 1912, the Greeks of Nikaria were able to throw off the Turkish yoke and since that time have been governed by their own people.
Jack is descended from generations of priests of the Greek Orthodox Church. His father was a schoolmaster for several years, but later followed the family tradition and became a priest; this did not, however, change his profession of teaching, as it was the custom for Greek priests to act as schoolmasters. They are frequently judges as well. Jack's father was distinguished not only for his learning but by the possession of a very fine singing voice, a gift which has descended in some degree to his son. As the father lead the singing in the Greek services and festivals at home, so the son does in his adopted home in America.
There were five sons in the Mavrikis family, all taught by their father and trained to habits of industry. They decided that they were tired of the restrictions of priesthood and were going to break the inherited priestly line in order to explore the wonders of the New World of which they had heard so much. America became the mecca of all their dreams, the land of adventure, freedom and opportunity. So, one by one, the five sons emigrated to this land of promise, each one who-came, in turn, writing back their joy and happiness in the fulfillment of all their hopes and dreams.
At the age of 19, Jack, the youngest son, decided it was time for him to join the other brothers and fare forth to seek his fortune. His decision was complicated however by the possession of a dearly loved sweetheart, his devoted playmate and companion from their earliest years. Fortunately for the young lovers her father had already gone before to seek his fortune in America. In the years after the World War chaotic conditions in the Near East drove many men to seek better opportunities elsewhere. Peter Carafas had been very successful indeed with a confectionery store in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Encouraged and advised by his prospective father-in-law, Jack and Alexanchia made their plans, Knowing that there might be years of separation ahead of them, they decided to be married, and that she would wait faithfully until he could prepare a home in the new world and send for her to share it with him. So they were married in their home village, with all the colorful and elaborate ritual of the Greek Church, the father of the groom acting as chief celebrant assisted by five other priests. They were attended by a best man, maid-of-honor and two flower children. The bride wore the traditional white weddinggown with train and veil, and both bride and groom wore chaplets of flowers on their heads, these being exchanged three times during the ceremony as symbols of the faith, love and courage which should endure throughout their lives together. The service lasted an hour and as the wedded pair left the church the flower children preceded them, scattering rice, wheat, flowers, and money, all happy omens of the future. The coins were eagerly scrambled for by all the children in the assemblage and carefully hoarded as luck pieces.
After a period of festivities, Jack carried his bride to her parents' home and left her until he could fare forth to provide a new home in a new and strange world.
On his journey he sailed to Alexandria and stopped for a visit with relatives in Egypt for three months, then on to France from where he sailed for America, staying only a short time in New York before going directly to his journey's end, his father-in-law's dwelling in Wilmington. There he found employment waiting for him in Peter Carafas' store, the Cape Fear Confectionery.
With an expression of pathetic amusement at past difficulties, Jack Morris of today described the loneliness and homesickness of the Zacharias Mavrikis of that long past yesterday. He knew not a word of English; he was self-conscious and sensitive and felt that everybody was laughing at him. He could not distinguish between a smile of encouragement and a jibe. He realized he had to learn the language of these people and be able to understand what was going on around him. Being well-educated in his Greek tongue, he provided himself with a Greek-English instruction book and went to work on it with a will. For sixty days he worked twenty-two hours out of the twenty-four, serving in the store during the day and studying his book at night, learning to speak English. Not even his father-in-law knew how hard he was working with so little sleep, out Peter Carafas was amazed at the rapidity with which Jack was picking up English. At the end of his sixty days of concentrated effort he could express himself in fairly good English on the usual affairs of his daily life and understand what was being said around him sufficiently to allay his timidity and fear of ridicule.
Jack applied most immediately for his first citizenship papers but a few months later moved to Ohio, thinking to better his opportunities. He was so eager to earn enough to send for his bride and establish a home for her. In the meantime, Peter Carafas developed a malady which compelled him to give up active business, so Jack returned to Wilmington and Peter went home to his Greek island, turning his business over to Jack. With hard work and long hours, the latter made a success of the confectionery store and was soon able to sell at a profit and start another venture with a cafe.
Owing to his change of residence his naturalization was delayed, and it was eight years before he completed his citizenship. He at once sent for his wife who came to him with all the haste she could make. She found that her husband had a nice home, completely furnished with more conveniences than she had ever dreamed existed. She was delighted at the ease with which she could perform her daily tasks.
Jack's wife is a very pretty and gracious woman, with the best education her island of Nikaria affords a girl. It is not considered necessary to give a girl more than a grammar school education. If she wants cultural subjects, literature or the arts, she is given the opportunity, but it is seldom that the Greek women of the island desire more than the household arts and to be fitted for a helpmate in fact to their husbands. She was restricted by a very limited vocabulary in English, and at times it is quite difficult to understand her. They own their home, and it is located in a nice residential section. They have divided it into two apartments, occupying the upper floor themselves.
Both the man and the woman expressed perplexity at the laxity with which Americans regarded marriage. To them love and marriage were regarded as among the eternal verities. When a Greek marries an American woman there is sometimes a divorce, if she wishes it, but no other Greek would consider fora moment any amorous approach to that woman. Their respect for her is qualified in many ways, but their loyalty to the Greek husband would preclude any thought toward his former wife except any help she might need, which would apparently be offered at arms length. The lack of governance of the children in American homes is another source of surprise. They will tell one frankly that they do not see how a people can survive through the centuries without careful parental control of the children. They do not approve of women working outside the home. The Greek women of the Wilmington colony do not assist their husbands at their places of business.
Jack attributes his economic success to hard work alone. He says he has always worked from fourteen to sixteen hours every day, until the last few years when he has been able to organize his own business in such a way as to have a little more leisure, reducing his hours to twelve. In the nineteen years he has been in this country, he says he had taken three days vacation, until December 1938, when he and his wife went back to Greece for a visit to their parents, all of whom are living. Jack and his wife love their native land. They were glad, however, to return to their home in the United states and were serious in their expressions of appreciation of their citizenship in this country and the freedom of opportunity allowed them here.