Brandon Mill Village
Greenville S. C.
I. L. M.
ELVIRA HAWKINS
Elvira was relating to me the particulars of Mr. Smith's death when her eight year old grandson, looking very thoughtful, came into the kitchen. Already she had depicted the actual death scene and was now going back to show how Mr. Smith's death had come in answer to prayer when the boy, standing across the table from her spoke.
"Mama, they never had his hands crossed on his breast like Robert said they'd be."
"No, Son, they don't do that no more, like when yore great grandpa died. That was the one Robert was rememberin' but ways of buryin' has changed just like everything else, men and women too. Crossin' hands has gone out. "
The boy sat down in a chair next to the kitchen cabinet to ponder over his grandmother's words. Elvira got the kettle from the oilstove and poured scalding water over the pan of freshly washed dishes, taking care that the water trickled over the surface of each dish stacked in the pan. She returned the kettle to the stove and continued her story.
"And the preacher had been there like on Thursday, seems to me that it was Thursday, anyhow it was the last day he went to the hogpen, and it might've been on Wednesday, because he died on Friday, and the preacher asked him about his soul and such, and if he prayed regular. Mr. Smith told him, 'Brother Denton, there's never a day passes I don't spend hours aprayin', and since I've started vomikin' up blood, and the thought came to me I might have cancer I've prayed to my Maker askin' him, if that was my trouble, to let me die sometimes soon in the still of the night and not linger on to suffer like some I've knowed." Nov that talk took place like on Wednesday or a Thursday and he died Friday night late. That sure was as straight a answer to prayer as I ever seen. The doctors had told Mrs. Smith that he had cancer in one of the tubes in his throat and he might linger on for a right smart while. He hadn't been out of the mill but five weeks and Mrs. Smith had to do a sight of beggin' to get him to stop then, her not wantin' to tell him what was wrong with him but at the same time tryin' to let him know he had to quit work and take care of hisself."
Outside, the rain which had been falling steadily for an hour increased in force and lashed against the windowpanes. The boy got up slowly from his chair and stood for a while before the window watching the rain, and then came over to the table where his grandmother was now drying the dishes. "Ain't it a awful day for a buryin'?" he said.
"Just about such a day as when your great grandpa was buried," Elvira answered. "Fact is, it rained all while his body was laid out and I never seen so much mud tracked in a house in my life. Pa was a man in a hundred, if I do have to say it, and there was a sight of folks come to the house when he died. About as many niggers come as white folks. Don't reckin there was a nigger at the mill that didn't come.
Elvira had finished drying her dishes and she now sat down across from me and gazed for a long time out of the window at the steadily falling rain.
She was as immaculately clean as the kitchen in which we sat. Her small-flowered print dress and the larger flowered smock which she wore were as fresh as if she'd just that minute put them on. Her hair brushed neatly back from her narrow face was piled in heavy coils on the back of her head. She wore black oxfords, neat and freshly polished. My attention was diverted from Elvira to the boy who, standing close against the window, was singing in a low monotone, "Rain, rain, go away, come again some other day. " When his song had ceased Elvira was speaking again as if there'd been no pause at all.
"Pa had been good to the niggers at the mill -- he was overseer in the unloadin' room and fifteen or twenty niggers worked in there -- and they all liked him. He never had a pay day that he didn't lend from five to six of 'em a dollar or sometimes two dollars apiece. And like next Saturday they'd pay him a dollar and a quarter or if they'd got two dollars it'd be two and a half. Pa made a right smart money that way and saved it too. He had the name of layin' by fifty cents out of every dollar he made, and he did have a lot of cash money in the bank when he died. Nora, that was my stepmother, got over two thousand dollars and us eight children got a hundred dollars apiece. Me and my sister Sally went up to the bank together -- course we waited till Nora'd been for her part -- and there was ten ten-dollar bills apiece for us, all fixed up with a rubber band around it.
"All of us children wanted Nora to have the biggest part, her bein' old and havin' no way to make her livin' and we had no desire to get what she left when she died, but we sure had cause to wonder what went with that money at her death just two year later. She'd not bought no clothes, she never had no expensive habits like chewin' or dippin' and the first eighteen months after Pa died she stayed around amongst her stepchildren without it costin' her a penny. She stayed here with me three months, slept in there on a cot in the room with me and Tom. One night I'd already got in bed and she was over in the comer pullin' off her clothes and I seen a big white string around her waist and a long sack hangin' down from it, and just to tease Nora like sometimes I done, I said to her, 'Lors Amassey, I'll sure know who to go to if ever I get ready to borrow money.' Nora give a big cacklin' laugh and kept on laughin' after she'd got in bed, never sayin' a word to me in answer. I know in reason, though, she carried her money around in that sack.
"Now the last two months before she died Nora stayed with her sister, Melissy Bane, and Melissey never mentioned Nora havin' any money and we never named it to her. Course, Melissey might not have got it all because Nora had a awful no-count brother and I wouldn't be surprised if he didn't talk her out of a heap of dollars all along. Nora was sure a good hearted woman and I thought a lot of her.
"She had one little way of doing I thought was the funniest thing I ever seen. If I was settin' in the room with her and got up to leave I would be no more'n out of the door before she'd pick up the broom and sweep and sweep and sweep, like she was sweepin' me out of the house. You could come and she'd do you the same way, and no matter how many come and went, Nora always picked up her broom and went sweep, sweep, sweepin' em out of the house. Never meant no harm about it atall, it was just Nora's way, and I don't reckin she could've told you why she did it.
"Pa married. Nora after I was grown and. married myself, "but I learned to love her almost like she was my own mother. She was good to Pa, and smart, she was sure smart. And savin' too. I've heard Pa laugh many's the time and tell her in some ways she put him in mind of Uncle Joe Edwards. He was Pa's Ma's brother that had raised him from a nine-year-old boy. Them was in the days when the white folks owned the niggers, before the war was fought. It used to tickle me to death to hear Pa tell about how he managed Uncle Joe's niggers, and him nothin' more'n a boy then hisself.
"Joe, ain't that old man O'Kelly comin'?"
"Yes, ma'm, and I'm gonna get out before he comes and starts his talk," Joe said, running out of the kitchen.
The child had barely made his departure when there was a knock on the door and Elvira crossed the kitchen to invite Mr. O'Kelly in.
"A little damp today, a little disagreeable," Mr. O'Kelly said as he seated himself and drew his pipe from his pocket. After cramming the bowl full of tobacco, he changed his mind about smoking, and placed the filled pipe by the side of his chair. "Thought I'd run over and talk to Mr. Davis about an insurance policy," he said presently. "Wonder if he's at home?"
"Yes, he's at home, Brother O'Kelly, but he's takin' his nap before going to work and I don't never wake him up for nothin' of a evenin'. Now if you'll come back sometimes of a mornin' you can talk with him. Did you have a good service yesterday, Brother O'Kelly?"
"Yes ma'm, we did, but I know the crowd would've been bigger if the weather hadn't been so bad. Folks will stay away from church when it rains."
"Well I hope to hear in a week or two they've called you to preach for 'em."
"I'll be glad to have the church if they want me, but if they'd rather have another pastor I say let 'em get him. That's the way I've always felt during the twenty-five years I've been preachin'; there's always better congregations than the ones that turn you down."
Mr. O'Kelly reached down to pick his pipe up and, extracting a match from his vest pocket, lighted it, and began to puff in a slow leisured manner.
"A funny thing happened out there yesterday, Mrs. Davis," he said when he was ready to speak again. "Close to Brother Simpson's house, where I was dining, there was a convict camp and some preacher was to hold a service there in the afternoon. While we was partaking of our repast Brother Simpson asked me if I wouldn't like to go out there and help out with the services. When I said no, I didn't believe I did, the good brother looked at me a little surprised and then I told him just how I felt about it. 'Brother Simpson,' I said, 'the scripture "Let the dead bury its dead," wasn't referring to the physically dead but the spiritually dead. After a man has gone so far into sin, his soul is cankered and rotten, and there's nothing any preacher in God's kingdom can do for him. So, says the scriptures, let his buddies associate with him, let them drink and carouse with him, and after he's physically dead, don't take advantage of him and take his body to the church house where he never wanted to go when he was living, but let his buddies take him into the woods, sit up with him, vomit over him, and at last bury him in a sinner's grave. No, Brother Simpson,' I finished, 'there's no point in wasting my time over the spiritually rotten but rather had I seek to save the souls standing on the brink of damnation but who haven't yet gone to unredeemable destruction.' I don't know what Brother Simpson might have thought of my words but I can't help that, I was talking according to scripture, and I never try to dodge scripture."
I looked at Elvira at the conclusion of Mr. O'Kelly's speech and caught the not-to-be mistaken flash of disagreement in her eyes. "The way I feel about it, Mr. O'Kelly," she began at once, "there's folks on the chain gang no worse than folks off the chain gang. Them off is just been a little luckier than them on, and they're still human if they do wear stripes. I've went down there to the store many a time and bought tobacco and cigarettes for a fellow with a ball and chain on his leg. A gang of 'em was workin' up the road a little ways and he'd slip off down here and ask me for tobacco and I'd go to the store every time and get it for him. Scared me nearly to death but I went just the same. I felt so sorry for him I never knowed how to turn him down."
Mr. O'Kelly puffed three times on his pipe. "I think they ought to furnish them with their cigarettes and tobacco," he said, "wouldn't hurt to give them a little tobacco."
Mr. O'Kelly took an insurance policy from his hip pocket and turned it over two or three times. "I believe Mr. Davis will be interested in what this company has to offer him," he said to Elvira.
"If you'll come sometime of a morning he'll talk to you about it," Elvira replied. "If you don't get that church, are you goin' to start sellin' insurance?" she asked.
"Well, I've not fully made up my mind yet, I'm working on more than one proposition and I can't tell yet which will be the best for me. Of course, I believe there's a charge for me somewhere and if I'm needed for the Lord's work I'll give my time to that. When I was a young man I gave up a chance to make big money to enter the service of the church, and I'm still willing to heed the call. I quit a good job, and one that would've got better, to go to Furman for six years to prepare myself for preaching. Now I've got my education and no money but I don't regret it a bit, never have. If I don't get a pastorate soon, I've thought some of going back to Asheville and running a rooming house. My things are all stored away up there, been there ever since my dear wife departed this life, and I'm beginning to want to get them in a home somewhere, and settle down again. I made good money with the rooming house, and times when I didn't have a church it was good to have that to fall back on. I preached off and on for nine years up there in the mountains and grew to love them. I made some awful good friends among the church folks too. Old Dr. Moore, president of Mars Hill College was a very good friend of mine when I attended summer school there, and Dr. Huggins I was also acquainted with too. I wrote to him the other day and am expecting a letter of encouragement on every mail.
"Now, that little country church where I preached yesterday would suit me all right but I'd like very well indeed to get a mill church. Mill people of today are good and clever and generous. I don't know whether you know it or not but a better class of people works at the mill than, well, say twenty years ago. Isn't that so, Mrs. Davis?"
"Well, Mr. O'Kelly, I've been at the mill all my life and there's always been good and there's always been bad.. Folks everywhere has changed their ways of doin', but when it comes to the better class at the mills now, my notion is they're just gettin' a little more money and they can live more like other folks."
"Guess I better be gettin' back to the house and lookin' after the children, Mrs. Davis. Don't like to leave them too long at a time when their mother and father's in the mill. Tell Mr. Davis I'll come back one morning before long to show him a policy I believe he'll be interested in."
"All right Mr. O'Kelly, you just come back any time between ten and twelve o'clock and you'll find him at home."
The door closed on Mr. O'Kelly. Elvira listened as the sound of his footsteps disappeared. "Pore Mr. O'Kelly," she said. "Him with all that education and not a penny to his name. He come here to me to borrow three cents to mail that letter he's expectin' a hearin' from. I want him to get him a job, and then a house, and then send for his household stuff, and after that I hope he gets a wife. He's sure wantin' one. Don't seem like his children ever give him nothin' and he's got three workin' in the mill too. They're all married and got families of their own but they could do without somethin' and give him a little change now and then.
"Now when Uncle Joe's own boys come along he give them some education, but Pa never went to school a day in his life. When he got to be a man grown he started to thinkin' what a injustice Uncle Joe'd done him, and he was fixin' to sue him when Uncle Joe took sick and died. With a little learnin' there's no tellin' what Pa would've owned because he had a good head, on him. Though you can't always tell because there was Uncle Joe ownin' all manner of stuff and him with no education atall.
"I went to work when I was nine year old, and in a few year when I got to makin' twenty cent a day I sure felt big. I reckin I felt about like the fellow here at the mill that got to be section hand. Some around said he'd got so big over his job that Roosevelt's overcoat wouldn't begin to make him a jacket. As for schoolin', I went one half a day and in a heap of ways I've got along better than lots of others that has learnin'. Course, I ain't sayin' a little readin' wouldner made things a lot handier for me, but what I mean is I've done the best I could on what I had. I seen to it that my two girls got through grammar school and I wouldn't be surprised if Lila don't send that boy in there clean on through. He's a pretty good reader now and him just in the second grade. He raised a fuss to go to school this mornin' but he got up with sore throat and I thought for a while he might be takin' the mumps. On a Monday he always puts a little money in his bank at school and if he ain't there that day he has to wait till the next week. Tom told him this mornin' if he'd stop worry in' he'd go his self to take the money, and he did. It's a good idea they've got at the school, I think, learnin' a child to save, and when he goes to work maybe he'll have sense enough to save part of what he makes. Tom says when a man's got no learnin' he don't start thinkin' about savin' until after he's forty and then it's too late for him to begin.
"He's been stayin' with me off and on since he was born and he's been with me regular since he had the measles last year, and they'd have a hard time gettin' him back home now. He was spendin' the night with me when he took sick and couldn't be moved. After he got well he told Lila and James he believed he'd just live on with me and they said they wanted him to be pleased. Course, Lila comes by here might near every evenin' when she gets off from work, and her and James come every night after supper. I've not got but three grandchildren and they're all foolish about me. Susie has a boy and a girl, both awful sweet children, but she lives over at Mills Mill and I don't get to see them regular like I do Junior.
"I think I heard Tom stirrin', so we might as well go in there to set where we can have better chairs."
I followed Elvira into the adjoining bedroom, a clean and uncrowded room with crisp blue curtains at the windows. Tom, a lantern-jawed man with bushy, sandy hair and watery blue eyes was sitting close to the small heater and trimming his fingernails with his knife. He wore neatly creased dark gray trousers with a pin stripe, a dark blue coat, and a light blue shirt. He seemed dressed for a trip to town although he was to go to the mill within half an hour. After a brief acknowledgment of my presence he resumed his silence which he kept unbroken for more than ten minutes while Elvira made conversation about their life in the village.
"I don't reckin I could be any better satisfied anywhere," she was saying after awhile. "If I had a job in the mill agin I'd take it but like it is now we get along all right. We can buy pretty near anything we want to eat and we keep good enough clothes, and a car to go places in. As for gettin' in a car and ridin' just to be ridin' that always seemed sillified to me, and I've never cared for doin' it. But I like to have a car so's if I make up my mind to go to a place the first thing I know I'm there."
Tom looked up from behind the stove. "I've never cared one thing in the world for pleasure trips," he said in a monotonous voice. "Just never did. But we've kept a car for twenty year, ever since the first good wages come in. Put a lot of money in cars, more'n in anything besides groceries I reckin."
"Now, I like to have money so's if I want a dime it's there, or if I take a notion for a dollar it's there too," Elvira said. "Don't see no need of buyin' every foolish thing that comes along. Last year Tom asked me if I wanted to buy a frigidaire and I told him no, wasn't no sense in puttin' one or two hundred dollars in a thing like that when we had a real good icebox that'd keep things cool every time we could get hold of a dime to buy a piece of ice for it. Bather save the money and have it to live on if the mill was to shut down agin. Course, Tom makes better wages than most, him bein' the overseer of the cardroom, and it's easier for us to save than for some. Sometimes I wonder how in the world a family gets along where there's five or six children and one aworkin' and makin' about twelve dollars a week. Plain fact is they can't buy enough of something to eat, let along other things a person needs to live on."
"In a way them families makes it hard on lots of other folks too," Tom declared. "When they get caught up with the work sometimes so's they have to send one or two out to rest, the man with the big family can't take his turn like the rest. The boss'll say, 'So and so's got to work full time or else he can't take care of his family.' Well, that man's big family ain't the other fellow's 'sponsibility but it gets to be his hard luck when he has to lose more time than his share.
"Takin' it all the way round though, this here is the best company in the South to work for. They keep a company store and you can buy anything you might think of there; and when you're sick and have to go to the hospital they'll make arrangements for you and take it out of your wages; they sell coal to us cheaper'n we buy it up town, and they've got water and lights in all the houses. No sir, you won't find another company in the South that good.
"It's time for me to be going," Tom continued as he fitted his gold- rimmed spectacles on his nose. He put on a broad-brimmed hat, tilting it slightly over his right eye, and made his departure.
"I'll have your supper there at six," Elvira called out to him.
Then to me she said, "I send him hot supper at six o'clock and he eats it right then, though reg'lar supper time don't come 'till eight o'clock Him bein' the overseer he can eat when he wants to.
"Tom, he never got no schoolin' neither and what little readin' and writin' he can do he learnt at night school. He's been overseer for six year now and he likes the company fine. We sure have made a good livin' here for pore folks.
"Tom's awful good about giving me money but there ain't nothin' like reachin' out your hand for your own envelope, and goin' up town with the money you've made yourself and buyin' yourself a dress or hat.
"It's got to be where I hate worse'n anything to go to town after a hat. They'll say to me, 'Why don't you cut your hair and then you could wear some of these here little hats.' I tell 'em right flat I ain't wantin' to cut my hair and I ain't agoin' to do it. Not that I've got any objections to short hair for some folks if it makes 'em look better. Lila, she looks a sight better with short hair and I tell her to keep hem cut. There may be lots of ways all right for other folks but they don't happen to suit me and I leave them ways alone.
"Some folks just goes crazy over picture shows but I've never got one minute's enjoyment out of 'em in my life, and I don't go. When my girls was at home I let 'em go once in a while but they sure never rode in no car to one. Ever where they ever went with a boy, and that wasn't much, they went walkin'. No car rides for my gals, and if I hader had twenty-five it woulder been the same, and I'd got 'em all safe married too without any bad talk ever touchin' their name. It's a wonder their ain't more ruint girls than are, the way some women let their daughters run about. Neither one of mine ever stopped on a street corner to talk to a man in their life. The ruination of many a mother's daughter has started right on a street corner, talkin' to some man that'd get her in trouble soon as he got a chance.
"Pa was sure strict with us when we was coming up too. He never 'lowed us to go nowhere with boys, and what little courtin' me and Tom done was right in the mill between times when we'd catch up with our work. In them days folks caught up, you know, and had little restin' spells when they could run around and via it one another. One Friday we was at alkin' and Tom told me I was lookin' awful fine that day -- I had on a white middy blouse, a black skirt, and a black and white checked apron, and I still think there's nothin' a girl looks neater in - and about the time he was ready to leave he said how about us goin' up town on Saturday evenin' and gettin' married. I was tickled to death because I'd got to where I thought of him most all the time anyhow, and so that Saturday evenin' we was married and I ain't never regretted it since. But times has changed and people ain't like they used to be. Women has got bolder, and to my notion it ain't right, but I let the other fellow live like he wants to and I do the same. I stay here cookin' three meals a day for Tom and Junior, cleanin' the house, and lookin' after their clothes, not goin' much but not wantin' to go neither.
"You've not been over the village much yet, have you?"
"No, replied this is the only street I've been on yet."
"Come out on the back porch and you can see pretty near all the village from there."
We stood there on the porch and looked across at row after row of small houses which from that distance seemed all alike. "Now that's our mill right over yonder. Ain't it a big one? Way over on that other hill is Monagan Mill and from here you can't tell where our village ends and their's begins. Well sir, they're just leavin' the Smith house with the corpse. That's the house, third street from here where you see all them cars amovin'. You can sure see everything from here. Pretty view, ain't it?"
S. C. - Excellent
Elvira Hawkins
Description grandpa's funeral -- Pa's business relationships -- clergyman's visit -- Unique episcopal utterance -- his opinion of mill people -- woman's opinion -- woman's work history -- husband's a mill overseer -- family reasonably well off -- big families make it bad for millworkers with no, or small, families when work's scarce men with large families are favored. -- "Best company in South to work for."
Names changed.