Approximately 2600 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT LIFE HISTORIES
TITLE:
Date of First Writing	December 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Anna Gales (white)
Fictitious Name	None
Street Address
Place	Marion, S. C.
Occupation	Housewife
Name of writer	Annie Ruth Davis
Name of Reviser	State Office
All names in this story, are true.
Project #3613
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, S. C.
November 29, 1938.
LIFE STORIES
ANNA GALES ( White)
Widow of Lumber Mill Employee
Marion, South Carolina.
Thirty-two long years have rolled by since Anna Gales left her girlhood home in Columbia, South Carolina, and came as a bride to live in a lumber mill community, West Marion, on the outskirts of the small town of Marion, South Carolina. As she allows her mind to glance once more over her experiences of those years, she seems to wonder how she gave up the conveniences of city life for the hardships to be endured by the wife of a mill laborer. Still, never a doubt seems to waver her mind that she might have chosen the wrong path in life. Did she npt have a family of eight children, two boys and six girls, of whom she has a right to be justly proud? Could anyone have had a better husband than Archie Gales had been? No, Anna Gales seemed sure of both these facts.
Archie Gales, as foreman of the Camp Manufacturing Lumber Company, West Marion, had always been an honest, reliable, hard-working man. His mill duties, which meant almost endless hours of toil day and night, often taxed him almost beyond the point of endurance, but he never forgot that he was head of a family and must provide the necessities of life. He carried on his duties until, stricken with a heart attack while at work in the mill one evening, he died at the age of sixty-two.
Today, Anna Gales is spending the easiest and most comfortable part of her married life. She is keeping house for four of her children in a newly built bungalow in one of the best residential sections of Marion. The house is a small frame dwelling, painted yellow, the first house Anna has over been able to call her own. It is with delight, beaming in her face, that she speaks of it as hers. She paid for the house and lot herself with what part had been left of the $2,000 insurance money, that came to her at Archie Gales' death, after paying his funeral expenses. The lot cost her $300.00, and the house took another $1,200. Owning a home had cleaned up her money, which meant the children would have to keep up the place, but to Anna Gales, insurance money was one of the greatest blessings she had over known.
J. C., age twenty-two, who is selling industrial insurance, remains at home with his mother and is the main support of the little family. He makes good collections some weeks and others he does very little - nothing is ever certain. Marie, ago seventeen, is also at home and has a temporary job as a stenographer with the W. P. A., which is enough to buy her own clothes and help the family a little. She took some typing in high school, and this was how she was able to secure work of this kind soon after graduation. Genevieve, age twenty, has decided upon a career as a nurse. She entered training at McLeod's Hospital, Florence, South Carolina, after finishing high school, and completed her course there in the fall. At present, she is with her mother resting up a few weeks before returning to Florence to take up hospital nursing. Ruth, age fifteen, and Eloise, age twelve, are still in school. Ruth works at Barnhill's five and ten cents store on Saturdays and makes $1.25 a day, which helps to dress herself. Francineer, ago thirty-one, Eunice, age twenty-eight, and Archie Paul, age twenty-five, are married and have one child each. Francineer's husband is a clerk in a dry goods store of Marion and provides a sufficient support for his wife and baby. Archie Paul is a mechanic in the automobile business and makes a good living for his wife and child. He also lives in the same town with his mother. Eunice has decided to follow the married life of her mother, having married an employee of the Camp Manufacturing Company and lives at West Marion. Thus, Anna Gales is able to keep in touch with all of her children day by day and feels satisfied that they have a plenty, more than she was ever able to give them as little children. She has the full assurance, too, that they are willing to help her at any time she might call on them.
Anna Gales, dressed in a clean print dress and fresh homespun apron, with hair neatly combed and face shining like a mirror, stood at the door of her bungalow on this cold November morning. Yes, she had her hands full with all the housework, and Genevieve was sick, too. But she wanted to help the government all she could and wouldn't mind tolling what she knew of the life of a lumber mill worker.
"Yes'um, me and Archie was married up to my home in Columbia thirty-two years ago, and we come right straight on to West Marion and started housekeeping. Archie was foreman of the mill over there and had to hurry and be back on the job. He never wouldn't ask no time off hardly, except to get married. Archie had rented one of them mill houses for us, and I'll tell you, I would be some lonesome before I got used to that place and the children commenced coming. Archie would be gone to his work all day from six o'clock in the morning till six o'clock in the evening. Then he would have to go back to the mill soon as eight o'clock come to see that everything was fixed for the night. Sometimes it would be eleven and twelve o'clock before he would come back home and that's how come I didn't miss him the night he died. You see, he had a cot down there to the mill and had a habit of lying down off and on so he could keep going. His boss was always mighty nice to him and was all the time telling him to rest whenever he could find time. People wanted to know did we miss him that night he was lying a corpse, but I told them I was used to him staying out till me and the children was so hard asleep that I never thought nothing of it. When I was first married, I would worry about him not coming in, and many a night I would run down to the mill at eleven and twelve o'clock hunting him. But I soon hardened myself to it, and the children coming on, I felt it was my duty to stay close and look after then, just like Archie knew it was his portion to stick on his job to make us a living.
"I tell you, that was some shock in this world, the morning they come and broke the news to me that Archie was dead. It was like this, I never saw Archie no more after he eat his supper that evening and went back to the mill about eight o'clock. When me and all the children was done washing that night, I was so tired out I didn't see no use waiting up for him no longer, not knowing how late he might be getting in. I fixed some coals by the fire and put a kettle of water on the stove for him to wash, and then I lay down on the bed. The next thing come to me, it was five o'clock, and I knew I had to be getting some breakfast for Archie Paul to be to the garage on time. When I turned over in bed that morning and saw from the looks of things that Archie hadn't come home that night, I never thought nothing, only that he had slept to the mill for some reason or another. I went ahead with my work, like as I always would, getting the children off to be to school on time and the house cleaned up. Then when Archie didn't show up for his breakfast, I did think funny, 'cause he wouldn't never miss coming back right at seven o'clock after it. He would always go down to the mill at six o'clock to get the men started on the job and come back again for his breakfast. Child, I didn't know one thing of it till Archie Paul, poor little fellow, it was hard on him, come home at nine o'clock and broke the news that his father had been found dead at the mill in the dry-kiln. Died of a heart attack. I'll tell you, that was about the hardest thing I ever had to stand. I know it couldn've been no harder. It was such a shock till if it hadn't been for the children, I reckon I never would have been no better.
"I tell people I don't mind speaking about Archie's death, 'cause it ain't nothing to be shame of, and it might make everybody more careful. The first thing he would do of a night at the mill would be to fill that big boiler, and he always would come off from it soaking wet. That night was a pretty cold one, and I know he went in the dry-kiln to dry himself like he oftentimes did. I just suppose it was so nice and warm in there that he fell to sleep and never waked up no more, ' cause they told us he was setting up in there dead next morning, when Mr. Alford looked in the dry-kiln about eight o'clock. Mr. Alford said he fired up the steam first thing that morning and noticed later on Archie wan't on the job, so he thought he would see how things was working in the dry-kiln. Mr. Alford told me he couldn't believe his eyes when he saw Archie setting up in that place dead. And you don't know nothing, child, all one side of him was burned awful from the steam that poured down in there on his body. The doctor said he died from a heart attack and didn't suffer none. I told the children I reckon that was pretty near right, ' cause I know if he had been able he would have crawled out of that steam somehow.
"Cose there's lots of them kind of things going on every day, but it's something mighty hard to stand. A girl up here to Latta got cut half in two by the train here last year, and my sister's child got all broke up in a automobile one time, but she overed it.
"Poor Archie, that was one hard-working man. The most of the mill hands generally works around ten hours a day. But I'll tell you the truth, Archie worked near 'bout all the time, and he never did grumble about nothing. He worked every Sunday the Lord sent and both day and night all the week. We're Baptist, all of us, and attend the Marion Baptist church regular these days. But back then, with a lot of children to get ready, the long distance over to the church, and Jim working Sundays, we didn't get to go very often. We never did have a Sunday off in all our married life. It wan't Mr. Camp's fault, 'cause he was mighty fine and was all the time telling Archie to take some time off. But Archie said nothing wan't ever done right if he left his work to the other fellow.
"I'll tell you the truth, I ain't never seen no man work like my husband did. When we was living over to the mill, he had two big gardens, for he did love to work a garden. I've seen him working out there many a moonlight night, and oftentimes he would get up at four o'clock in the morning and work till time to be to the mill. I used to do a little chopping along with him on a bright night, and the mosquitoes would near 'bout eat us up. He would call one of the children to bring the 'squito gun out to the garden and shoot him good with it. He would go right on working while one of us was squirting that stuff all over him. Them mosquitoes, seems like they just loved to hang around his face and nook mostly. I used to tell him to come on in and stay with me and the children a little bit, 'cause he had too much garden anyhow. That man would raise so much nice vegetables out there, we couldn't half destroy them. But he would sell what we couldn't eat there to the mill store and that was some help on the grocery buying.
"Nobody but me and Archie will ever know what a struggle it took for both of us to keep from getting in a hole, with such a big family of growing children on us. People used to say to me many a time that they didn't see how on earth we got along on what Archie was making. There was ten of us there to eat, and he wan't making but $4.50 a day. But we tried to be careful and managed to pull over from one pay day till the next pretty well - better than most of them day laborers that wan't getting but $1.50 and $2.00 a day. You see, part of Archie's salary was always took off to pay the mill doctor before he got hold of it. A small part of everybody's wages, working at the mill, was always took off to hire a doctor's service for them. It wan't much and it was a big help not to be bothered with no doctor's bills. I'll tell you the truth, I didn't never know nothing about what sickness and doctor's cost people till Archie died and we was cut off from the mill.
"Mr. Camp, he was always mighty fine to everybody working for him. He run that big store over there to West Marion just for the convenience of his workers to buy from, and he would give one or two big oyster suppers every year for all the men. He would pay for every penny of it out his own pocket, too, and would have everything you can think of to go along with the oysters. Poor Archie, he did look forward to than oyster suppers from one year till the next.
"We lived over there to West Marion about twelve years of our married life, and then we've lived all over this hero town. I like to live in town beat for the sake of the children, but then you have to live where your husband is. It was nice and cool over to the mill in the summer, and it was more convenient keeping Archie's meals hot for him. You see, he didn't get but thirty minutes for dinner and was always in a rush. Then being the houses over to the mill belonged to the company, the rent was cheaper than in town, and the water was furnished us free. Cose we had to pay for the electric lights.
"But it wan't no easy job getting them children off to school every morning. The first children had to walk a mile here to town to school, and it was mighty hard on them - so hard it didn't do them one bit of good. I reckon that was how come Francineer was sick about all the time, and her and Eunice never could make it out to finish. The school put on a bus over there about the time the other children come on, and that wan't so bad, 'cause I had raincoats and umbrellas for then. Child, I had to hustle of a morning to get things done on time, even on getting up at five o'clock. It takes such a lot of work to keep up eight children, and I never could stand to see none of them black and dirty. I know Mrs. Woods told me one time that she didn't see how I did keep them so clean, with all I had on me. Said one was a plenty to keep her hands full. I told her that I always tried to see that they had clean faces and teeth. Keeping teeth clean, that's something important, 'cause if teeth ain't kept clean, it will cause you to have this here pyorrhea.
"Yes, since Archie died, I like it lots better living here in town, and it means everything not to be paying no more money out for house rent. Lord knows, I bet Archie spent enough money out on rent in his lifetime to have bought a right nice place. I tell the children I feel more like putting out some work on my place since I know I won't have to be moving time I get things started good. I've got a pretty good patch of turnips out there to the aide of the house now. But I don't get much time to work in my flowers, without I leave the housework short. I want to got some roses and shrubbery set out soon as I'm able. Seems like there's so much I've been aiming to do, but I just don't never get to it.
"There's J. C., he's got more on him with that insurance business than he can hardly keep up with now. That's a working job, I'll tell you. He's just as bad as his father, working here till eleven o'clock at night sometimes. J. C., he wouldn't have five minutes in that garden out there. I tell him he better lay off working so hard or he might go like his father. But I reckon he has to work like that to keep up with all these taxes and everything. I don't see why the people have to pay taxes nohow and have to buy automobile licenses on top of that. I don't own no car myself, but J. C. is forced to have one in his work. That's one good thing Governor Johnson's done for the people, 'cause if it hadn't been for him, licenses never would have come down. It's just awful how they take money from the people and puts it up yonder in that office where the people don't get no good of it.
" I told the children the other day it's right nice over here but things seem so tore up and uncertain that I have a good mind to go back to Columbia and live with mamma. When I bought this place, I didn't know I was going to be crowded in here so close. Somebody's done bought that lot over there to put up a $8,000 house, and I don't know when another house will be going up right under me on this here other side. Yes, if it wan't for J. C. and his insurance business and that I think it's best to hang on here a little longer to let those last two children finish school like they want to, I would more than likely left this place time I was able after Archie's death."