Project #-1655
Phoebe Faucette
Hampton County
Folklore
Mrs. E. G. Willingham, 74 years, Estill, S. C.
Every summer 'Aunt Mamie' Willingham comes from her winter home in Florida to Estill, S. C. to spend one, two, or three months with her brother, her niece and nephews, grand and great grand nieces and nephews.
Upon request, she tells of a regime of which she was a part during her early childhood. It was a world of few cities, and was composed mainly of scattered country communities in the Southland of the then still new United Stated. Each home was surrounded by a huge plantation, and the nearest neighbors were those living on the adjoining plantations several miles away, Due to the number of slaves there was plenty of life about, and each home had to serve as a sort of institution through which the slaves were eared for, as well as the usual large family itself that lived in the 'big house'.
"The family life was very different from that of the present day, Aunt Mamie says. Families went together to entertainments. They went together to church, and sat together in the family pews. They came together for meals and family prayers, night and morning. This made a marked difference in the home life from that of today. The meals were served at regular hours, family prayers were held at a stated time, and the members of the household were always on time for both.
"The home was open to any, and all, that came day or night. The visitors, whether tramp, salesman, relative, friend, or stranger, were asked to spend the day or night. All were given the same hospitality. Any tramp would be taken in overnight and treated as well as if he were a king. There was never any charge for supper, lodging and breakfast, should the visitor remain over night, or for dinner should he be there during the day.
"The social life, as well as the hospitality, was unique and determined by the distances between the plantations and the slow mode of travel. Few calls were made, but spend-the-day parties were in style. Then, there were corn shuckings at which the families of the community came together for the men to shuck the corn ready for shelling and grinding. There were log-rollings at which the men piled the sawed logs together and burned them to help in clearing the new ground. A big dinner was also served on these occasions, and the day was ended with a dance in the evening. There were also syrup-boilings at which games were played in the moonlight, and the young people had a wonderful time playing and drinking the cane Juice in between games. Pound-parties ware held to which everyone carried a pound of something to eat. When all was put together it made a feast. Games were played, and there was square dancing. The musical instrument was a fiddle, played by a colored man. Sometimes there were two fiddles played by two colored men. They had someone to call out the figures: Swing your partners, balance your partners, change partners, etc. My brother, Charlie, liked to call out the figures. I've heard him call them out until he was hearse. The Virginia Reel was also danced. Sometimes, at a church-supper, a nice cake was voted off to the most popular young lady.
"The holidays were the same as we have new, but were observed in a slightly different manner. Fire-crackers were shot on the Fourth of July even in the South. Christmas was a day for big family dinners. Few presents were given. The ladies sometimes exchanged a few simple homemade gifts. The children hung up their stockings and believed in Santa Claus, but he only brought a few inexpensive gifts. A girl would get a China-doll (a doll with a China head and a body stuffed tight with sawdust), an apple, an orange, a few nuts and raisins. The boys would get a knife, the fruit, and a few fire-crackers. The girls were not given fire-crackers, nor did they shoot them. There was nothing lady-like about such a noisy play.
"The schools in my youth were neighborhood schools. All the pupils were taught by one teacher, and school was held all day, every child having to take a lunch for dinner. The boys usually had little tin cans or buckets; the girls, little baskets.
"The churches were few and far apart. The sermons were long, and the music was the dear old-fashioned gospel hymns.
"The roads were just natural country roads. Horses, mules, and oxen were used for transportation.
"The slave quarters varied according to the masters, some better, some worse. Some of the houses were frame buildings, some, log cabins. No typical quarters can be described, because they varied so much. Some of the cabins were crowded with large families, in others, the family was not so large.
"The clothes of the slaves also varied, according to the masters. Some dressed well and kept clean; some were in rags and dirt. During the war, the cloth was made at home. The cloth that the outer garments of the slaves were made of was of one thread cotton and one thread wool and was called Lindsey Woolsey.
"The working men were rationed a peck of meal, three pounds of bacon, and a pint of sy rup, for every week. In sweet potato time they were allowed to dig as many as they could eat.
"The slaves were looked after in sickness by their master and mistress and attended by the country doctor. The mistress would care for them as attentively as if they were members of her own family. Little attention was paid to their education; but they were allowed membership and attendance in the church of the white people. They sat in the rear balcony, and at communion when the two cups had been passed around to all the white people, they were brought to the front again and handed to the negro deacons who had come forward to receive the cups and pass them around to the colored members.
"The slaves would have dances, and hot suppers, and singings. The negroes are in many ways the same now as in slavery time, having much the same conditions and mode of living. Education has changed their condition a little but as a whole there has been little change."
Source: Mrs. E. G. Willingham, Estill, S. C.