November 7, 1938,
Fleta Cole (White).
Puryear, Tennessee
Industrial Worker
Ruth Clark, Writer
Jennette Edwards,
Reviser.
SOLID TIME
"Hub's hired solid time. Has been for two years. He works ever' day from six in the morning till six at night in Mr. Harker's brick plant 'cross the tracks. Some day's more'n that--twenty four hours. That's over-time, but it don't mean no extra pay. It's forty dollars a month straight, no matter what."
Fleta Cole--small, stooped, hollow-chested--put her whole ninety pounds behind the heavy flat iron. Collar and cuffs came from under the heat stiff and slick. She lifted the shirt from the board for final inspection.
"Hub fires the boiler most of the time. Then when they're drying bricks, he have to run the fan for twentyfour hours. They couldn't make out in that kiln lessen Hub was there.
"He ort to get more for the work he puts out. Forty dollars a month just ain't enough for us to live on. Me and Hub and the three children. We have to pay four dollars out ever' month for this shack. Mr. Harker makes the hands live close by the plant. And he gets holt of that four dollars for rent 'fore we ever see a cent of Hub's wages. This shack ain't worth four dollars a month, neither. Mr. Harker won't do nothing toward fixing it up. If a window pane's broke, we do the putting in. Leak done ruint the paper, it's up to us to see to new paper."
Fleta stooped to the tub of sprinkled clothes. She shook out a rolled-up bundle and slipped another shirt over the narrow end of the home-made ironing board. She settled the board again between the center table and the lard bucket set in a backless kitchen chair.
"I take in washing or do what I can to help out. Hub and Thelma has to pack all our water from over there at the plant. When Thelma's to school and Hub's to work it's an orful lot of packing for me. I got a weakness here in my chest. The doctor says it ain't T. B., but he won't say what it is.
"I guess Louise taken after me. She's thin as a stick and don't ever feel no ways well. Thelma gets up of a morning pinching herself to see if she can't rake up some misery to keep her home from school. Louise ain't gonna miss \ a day, sick or no sick. She ain't but eight. They's both a big help to me...Thelma, tote yourself in here and spread out them dresses I done finished."
Thelma, fourteen, buxom, came into the front room from the kitchen. She walked to the front door and emptied her lower lip's load of snuff into the yard. A cheap permanent wave tangled her blond hair. Her high-heel pumps flopped up and down at the heels as she walked. She carefully lifted an armload of freshly ironed dresses and headed toward the one bright spot in the drab room--the bed, gay with a cheap pink rayon spread.
"Mind the spread, Thelma. Turn it back and rest 'em apart on the quilt. I ain't had that spread but since morning. It's a premium for selling candy. I do a little bit of everthing to help out. I could have got two dollars in cash. Ort to have. I knowed we need a lot of things worse'n we need a two dollar counterpane. But when I seen how pretty it was I just let myself go and tuk it.
"Thelma, mind Dot. That young un's like as not to start 'cross the tracks if she seen somethin' she wanted there. She ain't never budged out the yard, but you can't tell what a little un'll do. I never seen a baby play better by herself--just all day long messin' in and out that old car of ourn 'longside the house. It's more help to me to keep her from under my feet than it's ever been for getting us places.
"Hub says little as he makes he's allus gonna have something to take him around 'sides his legs. I don't see why. There ain't no time a-tall he can go. We ain't been to church for years. I was taught working on Sunday was wrong. Folks that holds out 'gainst working on Sunday don't have to hire others to work for 'em if they don't show up. Hub had to pay a dollar and a quarter yesterday to get a man to turn the fan so's he could see after his sister. She's about to die. Dirty shame for a man to have to pay to go see his own die. I sure wish he could find hisself a better job."
Fleta licked her finger and touched the iron. The sputter told her the iron was hot enough.
"They's been talking something 'bout a new law on hours and wages. I've heard folks in town that knows say Mr. Harker oughta be forced to pay us more. Twelve cents ain't no decent price to pay for a hour's hard work. But what you gonna do? Mr. Harker's got the jump on us. Hub ain't got nothing good in sight right now. Last year Mr. Harker had ever' hand to Sign a paper or quit. Hub can't read so he don't know what was on the paper. But he let 'em put his name down. He couldn't quit not knowing of a job a-tall nowheres else.
"Mr. Harker made a big blow 'bout a bonus he give the hands ever' January. Me and Hub ain't never got the straight of it. Seems this way. Some's set aside for bonus money. What's left after all the plant improvement, charges for broke tools and such ain't much. The little's left's divided. A hand gets hisn 'cording to how much ain't been drawed from his share during the year. They fired a man last year in December. He'd worked steady all the year, solid time. But they fired him so's to make sure he didn't draw no bonus. He was a keerful worker and didn't have nothing to speak of drawed from his share."
Fleta tilted the iron back on the handle. She found the wad of paraffin screwed up in a rag in her apron pocket and shined the face of the iron.
"The bonus ain't never very much. Last year it run from ninety cents to forty dollars. Hub was working solid time. They give him thirty dollars. He's gonna hang on this year till after he gits his bonus. He can't quit then till he gits sight of something else. What he aims to do is to turn over ever' stone he can to get back on the W. P. A. We got along a lot better on the W.P.A. We had our check regular. Had good warm clothes for the girls. And they give Hub clothes, too, 'cause his work kept him in the open. I didn't git none but I could manage all right when the others was gitting all they did. Whenever one of us'd git down, the W. p. A. would send a doctor and medicine. They give us food, too. Things suppose to be healthy for eating. Prunes and raisins. We can't buy 'em now.
"It was three years back, in dead of winter, when a man in Paris talked Hub into taking this here job. He painted it up--how's it would be inside work. How's it's the only kiln in Henry County. Hub had been here for five years once time back. He was working here when the gov'ment shut the whole plant up. N. R. A. done it. Mr. Harker never would run the place noways like what the gov'ment said. Somehow Hub let his head lose track of the sort Mr. Harker's allus been.
"I just can't figger it out how a man that's got money he ain't never seen, like Mr. Harker, can be like he is. Won't share a thing with ones that's needful. The doctor told Hub he'd have to git a cow since my health was porely. There Mr. Harker had five big acres of good pasture and just one cow. But he wouldn't leave us put ourn there for love nor money. Hub offered him a dollar a month for the use of it. Didn't budge him. The second boss over to the plant told Hub to pick him up a roll of wire somewheres and take and fence the clay field for pasture. Hub done it. It's wild pasture, but better'n nothing. We got a good place to keep her in the winter. Up there in the powder factory. The gov'ment wouldn't let Mr. Harker use it to make face powder like he'd planned. Shame 'nuf having the brick plant going like it was. That powder factory house's built better'n this shack.
"Thelma, tote this iron out and git me a hot un."
Fleta stacked the ironed flatwork on the wooden box covered with newspaper.
"A body ort to take good keer of a cow. Cows ain't cheap. Somebody shot ourn last year. That's what me and Hub thinks from the way she died. We had to pay forty dollars for the one we got now. She's a good milker. Give six gallons a day when she's fresh. We aim to fatten one of them pigs out the back yard offen extry milk. We can have a hog-killing if we do's we aim to. Nothing I'd like better."
She ran the paraffin wad over the fresh iron's face and lifted the three sprinkled bundles from the tub under the board.
"I was raised on the farm. I like it better'n any ways of living I know. Time and time I says to Hub, 'Les go to farming.' If he could just git a good shot at sharecropping, I knowed he'd do it right off. We was allus poor--shifting from one farm to another. Pappy died when I was three. Mammy married two times after that. My last step father drapped dead right 'fore us all one day when me and Hub come out to the farm to ask a setting of eggs offen of 'em. Fus thing I thought was, 'Ain't none of us got money enough to git him buried.' 'Fore we got him straightened out Mammy says, 'Fleta get your pappy's Woodman's policy from under the dresser scarf. You can't tell who'll be drappin' in time like this,'
"Hub tuk out a Woodman's policy soonafter we's married. We allus so hard up he says ever' time dues comes, 'I've a mind to drap it.' But I ain't gonna leave him do it. Why, Mr. Harker don't carry a penny insurance on none of his hands. Something happened to Hub, me and the children would plain suffer. Hub use to put on that Woodman's pin any time when he had clothes fitten to be proud of. He says he ain't going to be shining a pin like that on overalls, and I don't blame him a bit."
Fleta shook out the last rolled-up bundle. She smoothed the heavy roller towel the length of the board.
"Burial 'surance's a good thing. I wish I had a policy on me and ever' one of the children. That's just wishin'. It pinches us plumb to death to keep Hub's going. We was allus back in dues till he got put on solid time. I couldn't git no 'surance noways, health I'm in. I've had the pneumonia since•we's here. Down three months. There wasn't a Harker had feeling enough to set foot in this shack. Mrs. Harker has spoke to me times since. Mr. Harker don't trouble 'bout nothing decent as a-speaking to them slaving for him. My mammy taught me a dog was good 'nuf to be nice to.
"It ain't nothing to be proud of going through life shut mouth. It don't help nobody none. I done this ironing twicet as quick having you here to talk to. Don't seem like I's wore-out as usual neither."