SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT LIFE HISTORY
TITLE WPA ROAD.
Date of First Writing Jan. 31, 1939.
Name of Persons Interviewed Charles Seabrook,
Arthur W. Bailey,
F. W. Johnston, (White)
Fictitious Names  (not necessary)
Place Edisto Island, S. C.
Occupation  WPA Workers
Name of Writer  Chalmers S. Murray
Name of Reviser State Office.
Project #-1655
Chalmers S. Murray
Edisto Island, S. C.
LIF HISTROY.
WPA ROAD.
In the days before highway building became a passion in South Carolina, a road rambled along the banks of Saint Pierre's Creek on the northwestern side of Etiwan Island, and came to a sudden stop at the gate that guarded the entrance to the Blue Cloud plantation grounds.
It was one of those informal roads. Often the roadbed was poorly defined. The trail seemed to lead off into the briar patch here and there, and its tributaries were nothing but footpaths. Sometimes shallow ponds left by summer rains, obliterated the wagon and cart tracks. When this happened vehicles must make a detour into the corn or cotton field, the driver trusting to luck that the wheels would not sink to the axles.
Fifteen years ago, the traveler would meet a few Negro pedestrians with loads on their heads, plodding along the side paths, and perhaps a cart or two, drawn by complaining oxen. Occasionally a shining black buggy would pass, the driver holding tightly to the reins, checking a high stopping sorrel horse.
The river was over to the right as one approached Blue Cloud. It showed itself between gaps in the pine woods - a winding slate-blue stream that flowed swiftly into Saint Helena Sound. Across the water could be seen three plantation dwellings, standing against a mass of greenery. At times the road came close to the high bank that fell abruptly off to the marsh grass field. As if frightened by too close contact with the creek, the road would twist itself nervously and take off into the pine barrens or the open fields.
It was about four and a half miles from the Etiwan public road to Blue Cloud plantation. Generally forty minutes were consumed in covering the distance by horse and buggy for sand and mud will slow down any horse. Bleak winds blew against the traveler in February and March. One arrived at his destination with numb feet and red stiff fingers. In summer the Saint Pierre's road was breathlessly hot for most of the time the trees haughtily kept their distance.
Near the plantation entrance was situated an old public landing once used by slave propelled boats. It was this landing that made possible the improvement of the road by the Federal government. The government cannot build a road to a private estate even though a number of families benefit thereby.
In February of 1938, the administrator who shapes WPA projects for Charleston county, upon request of certain Etiwan citizens, approved a plan to modernize the road leading to the public landing. It was to be one of those farm-to-market highways which enable the farmers to keep their produce moving by motor trucks. As the road stood nothing but the lightest vehicle could navigate the deep, boggy ruts. During rainy spells, even the Model Ts, found it hard going. Horse drawn vehicles had been outmoded. Beside the public landing was no earthly use unless it could be reached by a road that would stand up under the heavy summer traffic.
On March 17, 1938, actual construction work on the Saint Pierre's highway was started. The project was partially sponsored by a road commission of Charleston county which furnished the tools, and two motor trucks for hauling earth. The WPA pays for the labor. The county appointed the project superintendent. The foreman, the timekeeper, the truck drivers and the laborers were drawn from the WPA work relief rolls.
Almost a year after the work began, I drove from one end of the road to the other, and passed the greater part of one day talking with the foreman and the laborers. This is the story of what I saw and heard.
The men reported for work at eight o'clock sharp. Thirty-nine Negro laborers answered the roll call, their voices ringing out cheerfully in the frosty air. All of them had long handled shovels in their hands. They were variously dressed; some in overalls, some in coats and trousers held together in important places by brightly colored patches. The thermometer was hovering around 35, and many of the men were wearing two pair of trousers, old shabby pants covering the newer ones. Tin buckets and bottles of coffee were in evidence. There was not a sullen face in the group. The laborers all appeared to be in good health.
The superintendent, the foreman, the timekeeper and the truck drivers were white men. The foreman was a college man and an ex-army officer; the superintendent a small farmer, the timekeeper a mechanic out of a job; and the truck drivers, farm youths detached from the soil by adverse circumstances. None of them except the foreman had seen the inside of a college.
Most of the workers, white and black, rode to work in automobiles. A few who lived only several miles away walked; a handful rode horses. The Negroes paid on the average of twenty cents a day for their transportation in passenger cars or trucks. For them walking was out of the question. These who rode lived at the other end of the island, at least twelve miles from the job.
"I get up at six every morning," said the foreman. "of course, its pitch dlack dark then and I feed the animals by lantern light. I get my own breakfast. Its just too much to expect of my wife. She has plenty to keep her busy beside getting up in the cold dark."
The other workers had similar experiences. Some of them had to arise at five if they had wood to out, water to draw and cows to milk. Generally their wives fixed lunches for them the night before. "Too dark for fumble 'round with bittle 'fore day crask," one Negro remarked. "The old hen get for do that 'fore she fall sleep."
As soon as the timekeeper checked his rolls, the laborers were divided into two crews. One crew began leveling off humps on the roadbed and the other group was assigned to ditching. Soon the shovels were moving rhythmically with a steady purposeful swing. A large green truck drove up, the engine racing. Two men jumped to the ground, shovels in their hands. The loose yellow dirt started to move in a steady stream from the roadside to the truck's body.
The men were warming to their work. It would be a steady pull from now until twelve o'clock, noon.
The water boy came by with his bucket from which projected the handle of a tin dipper. He was a serious looking Negro youth of about 23, neatly dressed, and wearing dark glasses. The nearest well is three quarters of a mile distant. Until knock-off time the water boy will keep walking between the well and the place where the dirt is flying. Wielding shovels for hours at a stretch is dry work, even on a cold, dampish January day.
The youth with the dark glasses deals with two elements - water and fire. There are periods where everyone's thirst is quenched, and then the boy fills out his time by tending the fire, About eleven o'clock a small fire is kindles on the roadside, not for the purpose of warming hands and feet, but to heat the lunches. The buckets are placed in a ring around the coals, and the glass bottles full of coffee, in the center. By noon the lunches are piping hot. The water boy visits the fire once in a while to see that none of the buckets are burned or the bottles broken. He adds a twig or two when the flames die down.
The sound of soft singing is heard, coming from the place where the second truck is being loaded. The Negroes are singing so softly that the words do not register with the group of white men, even though the singers are only seven yards away. The Negroes might be filling in a grave so low and mournful is their song.
"I don't object to low singing at times," the superintendent says, "but this thing of one loud song after the other had to be stopped. It interfered with the work. Oh, it might help when they are pulling on a load - helps to keep them together. When we were moving logs on a CWA project several years ago they used to sing: 'I thought I hear the captain say, ho, ho, ho.' They would pull hard together at the word 'ho'. But they have got to remember that they come here to work - not to sing."
By this time the ditch diggers have heaped a big pile of earth along the edge of the road. Before long there will be several truck loads to move. This earth will be used for the fills. It is a good grade of soil, suited either for fills or top surfacing. "The government saved on this dirty," says the superintendent proudly. "We had to buy very little dirt outside."
The ditches are not dug "by air." Stakes placed at intervals along the road indicate the depth and the angle; line cord and surveyor's levels insure accuracy in excauvating and grading. The men evidently take real pride in the clean out, symmetrical ditches. Once in a while a Negro will step back and say: "Now, ain't that a pretty ditch?"
"Come on boys, come on boys," sings out the superintendent. The shovels move at a faster tempo. The foreman echoes the command: "Come on boys, throw it out." The sun goes under a cloud and the white men shiver. The Negroes do not seem to mind the bitting wind and the absence of sunshine. Their blood is pumping strongly through their veins. A few laborers are obviously sweating.
On Etiwan a great deal of criticism has been directed against the project. "It is a pure waste of money," says one man who now and then dabbles in the stock market. "The government will go broke building roads to every public landing."....." Their fathers hauled cotton and white potatoes over the road in carts. What's the need of a modern road? Let the farmers do what their fathers did. Old time methods are good enough," comments a retired farmer."... The Negroes spend their time leaning on their shovels, the foreman sitting on their shovels, the foreman sitting on their behinds," says a school teacher.
"All of that talk doesn't bother us too much," the superintendent declares. "we know that the road is needed and that the men put out real work. I would like to see any of those people who talk like that stay by this job eight hours a day in January or August. Cold winds in January, hot sun and mosquitoes in August and plenty of hard work all of the time. Yes, I would like to see them try it."
"Do the men knock off to rest now and then? I should say not. They don't knock off for any purpose except to eat lunch. They are supposed to take care of their bodily needs before they leave home. But I can tell you this - the work doesn't hurt them. They thrive on it."
"They are hardly ever sick," the foreman adds. "None of the laborers with us have lost more than five percent of the working hours on account of sickness during the ten months. As a matter of fact they cannot afford to be sick for more than five days in succession. If they are absent five days hand-running, they are automatically released from the project. That's the regulations."
The timekeeper looks at his watch, turns to the superintendent and announces: "Twelve o'clock."
The superintendent, a stockily built little man, draws himself up to his full height and shouts: "All right, boys. Knock off for lunch."
The men scramble out of the ditch, brushing the earth from their clothing. They are joined by the laborers who have been leveling the roadbed. All carry shovels on their shoulders. The thirty-nine Negroes walk toward the fire where their lunch awaits them. The white men assemble at a fire of their own. As a special treat the timekeeper has brought along a peck of oysters. The oysters will be roasted and eaten with cheese and sandwiches and coffee.
The Negroes open their quart buckets and begin eating without ceremony. Table spoons are stuck down into masses of hominy grits soaked with bacon grease, are pulled out with a quick motion, and then disappear into wide open mouths. There is much smacking of lips and licking of spoons. Some of the men have brought sweet potatoes, and they divide the tubas with their fellows. The coffee is now steaming hot. The men drink it direct from the bottles, scorning cups. Cups are for women and children and sick people. Those who didn't bring fried fish have butts meat cooked to a turn, or fat pork.
"You get for eat meat on the job or the bear going to get you," explains one of the Negroes.
When they talk about the bear getting you they mean that you will faint with hunger and exhaustion.
They laugh and joke as they eat, kidding the bachelor members of the crew about their scant lunches. They talk about the coming planting season, the revival to be held in the African Methodist Episcopal Church on Sunday, their ill neighbors, and trout fishing. They recall how a certain young man named "Boy Rat" used to gorge himself with sweet potatoes until he could hardly move when he has finished his lunch, and had finally been released from the project. "This ain't no place for trifling nigger," observes an oldish man.
Around the other fire there is also laughing and joking. The superintendent, the foreman, and the timekeeper have known each other all of their lives. Now they constitute an isolated little group, standing apart in one sense of the word, from the other white men of their class on the island. They know that their neighbors criticize them for taking relied work, and the three have grown closer together in recent years. But they can laugh and joke when they are on the WPA road, and forget for awhile the cutting remarks that are thrown in their direction. They say they don't mind the criticism much, but one can detect the bitterness in their voices.
In half an hour the men are back at work. Three and a half hours now before time to knock off for the day. The minutes pass slowly when lunch is behind them; the last hour is the longest, so the foreman says. There is no slacking of effort, however. The shovels move as rhythmically as before and none of the laborers pull on their watch strings.
The youngest of the crew is around 21. He is slight build, but his arms muscles stand out like heavy cord, and his shovel seems a toy in his hands. The oldest on the project is a man nearing sixty. His skin is pot black and shriveled; his form tough and wiry. He is said to be one of the best workers on the road - and the ugliest.
Several months ago the men over 65 were discharged since they were supposedly eligible for social security benefits. The superintendent says that if the truth is known they were really unfit for hard work. And one of them grumbled continually and spread dissatisfaction among the laborers. "The trifling ones are all weeded out now," the superintendent reports.
The white men have from two to three dependents, some of the Negroes as many as ten. All of them say that without this government work they could not hope to clothe and feed their families and pay doctor bills. Over and over again they have tried to get outside jobs, but there was no use, the foreman says. He for one has reached the conclusion that private industry has no jobs to offer men who have been down on their luck since the depression set in and who are getting along in years. "When a man reaches forty it is all over with him. Friends and politicians have made me promises but they were just talking, trying to let me down easy," the ex-army officer remarks.
During the ten and a half months that the road project has been on progress only one man has found outside employment. This was a young Negro, who quit recently to join a county road building gang.
About one third of the workers, including the white men, run small farms on the side. They say that there is little if any profit to this farming business, but it helps to provide them with vegetables and meat, and if they are lucky they can make taxes out of cotton sales. On the whole they break about even with their farming ventures from a cash standpoint. Thrown out of the WPA job, they could not make a decent living. A large stake is needed for successful truck farming. There is no money in planting a few acres of cotton. Thousands of dollars must be had to equip a modern, motorized farm.
Few of the Negroes who rent or own land plant cotton. An acre or so of peas and sweet potatoes is about all they can manage. No one can carry on a farm by working only on Saturdays and holidays. Some of the more industries raise hogs and chickens, and a small percentage own cows. Scant attention is paid to vegetables gardens; even watermelons are seldom planted. The men want to rest up a bit on non-work days, put on clean clothes and "take a walk out."
Jobs on the Etiwan plantations do not pay a living wage. One has to work from sunrise to sunset to earn 75 cents. Beside this is only seasonable employment, except in rare instances. Etiwan farmers, white and black say they cannot pay more with cotton bringing less than ten cents a pound and potatoes and cabbages a glut on the market.
During the time the project has been running, only one man has been discharged for cause. "He knew too much," the superintendent comments. "He thought he knew more about laying out a road than the head engineer. And although he was an able worker, he was always slacking. I just had to let him go. He had a bad influence on the men."
The superintendent says that the road is laid out by an engineer from the county road commission, and that the work is inspected at regular intervals. Every month the superintendent turns in a written report, telling how far the work has progressed, and giving the time required to complete certain stretches. He is provided with a level to check the grades and depths. The foreman has charge of part of the laborers. The timekeeper fills in a report at the end of each day and administers first aid to the men when necessary. In the event of serious accident, he is instructed to rush the wounded one to the nearest physician.
The project will be completed by the end of February, the superintendent predicts. The public landing is almost in sight. Of the four miles of new road, at least three miles have been finished and all of the grubbing has been done. The roadbed measures 28 feet from ditch to ditch, and 50 feet overall including the ditches. When the last shovel of dirt has been dug, the farmers en route and the people of Etiwan will have a durable, scientifically graded, top-surfaced highway that will hold up under heavy motor traffic.
The superintendent turns to the timekeeper and says: "This has sure been a cold day. I've been cold every minute. Wish I had my feet propped up in front of a roaring fire. How is the time going anyhow?" He looks at his watch. The timekeeper consults his. Ten minutes more yet.
The men in the ditch seem to be working like automatons. Lines of weariness are appearing on some of the older faces. The young men are apparently as fresh as they were eight hours ago.
The watch hands crawl slowly around and finally one points to four and the other to six.
The superintendent yells: "Time's up. Store your tools."
The men stop working, at least they ease down to a stop. Several keep their shovels going for another minute so they can out down little humps on the ditch edge. These are evidently the ones who take a professional pride in their jobs.
They march in a line to the big wooden box which stands under a small oak, and one by one put their shovels away. There is little talking. The automobiles and trucks are throwing out clouds of smelly blue smoke. One ancient looking truck refuses to start. A Negro is turning the crank as fast as his arm can work, and cursing under his breath.
In five minutes the road is bare of black laborers. Automobiles are disappearing around the sweeping bend that skirts the river bank. The white men stand around and talk for awhile, then the foreman says: "Good Lord, I've got to start toward home. Got wood to bring in and water to turn off. Look's like its going to freeze tonight."
Tomorrow he would be back on the road with the superintendent and the timekeeper and the rest of the gang. Maybe they will be breaking ice in the ditch and stamping their feet to start the blood circulating.
Tomorrow I would be seated at my typewriter, with a fire at my back, writing the story of the WPA road.
