494 Virgin Street
Macon, Georgia
NANNIE HAWKINS
In back alleys and narrow lanes close to the white families for whom they work live most of the Negro servants of Coman. Virgin Street is the name of one of these narrow lanes. Only one block on length, it extends from Forsyth Street to Hardeman Avenue. A row of rickety cottages, without benefit of paint, stand on one side of the street. They face vacant lots of tall grass and overgrown weeds. These houses are very much the same in appearance and are typical of Negro houses in Coman. Flights of shaky steps, three or four in number, lead to narrow porches, many of which are decorated with anemic plants growing in discarded lard buckets or broken pots. The houses are duplex in type, each apartment or half house having three small rooms and a porch that is jointly used by the families occupying the house.
Nannie Hawkins, her husband, Charlie, and her niece, Mary, live in second house from the end of the row. Nannie is a bright, rather intelligent Negro woman, twenty-five years old. She is about five feet, five inches tall and weighs close to one hundred and fifty pounds. Her skin is light brown, her eyes large and black and her even white teeth add much to her appearance in her ever ready smiles. Dressed in a light green cotton uniform such as is often used by house maids, her naturally kinky hair artificially straightened, her large feet in sensible brown oxfords, Nannie made an unusually neat appearance when I stopped to talk with her.
"What you want me to tell you,?" she asked. "I ain't never done nothing but grow up and marry and work, and I spec most everybody does that. I've always lived right here in Coman. My mother had ten children out four of 'em died. I don't remember much 'bout the three that died when they was little, cause I was young then, too, but Mary is my niece that lives with us, you know, and her mother died when Mary was born fourteen years ago. I loved her more than I did any of my brothers and sisters. Wessie was her name and we always slept together and played house together. I reckon that's the reason when she died I took her little girl to raise and Charlie and me have always tried to do for her jest like she was our own chile. She's a good girl, too, but she don't like to work much. Reckon we've kinder spoiled her. I always felt so sorry for her cause she didn't have any mama and her father has never done a thing for her. We don't even know where he is.
"We all went to school over there in Stinsonville when we were kids. I finished the sixth grade. I liked to go to school and hated to quit but I had to. I had to go to work to help my mama. My pa was dead by then and she couldn't make enough money to feed and take care of us. But she kept us in school jest as long as she could. She can't read a bit, never went to school a day in her life and she wanted all her chillen to have an education.
When asked where she learned to cook, Nannie replied, "I jest always been knowing how, I reckon. I took cooking lessons at school but we never did learn how to cook nothing there but little fancy messes that don't fill nobody up. I like to cock; jest show me a recipe and I can read it right off and make the cake or whatever it is.
"I started going with Charlie when I was jest about twelve years old, I reckon, jest sweethearting, you know. I went with him seven years before I married him. I don't know how come I married him when I did; I guess I thought I loved him enough but lots of times I don't know whether I did or not. He jest kept asking me and asking me and after while I told him all right, I would. Mama didn't want me to marry Charlie; she didn't want me to marry no man cause my money was helping her lots. But I didn't give up my job and I kept on helping her and lots of times Charlie gives her money to buy things with. My mama's always been good to us and she's old now and can't work much and I hates to see her do without things she needs. She lives in the other side of this house and I like to know I'm near her if she gets took sick.
"No'm we didn't have any wedding. We jest got married. We jest went down to the City Hall and the judge down there married us. I done forgot his name. He was a old man. Some of the boys and girls we run with wanted us to have a big wedding with me all dressed up in white but I don't see no use in throwing your money away that away.
"We married 'bout six years ago. Charlie was working for the Coca Cola Company then jest like he is now. He's twenty-eight years old now and he has never worked anywhere else since he's been grown. He's crazy 'bout his job and will talk to you all night long if you'll jest listen to him. He started down there washing bottles and now he's driving a truck. He makes twelve dollars a week. He keeps that truck shined up and all pretty jest like it belonged to him. He got off from work once and went up to Atlanta to see the Coca Cola plant up there and once he went to Birmingham and he jest had to see the plant there, too. He says this one in Coman is the best. I don't know whether it is or not; it might be he thinks it is jest cause he's so crazy 'bout it.
"Charlie's all right, I reckon. Leastways, he's lots better now than he used to be. Course he drinks sometimes and stays out at night every now and then playing cards but he don't do it near as much as he used to. We never had. no chillen; I used to be sorry, said I wanted as many as mama had but I reckon the Lord knows best.
"Me and Charlie both belong to the colored Vineville Baptist Church. I goes to the meetings there sometimes; Charlie goes more than me. The preacher we got jest rants and rares so I gets jiggety when I tries to listen to him. I sure do like my church circle though. I'm the treasurer of my circle. We meet every Monday afternoon at one of the houses of the members. There's about thirty in our circle but generally jest 'bout fifteen comes. Sometimes somebody will have refreshments when her time to have the circle comes. They generally jest has tea and sandwiches or ice cream and cake. We have a good crowd then; nearly every member will be there. We have a good time at our meetings. We make sheets, pillowcases, aprons and quilts. We generally sell what we make and send the money to the foreign fields. Once a year we make up a box filled with the things or some of the things we've made and send that to the foreign fields too. Sometimes we give some of the things we've made to po' folks here in town.
"No'm, we don't belong to no secret societies; nothing but the church and to two insurance companies. They're the Industrial and the Interstate. Both of us pay a dollar a month to both of them. They pay us five dollars a week if we get sick and a hundred dollars at death. I was sick about a month ago, was sick and had to be away from my job for two weeks but I was behind with one of my policies. The one I was behind with jest paid me $2.50 but the other one paid me all right. It sure was a help but the doctor charged me three dollars every time he came and I didn't have enough for him and all the medicine I had to buy, too. Since I've been back at work I've 'bout gotten everything paid up though.
"It takes jest 'bout everything that Charlie and me make to keep up with things. Looks like we can't save much. That car out there in the yard is ours. It's a Pontiac. Charlie bought a Ford 'bout six months after we married. It was a second hand car and we paid for it by the month. After while we traded it for another and we've had one of some kind ever since. It don't cost us very much cause Charlie loves to fool with it and fix it when some on gets the matter with it and we do have a good time with it taking our friends to ride. We've had this Pontiac 'bout three years now; spec Charlie'll be trading again before long.
"I reckon I'm jest 'bout as happy as anybody. Guess I've got lots to thank the good Lord for. We ain't never been sick much or in jail or had no kind of trouble with the law at all. Charlie ain't never been out of work and I ain't been out much of the time. Course I don't make as much now as I used to. I cleans up and cooks for a lady that works down town. She's got three chillen but they're big and in school most all the time. I don't work on Saturdays and Sundays and she pays me $1.50 a week. It ain't much, but she's nice to work for and she can't pay much and it's nice for me to be home on Sundays, too. Me and. her gets along fine. I comes to work 'bout nine o'clock after they've all gone and I clean up and cook the dinner and I'm through 'bout three o'clock. Yessum, things could sho be worse, I reckon. If Charlie'll jest behave, I ain't got no kick.