740 9th St.
West Durham, N. C.
July 15, 1938
I. L. M.
MARY SMITH
It was about two o'clock in the afternoon and Mary was still busy with her dinner dishes. She asked me to come back to her kitchen, and there I met her oldest daughter, Janie, who was with her mother for a two weeks visit. Mary continued washing dishes while Janie, after rinsing them in a pan of hot water, dried them. The kitchen was clean and orderly and the least disturbing of all the rooms in the house in which to sit. I was glad that Mary after finishing with the dishes did not suggest that we go into another room.
I had been told that Mary was ill and I expected to find her in bed. When I asked her about her health she replied, "Yes, I'm sick with diabetes most of the time but I try to stay up as much as I can. The doctors at Duke are treatin' me and I go in twice a week when I'm able. They tell me my body is suffering from the brutish treatment I've give it all my life. If they mean work I reckin I have done as much as the next one." Then Mary told me her story.
Mary Smith was born in Orange County fifty-seven years ago. Her father was a renter and he found it difficult to support his eight children on what was left after the landlord was paid. Not that the children didn't lend a helping hand. Mary cannot remember when she did not contribute her quota of work-hours toward her own support. At six she stood up in a chair to wash the dishes and prepare the scanty meals for cooking while her mother labored in the fields. There were then three smaller children who required the time left over from housekeeping duties. As she grew older there seemed no way to make a little time for school. She thinks that reading must indeed be a great pleasure. Many times she has picked up a book and sat with it in herhands wishing that she might know what was inside its pages.
When she was eleven the family income was supplemented by group participation in a relatively new industry. Smoking tobacco was gaining in popularity and the manufacturers of the product needed many small bags in which to pack it for distribution. The bag factories which grew up in answer to this need sent the bags out by the thousands into the surrounding countryside to be strung and tagged. During periods of slack in farm work Mary and her young brother walked the five miles into Durham and took back to their home two large sacks, each containing ten thousand small bags. She can remember sitting up all night on occasion during the rush season, each member of the family working as hard as he could to string these sacks for which they received thirty cents a thousand. When sleep laid such a heavy claim on her that she felt she could no longer stand it her mother sent her out on the back porch to dash cold water on her face that she might keep her eyes open yet a little longer. The year she was twelve her skill increased so that she raised the family income by several dollars, and her parents out of appreciation of her industry bought her two percale dresses instead of one.
By the time she was fifteen years old her father had decided his family would have a better living at a cotton mill than they could ever make for themselves on another man's farm. They sold the mule and the cow but they kept the twenty-six chickens for a while after moving to town. The nice fresh eggs came in handy because wages weren't so high that such things could be bought in plenty.
Mary began work at twenty-five cents a day. Her hours were from six to six but she will tell you that she doesn't believe the twelve hours then were any harder than eight hours now what with the speed-up system they have. Her man Jim comes in clean wore out at the end of a day, but of course she knows he's not a young man any longer. In fact, his working days are almost over because he's not so far from sixty and his body is none too stout.
When she married at eighteen she was making four dollars a week and Jim four dollars and a half. If it hadn't been for the installment plan she wonders if they ever could have bought the two beds and stove with which they began housekeeping. Nighttimes Jim made four chairs and a table. With so much furniture in their house they decided to take a couple of boarders to help with the installments still to be paid. The furniture wasn't more than paid for when Mary had to have an operation which cost Jim fifty dollars. That was three months before her first baby was born and another baby was on its way before the debt was finally paid.
Sometimes when her health was too bad to work in the mill Mary took up her old occupation of stringing bags. The wage had increased to fifty cents a thousand and with steady use of her spare time she could do a thousand a day. In the course of time five children were born to Mary Smith and four of them managed to live past babyhood. Mary's last child was born in 1912. It didn't live but three days and the Smiths had to borrow the money to bury it. "That year was one of the hardest in my life," Mary told me that afternoon. "The doctor started comin' to see me in early May and there wasn't a day from then on until the middle of September that he didn't come to our house. As soon as I was out of bed Jim took sick with the typhoid fever and for six solid weeks he wasn't able to work. Two of the younguns took the fever from him. If we couldner got credit we woulder starved. It was many a year before we ever caught up again. We was in such bad shape that the two. younguns was forced to go in the mill though I'd hoped to keep 'em out until they'd had a little more chance for schoolin'."
The oldest boy entered the mill at twelve and the oldest girl at thirteen. The boy has been there since except for sick leaves in the past few years when he has been bothered with hemorrhages of the lung. He was such a scrawny, pale, little fellow that many a time when Mary went to rouse him on a cold winter morning she felt like turning away from the bed and letting him rest through the day. But she knew he might lose his job, and the money he made was badly needed. Sometimes now she wonders if his health wouldn't have held out better if she could have kept him out of the mill a few years longer until his body had been given more chance to grow.
This son married after thirty and he has three children, all too young to work, and a wife whose health is so poor she cannot work. He was brought home from the mill with another hemorrhage the other day and Mary is wondering how she can help him. It seems to her that the fourteen dollars a week Jim is making cannot be stretched over another need.
Mary paused at this point in her story and sat with her hands folded in her lap. Janie looked first at her' mother and then at me. "If it hadn't been for Mama my younguns wouldner had no clothes atall the past year," she said. "The mill where my husband works aint give its help but four days' work a week in over a year. Tom makes eleven dollars and its all I can do to feed, let along clothe, my crowd on that. My, children is pretty good about not complainin'. They'll set down one day right after another to dried beans and potatoes without raisin' a row. Of course, that oldest one has got all manner of pride and she caused me a sight of trouble for awhile when she had to wear a old coat to school that never fit her nowhere. The worst hurt I ever seen her, though, was along 'bout the last of school when her teacher tried to collect rent for the school books she'd been usin' all the year. I thought the State was furnishin' 'em free but they say everybody is supposed to pay rent on 'em. Emma Lee kept after me but I never had the money to give her. One day she broke down in school and cried and told her teacher they wasn't a penny at her home to pay for book rent. The teacher told her to stop worryin' then, and she never bothered her any more. Emma Lee says she's not goin' to stop until she goes clear on through high school."
Janie's four-year-old child came into the kitchen and propped herself against her grandmother's knee. Mary put her arm about the child and seemed to forget for a while that she was there. "Well, she'll have plenty time to go through high school since the mill can't take 'em until they are sixteen or eighteen, I don't know which," she said. "Of course it's hard to say if things keep on like they are who's goin' to furnish the money.
"It's been a funny thing about my own family," she continued. "Pa didn't have a single child that wasn't willin' to work to try to get ahead and they aint a one of us that's got anything today. They aint never been a time when one was havin' trouble that the others was able to help him out of the bog. They's three of us livin' now. One of my brothers whose wife died last year is gettin' just two day's work a week and him with eight children. I don't know how on earth he's livin'. The other brother is makin' $8 a week and he has four children at home.
"This is my pet," Mary continued, changing the subject abruptly as she drew the child closer to her. "She come over a week before her Ma did and I never heard a whimper out of her."
"Is she the next to the youngest?" I asked, addressing Janie.
"No'm, there's two younger than her," Janie answered. "My lap baby is just three months old and the knee baby in yonder room with her is two year old."
"Six children and her thirty-three," Mary said.
"That's more children than a working man can take care of" I ventured.
A queer sort of smile flitted across Janie's face and she lowered her head. Presently she looked up at me and said slowly, "You are right about that."
Before I left, all of Janie's children had been in the kitchen. The oldest girl, twelve, looked pale and undernourished. Two of the younger ones played about with a great deal of energy. They would be considered pretty in any average group of children and as I looked across at Janie I wondered how it could be. At thirty-three she is fat, sallow, and unkempt with a look of forty-five at its worst about her face and figure. Good-naturedly she watches her children at play and thinks no further than the next feeding of her small baby. Mary, clean and not unattractive, smiles with patient affection at her daughter and her grandchildren. She has a capacity for thinking ahead that Janie seems not to have.
Mary looks back over her past life and can see in it no period in which she might have saved for the days that are ahead. She will tell you that she has on occasion spent a little money for foolish pleasure but she wonders if a person could stand all the ups and downs of life without giving over now and then to foolish things. Occupying a prominent position on her mantel in the front room is a rose-colored goddess edged in green, propping itself against a, green scooped-out tray which serves miscellaneous uses. She bought it for herself at the fair about ten years ago and she's still proud of it. In no less conspicuous places in her front room are framed pictures of the Rock of Ages; Jesus, the Savior; and a bordered motto of her missionary society. A good many of her extra quarters have gone through the channel of the church to help the heathen in foreign lands to a better way of life.
She faces sixty with assets spent and liabilities yet to be reckoned with. Her chief asset in life has been her capacity for labor and from that, the one material asset she has saved for herself is something like two hundred dollars worth of furniture. The mill can no longer use her and she knows that Jim's days of usefulness are numbered. There has been talk on the hill in recent months about old age benefits. All that Mary understands out of that talk is that when Jim is sixty-five he will begin to draw a little money. She says it isn't reasonable the amount will be enough to keep them both. Actually Jim will draw with interest the 112% of his wage saved for him and matched by his employer during his work years beginning with 1936. If his fast-failing health will permit him to serve the mill for two more years he will consider that nothing but luck is carrying him on. He will be sixty-one then with only four more years to go before he starts collecting his old age benefits which with care would last him about six months.
Just before I left Mary's house she looked out of her kitchen window and across the hill. For awhile no one spoke and the hum of the mill was the only sound to be heard in the room. When Mary began to talk it was as if she thought that Janie and I, too, must have been thinking with her on the growth of the mill. "Yonder mill want one-tenth the size it is now when I first come here forty-two year ago," she said. "It seems like me and Jim's got old with the mill but age aint hurt the mill none. When it slows down it can git new parts and we caint. What's worse we soon aint goin' to have money to buy rations for feeding our wore-out bodies. The mill keeps makin' money but it has to give to them that's young and strong, I reckon, and even to them it caint give a regular livin'."
Mary would like to have a little place of her own on the edge of town where she might raise a garden, and small patches, along with chickens, hogs and a cow--especially a cow. She knows the country can be hard, bitter hard, because she hasn't forgotten when she was six years old. But then she was working for the other fellow and she believes it would be different if the land and house were hers. Nobody knows better than Mary that such thoughts are but an idle dream. She says that all her life she has known nothing but half-living and she expects no miracle when her days of usefulness are behind her. She does wonder sometimes what kind of a life lies before her children and grandchildren.
Elsie Wall sits on her porch between dinner and supper and rocks in her chair with a complacence that nothing is able to undermine. Her husband, Jim, makes six dollars a week on a part-time job in the Wake Forest cotton mill. On that amount he, his wife, and their four children must live. On off days Jim tends his garden in which he has tomatoes, cabbages, beans, onions, and corn. Elsie says she does not know how to chop in a garden and that it's too late for her to learn.
She is thirty-two and looks forty-five. The leathery skin of her face is the color of a frost bitten pumpkin. The veins around her puffy ankles stand out in purplish blue blotches against the pasty skin of her legs. She thinks that standing on her feet in the mill must have caused the broken veins.
Elsie can cook and she can work in the mill. The mill no longer needs her and there's not much food at her house to cook. Her breakfast rarely changes. She knows now that a week from tomorrow she will have biscuit, coleuses, and coffee. The young children are fond of coffee and they do not have milk to drink. Sometimes the seven year old girl will say to Elsie, "Mother, just give me a cup of coffee; that's all the breakfast I want."
Jim buys the groceries for the family. It isn't that Elsie doesn't have time to do it. There are problems of arithmetic involved in grocery shopping that Elsie is unable to master. She stopped school just beyond the sixth multiplication table after having worked weeks upon it. Today it is the only one in which she feels at case.
Her oldest daughter, Tabby, is finding the same difficulties in arithmetic which checked her mother's progress. At twelve she is still in the fourth grade, Elsie says that it is surely the teacher's fault or Tabby could get along faster than she does. She believes that the teacher is the kind to neglect children who some from the mill hill. School had been out a month before Elsie knew her child had not passed her grade. On her way home from school Tabby had erased the "not" from "not promoted." After a month's time she told her mother whet she'd done. Elsie tried to figure out some way to send Tabby to the six weeks' summer school to make up her arithmetic but that school was not free. There's nothing for Tabby to do, if she goes to school next year, but to repeat the fourth grade.
Elsie does not intend to send her children to school next year, not even the bright and attractive girls of seven and ten. The questions she raises seem reasonable enough. How can her children eat and have warm clothes too out of six dollars a week? Would you be willing to have your child with not half enough clothes on his body stand out on the road some cold ioy morning and wait for a bus? Would you want your child to go to school in such rage that he was schemed every time a better dressed child looked at him? Mea there any child who wanted to be made fun of or to be pitied by his classmates?
She has been told that there is a law which will force her to send her three school-age children to school. In that case, she thinks the relief had better come out bringing warm clothes for them.
She'd like to see her children get educated, but it doesn't matter with her so much as it does with Jim. Jim thinks that the children can make a better living if they go through school. Her argument is that her children are no better than she, and she has had to work in the mill. Jim's answer to her argument is that their children have more sense than they, and if he can manage to send them through school perhaps they will find something else besides cotton mill work to do. Well, it's Jim's problem. She can't figure it on six dollars a week.
Elsie doesn't think that cotton mill life offers many advantages, especially this particular mill villages where the toilets are outside and there are no lights unless you are able to wire your own house. She says, "It's just as bad as living in the country." But one of the worst disadvantages, she says, is to have school teachers neglect your children because they come from the hill. A teacher with any sense should know that some of the people on the mill hill are just as good as people anywhere.
To Elsie it seems strange that some people never get over a feeling of shame at having to move to the mill. Her own mother, Clara Bedingfield, still holds hard feelings against her father, Charlie Bedingfield for bringing her to the mill. Her father teases her mother by saying that he is going to bury her in the village. Clara says that if there is such a thing as coming back to "hant" a person she'll hant his so he'll know nothing but misery the rest of his life. All of Clara's children are married and live at the mill. Her brothers' and sisters' children live in and around Raleigh. Many of them have good positions. If Charlie had never moved her from Raleigh to the cotton mill she thinks her children would have done well, too.
Elsie thinks that such talk from her mother is highly abusing, Maybe she herself could have done better if her parents had stayed on in Raleigh and if she could have managed to get a job in which there wasn't any figuring. However, she likes the cotton mill fine if they could make a living at it. If she and Jim both could work or if Jim could make a living wage so that they could have lights in their house, plenty of food to eat, and good clothes for their children she wouldn't mind spending the rest of her days at the mill. There are plenty of good people to keep her company. On the other hand, there are some who are awfully ignorant, At least they seem ignorant to her or they'd never take up so much time with the Holiness religion. Her neighbors right across the road belong to that religion and they certainly do strange things.
It was after this fashion that Elsie talked with me the other day when I eat with her on her front porch and looked across at one of her Holiness neighbors. An elderly woman stood in the doorway and beat off a jazzy rhythm to which she supplied a crooning sort of song.
"She may get into the unknown tongue by night," Elsie said, "One thing I'd hold against joinin' with 'em' is wearing long sleeved dresses. A regular member is supposed to wear long sleeves even in the summer time."
After this remark Elsie looked at me with a devilish smile, and a merry twinkle in her eye that belied the yellowed illness of her skin. Encouraged by my response that I found long sleeves uncomfortable in hot weather she continued.
"And I never could get up enough faith in God to trust to "layin" on hands," for healin' the sick. The Bible says send for a physician. When my little home remedies fail I want to send for one that knows more than I do, Have you got that much faith?" she queries unexpectedly.
"Well, I guess I'm like you in that respect," I answered. "When I'm ill I want a doctor." After a moment I asked, "Do you belong to the doctor's list?"
"Yes'um, and that's something else to come out of them six dollars." The sudden realization of how much Jim's meager weekly wage had to do provoked her to laughter. She chuckled lightly. I found myself chuckling too.
"You've got no notion how much children can want," she said when she was ready to talk again. "Mine worry me to death about the movies but the only time they get to go now is when their Grandma Bedingfield gives 'em a dime."
"Are those pictures in there on the mantelpiece some of their favorite stars?" I asked, glancing into the shadowy interior of the near-by room.
"Mo'm. Them's pictures of the Lord. They've got actor pictures though. Come on in and I'll show 'em to you."
Inside the respectably clean room Elsie brought forth framed pictures of Helen Twelvetrees, Ginger Hogers, Jean Harlow, and Gene Autrey. At the mention of these names the three girls came rushing out of the adjoining room and began discussing excitedly the merits of their favorite stars. Ginger was such a good dancer. Jean was beautiful and they hated she had to die. Gene Autrey was just about the best one in the movies. They'd like to see him every Saturday.
I looked with interest fit the animated expressions of the seven-and ten-year-old girls. They reminded me of young movie stars themselves with their black curly hair, their bright blue eyes, and their heart-shaped faces. Tabby stood by with an adenoidal expression that would stay with her even if the adenoids were removed.
The room in which we stood had only one bed. Two connecting rooms had one bed each. Buckets and pans dotted the floor of the room to the right.
"I've just got them ready in case it rains," Elsie explained. "The roof leaks so bad during a heavy rain it's like being out doors."
When we were seated again on the porch Elsie said, "Some folks are having a hard time on this hill. There's my sister-in-law Sarah Wall who's got six children all crowded in three rooms, I don't see how she does it. Her man don't make much more than mine neither," she finished as she rocked slowly back and forth in her chair.
A few minutes later as I was leaving I ventured to say "I hope you do find some way to send your children to school this year."
"Would you want to send a child of yours out on a bitter cold morning and him not having enough clothes to keep his body warm?" she asked me. "Children hate to look different from other children. A child's got a sight of feeling about such things."
"Yes, I know how you feel," I said, and turned to leave. I looked back and Sarah was rocking complacently on her porch. Her three pretty children and the adenoidal child eat in a row on the steps and watched me until I had passed below the hill.
