Durham, N.C.
November 18, 1938
L.R. (Leonard Report)
FRANK WALLACE, COUN'TERMAN
"1932 was one hell of a time to get out of school.
"I left all of a sudden one day the next spring. I just got a notion to go and I went. I didn't take anything but the clothes I wore and a couple dollars. I hitchhiked down through Birmingham and on to New Orleans and then back up the river. When I needed money I'd stop and work a couple weeks. I didn't have any trouble getting about. When I got back people wouldn't believe I'd been as many places as I had in that time.
"I've had so many jobs I can't say how many there were. I've never got into anything I liked so I've always eventually quit."
Frank Wallace works in a hamburger stand in Durham, one of the spic-and-span white affairs patterned after those so popular in the North. He's just started; he works the night shift from 7 p. m. to 8 a. m. seven nights a week. Most of this time he handles the stand alone. He sells hamburgers, coffee, hot chocolate, milk shakes, pies, pastry, cigarettes. Hamburgers are made by dipping out a pat from a large can of prepared raw meat and setting it to fry on the grill. The coffee is brewed visibly in glass. Hot chocolate is made by pouring a cup of hot water into a prepared mixture of chocolate, sugar, and powdered milk, stirring with a milkshaker, and adding a marshmallow. Pies, doughnuts, and cakes are ready-made.
After midnight there is only an occasional customer, so he cleans up. The floor is mopped; sugar, mustard, and salt containers are refilled, empty bottles crated, the grill scraped, utensils washed, fixtures polished. He is used to it; he has worked in many such places.
Frank Wallace was born and raised in Durham. He is of a large family, his father having had by two wives sixteen children, of whom fourteen are living. Frank was the first born to the second wife; but they have all been raised together and there is no difference in his feeling toward his half and full brothers and sisters. All the children except two sisters live in Durham. They both live in Philadelphia; one was working in the Victor-RCA record manufacturing department at Camden when she met and married a Philadelphia full- fashioned knitter who originally came from Burlington, thirty miles from Durham. Frank has other relatives who have migrated from North Carolina into New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and other parts of the North.
His father and mother were from the coastal region of North Carolina. For a number of years his father worked with the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad; then he came to Durham and opened a meat market. ("They tried to make a butcher out of me but it was no go.") Later he went into laundering, managed two Durham laundries, and, when the Duke Hospital was built, went there to take charge of the laundry.
Frank went to grammar school in Durham, was a Boy Scout, took a commercial course in high school, and graduated in 1932. He played football both in junior and senior high school. He loved the game; he was an end and his present rangy size indicates that he had the physical makeup for a good end.
After graduating and taking his hitchhiking trip he got a Job with an uncle at the Southeastern Express Company in Durham. From there he went to the Duke Hospital to work in the commissary department. It was a good job except it didn't pay much. From that he got transferred to the Duke student union. Here he was in the laundry department; he handled all the bundles from the womans' college division.
One morning -- why, he doesn't know -- he quit and went down the street and got a job with the United Dollar Store. There he sold shoes for a while and then got on at the employment office, where he worked for a. year and a half. Then he went back to the United Dollar Store -- it was in the winter -- and worked until Easter. He also worked a. while for Sears, Roebuck in their Durham store.
"From Easter to September I didn't have a job. On the first day of September -- this was 1936 -- I went to Washington to see my girl. She was staying there with her aunt. When I got there I thought I might as well see if I could get anything, so I went out the next morning and found a job that day in a place sort of like this one. We got married in two weeks."
His wife at that time was working as a waitress. She was born in the eastern part of North Carolina but her mother had died when she was ten and she had lived with aunts. Frank Wallace's mother and her favorite aunt had been girlhood friends so he had known her since they were kids.
He worked in the hamburger place three months, until it closed for the winter. From then until Christmas he worked in a large department store, wrapping packages.
After Christmas he got a job jerking sodas in a drugstore. "I stayed there until February and got fired -- and the man gave me one of the best recommendations I ever got."
Then followed a series of jobs in drugstores and eating places, including one across the Potomac in Virginia at a stand adjoining the airport, but the best place was the last, the one he quit to come back to Durham.
"It was the biggest in Washington, I guess the biggest anywhere. We had a concrete parking lot back of it half as far as from here to the railroad. You could eat in your car or come inside. It was in the best part of Washington and the highest people --diplomats, senators, the President's sons, used to stop there. I started off making milkshakes. I had twelve shakers and didn't do a thing but make shakes. They were fifteen cents and you couldn't drink them through a straw they were so thick; in each one I'd put three scoops of icecream.
"I got $17.50 and meals. Then I was relief manager of the car-hoppers. That paid $25.00 and meals. Altogether, there were one hundred and twenty-five waitresses and car-hoppers. We once served 5080 suppers in one evening.
"The car-hoppers didn't get any pay except their tips but that usually ran four or five dollars a day and sometimes eight or nine dollars a day on weekends. The waitresses worked the same way except later a law was passed and they got a dollar a day plus their tips. Most of those places run that way, -- no pay except tips. Fellows in those jobs change around all the time, especially in the chain joints. They're like the A and P stores, always shifting a man from one place to another. After a while a fellow gets changed to a place away from the part of town where he lives and he quits.
"I didn't make any tips. I just had to see that cars were served. Sometimes the boys under me would make more than I would, but mine was steady and sometimes they wouldn't be able to work or they'd have a bad week.
"I really had it soft before I left. I was timekeeper; it paid $30.00 a week, and I sat around most of the time.
"We had a wonderful setup about that time, too. This family had an apartment and rented us a bedroom with two windows looking out on the street, twin beds, a private bath with hot and cold water and a shower, and only five dollars a week. When we first took it it was right across the street from where I was working and my wife was working just a little ways down the street. That saved us carfare, too. When I got the job at the last place I had to catch a car across town, but it wasn't so bad.
"We were living there when we left. My brother had been up four times to get me to come back to Durham. He wanted me to work for him in the grocery business. And my wife had had to quit work on doctor's orders because she was too nervous. So I quit and we came back on the Greyhound bus. We hated to leave, it was such a nice setup.
"I worked two weeks with my brother and couldn't get along with his partner and had to quit."
Frank Wallace is confident of his ability to pick up jobs in eating places wherever he goes. Sometimes he wants to get hold of a car and trailer and start out to see the country. It won't take any money, he says. Six years ago he was able to pick up enough to keep himself fed, clothed, and going. Now with added experience and confidence he thinks he could do even better. And his wife is well and able to work; she is just starting again as a waitress in a place similar to the one in which he works, which employs girls. He has been in thirty-two states and wants to see the rest of the country while he and his wife are young enough to enjoy it.
"But I want to go back to Washington; it's just about the size town I like. New York is too big, Baltimore's too dirty. I don't want to stay here; the difference in pay between here and up North is too much. They say it's cheaper to live here than there but it's not much less, not enough to make up for the big difference in wages.
"What I want to do is be a radio engineer and that's what I intend to be. I have a good friend who used to be with the radio station here and now has a good job with a station in Washington. When he was here I used to hang out at the station all the time.
"I couldn't be a regular announcer because that takes a college education now, but I've got a good radio voice -- I've had auditions -- and I could hold down something like a police radio announcer job.
"They give a course at the National Radio Institute in Washington and as soon as I can get a little ahead we're going back and I'm going to enroll. They have night classes, and you can get a diploma. Then I can get a job in radio and get ahead."