WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION NC-459 of North Carolina
Elizabeth City, N. C. June 15, 1939
Mr. W. T. Couch, Regional Director
Federal Writers' Project
Chapel Hill, N. C.
My dear Mr. Couch:
I am inclosing herewith a personal life history of a Negro squatter. It has been necessary to write and rewrite this piece because I have tried to make a faithful rendition of this Negro's dialect; a dialect common to this region. The dialect of our Negroes is not the dialect of the South Carolina Negro, the Mississippi Delta Negro, or the Octavus Roy Cohen and minstrel stage dialect. My pride in this piece is in the consciousness of having tried to be faithful to my subject.
Ever sincerely yours,
<text not clear>
W. O. Saunders,
Special Research Worker
cc Mr. Bjorkman
Mr. Andrews
WOS/lw
PERSONAL LIFE HISTORIES
Subjects: Tom Burnett, Negro, and his wife Julia.
Address: Persse St. at S. & C.R.R. Crossing, Elizabeth City, N. C.
Vocation: Scavenger.
Writer: W.O. Saunders
First Written: June 15, 1939.
REAL NAMES	CHANGE OF NAMES
Elizabeth City	Oak City
Persse Street	Plum Tree Road
Suffolk & Carolina R.R.	Virginia & Carolina R. R.
Tom Burnett	Ned Spellman
His wife, Julia	Judy
Mr. Fitghugh Garrett	Mr. Grant
Granville County	Pitt County
Mr. Garland Dunstan	Mr. Gordon
I noted the little house on a clearing on a city dump on the outskirts of Oak City, on plum Tree Road where the tracks of the Virginia Carolina R. R. cross that little used readway in a neglected Negro neighborhood.
City street carts have dumped their loads of trash there until one observes a pile of paper cartons housetop high. Against this hill of rubbish Ned Spellman has built himself a tiny two room cottage of odds and ends of boards, packing cases, discarded doors and window shutters, and sheets of tin. It was roofed with metal roofing that had seen better days. There lived he and his wife Judy. Across the road I observed the discarded body of what had once been a school bus, now converted and into a cabin which showed evidences of occupancy.
A crudely constructed wire fence surrounded three sides of the tiny clearing on which the two story cottage stood. The fence was within three feet of the rail road cracks. The cottage itself was plainly on the railroad's a right of way.
A crudely constructed wire fence, secured by quite substantial and solidly set posts, inclosed the place on three sides. The place seemed deserted, but I opened the front gate, which had been improvised from the foot of a metal bed, and entered the yard. There was a pad lock on the front door. went around the north side of the cabin and observed a porthole like window that seemed to have been made from a discarded toilet seat.
Back of the shanty I found a tiny garden in which corn, cabbage, beans and tomatoes were growing. There was a riot of rose bushes of the rambler variety along the fence beside the rail road tracks, and under these bushes, protected from the sun, were boxes of cabbage, tomato and pepper plants. Outside the fence, close by the rail road tracks a row of cabbages had been planted. There wasn't room between fence and tracks for more than one row.
In the backyard, just behind the shanty, I found a crude shelter, covered with rusty sheets of metal roofing. A rough board table had been built into this shelter and there was a rude bench alongside the table. At one end of the shelter was a rusty sheet. iron range, sans legs and oven door. It reposed on its side and I found the oven itself had been converted into a fire box by the installation of a makeshift grate and a flue composed of two rusty joints of stove pipe.
On the table was a dishpan piled with odds and ends of nondescript dishes and cooking utensils. Nowhere around the place could I find a pump, a well or a privy. I resolved to come back in the evening when perhaps the owner or owners would be at home.
I came that same evening just after sunset. The shanty door was open and a cloud of smoke arose from rags burned in a pail in the dooryard, a common device of colored folk employed to combat the mosquito nuisance.
As I drove up to the place I thought I saw a dark figure arise and scuttle around an end of the shanty. I entered the yard, went up to the shanty, knocked at the door. A smoky oil lamp burned in a corner of the room that served as a bedroom. There was no one in. I called and got no answer. Going around the house I found a smallish black woman clearing up the table on which a meal obviously had been eaten. I noted the glow of embers in the oven firebox of the funny stove I had inspected by day-light.
"Is Ned at home?" I asked the woman.
"Aint'e in the house?" she countered.
I assured her he wasn't in the house.
"Den it's a question whar'e at," she said, enigmatically. About that time, my eyes having become accustomed to the gloom, I observed a bundle stretched on the bench by the cook table.
I went over and touched it and it was Ned. He sat upright with a start, rubbed his eyes, said nothing.
I introduced myself, explained my mission. Old Ned came to life with some alacrity, led the way around his shanty to its front porch. (I had forgotten to mention that it had a miniature porch with a rusty sheet metal roof.) He motioned me to a seat on a home-made bench. I learned later that when Ned saw me drive up in front of his domicile he had fled around the house and stretched himself out on the bench in the shadow of the cook shelter table, fearing that I was "the Law".
"Yas suh, I owns this place; been right heah ten year <text not clear> cap'n two year I wuz at Cape Charles. Built this house three year ago. Built dat t'other house across the road thar fuh my boy. He live thar.
"Fust house I built heah was a two story house. But me on de ole 'oman, want away en' when we cums back dar want nothin left but de four sills. Dey jes toted it off on burned it up, an sv'ything in it."
"Who did it?" I asked.
"My chillun," he grunted.
"Den I sot to an built dis house. Come, it tuk me uh long time tuh git all my buildin' materials together. I deals in junk. See <text not clear> two wheel barrows? I made 'em <text not clear>uhself Co all over town pickin' up ole ahn, ole bones, ole rags an sich an sellin' 'on tuh Mistah Jinnins He doan buy no lumbah, but I o'n use dat suhself. 'E used tuh buy paper, but <text not clear> car aint nothin' in it no mo, an I kaint sell paper no mo. Used tuh make a lot o' money when 'e bought paper.
"Who did I buy this land fun? I bought it fun Mistah Cordon. Mistah Cordon sho did me a good turn when I bought it. 'E tols me, 'Now Hed youse buyin' land side uh rail road en yo wants to make suhtin yo doan trispass uh inch on dar right o' way, uh dey'll sue yo an take all yo lan' away fun yo.' I was obleeged to Mistah Cordon fo dat. I went right to Mistah Grant, de rail road agent, an tole him tuh come out hyer an lay off whut he claim was his. 'E say da's all right, ole man, yo jes cum right up to de tracks of yo want tuh an yo wont be botherin' us. We need sumbody out dar tuh look atter our property anyhow. Mistah Grant's uh fine man, sho.
"How much does I make a day?
"Well suh, I kaint say zackly.
"So much as a dollar a day?"
"Hardly dat much."
"Huh," snorted his wife Judy who had just come around the house and <text not clear> herself near the bucket of smoldering rags. "'E duz well of 'e meks fifteen cont. Dar's days w'en 'e doan bring nothin' home cep'n a passel o' beef bones dey gi's him down at de market house. But I wuhks; whuks ev'y day de Lawd men's. <text not clear> I didn't wuhk no tellin whut'd oun uh us.
"Whut duz I do? I washes, I ahns, I cooks, I scrubs, I goes in de field on picks peas, grabs taters, scrub, I goes in do field on picks peas, grabe tetors, picks cotton in de fall. I maks good money too, <text not clear> times; I' se made more'n six dollars a week grabbin' taters on <text not clear> dat pickin cotton fo my back gi'n out. Now jes supposin' I didn' wuhk! We'd starve tuhdeath. 'E always. talkin' erbout de money's make; 'e goes off sum times on stays ez much ez seven months an doan sen' me uh eint; cums sneakin' back home hongry ez uh houn dawg.
"Look at him now; jes look at him! Yo knows a roostah oughta be better'n uh hen. 'E's de roostah, en I'se de hen, but I'se better'n 'e is any day in de week. I wuz better'n he wuz when he <text not clear> me; dat's how <text not clear> he nahied me. Now look at 'in -- all stove up wi'rheumatiz; I'se got rheumatiz too, but 'at doan stop no fun goin'." Whereupon the little old woman jumped up and fluttered about the yard, hopping, skipping, jumping and waving her crows.
"She lak torun on lak dat," said Ned, with a show of tolerance. "Wiamen jes natchally got to run down day min folks. I'se made good money in my day. I wuz one uh de best terbacker curers in Pitt County. Made fifty dollahs ev'y week in de season. I cud do anything had tuh be dun aroun' uh farm."
"Da's why 'e cun tuh town," interposed Judy; "Skeered sumbody'd fin' uh li'l wuhk fuh 'in of 'e stayed on de lan'."
"Yes suh," said Ned, paying no mind to his querulous spouse; "I'se made good money. I wuz bawn in Pitt County, big terbacker county it wuz My pappy wuz uh blacksmith en uh carpenter; wanted tuh bring me up in iz bisness; but I didn' like shop work. 'R <text not clear> me out tuh Mistah Mebanc when I wuz 'bout twelve yeah old. Mistah Mebane gi' me a dollah a month on muh keep, on gi' me two shirts, two suits uh ovahalls on uh pair uh brogan shoes in do run o' a yeah. Fust yeah I wuhked fo Mistah Mebane I e'in muh pappy ten dollahs when settlin' time cum.
"Doan zackly remembah how long I wuhked fo Mistah Mebane; mebbe eight yeah, mebbe ten yeah. I mahied Judy dar fifty yeah ago; dat wuz eighteen eighty nine. How cum I lef' Mistah Mebane, dey wuz uh rich dcctah 'roun' dar who bought uh lot uh lan' in Nash County, tuh grow terbacker. I hahd out tuh 'im on went up to Nash. But 'e wuz uh hard boss man en did'n pay but ten dollsh uh month. I reckoned I'd better scatter. Heard South Ca'lina wuz uh great terbacker country. Went down dar on bless de Lawd dey did'n grow no terbacker. But I got uh job wi' de Maccanaw Lumber Co. Dey wuhked Eyetalians, Indians en niggers. Fust time Ievah saw uh Indian. Fust night we got dar, dey turned us ovah tuh uh dark man dey said wud put us up fo de night. I looked at de man en he was too dark fo uh Eyetalian, en his hair too straight to a cullud man. En den I suspicioned 'e wuz uh Indian. W'en suppah time cum en I tasted dey bread wi' no salt in it, I knowed 'e wuz uh Indian.
"After suppah I felt oneasy 'cause I did'n know how tuh make convusashun wi' uh Indian. After uh while I spoke up en said, 'Whut shall we make convusashun erbout, history, joggerfy er de bible?' En tuh my su'prise dey all said de bible. Dat suited me zackly, cause I knowed my bible. Dat's one thing Miz Mebane learnt me when I wuhked fo Mistah Mebane. She learnt me to read fun a blue back speller, read de bible ev'y night, en had Sunday School fo us ev'y Sunday. But she did'n want me tuh eat no hawg meat, en did'n want me tuh eat watah millon. Nevah could undahstan' dat; let me eat mutton en beef, en chicken, but no hawg meat.
"Got erlong fine wi' dem Indians down in South Ca'lina; pres'ny dey wuz talkin' to me lak as ef I wuz one uv 'em. Ast me all erbout Richmon', Raleigh, en Newbuhn. Wanted to know of Raleigh wuz on uh river. I tole 'em no, but Richmon' en Newbuhn wuz. Dey say dey wuz goin' to 'tack them towns en tek back de lan' de white folks hed stole fun 'em. Said dey wuz sorry Raleigh won't on uh river, cause dey'd ha' to travel by watah. Said dey wuz goin' tuh kill all de white folks, but dat dey wuz goin' tuh be good to de cullud folks.
"I did'n tell 'on de white folks wuz too many fo 'em en hed too many guns. No suh, I did'n argy wi' 'em, cause Indians is tricky folks; got mo' sense den eny nigger; knows jes how tuh go out intuh do woods on git roots dat'll pizen yo tuh death.
"I wuhked fo de Maccanaw Lumber Co. seven yeah. <text not clear> den dey cum uh time w'en dey had tuh shet down cause uh de Rockyfeller panic. Boss man sez ev'y saw mill in de country dun shet down. Tole me I bettch go back tuh Nawth Ca'lina.
"Me en Judy did'n lose no time gittin' out uh dar. Cum up fur ez Wilmunton. Saw mills shet down dar too. Dey was movin' garden truck uhroun' chad- bun; went ovah dar. Judy got uh job right uh way, cuttin' truck; white man say 'e couldn' use me. Atter uh while 'e Say, 'hez yo got uh knife?'
"I says 'yas suh', en I tuk out muh pocket knife on showed it tuh him. 'E sez, 'well, yo see of yo o'n git a truck en I'll let yo cut behin' us en sell anything yo o'n sell in town. But, mind yo, doan let me ketch yo cuttin' uh head uh eny uh muh hands; yo iz welcome on'y tuh do sorap stuff.
"Twarnt long fo de truck season ended on I had tuh lock fo uh nudder job. Got uh job in uh shingle mill; but de noise uh <text not clear> shingle outtin' saws made my head ache. I sez tuh do boss man, 'kaint yo gi' me uh nudder job?' 'E sez, we needs men in de woods cuttin' cross ties; pay yo ten cints apiece fo ev'y one yo cut, but if yo go in de woods yo kaint cum out but wunst uh week. I sez I doan ain' dat.
"I wuhked in de woods <text not clear> wintah time cum on en it got so WET I could'n wuhk; rain, rain, rain. Laid no up wi' rheumatiz, en I wuz bad off ontil uh dootah in Wilmunton tole me tuh drink watah out'n uh pine bucket dat tuhpentine hed bin in. I done whut 'e tole me en muh rhcumatiz won' away sho nuff. Cum back agin uh yeah or so later en I'se tried ev'ything en it's still wi' me.
"Cum back tub Pitt County en tuck odd jobs ontil dey started curin' terbacker dat <text not clear>. Made good money den. Well, I'se scattered uh lot in muh time, but I'se hed uh lot o' fun. White folks al-ways bin good tuh me.
"Seems lak my chillun hez gin me do mos' trubble. Tek dat boy det live in dat little house I bilt fo him over dar: 'o alway in trubble.
"Tried tuh raise me sum chickens wunst. Hed uh hunnard fryers on <text not clear> on, en presn'ly I gun to miss um ten at uh time. Saw de law uhbout it en Mistah Winslow, de police cun out hyah. 'E looked uhroun' but say 'e kaint do nothin'. Tole me tuh git uh gun en lay fo de thief wbut was stealin' suh chicken. I watched all nite dat nite on all nex' day ontil mos' sundown, w'en I seed uh boy go tuh suh chicken yard, unfast'n de gate en scatter sum cawn. Den'e scatter uh lii cawn clean <text not clear> de road on uhroun' he house all de way tuh 'e own hen house. Presn'ly my chickens wuz peckin' dar way to his henhouse. Ez soon as ten uv 'en went in dar'e crep' up en closed de do on 'em. By dat time I wuz out uh my hidin' place an rite on is. I tole 'in I oughta kill 'in, but I was goin' tuh tok him down to de police en turn 'im ovah to de law.
"E say, Mistah Spellman, doan tek me tuh jail, cause I warnt stealin' yo chickens; I wuz jes doin' whut yo son tole me tuh do; X wuz ketchin' 'em fo 'im'. Well suh, w'en dat boy cum home dat nite, fust thing I ast him wuz why did 'e ateal muh chickens? 'E lookt at me queer like en saw I knowed ev'ything en he lit right cuta de window en did'n show his self uhroun' me fuh uh week. I told off de <text not clear> uh den chickens. Taint no use fo uh cullud man tuh try tuh ha' chickens; deys too meny niggers likes chicken."
I asked Hed where he got his drinking water.
"I'se got uh good well," he replied. He led me around his house and lifted a square sheet from box from the ground. Underneath the box was a hole in the ground probably 16 inches in diameter, and which I was told was twelve fest deep. From this hole in the ground water for drinking and household purposes was drawn with a small metal pail fastened to a string.
I asked Ned about his toilet facilities.
"Aint got no privy; doan need one; me en Judy's uh way fun home all day enyhow; doan need uh back house. W.P.A offer tuh bild me one ef I'd pay fo'- teen dollah eighty cint fuh de lumbah en coment. I tole <text not clear> nevah min.'. Doan need no privy."
"Are you getting an old age pension?" I asked. Ned laughed softly and said: "No suh; I signed up fo it; signed up twice; but aint heared no mo' fum it. Reckon dey's waitin' ontil I'se a hunnard yeah ole; 'twon't do me no good den."
I turned to Judy and quizzed her about the family diet.
"We mos'n ginrally gits plenty suppin t'eat. I wuhks fo Miz Roper en gits two meals uh day at huh house. Sum times she gi's me uh pile uh lef' ovahs tuh fetch home.
"Doan cook but one meal uh day at home. Cooks enuff fo all o' us on sum lef' ovah fo de ole man ef 'e gits hongry nex' mawnin'." "All o' us," I learned, consisted of Ned, Judy, a 12 year old grandchild who lived with then, and the one boy who lived in the cabin across the road. Judy in- formed me that she had raised leven head o' chillun,' and that all were now on their own except the one boy who "wuz still hangin' uhroun'."
I asked for particulars about the kind of meals she prepared.
"Doan do no bakin', en mighty little fryin'. Mos'ly we hez biled dinners, wi' cawn meal dumplin's biled in de pot. De ole man, he knows all de butchahs down town en wunst uh twice uh week dey gi' 'in uh mess uh bones. I puts 'em on tuh bile wi' ahsh taters, onions, cabbage en termatoes ef I hez 'em. Meks uh fine stew, season wi' salt en Sun time we hez fish, cooked de same way. We mos'n time ha' plenty taters; dey grow taters all uhroun' hyah en all yo got tuh do tuh git all de taters yo want is jes go in de field en git all de culls lef on de groun' atter dey's dun diggin'.
"We lays by mos' nuff taters in summah tuh las' us thu de wintah."
"I duz mos' uh my cookin' out do's, cep'n w'en de weather's bad uh too cold tuh cook outside. Got uh heatah in de house w'en de weather's bad."
I have done some checking up on Ned and his wife Judy. At police headquarters I learn that they are a law abiding couple and industrious in their way, making few demands upon charity. The boy who remains at hone has a police record. But Ned is not on the tax books. There is no record of his ownership of land. The realtor, Mr. Gordon, from whom he claims to have bought his piece of ground says he has never sold him so much as a foot of land. At the rail road offices they had never heard of him and were surprised when told that he was squatting on their right of way. I told then I hoped they would not molest him after all these years of his industrious occupancy. I felt like kicking myself for having pursued my study of old Ned to this point. If the rail road company tries to dislodge him as a result of my inquiries I shall go to their general offices and plead for him on bended knees, if necessary.