Original Names Changed Names
Gastonia Dolphin
Nolan Boyle
Hickory Kamer
Neal Hawkins Ben Tunner
Faysoux Bisoux
Miami Orange Park
Atlanta Stomata
Augusta Littleport
Spencer Atkins Mortimer
John A. Davis Colman Thomas
Spencer Mortimer
Charlotte Calote
Washington Jefferson
Virginia Claudia
Date of first writing: March 5, 1939
Name of person: Hubert W. Johnson
Address: 141 W. Main St.
Place: Gastonia, N.C.
Occupation: Photographer
Name of writer: John H. Abner
Reviser: Edwin Massengill
Number of words: About 3000
THE PHOTOGRAPHER
"I was born August 28, 1905. My father was a horse trader, and he also ran a small cafe. From my earliest recollection my mother was an invalid but a kind and gentle woman. She died when I was seven years old.
"That was a great blow to both my father and myself. As for me, I felt lost, friendless, in a hostile world, and I know now that my father must have felt much the same. His work kept him away from home a great deal, and soon after my mother's death he brought me to live with my grandmother.
"My uncle and grandmother treated me kindly, but they could not replace my mother. But time heals sorrow, especially in the young, and I soon forgot my grief. I wandered out into the field one day, and my uncle gave me a small bucket and told me to fill it with guano from a sack at the end of the row. I did this and continued until he had finished his job. Then we washed up and drove into town. Here my uncle bought me a pair of coveralls which he said were in payment for my work. I was very proud of them, and then and there I resolved to be a farmer so I could set out plants and wear coveralls.
"I never did like school. Ever since I can remember I wanted a job; I wanted to earn my own way, and when we moved to Dolphin I soon found a paper route. I worked that for two years, then I quit school and went to work for Boyle's Newsstand. I liked that job. I waited on customers; handed papers and magazines to them as they sat in their cars. I got to know a lot of people here, and I even knew what papers and magazines they commonly bought.
"I worked for Mr. Boyle about two years, then I got a job selling soft drinks in a tent show. When the show closed that fall the man opened a grocery store and gave me a job in that. I worked on that job for about six months, and then I went back to the newsstand.
"One day I took a sudden notion to go to Kamer. I had the newsstand's post office drawer keys in my pocket, but I never thought a thing about then until I had arrived there. I spent two weeks, then came back. I went around to the newsstand and gave Mr. Boyle his keys, but he did not ask me to return to work.
"I took a job with Ben Tunner, collecting old accounts. I was paid ten or twenty per cent commission, according to how old and doubtful the account was. I worked on that job quite a time, then I decided to join the Navy. I stood the examination and was ready to be sworn in, but I backed out. I was in love with a girl here and could not leave her.
"In the spring of 1922 there was to be a prize fight. The match was to be held in Bisoux' tent. I put up the tent and had a gang of boys to help me. I was taking the boys home in the truck and had just dropped one boy at his house. Then as I was crossing the railroad tracks the train hit the truck and injured me very seriously, and I had to stay in the hospital nine months. The railroad company was at fault, and they compromised for several thousand dollars. The court appointed a guardian for me.
"For a long time I was unable to work. Bisoux was jobbing cleaning implements at that time: brooms, mops, brushes, soaps, powders, and such, and I hung around his place a lot. One day he suggested that I try my hand at selling. I tried it out and got along all right, so I worked on that job until he closed up.
"Along about 1926 a bunch of boys decided to take a trip South in an old car. They invited me to go along with them, and I accepted. We planned to camp out along the highway and to cook our own meals, so I bought a coffeepot and frying pan. We only used them once, as we found there was no cook in the outfit.
"When we got part of the way I found that I was about broke, so I wired my guardian to send me $50. He did, but the telegraph company demanded a personal identification from someone they knew. None of the crowd knew anybody, and it began to seem like I would have to leave the money in the telegraph office. I was wearing a tailor-made suit, and it had initials sewed on a pocket. So the telegraph company finally decided that I was the right party and gave me the money.
"We rolled into Orange Park about midnight, and never in my life have I seen so many people on the streets at that hour. I learned later that the town was full and overflowing. There were not enough beds in town to take care of all the people, so a part of them had to sleep during the day. A man offered us a room for $5, and we were going to take it until we found that he meant $5 each. We slept in a park.
"In the morning we bought a paper and read the want ads. I answered one and was offered a job at $25 per week wrapping bread. Everything was so costly that I did not think I could live on that, so I did not take it. Instead, I made up my mind to return home, so I wired my guardian for $25.
"I was sitting in a little park, waiting on my money when a fellow came along and offered to play a game of checkers. We played a few games and got acquainted. He told me that he lived in the North and that he was leaving for home that night. I offered to help buy the gas if he would let me ride to Stomata. He said that I might ride without buying any gas. He told me about what time we would leave and where to meet him. I went over to the telegraph office and got my money, then I told the other boys good-bye. My friend invited me to continue with him and pay him a visit, but I left him in Stomata.
"I had had such good luck that I decided to hitchhike on home. I caught a ride with a farmer who was going in the wrong direction, but neither of us knew it. He did not know in what direction my home was, so he carried me almost to Littleport. When I left him I was so near Littleport that I continued on there, thence on home.
“After resting for a few days I got a job in a print shop, running a press. I worked at that job for about one year, then I got mad and quit. It was not much of a job-- just feeding blank sheets of paper to a hand press.
“When I left I took a job with the Mortimer Book Company. I worked in the printing office for about six months, then I was promoted to the front office as a salesman.
“Colman Thomas was my buddy. We had grown up together, and all the time I was in the hospital he had visited me regularly. Late one Sunday we were hanging around the railroad station, and Colman dared me to go to Stomata with him that night. We neither had any business there, but I would not take the dare. We both bought tickets and left on the next train. I wired Mr. Mortimer the next morning, and Colman wired his brother-in-law for whom he worked. We spent Monday in Stomata and came back home Tuesday. Mr. Mortimer was sore, and he laid me off for the balance of that week. I just took that as a vacation, so I made a visit. The next Monday I was back on my job.
"Soon after that, Colman, another fellow, and myself went up to Calote one Sunday. That night Colman was driving, and we were on a boulevard which had not yet been finished. He was speeding, and he ran into a barricade. The car turned over three times, and the other fellow and myself were thrown clear of the car. Colman stayed under the wheel, and I learned later, for I was knocked unconscious and knew nothing then, that one car picked me up and rushed me to a hospital, while Colman and the other fellow were picked up by another car.
“The people in the car that picked me up didn't know the town very well. I returned to consciousness while they were driving around looking for the hospital and was able to direct them to it.
"Colman died on the operating table. The other fellow was not seriously hurt, but I had a bruised kidney. I stayed in the hospital five weeks, then I came out too soon and had to go back. After several weeks in the hospital, I was able to return home. I filed suit against the contractor, as the barricade had no lights on it; I also filed suit against the insurance company. I lost the suit against the contractor, but the insurance company compromised. As soon as I was able I went back to work for the print shop.
"My friend had a brother in Jefferson, and we went around to his boarding house. We got room and board there and spent our last quarter to go to the show. The next day the two brothers quarreled and we went on to Baltimore. But I did not like to be rambling around broke, so I returned to Jefferson and put in a check for collection. I had to wait until the bank in Jefferson heard from the bank at home.
"While waiting I got acquainted with a girl, Claudia, who lived nearby. I talked to her every afternoon. I told her that I had no money, but I made a date to take her out as soon as the check came in. The check came on Saturday, and Sunday I was out with the boys. We had a few drinks, and another young fellow joined us. He was a cop, but, as he was not in uniform, I did not know that.
“As we strode along the street a touring car drove ahead of us and stopped. My girl was in it with another girl. She invited me to ride, and the cop came along, too. The two brothers did not join us. Claudia and I sat in the back seat, and the cop rode in front with the other girl. The cop was driving and he drove out of the city. I noticed him trying to adjust the mirror several times, and later I learned that Claudia had been his girl but I had cut him out. However, he took it like a good sport. He got another girl, and we were always good friends.
"On Monday I found a job in a stationery store and went to work that same day. I stayed there about six months and made friends with another fellow there in town. He worked for a finance Company. I don't know just what you would call him-- a puller I suppose, for he pulled cars for the finance Company if the payments were not made on time. They furnished him a car and kept it up, as he often had to chase delinquents.
“I rode around with him on Sundays, and one Sunday we drove over into Virginia. We came to a big, fine house, and he turned into the driveway. I was surprised, for I did not think he had any business there. I was more surprised when I found that he lived there. He had been a little wild and his father had made him leave home.
"Well, I finally got homesick, so I came back. I once more went to work at the print shop. I worked there for sometime, and then the manager pulled out from the shop, bought an outfit, and opened a photographic studio. He wanted me to work with him, so I left the print shop and went to work in the studio. We neither knew much about photography, but we got along and learned.
"One day I met a fellow who was selling seed. He offered me the same price I was getting in the studio, plus expenses, to travel and sell seed. I accepted his offer but soon found that I did not like to travel as well as I had thought I would. I quit that job and returned home. I went back to the studio to work, but my friend was not making much money. He soon closed the studio and moved his outfit to another town. He wanted me to go with him, but I did not want to leave.
“He found business very dull, so he stored his outfit and came back home. He returned to the print shop to work for his father. He had lost interest in photography, but I was just beginning to get interested. I offered him a reasonable sum for a half interest in his outfit, and he snapped it up. We moved the outfit back here and opened a studio. For five years we were partners.
"In 1936 I bought him out and I have been running the studio by myself ever since. I like the work. The camera is a most interesting instrument. It cannot lie; it must film what it sees, no more, no less."
