SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
Title: ROBERT JOSEPH GANTT
Date of first writing-  February 15, 1939.
Name of person interviewed- Robert Joseph Gantt.
Fictitious name None.
Address Spartanburg, S.C.
Occupation- Attorney.
Name of writer  D. A. Russell.
Name of reviser-
"I'm not making a lot of money, but I live well, huh; Financially, I don't guess I would be called a successful lawyer, but I've never been hungry, and my home is my own, huh? I owe a little money, but it's not pressing. I don't have to worry like acme people I know, huh?"
Robert Joseph Gantt, who, in point of service, is the third oldest member of the Spartanburg bar, is a typical country lawyer. There is no "put on" about Bob Gantt. He's just "the Judge" to all of his acquaintances in Spartanburg, and has received the title during all the years since he served as a city magistrate in Spartanburg. He's "plain as an old shoe," if you please, and he knows it, and, furthermore, likes it!
No, he doesn't make so much money, to be true, but he doesn't worry. On some days he makes as much as $50.00--"when business is good"--and most of the tine he is satisfied if he picks up a case that will net him $5.00 or $10.00 for his services. During the present hard times, he will average $30.00 a week, sometimes more, most often less. The estimate is his own. There are days, however, when no money is forthcoming, and clients are scarce. He makes a persistent effort to secure all of his legal fee from his client in advance, but failing in this, he will ask for at least half of it as a "down payment." If he fails in that effort, then he will consent to wait until his client has a pay day--that is, if he is convinced that his client has a habit of receiving weekly or monthly pay envelopes!
Judge Gantt was born at Elbert on, Georgia, on May 15, 1872, the son of T. Larry Gantt, a country newspaper editor, and founder of the Oglethorpe Echo at Lexington, Georgia. His father was once a power in Georgia politics, and after he came to Spartanburg in 1691 to establish the Piedmont Headlight, he became a staunch supporter of Ben Tillman, and remained so until his death in 1933. For years his influence was felt in politics in the Palmetto State.
Practically all of Judge Gantt's boyhood was spent in Georgia. The family moved to Athena, Ga., when Larry Gantt purchased the Athena Banner and the Southern Watchman, combining the two papers under the name of the Banner-Watchman. Judge Gantt had attended and graduated from the University of Georgia, and he came with his father to Spartanburg when the latter began publication of the Piedmont Headlight. Shortly after coming to Spartanburg, however, young Gantt, through the friendship of his father with Hoke Smith, of Georgia, then Secretary of the Interior Department in Grover Cleveland's cabinet, received an appointment to the Interior Department at Washington. Gantt found that his closest friend in the Interior Department was Josephus Daniels, of Raleigh, N.C., afterwards editor of the Raleigh News & Observer, and later Secretary of the Navy in the cabinet of Woodrow Wilson, war-time President. Mr. Daniels was at that time chief clerk of the Interior Department. Judge Gantt says that his friendship with Daniels has lasted through the years, and he takes every opportunity he has to see his former "boss," 'as he refers to Daniels.
Judge Gantt remained in the Interior Department until the election of President McKinley, and then he was offered, and accepted, the position of private secretary to Senator J.L.M, Irby, of South Caroline, During the at Georgoetown University, and upon his graduation was nineteenth in a class of over two hundred students. When he had attended the University of Georgia, he had hopes of becoming a civil engineer after graduation, and had received a degree in engineering.
"I sometimes wonder," he says today, "if it wouldn't have been better for me to have become a civil engineer rather than to practice law? But it's too late to change now-if I wanted to."
After his graduation in law at Georgetown University, Judge Gantt returned to Spartanburg to hang out his shingle in 1896, and for forty- six years he has been a resident of the "Hub City." He says that although he is a Georgian by birth, he is a Carolinian by adoption. He has no relatives in Georgia at the present time, but has several in South Carolina.
Judge Gantt believes that he is the only living person in Spartanburg, and perhaps elsewhere, who, as a youth, saw and talked to Jefferson Davis, who later became President of the Confederacy, and Alexander Stephens, who became Vice President of the Confederacy. He was eleven years of age when these two Southern leaders visited with his father in their Georgia home. Thomas Wilding Gantt, of Lowndesville, S.C., who was the grandfather of Judge Gantt, was a Major in the brigade of General Robert Toombs, of Georgia, during the War Between the States.
Judge Gantt was married to Dr. L. Rosa Hirschman, of Charleston, and this union lasted for almost twenty years until the death of Dr. Gantt about three years ago. Mrs. Gantt was a remarkable woman, especially in view of the fact that women doctors were not looked upon so favorably in a town the size of Spartanburg. Nevertheless, she won national recognition in her practice, specializing in the eye, ear, nose and throat. At one time she was chairman of this branch of the American Medical Association. Her personal charm and her ability won for her leadership in women's club activities in Spartanburg. Since the death of Mrs. Gantt, Judge Gantt has called himself the "chief cook and bottle washer."
To say the least, Judge Gantt is a unique character, and while his dress and mannerisms may not appeal to the masses, his ability as a lawyer is respected by all members of the bar. Without knowing, one would never suspect Judge Gantt, on first acquaintance, to be a lawyer. He is far from immaculate in his dress; and his hat, like his suit, shows unmistakable signs of having survived many winters. He goes to and from his office to his home, located in the mountains near Tryon, N.C., in an automobile he purchased second-handed in 1925. He insists to friends who have tried to prevail upon him to buy another car, that he does not need one, despite the fact that it requires about an hour and a half for him to travel the twenty-five miles from his office to his home.
"I just tell them I don't need another oar, huh?," he told the writer. "This one serves my needs. It gets me back and forth, and that's all I want it for, huh?" Judge Gantt confided to the writer that he could purchase another oar if it was absolutely necessary, but "there's lets more years in this car yet, huh?"
To reach Judge Gantt's office you go up a flight of stairs that give withbevery step taken, enter a dark hallway, and turn to the first door on the right. His office is not of the type you would expect to find being used by a man of his acknowledged ability. Seven cabinets of law books, many of them of much value, almost crowd him out of the window into West Main Street. You can see that the ceiling was once covered with yellow paper, and that the walls were at one time calcimined in green, long Ago faded. He uses an old walnut desk that he says is over sixty years old, and it is scattered over with papers. Nothing is arranged. It is a picture of a country editor's desk. The dust has settled on most of the papers thereupon. Hanging immediately over his desk is a framed picture of Senator Irby, wearing a campaign hat. Nearby, a frame holds the diploma Judge Gantt received at the University of Georgia in the nineties, but it is necessary for you to part the dust with your fingers before being able to read it. Apparently, there is no janitor service in the building he occupies, or at least, not for his single room.
In a corner of the room is a small sink which is badly in need of washing. Above the sink is nailed a ten-cent mirror. A soiled towel hangs from a nail nearby. On a shelf to the left of the wash basin are two glasses, a box of soda, and a large bottle of kidney pills. There is a coal bin in the room, and a drum of kerosene. The room is heated by a small laundry heater. A small pan of water is on top of the heater, and the room is kept uncomfortably got, even though it is cold outside. There is a trash can beside his desk that is forever empty, since the uncarpeted floor is used for unwanted papers. Occasionally he sweeps out his office, but only when he feels that he has to in order to clear a path for his own entrance. There are three chairs, one of them being an old-fashioned rocker more than forty years old which he says he made himself.
If you ask him the age of the old law books on the shelves, he will tell you that many of them are over a hundred years old. Then, he will get up from his rocker, go to a cabinet and hand you a book that is covered with dust, titled, "The Symboleography-Newly Corrected and Amended and Verie Much Enlarged in All Four Severall Treaties. Printed for the Companie of Stationers-1618. Cum Privilegio." Judge Gantt tells you that he could, if need be, sell this particular book for quite a sun, but that he will not do so "unless the wolf comes to the door, huh?"
In sharp contrast to the shabby appearance of his office, is his home, nestled in the Carolina mountains near Tryon, which is a picture of contentment and peacefulness. From the main highway, just beyond Tryon, you turn to the left and continue up a winding dirt road for about a mile until you reach "Liberty Hall," which Judge Gantt calls his home place. The two-story frame structure is situated on a hill right in the heart of the mountains, and the picture from the flower garden looking towards the mountains, is one for an artist to paint. Many years ago Judge and Mrs. Gantt built this home in the mountains.
The front door of "Liberty Hall" opens into a spacious living room where, during the winter month a, a log fire is burning. All modem conveniences are available, even to a hot air furnance in the basement, which Judge Gantt has not fired up since his wife's death. There is no telephone, but, as Judge Gantt says, "I don't want one here, for when I get home I want to forget the court room and my clients, huh?"
To the left of the living room is the dining room, and to its right, the kitchen, which has a frigidaire. His water is supplied from a well that he helped to dig himself, and the water is always cool.
French doors in the living room open into Judge Gantt's library, where he has A large number of valuable books and personal papers of his father. He has a first edition of poems by Robert Burns, which is valuable to any collector, and other books that would bring him hundreds of dollars were they placed on sale. He how some of the original manuscripts of Henry W. Grady, the crusading Georgia editor of a generation ego, who was favorite of both Judge Gantt and his father when they resided in Georgia, and whom the Judge knew as a young men while at the University of Georgia. He will sit end reminisce for hours on Grady, Robert Toombs, Alexander Stephens, Jefferson Davis, Thomas Wetson, Eli Whitney, Ben Tillman, and many others who made history in the years past.
The upstairs has four bed rooms and two bath rooms and three large closets. There is one room that no one but himself is permitted to enter. It is the bed room used by Era. Gantt. Everything is just as she left it. Judge Gantt stopped the clock on her mantel at the very minute end hour of her death.
Each day, after Judge Gantt leaves for his office in Spartanburg, the house is a leaned by a woman who, with her husband and two children, live in a home which Judge Gantt built in the roar of his place. The husband acts as caretaker of the twenty-three acres which the Judge owns in the mountains.
The judge does his own cooking, and when he has invited guests, talks boastingly of his preparation of the meals. And all who have eat at his dinner table come away praising his culinary ability. His Sunday dinner, for example, may consist of the following: broiled ham two inches thick, with gravy; boiled Irish potatoes, baked sweet potatoes, carrots and peas, rice, tomatoes and celery, and hot biscuits and coffee. In the evening, if you feel the need of additional food, the Judge will offer you swiss cheese, rye bread and coffee. In the morning you will be served with scrambled eggs, toast and coffee, and grape fruit.
After his evening meal, unless he has company. Judge Gantt enjoys the solitude of his library, where he will continue work on a book he is writing. He thinks he will give it the title, "A History of Upper South Carolina," He has been working on this book for two years, he says. He hopes to finish it during the next few months. Ha hopes, also, to prepara a book on the Spartanburg bar similar to Judge O'Neall's Bench and Bar of South Carolina; and toward this purpose he has accumulated a mass of material. He might find embarrassment if required to write a three-figure check on short notice; but he can always give a guest a warm welcome, a comfortable bed, and a good meal; and he can always answer an intelligent question about the county of Spartanburg.
Such is Judge Robert Joseph Gantt, respected member of the Spartanburg bar, a Tillmanite to the end, a country gentleman, and an author with perception and insight.
