Atlanta, Georgia
Name: not given
Maurice Russell
NIGHTWATCHMAN
"That's sure a truckload of 'shines'." The old fellow sitting beside me cast the remark as though it were a knowingly inadequate bit of conversation bait, but I could see that he was almost pathetically hoping I would bite. He'd boarded the streetcar several blocks back, and not until he'd definitely chosen the unoccupied half of my seat did I realize that I'd been unconsciously watching his rather feeble progress down the aisle. I turned my head forward as he settled himself beside me. After a few minutes I noticed that the old fellow beside me was opening and closing his mouth in the manner of a fish gulping. Though sighted out of the comer of my eye, it was distracting--and fascinating. Then it was that he spoke about the truckload of Negroes ahead of the car, and I realized the peculiar mouth-gapings had been mere indecisive attempts at speech.
The truck was packed. Twenty or thirty Negroes so closely huddled that they appeared to be standing on one another's feet. They swayed and jerked as one with every lurching of the complaining truck. "Yes," I said, "they're probably a bunch of WPA workers."
He looked at me with just a bit of suspicion and distrust in his eyes. Then, deciding there was nothing derogatory or sarcastic in my remark, went on. "Well, you know, son, the WPA's a mighty good thing. It's saved the lives of a lot of people. I don't know what'll happen if they do away with it. You can't let people starve. People've gotta eat. You gotta look after them."
"Oh, yes," I hastened to reassure him. "I know how it is. I'm on the WPA myself."
His face brightened. "Are you now? Well, then, son, I don't mind telling you I am myself. I can't tell that to everybody, you know. Lot of people get so 'het up' when you say anything about the WPA. Talk about all the money the Government's spendin' and throwin' away and stuff like that. The Government ain’t throwin’ away nothin'. At least, it could do worse things with it than that. Why it's givin' people jobs and a livin' and if that's throwin' away money I'd like to know what in tunket they ought a spend it on. Most of the people who're always complainin' about the way the Government spends the tax money ain't people who pay taxes anyway. I know! I've talked to too many of 'em. Only tax they ever pay is when they buy a pack of cigarettes or go to a show or some'in', and they don't know they're payin' it then. I tell you, son, people just like to talk big and complain about the way the Government's robbin' 'em, when the Government ain't even touchin' 'em. I wish it would touch 'em! I wish it would! It's a pretty come-to-pass when the Government has to take money away from people to take care of others just because people are too stingy to do it themselves. People weren't always thinkin' of themselves like they are now when I was a young man. The world's goin' a bad way, a mighty bad way....mi-i-i-i-ghty bad. Why if you'd a-told me twenty-five or thirty years ago………."
He broke off suddenly, noticing that I was busily scribbling notes on the margins of a magazine I held. "'Scuse me, son, I didn't mean to interfere with you. You go on with what you're doin'." There was nothing for it but to explain what I was doing, that I was with the Writers' Project and that one of my jobs was interviewing just such people as himself and getting their life stories. It was obvious that he didn't quite understand nor believe what I told him. He eyed me suspiciously and with just a hint of hurt, as though I'd betrayed a confidence. "You ain't with the State Office, are you?", he asked. I assured him I wasn't and, to prove that I had no ulterior motives, told him I wouldn't even ask his name. It took quite a bit more talk and tactful urging to get him to continue.
"Well, son, it's like I said. The world's pretty bad. Pretty bad when you have to study what you say least somebody don't take you right. Talk about Germany! Of course, I don't mean we got anything like Germany here, but it's one thing to say we got free speech and it's another to say what you want to. First you got to be sure you're talkin' to the right kind and then you gotta be sure they ain't foolin' you. Like I asked you if you was from the State Office. Now, I haven't said anything against the WPA---at least, I don't think I did. But even if I hadn't of, I'd a-shut up like a clam if you'd a-said you was from the State Office. You hear all sorts of rumors---maybe they ain't so---that the WPA's got spys a-snoopin' around on all the projects tryin' to find out what you're sayin' and thinkin'. I've never seen none of 'em---but I don't know. That's why I was tellin' my daughter just the other day that I'm glad to be on this nighwatchin' job. There’s nobody all the time comin' round checkin' up on you. Not that they'd catch me doin' anything---or not doin' anything. I do just what they tell me. One of the fellows was kiddin' me down at a meetin' we had last Tuesday. He says, "Pop...." (they all call me Pop. I don't like it. Now everybody knew me as 'Dad' when I worked for the railroad. Everybody. You'd just say 'Dad' and everybody in the shops knew who I was. That was all right, but I don't like 'Pop'). Anyway this fellow says, 'Pop, I bet you get away with murder on your job. Sleep all night and do anything you want to.' Well, I knew he was kiddin', but it kinda made me mad. I told him, "By God, I wouldn't sell my birthright for any forty dollars a month. Not for any amount of money!' And that's right. I'm honest. Always have been. 'Course I do read some on the job. Much as my eyes'll let me. They know you do. You got to. I make a round once every hour and then I read till its time to go around again. I ain't been able to do much readin' lately, though. I broke my glasses and I can’t see well without 'em. That's what I been doin' this afternoon. Went down to the fellow on Mitchell Street to get my glasses fixed.
"Yes, that's right. I worked for the railroad. Thirty-seven years. In South Carolina and Georgia. I started out as a fireman and then I went into the mail service. Then I left that and went to work for a chain of stores operated for railroadmen. Regular commissaries. There's one in every railroad yard. I worked at that for twenty years and then I got into the shops. I had charge of storehouses in South Carolina and Georgia until they let me go. Say, son," he broke off, "how old would you say I was?"
He looked about 65, so I said 55. He chuckled and was so obviously pleased I knew I'd missed the actual figure by a flattering margin. "Well, nobody believes it, but I'm 76 years old!" Then in an instant his beaming pleasure changed to alarm. "Say," he said, "I forgot you are writin' all this down. You'd better not say anything about my age, son."
I asked him how long he'd been on the WPA. "Four years," he said. "The railroad cut me off when I was seventy---no pension----and they cheated me outta my insurance policy. I'd been payin' on it I guess twenty years or more. They said something about the company matin' a new ruling against everybody over seventy and that I'd lost my policy. No, they didn't give me anything...not a cent...not a red penny. Well, I couldn't find anything to do....a man my age, you know. I'm as strong as any younger man a-runnin' 'round here, but that don't help you none gettin' a job. They look at your hair and figure you're too old to do anything. They don't always say that, but you can see they mean it. God-a-mighty! What if I was a hundred! I'd still have to eat, wouldn't I?
His voice had risen somewhat and a couple of passengers turned to look in our direction. Somewhat embarrassed, he sat sulking for a few moments, his eyes boring straight ahead. I took advantage of the lapse to ask him how and where he lived. "No," he said, "I don't live alone. I stay with my daughter over here on Verdan Avenue." Suddenly he half rose and started to ring the bell, decided not to, sat down, and then got up again. "Sa-a-a-y, look a here!" he said, "I've gone by my stop. I oughta got off back there!" Having purposely passed my own stop, I suggested that he ride on out to the end of the line and back with me at my expense. After a moment's indecision he agreed and sat down again. "Got nothin' to do this afternoon, anyway," he said. "Don't go to work till ten O'clock tonight."
"Yes, with my daughter," he went on, discussing his home. "She's got a nice little four-room house. I used to have a little room right off the kitchen, but I live in the backyard now. There's a little sorta storage-house or garage out there, and I've fixed it up. It's right comfortable and I like it better than being in the house. I don't mean my daughter put me out there, but she kinda suggested it, and I didn't care.
"She's a good girl, hut she's kinda nervous, and she's always yellin' about somethin'. Got a temper like her mother. Her husband's as fine a man as you'll ever see. He thinks more of me than if I was his father, I believe. He's part Italian and---you know---they're fine people. He gets after my daughter sometimes because he doesn't like the way she talks to me, but I tell 'im he ought'n to do that because she don't really mean it. You see, the house was too small, and when they had friends in they didn't want an old man around. Old people and young ones aren't meant to get along together. 'Course I'd stay in my room, but they'd have to bring their coats and things back there. Anyway, I like the little backhouse; it gives me a place to myself too. I wanted to get me a little oil stove and fix my own food back there, but my daughter wouldn't hear to it. She brings my lunch and supper down to me or I go up and get it. My son-in-law got mighty mad about me not eatin' with 'em, but it started when I was sick a spell and didn't feel like goin' up to the house, and now my daughter just keeps on bringin' it down. I like it better though, 'cause she would fuss at her husband so much at the table I couldn't enjoy eatin'. I've always said people should be quiet at the table.
"Now don't put down there nothin' about my daughter. She ain't mean. She's just nervous like I told you and likes to boss a lots. She fusses at her husband and me and everybody else, I guess, but she's all right. She'd do anything for you. There ain't a better nurse anywhere. When I was sick she pestered me to death makin' me take this and that. I think folks oughta be left alone when they're havin' a spell of sickness. I'd keep telling her to leave me alone. I'd tell her like I tell everybody; when a dog's sick he crawls off by himself and lays down till he's all right again, 'By God,' I'd say, 'leave me alone.' But she got me well in no time. I just had some sorta cold ache in my stomach. It wasn't just stomach ache like everybody has, it felt different from anything I'd ever had before. But I got all right. I'm tough.
"No, my daughter don't have no children. Her husband runs a grocery store and they never had no children. It's a shame, too, 'cause Joe likes children. I been down to the store sometimes and seen him give fruit to some poor children that come in there. He nearly always gives 'em a piece of candy or somethin' when their mammas send them after stuff. Lot of times people thinks he's a Jew, but you never saw no Jew doin' nothin' like that. Not the 'kike' Jew anyway. Some Jews I know are fine people, but not those 'kikes'.
"When me and my wife first came to Atlanta about 45 years ago we had some mighty nice Jew friends. They were good people and they'd do anything for us. If we was sick they'd take care of us just like we was Jews. You take Cohen, now, down here on Chapel Street. He's got that big store and lives in one of the best houses, but when me and my wife lived next door to them on old Flagler Street, they didn't have a thing. He started out buyin' junk and sellin' it and you see where he is now. They were mighty fine people. We used to go to work together every mornin'. Had to ride bicycles then, there weren't no streetcars. He wouldn't know me now. I don't guess I've seen Abe Cohen in twenty years. He'd still shake hands with me, though; but I don't want to see him. I've come down so. My wife died and several of our children died. One of my sons got killed in a automobile accident. I still got three sons livin', but I don't know where they are. I guess I didn't do right by them, but I did all I could. I think one reason my daughter talks to me so sometimes is because we was always so poor. You can be nice and polite and all that when you got money to walk away whenever you want to. But poor people can't get away from each other, they got to stay together. That's why I don't mind livin' out in the back yard; I can be to myself sometimes.
"If you'd a-told me years ago that it was gonna be like this, I'd a-said you was a liar. I don't know how I got where I am, it all came about so slow-like. Some bastards just go up in the world. They don't care what the; do; they just get in with the crowd and do a lot of bootlicking. If a man thinks anything of his birthright he can't get anywhere in this world. You got to lie and cheat and steal and then, after a man's worked for you all his life, kick him out like he was a dirty dog. And it's them bastards that got ahead like that that complains about payin' taxes to the government and giving money to the WPA. Serves 'em right. By God, I say the WPA oughta take over all the business in this country and run it. Maybe poor people'd get a break then.
"You watch Mr. Roosevelt. That man may not run for president again but he's gonna keep on runnin' this country. He's the greatest man we've ever had. There ain't gonna be no more presidents. Mr. Roosevelt could take this country over tomorrow if he wanted to and everybody I know'd go right along with 'im. I don't mind a dictator if it's Mr. Roosevelt. If the people'd kick Congress and all the damned politicians out of the way, Roosevelt could make this a decent country to live in. But you watch 'em....the American people are gonna stand just so much and then they're gonna start tarrin' and featherin' a few of those guys up there in Washington. I say anybody who's against Mr. Roosevelt is against progress and decency and he's gonna….."
We were approaching the old man's stop again and I'd already rung the bell. "Well," he said, getting up, "I don't wanta miss it this time. So long, son. Good luck to you."
<text not clear>
