Project #3613
John P. Farmer,
Columbia, S. C.
12/16/38
AUNT SALLY RAINES
(NEGRO)
BLYTHEWOOD, S. C.
Aunt Sally has been known to the people of Blythewood since the memory of the oldest inhabitants. Very few people know her last name. She lives on a place of land that was given her by Mr. John Wooten, who originally owned her as a slave. For twenty-five years, she acted as servant for the family of Mr. Brookes B. Boney. Road Commissioner of upper Richland County, and the children of his family regard her as one much closer than an ordinary servant. She has acted as midwife for so many families, both white and colored, in the community, that "go get Aunt Sally" is the first thought, when anyone is in need of help.
I went to see Aunt Sally early one morning. Not finding anyone in the house, I went around to the back yard and saw her out by the pig pen feeding the pigs. I walked on out to where she was and made myself known to her. "Lawd honey, where in do worl' you been so long," she inquired. "How's yo' ma?" Aunt Sally has known my family since slavery times.
Having finished feeding her hogs, she excused herself and went into the house where she put on a crisp clean apron that seemed to stand out from her dress like it was boarded. Her yard was neatly swept, and there was plenty of wood cut and piled up alongside the hack porch. There didn't seem to be any danger of Aunt Sally going without fuel during the cold winter months.
"Come in de house," she invited. "There's a good fire here in de settin' room." The house was strikingly clean. You could tell it was the usual condition, for Aunt Sally certainly didn't expect "white folks" to visit her so early in the day. The walls were neatly papered with newspapers and calendars, and around the fireplace chimney, cracks were neatly chinked up with some sort of mortar material.
There was a grand open fire with a kettle sitting on the side in the ashes. At the edge of the hearth, Aunt Sally had a churn of milk "gittin' ready for churnin'" as she expressed it. The front or settin' room served as a bedroom for Aunt Sally, and the bed was neatly made, having a nice white spread and several additional quilts folded at the foot of the bed. The rest of the room contained two rocking chaird and a straight chair, an old-fashioned trunk that had been given her by some of the white folk in the neighborhood, an old-timey washstand with a pitcher end bowl, and a table upon which a neat white center- piece served as a covering. An old leather-bound Bible, yellow with age and use, along with a Sunday-School quarterly, rested upon the table. Several pot plants were in the room, one in each window and the rest on the floor under the windows.
Aunt Sally had been up long before "sunup," as she expressed it. The house had been cleaned up right after breakfast, and all the morning chores had been completed before my arrival.
Aunt Sally la known as the "blackest nigger" around the community and shows a true African strain. She had some sort of stocking material on her head that completely covered her kinky gray hair. She wore a pair of men's shoes that looked to be number elevens. As she sat there, she gave the impression of being ageless.
"How old are you. Aunt Sally?" I asked.
"Chile, I ain't got no idea, 'cept I was born befo' de Rebel War. I belonged to Cap'n John Wooten, yo' granddaddy, and I 'member when de Yankees come through. De bes' I can tell, I's 'bout eighty-five year old. My mammy's name was Harriet, and we lived on yo' grandpa's place 'til she died. I don't 'member my daddy. He was killed in de woods cuttin' down trees befo' I 'member real good. Cap'n John was powerful good to us niggers. We got 'long lot better dan we do now. Times is show hard when you gits too old to work.
"How long is I been livin' here? Lawd, chile, ever since I lef' Cap'n John's place. When I was 'bout grown, my ma died, and Cap'n John went to work for de railroad, buildin' de tracks. He wasn't usin' all his land and he giv' me dis little piece, and I been here every since. All dat was here den was a one- room cabin, but most all de land was cleared. I had me some hogs, and Mis' Lyda, yo' grandma, gimme a ca'f, and I planted me a garden. I done a lot of work around de house, but I was a good field hand too. I didn't have no trouble stall. I borrowed a mile from Cap'n John and put me in a crop de fust year and done good. I reckon I been here sixty years or more. I been gittin' 'long fine 'til I got too old to git 'round good. But I ain't complainin'. De neighbors is right good, and dey he'p me out wid de plowin'. I kin still mess 'round in my garden and feed chickens and hogs.
'Money dem times? It was mighty scase, I tell you. Didn't need much tho'. We had plenty toveat, and if was needed somethin' terrible bad, we could always git it at de store and pay for it when we got de money. I made a little extra money all along. 'Bout de time I got settled good, I started bo'din' de section han's on de railroad. Dey was puttin' in crossties and side- tracks from Winnsboro to Columbia. I fed dem for twenty cents a day, and dem niggers sho' did lak my cookin'. After de section han's lef'. I bo'ded de sawmill han's dat was outtin' on Mr. Jim Bookharts land up by de Sandy-level Church. 'Bout dat time my fust chile was born. His daddy worked at de sawmill but he got in trouble in Ridgeway, and I never did know what be-come of him. I named dis chile 'Lem'. He was a fine boy, but he is dead now. He caught de 'flu' durin' de big war, when everybody was dyin' so fast. He was a mighty good worker, and he stayed right here with me 'til he died. He runned de farm, 'sides workin' by de day for other folks. In de wintertime he worked at de saw-mill.
"When Mis' Minnie and Mr. Brookes Boney got married I went to work for them. They built a nice house on their land what joins dis place of mine, and de whole time I worked for Mr. Brookes, he'd have his han's work my land 'long wid his. Befo' you could turn 'round good, dey started havin' chilluns. I raised everyone of their chillun 'til they was grown. Times was mighty good then. Wasn't no boll weevil in dem days, and we got a bale to de acre and everybody had money. I worked for Mr. Brookes as long as he farmed. They sold de farm and moved down where they're livin' now, and it was to far for me to come and go. I worked for Mis' Beulah Boney up 'til de time I couldn't git 'round so good."
"You had other children, Aunt Sally. What bacame of them?"
"Well, Mary, my oldest girl, is married and got gran'ohillun. She lives on Mr. Bates place. Time is mighty hard wid dem, and dey ain't got nothin'. Her boys what stays wid her is on gov'ment work. Minnie, my other girl, is married and lives up 'bout Ridgeway. Her husband works at a sawmill, and dey gits 'long fair. I ain't seem dem in a long time, but I hears from dem every so often. Jim, my next boy, is sawmillin' for Mr. Fletcher Boney. He's got a house full of chillun, and day haves it mighty hard, 'cause day don't work regular at de sawmill, and he can't git nothin' else to do. youngest boy, Silas, went North befo' de 'big war', and I ain't never heard tell of hin since.
"Yes, Jim Raines was my husband. He's dead. He wasn't no good, no how. He got in trouble ' bout some gal and gits time for it. When he gits out, he went to her house one night and shot through de window and near 'bout kilt her. Dey put him in de pen'ten- tiary, but day turned hin loose in a year or two on 'count of him havin' consumption. He come back here and I nursed him 'til he died, right here in dia room. Soon as he died, I had to bum all de bed- clothes in de house, and it sho' was a job gittin' some more. I had to make quilts for over a year to git enough covers. He sho' was a no'count nigger."
Aunt Sally had five children out of wedlock before marring Jim Raines. She never had any children by him, and, of course, the paternity of each is a mystery.
"No, ain't by myself. I has one of Alec Simpson's gals, Susie, livin' wid me. She's going to scholl, and she's in de fifth grade. When Martha, Alec's wife, die, I tuk Susie to raise. Alec had eight chilluns on his han's, and he 'stributed de younguns 'round de neighborhood, 'cause he didn't have nobody to take care of dem. Susie's elevan years old, and she's a mighty good girl. She can read good, too. She reads de Bible and all de papars to me. It sho' is fine, too. I never could read and write. I could have larned tho'. I jus' never did git 'round to it. Mis' Lyda, yo' grandma, was gonna larn me befo' she die, but somethin' always come up 'bout de time I gits ready to larn, and I jist didn't. I ain't missed much. De whole time I was workin' for Mis' Minnie, de chillun larned to read and read their lessons to me, and I reckon I larned as much as a nigger ought to know. When a nigger gits too highfalutin' they gits too far away from de Lawd. Susie is mighty good help. She can cook right good, and she helps me wid de cowmand brings in my wood.
"No, I doesn't do much wid de land now. Alec Simpson does what plowin' I needs done. All I raised dis year was some corn, taters, and some cane 'sides my garden. I pasture my cow and yearlin' on de rest of de land, and I got 'nough corn to feed my hogs, 'sides 'what I ground for meal.
"Yes, I goes to church everytime I can git a ride. It's too far for me to walk, but de neighbors is mighty good 'bout comin' by for me. Dey has prayer meetin' most every night at somebody's house, and I sho' -wish I could go. But, Lawd, it's too much for me, and de night air makes my misery mighty bad. It's lots of difference now 'bout going to church dan it use to be. Long time ago, de niggers would have singin's, and when de white folks would have preachin', day would go. Now we got col- orad churohes, and we have preachin' every fourth Sunday. I laks both ways, but it don't make much difference, long as you praise de Lawd. We still have some mighty good singin's 'round here. Lots of times de white folks come to our ohurch when we haves meetin's at night, for de singin'. I sho' want you to come sometime and hear it.
"Aunt Sally, have you ever been away from Blythewood?" I inquired.
"Never 'til las' year, honey. Mis' Beulah's boy. Joseph. tuk me to Columbia in his car. I never thought I'd ever see a place as big as dat. I don't see how people gits 'round widout gittin' runned over. I never did git out de car. Dats de fust time I been 'way from right 'round Blythewood. I ain't even been to Ridgeway but once. I never did caro "bout going off from home much, 'sides not havin' de time. I been to de schoolhouse, where day have suppers and such, lots. Dey had a movin' pitcher show for de chilluns when I was down there one night. It's do only time I ever seen one."
"Did you like the picture?"
"Well, to tell de truth, bein's it's de fust time I ever seen one, I can't tell much 'bout it. I always thought it was a sin to go to movin' pitchers and danoes, but I don't reckon it's bad wrong iffen de white folks let de chilluns go to dem. Leas' ways, I don't feel lak I was hurt. Reckon it's do way you looks at dem."
"You mentioned the Rebel War! Do you remember much about it?"
"Uh, Uh! I sho' does. I 'member when Cap'n John and all de neighbors had to go. We sho' did have hard times. When de Yankees come through in '64, day tuk all de stock we had, 'sides cleanin' out do barns. I never will forgit how Mis' Lyda had us take all de meat, 'oept a few pieces, out de smokehouse and bury it 'long wid de silverware in de rock mounds out in do front yard. Dey never did find it, and dey camped 'round your grandpa's place for over two weeks, and den was back and forth. When de Yen- kees come day tried to git us niggers to tell where do meat was hid, but nobody wouldn't tell a thing. Cap'n John come home in '65, and things was sho' in a mess. We didn't have a crop in, 'cause we didn't have nothin' to plant, and we jus' had to git by de bes' we could. We didn't have a male or cow on de whole place. All do hogs was gone, end Cap'n John had to go to Winnsboro and git a mule dat we wouldn't have on de place befo' do war, he was so po'. I don't 'member no fightin', 'cause do Yankees didn't come when any solders was 'round."
"How do you manage to get some money nowadays!"
"Don't git none, 'cept what little bit my white folks gives me. I gits a few rations from de gov'ment sometimes, and de rest of de stuff I raise. Mis' Beulah and Mis' Minnie gives me an old dress now and den, and my neighbors is mighty good to me. I don't never go hungry, and I ain't complainin'. I kin still git 'bout, and I has de he'p of de Lawd, and as long as I has dat, I'se mighty thankful."