<Text Not Clear>
STATE EDITORIAL IDENTIFICATION FORM
STATE: FLORIDA
RECEIVED FROM STATE OFFICE JACKSONVILLE
MS IZELLY HAINES WORDS 1,834 QUOTA______
STATE GUIDE______LOCAL GUIDE______NON-GUIDE YES
TABLE OF CONTENTS DIVISION LIFE HISTORY: CONCH MIDWIFE
COMPLETE FOR THIS SECTION?______WHAT PERCENTAGE REMAINS______
PREFINAL REVISE NO______.WASHINGTON______CRITICISM
PREFINAL REVISE NO______.WASHINGTON______CRITICISM
PREFINAL REVISE NO______.WASHINGTON______CRITICISM
PREFINAL REVISE NO______.WASHINGTON______CRITICISM
PREFINAL NEW: YES
VOLUNTEER CONSULTANT:
Name_______
Position______
Address ____________
By <Text Not Clear>
Position<Text Not Clear>
DATE: Jan.17, 1939
October, 1938
Izzelly Harding (Negro-White)
Inlet Road
Riviera, Florida
Midwife in Conch fishing community.
Veronica E. Huss, writer.
Izzelly Haines
The Haines home is a small, one-storey frame cottage, painted white and trimmed in green. There are four poorly furnished rooms, two bedrooms, a living room and kitchen. An extra bed is on the screened front porch.
The house is surrounded by a sandy yard in which attempts have been made to grow grass and shrubbery. The hand pump is in the back yard near the rear entrance, and an outhouse is at the far edge of the small lot.
Izzelly Haines lives with her daughter and son-in-law who have several children. Across the shady front porch, she sits on the side of the clean bed, a tall woman, well built and of middle age. Anglo-Saxon in appearance, she has the skin color of a well-tanned person. Her long dark hair is slightly streaked with grey, and her dark eyes have yellowish eyeballs. Soft-spoken and friendly, she answers all questions in a polite but reserved manner.
Her mother was a full-blooded Bahaman Negro, her father a white man of English descent. She is careful not to mention her mother, giving all credit to her white aunt with whom she lived the greater part of her younger days.
"You say Lena Smith sent you over 'ere? I'm glad to know you. I'll be glad to tell you what I can about me 'ome in the Bahaymees. I was borned there and I'm still belongin to that country. We never got papers 'ere, cause we haint never needed them. I was back 'ome to visit this past spring. It's changed a lot, but folks still 'as a 'ard time there and I sure don't want to live there no more.
"I visited Long Island; it's me 'ome. We got a Long Island down there, jest like you all 'ave in New York 'ere. I lived there all me life until I come to the United States moat twenty years ago. My 'usband 'e's from there too, as is all me folks. All my kids was borned there and haint none of them United States citizens neither.
"My last name was Pinder before I was married. When I was little I lived most of me life with me aunt. This was in Long Island too; she owned a store there. She was sure a smart woman, and a real English lady. She was a doctress, you know, she 'ad books that told 'er 'ow to tend sick folks. She worked as a midwife mostly, that's 'ow come me to know what little I do about this work.
"I been a midwife ever since I was 17. I useter tend all the women around where I lived in the Bahaymees. I've tended me own girls as well as me self. I still go when I'm called 'ere in Riviera, but if it gits beyond me I always calls a doctor. Most of what I know I owe to me aunt, for it was 'er what 'ad the books although she kept them under lock and key, cause she didn't want us childrens to read them. I useter steal the key and then open the case what she kept the books in, and sneak them out and 'ide until I could read them. As I growed up, I got more and more interested, so after readin them books I decided I'd be a midwife too, and sure enough that's what I did.
"I was seventeen when I took my first case. This 'ere case was sure pitiful, that's 'ow come me to take it. If I 'adn't, the little mother woulds died. You know in them days folks was ignorant about sech things, and In the Bahaymees there warn't no doctors atall. There haint many now, and midwifes does most everything, but it's better than it was in them days. Well all I knowed about this work was what I read in them books and what I'd already seen.
"This woman what I'm about to tell you about 'ad given birth to 'er baby at about six o'clock in the morning and by four o'clock that afternoon the afterbirth 'adn't come and she was dying from the pizen what sets in. There warn't a soul around what could do nothin about it, so remember- in what I could, I took two pounds of onions and pulverized them; then soaked it in a pint of gin. Then I took it all and put it in two cloth bags. One bag I put to the lower part of the woman's stummick and the other to 'er back. Inside of a 'alf 'our it 'ad come and she was gittin along fine.
"I learned a lot of things down there in the Bahaymees and I tended a lot of cases. One 'ome remedy what can be used for the same case I jest mentioned is to boil mud-dauber nestes that still have the worms in it, and give the woman the tea. It always works. Another remedy is tea made from the wild peanut; it grows to-'ome in the Bahaymees, and it will start labor pains again if they 'ave stopped and shouldn't. I never practised under no doctor's orders, and I don't yet unless the situation gets beyond me.
"As for pay I takes whatever they give me. I can't expect much for folks 'ere is most as poor as they was in the Bahaymees, so I'm willin to tend the women for whatever they can afford and am glad to do it. What little I does git out of it 'elps though, cause there haint much in fishin now days.
"My girl's 'usband is out fishin today. The blues is runnin 'eavy. These 'ere windy days what's chilly brings them down fast from the north, and I'm 'opin the ketch will be a good one. The men been out ever since early this mornin, they gotta work and work 'ard while they can. They work nights too every time they git a chancet.
"So far the weather as been jest right for blue fishin. The run is 'eavy and they been doin purty well. Prices haint so good, but they never is, so that haint nothin neither. That's another reason how come I'm al-ways glad to make whatever money I can, you know, like as a midwife or by weavin.
"The only thing what gits me is, I worry so about the men folks when they're out. It's kinda bad and dangerous too. I wish you could see it, but I never would want you to risk it. To ketch them blues they have to come in closet to shore, for the fish plays about in the breakers. Then when the boats comes in close, sometimes it's too close and they git caught in them same breakers and is washed ashore. When this 'appens the boat is torn to shreds on the coral, and sometime the men don't make it neither. But I reckon that's 'ow it's mean't to be.
"So far all of mine 'as come 'ome safe, but they haint no tellin. One time last year I seen their boat smash plum to pieces on the rocks and wash all away in jest a few minutes. All that was left was the engine and she was so 'eavy she sink, or we wouldn't saved that. After cleanin the salt water outten it they built a new boat and they still usin the same engine. It's dangerous though and I worries so, so, much about them when theyre gone.
"Storms is somethin else to be feerd. A-course the hurricane time 'as done past when fishin starts but there's storms from the north what ruffles the water plenty.
Speakin of storms and rough water reminds of me 'omeland agin. It aint never as bad 'ere to what they git down there. Our 'omes were so poor which made it worser. They 'ad thatch roofs and in the first blow of a 'urricane them fans would stand on end and there weren't no shelter atall. It warn't never long after that, till the wind would crush the walls and we'd 'ave to take to the 'ills.
"Them 'ills 'as sheltered us many a time durin bad weather, and in tryin to git up there, we often would lose some of the littlest one's and 'ave to go back and 'unt them. One time my 'usband 'ad to go all the way back to the 'ouse to look for the baby what we'd plum forgot in our fear.
"There was some 'ills right behind where I lived. But the island where we lived was most all 'ills anyways. There warn't 'ardly no valleys atall, and we built on the side of them 'ills. But anyways we 'ad a cave on our place in which we kept dung in ordinary times, but durin a 'urricane we'd always 'ide in that cave until the sea come up and we 'ad to leave to keep from bein drownded. Then we'd crawl still 'igher in them 'ills and cling to the ground so as not to be blown to sea.
"Talkin about the cave, though, I seen water that was bein swept out of the north sea that's what we call the ocean north of the islands and bein swept over them great cliffs and comin down the 'ills like waterfalls. I seen them falls filled with stones and brush washed down from above and fallin over the cave entrance till we 'ad to be awful careful when we rushed through so we wouldn't get kilt. It sure is terrible and folks suffer so. After them storms is gone, our 'omes and everything is gone; the islands 'as been washed clean. The fresh-water wells is polluted and we aint got no water to drink. The food ia all gone, exceptin that which we been lucky enough to save. One time, all we managed to save was one barrel of flour. One of me own boys toted it up to the cave before the storm got too bad. It got all wet with salt water and stood sourin in the cave but two of us families lived on that for many, many days. After every storm we always nearly starve and thrist to death until somebody comes from Nassau or some eres to 'elp us.
"More than that, I seen the winds whip all the water outten the south sea until you could see land plum from shore to as far as you could place your eye. Fish would be left stranded and dyin but it shore appens. We calls the ocean north of the islands the north sea, and south, the south sea, but it's all the Atlantic. The reason for this is, the north sea is deep and almost bottomless; it's 'ere where the big ships pass, and the south sea is very shallow, and that is what causes the wrecks in the passes between the islands, and makes it so dangerous for the boats to pass. It's all right when the tide is 'igh, but when it's low and the water from the north sea comes rushin through the passes to the south, it's terrible. Many a boat 'as been smashed to pieces on the rocks tryin to get through. Folks 'as sometimes been standin on the banks watchin it all and unable to lend a 'and.
"In them times we didn't 'ave no way to tell when storms was comin. About the onliest way we could tell was by the perdictions of the old sea captains and they'd tell us we could watch for a blow when the wind backed agin the sun. Of course, we knowed storms was likely when the sun neared the line goin south in fall, and summer was on the wane but you never could be sure about them. When I said the line I meant the equator. Of course we haint never worried when the sun goes north in spring; it's jest when she comes south in fall.
"Some folks 'ad 'omemade barometers for tellin about the comin of a storm. They was made from two bottles, one a trifle bit littler than the other. The biggest one was set upright on somethin and some fresh spring water put in it, then the little bottle was shoved neck first down into it. They was so much alike that they fitted almost perfect. They was sealed tight then and left alone. When dirty weather was comin, no matter where them bottles was, the water in the lower bottle raised itself up into the neck of the top bottle. I never did know the reason for it actin that way, but it sure did."
