Reverses
Written By:
Mrs. Leola T. Bradley
Research Field Worker
Georgia Writers' Project
Athens -
Edited By:
Mrs. Maggie B. Freeman
Editor
Georgia Writers' Project
Athena -
WPA Area #6
November 24, 1939
 
November 16, 1939
Mrs. Hazel Hoff (White)
711 Highland Park Ave.
Chattanooga, Tennessee
District Manager
Avon Products
Bradley -
Reverses
"Come in," answered a cheery voice to my sudden drumming on the door of a local hotel room. This room, at the time, was occupied by Mrs. Harriet Huff, district manager of a well known cosmetic corporation. She was packing her trunk and bags after a week's stay in [our fair city.]
"Have a seat," she said, "that is if you can find one. Everything is in a tumble. You know I'm leaving tonight on the seven-fifty bus and I am trying to get my bags ready to go. I'll be through in a few minutes."
[I assured her I was in no hurry and insisted that she continue with her packing.]
"Well," she said, after snapping the last bag and strapping it, "I've finished now and have nothing more to do for a while. Before we begin talking though I want you to look over there on the dresser at some of the bargains I have. I'm overloaded with samples, so I thought I would sell some of them at a reduced price. Here," she said, picking up an attractive case, "is a good buy. It has powder, lipstick, and rouge; all for one dollar. It usually sells for one-fifty.'
She continued in this manner until she had shown me all of her sample goods. Then she said to me, "Tell all your friends about them. I told her I would. After that she began to tell me parts of her life history.
"The sad part of my life is," she said, "that just as soon as I make some friends and learn to like people of the town I have to move on somewhere else. Still, I don't let that worry me much, for I generally make new ones at the next place I go. I've been busy all today. This morning I had to interview two new agents that I have appointed, besides having a short visit with each of the old ones.
"My visit to Athens this week has been filled with varied experiences. I saw my ex-husband the other night - the first time in seven years. I've been wondering how I would feel to see him again, but it did not worry me a bit. We had a nice friendly little chat. You know, I have let him have our youngest son to educate. Yes, I did it voluntarily. My work is such as that I can't make a home for him, so I feel that his father can now do better by him in that case than I. And he really is doing so, but I am getting ahead of my story and I know you want that in chronological order. 
"I have come, both to see you and, also to get your story," I volunteered. She continued after this brief interruption.
"I went through some terrible times as a result of the depression, but then there are only a few people who didn't. My story may not be as good as plenty of others you might get.
"My ancestry is nothing to rave about. What we have had as we made ourselves. However, if any of my people were ever hung for murder or caught stealing, I don't know it. My grandfather on my mother's side I guess you'd call a damn Yankee. He was a scout for the northern army during the Civil War. He really was a very fine man, a lawyer and a writer. He lived in New York and wrote a history of the war. It is now in the library in Washington, D. C. All my mother's people were long lived. My grandfather lived to be one hundred and four years old and my grandmother is still living at ninety-nine. My grandmother has been living in the same place for ninety-four years. My mother is in her seventies and I don't know much about my father, for he died when I was six years old.
"My sister and I were the only children. We were born on a farm in Squatchee Valley near Chattanooga, Tennessee. I don't remember very much about living there but I have heard my mother talk about how hard she worked. They didn't have conveniences then in the country like we have now. Father was very successful, though, and the farm he rented in the valley was fertile. While they were still living on this farm, father went into the butchering business in town and mother ran the farm and took care of us. Mother was really the biggest factor in our lives and as far as that goes still is.
"When we were old enough to go to school we moved to town. Father was really prospering, for his butcher shop had grown until it was the largest in Chattanooga. He built a nice two-story home there for us - the first of our own that we have ever lived in. 
"My father died when I had just begun my schooling and I was able to continue because he had well provided for us. He had left us a home, a business, and some life insurance. Mother, being an expert seamstress, made some extra money that way. We got along fine and my sister and I finished high school.
"I married when I was seventeen; a young marriagable age of course, but my husband was only twenty-one. He had a good Job and was a hard worker. The first week we were married he said, 'Harriet, no matter how little or how much I ever make we are going to put some money in the bank each month.' Well, I came from a thrifty stock, so I agreed and co-operated, so right then we got our start.
"We moved from Chattanooga to the extreme southern portion of Georgia, near the Florida line. John was made cashier of a bank there and we continued to bank our money. Later six children were born to us, three toys and three girls. We were just as happy as we could be for a long time. My husband was kind to us and life seemed secure. Too, we had drawn out some money from our savings and bought a lot of naval store stock. That, too, began paying dividends. The first cloud came when four of our children were in the hospital at one time with typhoid fever. The baby died, our hearts were broken, but we had much to live for. John made other investments and it seemed that he succeeded in everything he did. We became leaders in all civic, social and religious affairs. Everybody was our friends. Then came the blow that almost crushed me. It happened in 1929. It didn't affect me financially; money didn't matter then. I don't often tell this, but since I've started I'll go on.
"One morning while I was sitting in the room nursing our three children who were recuperating from the measles, my husband came in and handed me the morning paper folded up and said, 'Go and rest awhile and read the paper. I'll stay with the children.' I went to my room, sat down and as I opened up the paper a letter fell out. It was addressed to John and in a woman's handwriting. My heart almost stopped beating. I had a feeling something was wrong. Until then, I had never suspected his being untrue to me. Well, I guess I shouldn't have read it since it was not mine, but curiosity got the best of me. It began like this: 'My Darling' - I just can't tell you all that was in it, but she wrote enough to let me know he had been untrue to me over a period of nearly two years. I learned later that she had handed him the paper at the bank with the letter rolled up in it and he, unknowingly, brought it home to me.
"I didn't say a word about it all day nor that night, but I didn't sleep a wink. I tried to keep cool and think out some way to save the situation for us all. Finally I told John's brother the whole story, and he promised to talk to my husband and try to reason with him. It didn't do any good. John kept staying away from home more and more. My children were old enough to know and were embarrassed over it. Finally I refused to let him come home at all. I guess I did wrong. Maybe if I had been patient a little longer, it would have kept my home from being broken up, but I had stood it until my nerves were ready to snap. Then the directors of the bank told him he would have to choose between his job and the woman. It seemed that he couldn't break entirely with her, so he decided to leave. He went to California, leaving me, our children, and also the other woman behind. Before he left he made over everything he had to me. He took just enough money for his ticket and support for a month's time. That, of course, kept us from suffering from a financial standpoint.
"Troubles never come singly. In 1931, I lost two sons. They had spinal meningitis. That left me only three children, two girls and a boy. Soon after that I moved back to Chattanooga to be near my mother and to start life over again. I took part of our savings and made a down payment on a home for us. That was my first mistake I guess. I should have paid for it in full, but I had enough income to finish paying for it I thought and take care of us too, when I had it over half paid for, the country began getting in a terrible condition as a result of the World War. Property went down in value and investments were paying practically nothing. I sold my stock in naval stores at a much reduced price and added that money to my bank savings. This was supposed to have been one of the strongest banks in that section, so I thought my money was safe. I had two store buildings from which the rents netted me a small income. Then rents went down so by the time I paid insurance and taxes, they were a liability instead of an asset. I was drawing enough interest, though, from the bank to support myself and children, by living very conservatively. My check from the bank usually came on the first of each month. On the first of October, 1933, my check failed to come. I thought it would come the next day. It didn't. When I opened up the morning paper the first thing I saw was the headlines on the front page:
"Blank Banks Fall To Open Doors."
"For awhile I was so stunned I could read no further.
Savings gone! Practically nothing left, but a little worthless property and a home not entirely paid for, just how long I could hold on to that, I didn't know. I knew I had no way of keeping up the payments on it.
"Of course, at first we had promises that the bank would reopen, and we had some hopes of getting at least a part of our money. These didn't materialize, so once more I had to plan anew.
"I had a nice car, but I sold it to help out, for I had rather have a home anytime than a car. That didn't help much, though. Then my mother lost all she had in a bank failure. Her home was free of debt, but she had no income, so I couldn't get any help from her. I worried over trying to save my home until I almost lost my health. When several payments lapsed and there were no hopes of immediate help I finally had to see my home go. That left me and my three children with absolutely nothing. We moved into my mother's home. We were thankful for a shelter. That did not give us food though and other necessities. I didn't know what I could do for a support for I had never worked out a day in my life. I went down to a factory where I was told they hired green help. Sure enough I got a job. At the end of two weeks I was fired. I was not physically able to do the work, they said.
"I went to the WPA Office and they certifed me for work. The first job they assigned me to, was in the sewing room. After I had worked there awhile, they began investigating my case again and laid me off - just because my mother owned her home. You can't eat a house though, you know, so I got a job as a practical nurse. The first case I had was with a woman, a mental case. My, I had a time with her, lots of fun, too, sometimes. One of her hallucinations was seeing people at the windows. So every night I would have to stand at the windows and shoo them away. Too, she had an idea she could hear men's voices out in the hall, and accused me of flirting with them. She got to nagging me so about it I felt like I couldn't stand it any longer. I talked it over with her daughters, and they told me to do anything I could to stop her. That night when I was fixing my patient for bed she said, ' I notice you're in a powerful big hurry to git me to sleep. How many men are out there in the hall waitin' fer you?' I answered, 'There are exactly ten out there. How many of them do you want?' That cured her, and she never nagged me again about men. I nursed her six weeks and almost had a nervous breakdown myself, so had to give it up.
"I was re-certified for work on WPA. This time it was a Library Project, mending books. I was just crazy about that and it paid better, too. Still it wasn't enough money, though, to support and educate three children so I began using my spare time selling cosmetics. I worked awfully hard at it for I saw a future to it. My ambition was to become a District Manager of that corporation. I wanted a job that would make my future more secure. In order to get a job of that kind you had to get a certain amount of sales as an agent. I was thrilled to death when I got a telegram one morning saying I had been made District Manager over fourteen states. That really is a nice job even if it does keep you on the go. I left my children with my mother. I put both of my girls through high school and gave them each two years in College. They are both married now, so there is only the boy left to be educated.
"I guess you wonder what became of my husband. Well, he didn't marry the woman who broke up our home after all. He made several attempts to come back to us, but after I struggled through so much without him, I began to like the independent feeling I had, so we stayed apart.
"After living several years in California, he met and married a very nice woman. I had had such a time educating the girls, so when he asked me to let him keep the boy a few years and put him through college, I consented. Oh yes, I'm friendly with John, also with his wife. It's best for us to be friends for they could hurt me a lot through my boy. They are really doing a good part by him. I believe I told you they have recently moved to Athens, Georgia.
"In looking back over the last few years of my life, I wonder sometimes what my life would have been had the depression not come. I know it has made a stronger, better woman of me. I had such love for my children and my ideals were so high that I was determined I wouldn't let adversities get me down. One greet trouble with people, I think, is that they just can't take hard times. As for my social status, in our respect it never went down. My friends were just as staunch as they had ever been. They stood by me in all my marital troubles and helped me in various ways. Of course, you know when your money is all gone, you can't do the things you had done before. I didn't have time to worry about other people. Why, you know, sometimes I didn't know where our next meal was coming from.
Through all this we always went to church and Sunday school and we were rewarded.
"I don't often stop now and think over the past and I never brood over it. My chief concern now is the future. I know I will never recover what I have lost. I have a good job and there's one good thing about it, there's no age limit. I can hold it just as long as I make good at it and my health permits. Also I don't have so many responsibilities now either, so my salary is ample enough for my mother and me. I make my home with her now,"
In answer to a querry, she exclaimed.
"Law, no, I don't have time for politics! They're rotten in our town anyway. I think every woman should vote and I guess I would if I were ever there long enough."
Just then there was a knock on the door.
"Oh, yes," she said, "I guess that's my boy. He's coming to tell me goodbye."
I felt that my interview was over, so thanking Mrs. Huff and promising to see her on her return trip in December, I left her with her young son.