A FARMIHG PREACHER - PROPHET
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 – Athens
and
Mrs. Leila Harris
Area 7 – Augusta
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Ga.
March 17, 1939
March 6, 1939
March 7, 1939
Nick Weller (Negro)
290 Tabernacle Street
Athens, Georgia
Farmer and Preacher
G. M.
A FARMING PREACHER – PROPHET
Tom Gosden is a well known figure about town, and coming across him on one of the main streets, I asked if he would give me the story of his life. He readily agreed to meet me in about two hours at a local tailor shop, where we could talk, but in the meantime he had to "tend to some business."
Tom is famous for his remarks about the Bible, as he understands it, also for his alleged power or gift of "seeing things" and predicting future events. I arrived at the shop ahead of the time appointed for I did not want to miss him. Several people were there, and they were having a friendly but spirited argument. Great as a young man was being told that he was "just impossible," Tom came in.
The young man said, "Tom, did you hear what they called me? What do you think about it?"
"That they is wrong," Tom solemnly, replied, "for with God nothing is um-possible. He’s the only one that's um-possible."
"I knew Tom would take up for me," the youth boasted, "and I guess you all will let me alone after this." The argument dwindled and they left.
As they went out, Tom said, "Mistess, just what is it that old Tom can tell you, for you knows I'se just a plain old ignorant stick man, that was borned and raised in the country. Yessum, I was borned right down yonder in Oglethorpe County, end that's still home to me.
"I worked in the fields when I was too little to last out all day. When I went to school it was in just a plain old country school. The schoolhouse was made out of logs and the cracks was daubed with red mud to keep the cold wind out for us really had winters then.
"Along in them times schools wasn’t no ways lak they is now. Our only hook was that old Blue Back Speller. Yes, Mistess, that’s what us larnt, and too, us stayed all day, and us started out to school soon as it was good daylight. Wasn’t no going then at eight and nine o’clock in the mornin’ lak chilluns does now. I didn’t git to go to school, ’ceppin’ just two or three years, ’cause I had to work in the fields.
"When I was big enough to work all day, I was paid 15¢ a day. Yessum, 15¢ a day was good pay for us chillun in them days. My home was just lak all the other houses then on the farms ’specially for the colored folks, just a plain old log cabin, and they called ’em notched houses. Don’t ’spect you knows what a notched house is.
"But you know us didn’t have sawmills back then, so us couldn’t make planks, and nails wasn’t plentiful neither, so they just notched the logs to make ’em fit and the cracks was all daubed with red clay, and them old chimblies, they was made with sticks and red clay too, but us was happy and contented ’cause that was all us knowed.
"I tell you them old black mo-lasses and ash cakes sho’ tasted good ’specially after a day in the fields and us only had a biscuit on Sunday mornin’, but that one biscuit made us feel rich, or as you say now, lak millionaires, only us didn’t know nothin’ ’bout them then. When us' had biled victuals it was most times just plain poke berry sallet, but us enjoyed it.
”I remember too that good old eatin’ when my mother fixed ash cakes in biled sweet milk and many a day that is what us et, and us was happy to git it. Yessum them was happy days, more so than they is now.
”Us wasn’t up to dressin’ then lak us is now and most all us wore was just one garment. That’s right. And that garment was just a short shirt. I’se worked many a day in the field in nothin' but one of them long shirts. They was made right at home too. Mother would weave the cloth on her old loom at nights, and plenty times when us didn’t hove candles, she worked by the light from light from knots and us chillun would play ’round on the floor.
"The very day I was big enough to plow, what you 'spose I plowed with? Well it was old Mike, our old ox. He was just as good as a mule any day and when us got out of bread, then one of us just put a sack of com on Mike’s beck and away us went, and it was eight or ten miles to the mill. While the corn was being ground, Mike had his dinner of corn shucks. If it wasn't too late when us got back home, us went right on to the field, ’cause, Mistess, us was raised to work.
"'Long at that time, us thought twenty-five or thirty cents a day was fine wages. Then us had plenty of corn and 'taters, and a meat box full of good meat. That was some good meat 'cause we raised our own hogs and cured the meat by smokin' it with hickory wood. Back then, I don't know if you has done heered about this, but soda was mighty skerce. Even that didn't 'mount to so powerful much 'cause corn cob soda would sho make that bread rise. Yessum, us just burnt the corn cobs 'til they was just a fine powder. That was good as anybody’s soda.
"That old persimmon beer was half of our living. Us chillun would gather persimmons by the bucket fulls. Mother would cook 'em with wheat bran and make it out into big pones that she used to make the beer mash and she put lots of locusts in it. That beer was really good and so refreshin' after a hard day's work.
"We wasn't sickly ’long in that time, but when we did git a little sick, mother would go into the woods and git herbs and grass. There was one kinda grass 'specially that she used. Just let me call Sally Anne, that’s my wife, and bless her soul she’ll know.”
Tom went to the telephone and was back in a few minutes. He said, "I told you Sally Anne would know. She always knows and I can ’pend on her. She stays right at home in her field of duty, just right on the job all the time.
"Sally Anne said it was just plain old scurvy grass, and you find it mostly in pine woods. It has long yellow roots and the roots is what they made the tea with. It was, and still is, 'cause us uses it how. It's the finest medicine anybody can git to cure colds, and then when folks git the measles, if they would just drink old scurvy grass root tea, they would soon be well and wouldn't have to worry 'bout gittin' wet even.
"Another good tonic is this very simple one. It'll make you eat your head off and lessen you wants to gain in weight you had better not try it. That's just the plain old turnip. Yes, that's right. You just bile turnips in clear water 'til you have 'bout a quart of the juice and drink that juice two and three times a day, but I 'spects you would have to put some sugar in it 'cause it's mighty bitter. 'Long in them days us used the old black mo'-lasses to sweeten most everything; even used it in our coffee." Tom laughed and said, "Why even our coffee wasn't what it is today. 'Most all us had was corn meal, parched right brown, but to us, that corn meal coffee sweetened with mo'-lasses was really good, and us was thankful for it.
"Another good medicine that the women folks used lots of times was what is known these days as black hall (black haw) root. They made tea out of that 'cause it wasn't easy to git out and buy medicine back then, for us didn’t have drug stores lak us does now. A doctor was seldomed called. Folks just made their own medicine. Yet there wasn't many folks sick in them days.
"'Long back in them days when us got in distress, trying to make a living, us used to set up lots of nights burning lightud knots to make tar. That was sold by the quart or gallon. You know that blessed old mother of mine has even used that old home-made tar as a medicine. We had to drink the water off of the tar for colds and it was a good tonic also for any one that didn't have no appetite.
"Still and too, that wasn't just perzactly what us made it for, 'cause you knows back then us didn't have no such stuff as wagon grease. That old tar answered the same purpose and it was used on wheels and harness too, and just 'bout everything they needed to grease.
"Another thing, Mistess, us didn't git no shoes 'ceppin' one time a year and that was on Christmas, that was our Santa Claus. Us would go to bed and try to see when they come, but it wasn't long 'fore us would be sound asleep. Next morning our brogan shoes with the bright shiny brass toes would be there and how happy us was! Just thankful for everything.
"They said I was always a very peculiar sort of a chap even when I was just a little tike. I was always asking questions. I was gifted with some kind of a strange power, but it was some time before I could really understand this strange and wonderful power, Fact is, I don't understand it now.
"But things just comes to me. I can see them and tell folks for it is just like a vision. Back then some folks would laugh at me about them visions. But, Mistess, they is all glad now when old Tom can help them out sometimes. Sometimes I can't help them a-tall for the vision just will not come and that is all I tells, just what the Lord shows me and tells me, to help folks, and I has been trying to help for 50 years or more.
"’Long then us had confidence in each other. Us was taught to live right and serve God, Never to take nothin' that didn't belong to us and never to do anything that would hurt anyone. Us just lived in the bonds of the law. Nobody broke the laws and when night come, us could lay down and sleep with a good clear conscience.
"I still 'members the first time I ever heered 'bout anyone breakin' the law. It was just outrageous. People for miles around were upset, skeered, and shocked. A man killed his wife. It was just terrible. Us couldn't understand it. When they tried him in court lots of folks couldn't git nigh the place 'cause everybody tried to go. He was sentenced and hung for murder.
"From that time on folks begun to grow weaker and wiser, and how wicked they are now! Murder is a very common thing now, and folks just will take things that don't no ways belong to 'em. Folks just don't live right. God is going to show us one of these days. Oh, how wonderful and grateful I was that I could hear my mother pray." Here Tom broke down and cried. After a few minutes, he said, "You couldn't go wrong on her prayers."
At this moment someone called and asked if Tom was there. The proprietor of the shop called Tom to the telephone. He came back to me and said that two men wanted to see him, "but I told them I was busy,” he added. They didn't accept that excuse and before Tom could get back to his story, the men were at the shop for him.
Calling Tom to the door, they said, "We have just got to see you for a few minutes, but we won't keep you long.” Excusing himself, Tom said, "I’ll he hack in a few minutes.” The men were dressed in overalls, wore heavy shoes and seemed to be farmers. They escorted Tom out to their car. I waited over an hour and still Tom didn't get back. Finally he came in and said, "It is so late and I just can’t git ’way from them men. What is I gwine to do?”
I asked him if I could come to his home the next morning and finish our interview.
Tom thanked me and said, "I’se sho sorry ’bout this, but one of these men is in trouble and wants to see if I can help him.” He told me how to find his house, but asked if I would prefer to have him come back to town and talk to me ’cause he lived ’way crost town." I wanted to see his home, and said, "I will be there if you are going to be at home."
"Yessum," he replied, "I’ll be there lessen someone dies, and I’ll call you if that happens." He went back to the car where the men were waiting for him.
Reaching Tom’s house early the next morning, I found that even then he had already been to town and returned home. He asked me to have a seat in the living room and apologetically said: "Excuse me while I eat breakfast, for I went to town early so I could git back by the time you got here." As he went out of the room to eat his breakfast, I looked around. The house was a new four-room white cottage, trimmed in green.
The walls of the living room were papered with comic sheets from the Sunday papers, and the border around the top was of pictures cut from magazines. The ceiling was of grooved and fitted planks, and a brightly figured linoleum square covered the floor. Rolls of music were neatly stacked on a player piano, which was flanked by large ferns in white home-made boxes. A crocheted cover adorned the cushion on the piano bench. I noticed a cabinet-style victrola and three large rocking chairs that were painted a bright shade of green. Fancy lace curtains were draped at the windows and crocheted squares covered the glass panes in the front door.
Tom returned in a short time and asked me if I would like to go through the house. He said that he wanted me to see Sally Anne and his daughter. I followed him through a bedroom where I saw a walnut colored iron bed, which was covered with a red silk spread, and a telephone that rested on a stand near the bed. There was a dressing table, several chairs, a heater, and a faded wool rug. The two windows were draped with clean scrim curtains, while newspapers covered the walls.
Then we entered another bedroom with a bright grate fire. A brown iron bed, covered with a green silk counterpane, a dressing table, a smaller table and several rocking chairs completed its furniture. The walls were papered with newspapers, the floor covering was of linoleum, and a box of baby chicks occupied the space in front of the fire. Cream colored curtains hung at the only window.
The kitchen, also papered with newspapers, was warm and comfortable from the fire in the large wood-burning range. A small dining table covered with a clean white cloth, a side table, upon which some dishes rested, and a very large cabinet were on one side of the room. A shelf just outside of the door held several very brightly polished water buckets, and plain white curtains draped the two large windows.
Just outside of the kitchen door was a well. "This is one of the best wells of water that you will find anywhere these, days," Tom remarked, "It is cold and pure too. Yonder is Sally Anne and Sister at the wash house. They are a little put out ’cause they is washin’ today, and ain’t had time to git fixed up. I told them that was all right ’cause you knowed us had to work."
As we reached the wash house I was greeted by Sally Anne, who with her daughter, was busily washing, both of them looking clean and neat in fresh house dresses. As Sally Anne smiled she showed a mouthful of gold teeth. There was a decided contrast between Tom’s wife and daughter. Sally Anne was very dark and inclined to stoutness, while Sister was tall and thin, much lighter, and wore her hair combed back very close to her head.
As we chatted we walked about the large clean yard, Tom displaying the hedge and various recently set out flowers. "If us can ever git fixed up lak us wants," he remarked wistfully, "this will be a right nice little place, but you know it takes money to do that. I have seen the time when I wouldn’t have to stop for that, but lak most everything else, it is all gone now.
"I has had my day and I has been wonderfully blest by a gracious and understanding God, and I wouldn’t call back them days if I could ’cause I’se done had my day. I tried to make good use of the days past and I hope the good Lord can say ’well done,' when I goes home, but us will go back to the fire to talk. This sunshine is mighty warm end pleasant, but if you stay out too long you can feel the chill.”
After we were seated in comfortable chairs in the room with the grate fire, Tom removed his large, white felt hat, and asked if he might smoke his pipe, "’cause I can think better if I can smoke,” he said. I hastened to assure him that it would be quite all right for him to smoke, and watched him closely as he very carefully filled his old pipe. My observation revealed a tall, straight, and very dark Negro between sixty and seventy years old. He presented a neat appearance in his white shirt, gray wool trousers and blue coat, together with a bright tie and black shoes.
The pipe puffing satisfactorily, he looked around and smiled. "Pride done ruint this old world, Mistess. Pride just done took the day. Back long in them times, us wasn’t ’fraid to work. Us didn’t know what it was to go to the store when us went to cook a meal, ’cause all the victuals was raised at home and all the cooking was done in the fireplaces. Clothes was made at home. Why, when us went to church, it was in old home-made clothes, that our mothers made.
"But bless the Lord that sho didn’t stop us from having meetings. Folks had ’ligion then and from the time the pastor read out the song and the brother over in amen corner started it off, every-body would 'gin to git happy, and when that old song, Amazing Grace now Sweet the Sound, was sung the shoutin' could be heard for a mighty long ways off 'cause didn't nobody stay home 'cause they didn't have no clothes to wear. Everybody was there shoutin'.
"All of us worked hard in the fields and as dutifully as the sun rose in the morning it found us in our fields at labor for that was the way us made our living and us did work. I wanted to have something and from daylight 'til dark us was at our work. At night us was tired out, that us was, and ready for the bed. Wasn’t no runnin' 'round at nights for us on the farms, but us did larn new things to grow and how to grow ’em better. As us 'vanced 'long us could raise more things to eat and us larnt how to grow sorghum cane and to make our own syrup. That was a change from the old black mo'-lasses but I'se frank to say that black mo'-lasses is still my favorite. There was just nothing lak them gingerbread cakes that my mother made with mo'-lasses end baked in them old ovens in the fireplace.
"I'se farmed all my life and I’se made money in farming, and then and too I'se lost money the same way, but mostly after farmers started to raising cotton as the money crop. For a while us made money that way, then prices of cotton would go up and then down to the bottom. When the price started up, everybody would hold all they possibly could, just warn't going to sell, just waiting 'til it got a little bit higher and fust thing us knowed it had done hit the bottom.
"I was just lak everybody else. I knowed I was going to git rich that way, but one thing I didn’t do, I didn’t quit raising plenty of foodstuff for us as well as plenty for the stock. I done pretty good.
"I took care of what I had. I didn’t throw it away and from my old ox, Mike, that I learned to plow with, I traded ’til I had good mules and some fine horses. I loved good horses and I raised only the best, and if I do essay it, there wasn’t no finer horses in that county than mine. I sold one to a man here in town for a thousand dollars. Yessum, that is right, I had ’vanced from that little notched log house until I had a good farm and a comfortable house for those times. When I married in 1894, I had, besides my farm and horses, a sawmill, shingle mill, gristmill, and a gin, and I run them all by myself.
"Course now you understand there was different times to run ’em. I couldn’t do it all at one time, but I got it all by hard work and saving what I made.”
At this point the insurance man knocked on the door. Tom went to a nail at one side of the fireplace and took down an envelope with the book and money in it. The collector chatted for a few minutes and asked Tom if he was going to farm again this year. "I guess I’ll try," Tom replied, "but all this rain us has been having will sho bake this old earth later on."
As the man left, Tom said, "How does you write that way and me just talking my head off? I just can’t see how you does it."
"It was hard at first," I replied, "but you know when you have to work, you have to learn now."
"That's right," he said. "I’se been watchin’ you as I talked and I’se had a vision. See if I’se right."
"Well, I hope it's a good one," I said.
"I’se seed that you is the only one of your fambly left, and the last went less than a year ago. Is I right?"
"You are," I replied. He started to say something else when someone called to him to come out in the yard.
As I waited for his return, I picked up one of the baby chicks out of the box. Sally Anne came in. Seeing the chick in my hand she laughed and said, "Does you lak little things too? Bet you laks dogs."
"I really do," I answered. "I think they’re the most faithful animals that we have, and I always had a dog when I was at home and the little girl at my boarding place has one that I’m very fond of."
Tom came back into the room and said, "It was about them same men that wanted to see me yistidday. I done said that I warn’t gwine nowhere ’til us got through talkin’ so they can just wait. Wasn’t us talking ’bout cotton? I ’member back in 1920 when things was sky high and I had forty bales of cotton here in the warehouse.
"Cotton was sellin’ for 40¢ a pound, and lak everybody else I helt on to that cotton, just knowed it would go higher, and I ’vested heavily in land also, bought every bit I could git a holt of. Everybody was just money mad. But it wasn't right, and I lost everything I had 'long with the rest of the folks. I'se larnt that the best way to make anything out of cotton is sell it, Just as quick as it gits out of the gin house.
"I never plowed up one stalk of cotton 'cause I 'bided by the laws and didn't plant only what I was 'sposed to plant. Yessum, I has stayed right in the bonds of the law. I'se got some money on my land and it was a blessin' to me. Why, last year the farmers didn't make nothin'. It was the worst year I ever 'members for farming. Course most folks wouldn't do lak the great President done asked 'em too. They just went ahead and planted their cotton and then when it was ruint, they plowed it under so they could git their checks.
"I think our President is the grandest man that has ever set in the President's seat. He is a blessin' to humanity. He has done more for the farmers than anyone else has ever done. He is just lak Moses leadin' the chillun of Israel; Just trying to lead us out of 'struction, but he don’t git much help. He feeds the poor and fixes jobs so that people can work. He is a blessin' sent by God."
Picking up a worn Bible from the table, Tom said, "Does you believe in this Good Book? 'Cause if it is wrong then there ain't nothin' else left for us. Does you believe in it?"
"Yes, indeed!" I replied. "My mother taught me to believe in it."
"Do you ever read your Bible?" he asked.
"Certainly," I answered.
"But do you just read it or do you really study it? I'll find out later cause I'se goin to ask you some questions.
”I ain't never had much education. But when I married, I decided that I was goin' to larn and make a man out of myself. I has sho tried to do that. I'se worked hard and I can read and write a little 'specially can I read this Book of Life. God lets me onderstand its meanings.”
"But tell me about your wedding,” I said.
"Well, along then, times wasn't lak they are now. Us had a big weddin', big for Negroes. Crowds of people was at our weddin' and there was plenty of white folks too. All Sally Anne's white folks was right there 'cause they sho did lak that gal and I tell you, she is one of the best of women, and if I had a $1,000,000 today, I would lay it all in her lap. She has never failed me. I always know that she is right here in her field of duty. She has worked right side of me in everything.
”Us had farmed together and raised all our things to eat. I didn't never try no 'bacco, just corn, peas, 'taters, rye, and wheat. Yes, I has made money farming, and I has also lost money on the farm. It is hard work, but any kind of work is that way if you stays at it. My check from the government for $30 came just before Christmas. It sho did come in a good time. I took that money and bought us all something to eat and some clothes.
”We has just got two chillun; a girl, Sister, and a boy. Sister is a good and smart girl, but my son is just no 'count.” Just here someone called him again and he left the room.
Returning in a few minutes, he said, "I has been wonderfully blest for God gives me these visions so that I can help folks and I has been so thankful but, Mistess, war is comin'. I know it is 'cause I has had the same visions I had before the World War. I has seed the people gatherin' together and marchin' in crowds, and then the Bible is fulfillin’ its teachings, for it says: 'There shall be wars and rumors of wars,’ and the war that's comin' and comin' fast is goin' to be bad 'cause folks is wiser in wicked ways than they was in the last war.
"I has had visions end predicted for our governors. Yessum, I has had letters from more than one of 'em asking me to help 'em. But lessen I gits the vision I can't help a'tall. But when God lets me see these things I think it is my bounden duty to tell 'em.
"I'se been a licensed preacher for more than nineteen years, but I'se never been ordained. They has wanted to ordain me, but I just don't feel right yet in that way 'cause I'se just plain and ignorant, but I takes my stand on my Bible, if it is wrong then I am wrong. But if this Blessed Book is right, then I am right, for as the Lord said to Nicodemus, 'Ye must be born again.'
"Churches ain't lak they used to be, just too much high polutin' preaching now. I don't lak that. I laks to hear 'em preach from the Bible, and the heart, not just read off a sermon that somebody done perpared and writ down for 'em. Why, they don’t study the Bible no more. They reads it, but not with onderstanding. Some of our greatest preachers today can't explain what the soul of man is.
"Now, my Bible says this and I takes my stand on the Bible. See right here in the second chapter of Genesis in the seventh verse." With apparent difficulty Tom read slowly. "’And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, end the man became a living soul.’ Now that is plain for anyone to read. The soul is the breath of life. My white folks comes to me lots of times and asks me questions about the Bible.
"I 'member one time us had up a question about the Sabbath Day. Has you always been taught that God made the earth in six days days and rested on the seventh day?"
"Yes, I have always been taught that," I replied, wondering just what he would say about that.
"Well then, Mistess, just let me read the second verse of the second chapter of Genesis to you."
Continuing slowly he read. "'And on the seventh day God ended his work which He had made; and He rested on the seventh day from all His work which He had made.'"
Handing the Bible to me, he said, "There read it for yourself, and you can see where it says he ended his work on the seventh day." He had this passage, as well as the seventh verse which he had just read, marked with a cross.
As I handed the Bible back to him, he said, "Don't you think that is plain for anyone to onderstand? For He says He ended his work on the seventh day. I is just a plain old Missionary Baptist preacher, but that is plain to me, and if all people would read with onderstanding and belief it would be plain to them.
"A little more than a month ago, I was called to preach at my old church where I still keeps my membership 'cause I never has moved it in all these years. Everybody was upset and distressed 'bout these hard times. I just tore up that church. God just told me what to say. I told them that us didn't have no panic now, and I took 'em. back to the days of Moses and Aaron and when Elisha led the people into Samaria and there was a great famine in that land.
"People was so hungry that they et they own chillun. Some of them didn't lak it and said there wasn't no sich thing in the Bible. I asked them to read 2nd Kings, 6th chapter, 28th end 22th verses. They came to me and told me I was right. I had took my stand on my Bible and it proved me right. Now, I want to read them verses to you.
"And the King said unto her, what aileth thee? and she answered, This woman said unto me, Give thy son that we may eat him today, and we will eat my son tomorrow.
"'So we boiled my son and did eat him: and I said unto her on the next day: 'give thy son, that we may eat him; and she hath hid her son.'
"See I was right, Mistess. This Blessed Book has never failed me yet. I always try to preach just what I see 'cause I don't lak this high poluting preaching and God don't lak it neither. He wants his disciples to preach the truth and nothing but the truth, but, oh, just for some more of them old meetings when people got happy and wasn’t 'fraid to show it, that is what I call real 'ligion.
"But I'se had my day and I 'spects I'se gittin' old. I don’t know how old I is 'cause my folks didn’t know how to count. I still tries to farm and I sells face creams, powder, and sich things as that and piddles ’round on odd jobs all the time."
"What did you do back in those days for recreation?" I asked.
"Well, ’bout the biggest times was them old corn shuckin’s. Now, Mistess, they was really enjoyable. Sometimes they lasted for two and three days ’cause folks sho raised corn then. We had a general that led the singin’ and there was big suppers. I has shucked corn by the light of the moon and by bonfires. After the work was done there was games and I tells you playing marbles was a great sport.
"When us just wanted a get-together supper and party, us had hominy feasts. It was the real old lye hominy. Big pots full of it was cooked and that was something to enjoy and be happy and thankful for."
I was afraid to mention dancing so I just asked if they continued to have corn shuckings at the present time.
"Why, yes, lots of times, when the corn is all gathered in 'specially ’mong the colored folks. They 'vites crowds to help git the corn shucked ’cause they don’t change much as the white folks. However our folks is gittin’ in better shape, just ’vancing right along.”
As the same men came back for Tom again, I prepared to leave. He walked out to the sidewalk with me and said, "This sun is delicious today and makes me feel good. I’se glad I’se not in the trouble dem folks is.
"Come back agin when our flowers gits to blooming out, and our place will look better.”
As Sally Anne came around the house to tell me good-bye, Tom said, "Mistess, I’se gwine to come and tell you ’boat that vision. It ain’t right clear yit, but I’se seen enough to know that you is gwine right on to success. I cen tell you more about it soon.”
