November 15, 1938
Arlie G. Lane
Welfare Department
#1008 McGhee Street
Knoxville, Tennessee.
Della Yoe, Writer
Revised by Edwards and
Aswell.
THEM THAT NEEDS
"Sorry. I ain't allowed to make no changes. . . Keep the line moving, please. . . We ain't got no salmon. Fat bacon's the only kind of meat we got. It's good for seasoning. Meat's too high priced for the city to give away. . . We got enough stuff here, such as it is, to keep folks from starving."
Red Lane shoved supplies across the table to the city's needy with the speed of a well-oiled machine. He stuck the last relief slip on the filing pin. The frail looking woman who handed it in packed canned goods carefully in her split bottom market basket. She parcelled out the sacks of potatoes, flour, meal to the three small boys with her. She could take her time getting in moving order with no line shoving her now.
"Thanks," she said as she walked to the street door.
"Not a-tall."
Red did not look up as he gave a hurried straightening to tiers of corrugated boxes filled with canned good s. He pushed back the stacks of flour, meal, potatoes that lined the concrete floor of the basement supply room. Work finished, he pulled a chair close to the table and sank down to get the weight off his feet. His elbow rested on the table as he talked.
"She'd be polite if I give her sawdust. Some's like that. Got manners. Some's had it so hard they've forgot how to be polite if they ever knowed it. That woman that got so fussy when I wouldn't swap for salmon, she's had it hard. Five little children and a sick ma to take care of. No money to do it on except what comes from taking in washing. Her husband took off and left her before the last kid was borned. She don't even know where he's at. All the kids is just to the size to be under her feet. Not a one big enough for helping. Lives more'n three miles from here and has to walk every step of the way here and back when she comes for supplies. That's hard on a woman.
"The way I look at it is this. This is a rich country I figger it ain't going to hurt the government to feed and clothe. them that needs it. Half of 'em can't get work, or just ain't fixed to handle work if they get it. I imagine this country's worth near on to ten billion dollars. We've got the money. Plenty of it. No sense in the big fellow's kicking about a little handout to the poor. matter's not if some ain't deserving.
"I'll admit there's some don't deserve a nickle of the government's money. Lot of them that comes here, why I'd sooner give them a kick in the pants than shove 'em out supplies. But you got to take the good with the bad. Or bad with the good, whichever way you've a mind to put it. Most that comes here are poor and can't help it. Needs help. Need sit just same I need this job. always going to be more poor folks than them that ain't poor. Now take me. I've always been poor and I guess I always will be. I ain't saying that's the government's fault. It's just a downright truth, that's all.
"There's a lot of things I'd like different in the world. But I can't say I got so much to complain of. If I'd had more education like as not I'd be getting more pay. Maybe, I wouldn't. Not getting no schooling is my own fault. Poor or rich, humans is faulty one way or the next. Time I got to the seventh grade I got the making of money in my head. Wages looked to be about the best thing in the world. Well, I had a run of' good jobs. Made fair money for a year or two driving trucks. Took a turn at auto fixing, too, around a filling station. Just first one thing and another. Jobs was easy to get then. That's before women got set on going to work. That's what caused all this depression business. I'm not saying that the women don't need jobs now. They does. But they got themselves to thank for the fix the world's in. They started out taking jobs from men when there wasn't no sense in them working. Them men lost out on good jobs and dropped right down and took ours. Just wasn't no jobs left for poor folks.
"Folks that ain't never been poor just don't know nothing a-tall about doing on nothing. I get so all-fired full of laugh when some of these women from the higher ups comes down to the welfare Department. Nice ladies, but it ain't a salt spoon of sense about poor folks in their heads. Pretty little thing come last week to tell the women come here about cooking. Before she started spieling, she seen them cans of salmon I took from the big case and put on that shelf' back there. That give her a start. She aimed to tell them how to make up a pot dish from leftover salmon. We ain't really got no salmon here. Just a cheap grade of canned mackerel.
She sailed in.' Brush the baking dish with melted butter,' says she. If she hadn't been so pretty and so young, I'd liked to asked right off -where they going to get the butter? Ain't two in the rooms got butter for their bread. You'll have to shift to a skillet for the cooking. that's about the best they got for greasing up.' Of course I didn't say no such to her. She was just plumb wore out tine she got that salmon out of her head and into the cook stove. When she come to tail part of the talk giving them leave to ask her questions, she looked to me about ready to falloff the box I'd drug out for her to speak from. It's a blessing the Lord made it easy for some. A blessing. And I'm glad He done it.
"my wife's one ain't got no easy going. She do all the house work. Washing Ironing. Sewing. Cooking. There's eight of us counting me and he. Six children. Me and Ella took a marrying notion when we wasn't to no age. without a penny laid by two that age ain't got no sense about what's to come. Ella ain't never throwed in my face talk of things she ought to have. Things I ain't been able to give her. She's been poor all her life. She ain't got as much schooling as me. No further than the fifth grade. Same year we's married our first young one come along. They's come two years part regular since then. All boys but the last one. We got the sharpest little girl baby I ever seen. Born past July. Suits me alright. I'm proud to have one like her. Girls mostly have a hard time. Ought not have too many. Especially when thing's like they's now. Me and the boys can take care of sister. I aim to see she gets a shot at schooling. I'd like to get that little farm I'm set on while she's little. Give her just the kind of playing and eating she ought to have.
"Lord, there's one thing a man with a wife and kids got to do - hang on to some sort of steady work. Get the most pay he can. When we's first married, I was carrying freight all over the state. Trucking for a big concern. I just throwed up that job. Thought I'd pick up another one in no time. I'd just got plumb sick of sleeping and eating in cheap boarding places. Being away from Ella all the time. I just quit.
"Well, I wasn't as smart as I thought. I'd get first one thing and next for piece time. No steady work. The depression Come on. I really wasn't trained to do much of nothing except drive a car and do mechanics round filling stations. And in them two lines looked like I couldn't find nothing. I said to Ella, 'I ain't no fool and I ain't proud. I'm going to get something steady if it's digging ditches.' Look like the Lord know'd I meant what I said. Next week I get wind of the janitor job over the City welfare Department being open. They seen hard work wasn't no' matter to' me. I didn't ask one thing or another about all the things they aimed for the janitor to do. I just said, 'I wants that job and I needs it.' They give it to' me. Driving the car for the Director was throwed in extra to the cleaning and such. And I was plumb glad it was. I come right up from that job to where I'm now. I'm in charge of supplies and keeping track of the stuff that comes in and is give out. I still drive the car for the Director. It ain't good for a man to spend most of his time in a hole damp and dark as this basement. Driving that car give me a shot at a little fresh air and sunshine. And I needs it.
"Just goes to show the Lord'll work things out for us if we give him a chance. when I Come down here I thought to myself -'well, I'll put up with it till things takes turn for better.' why it's just drug us along through hard times' I get my transportation. food supplies. Clothes. They leave me take the pick of them sent in for poor families. Take shoes-you just try to keep shoes on growing kids. See what a hole it knocks in your cash. I'm glad I'm in on the ground and gets the first drag at what's sent in. And working for the city I don't have to pay my own house rent. Now that to me's about the best part of the job. Sickness come along like as not a man'll take rent money for doctoring and time comes to pay up he ain't put it back for rent like he thought he would. Out he and his goes. Unless he's got a mighty fine landlord. There's a few of that kind. Most is in the business for the money, though, and nothing else.
"Asides from groceries and. rent and clothes there's ten dollars a week wages. I figger our spending, all told, about twenty dollars a month. Things we got to have that ain't give us is bought on the installment plan. Cost more that way. But what you going do when things got to be got and there's no spot cash to hand! we's pulling long through debt right well. Just fifteen dollars owing on the furniture and bout twenty-five on the washing machine. Lord, that washing machine's worth ever cent we paid for it. I told Ella if I ever seen another thing that'd be as big help to her I'd buy it if I had to bust a bank. It don't take her half the time used to to get all them young on's clothes did and the house things and such. Ella keep ever thing from the kids to the kivers clean as a pin. House the same. We keep our kids close to home. Don't let them run round with just any trash. I got the last one of ours insured for burial - except sister. I'll get her fixed time she's year old. I pay twenty cents a week on me and Ella. Ten cents for the two oldest boys, five cents for the others.
"Thing that worries me most about a large family is the feeding of them right. I know ours don't have what they's supposed to. Not if half's right I hear them ladies who come here to talk says. we can't manage the milk we should for them. If we get Grade A they ain't enough for more than a cup around. I guess that cheap canned milk's good enough for cooking. we uses what they give us. Them things concocted for the place of butter ain't as cheap as you'd think. I ain't strong like I used to be. And with all this talk I hear floating round I wonder if its the things I ain't had to eat that's done it.
"I aim if we ever get out of debt to study about things like that. Give our kids ever fool thing folks says they ought to have to miss miseries that might take them off. I want to buy me about three acres of land. That'd be much as I could work. Build me a nice little house on it. I'd raise chickens, have a garden, two or three good cows and some pigs. I seen advertised in the paper where you could pick up acres of land round here cheap as ten dollars down and ten months coming till its paid for. How a man's going to live and bring up a big family on what the higher-ups call "minimum wage" is something to study bout. I tries to do the best know's how. I guess the Lord don't ask more of nobody than that. But I'd be a lots easier in my head if I could get together enough to buy that little farm for me and Ella and the kids. A lots easier."