Approximately 5059 Words.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
MARY WATKINS AND HER FAMILY.
Date of First Writing	Jan. 13, 1939
Name of Person interviewed	Alph Kinard (White)
Fictitious Name	Mary Watkins
Street Address	140 Wentworth Street
Place	Charleston, S. C.
Occupation	Department Store Clerk
Name of Writer	Rose D. Workman
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #-1655	LIFE HISTORY.
Rose D. Workman
Charleston, S. C.
January 4, 1939.
MARY WATKINS AND HER FAMILY.
The neat, bay-windowed house stood a little back from the street, with a small unfenced yard in front, in which some unhealthy looking flowers were half-heartedly trying to bloom.
The house itself had probably started life as a private dwelling in the days when servants were plentiful and families were large. That at least two families shared it now was evident from the two unmarked bell buttons at one side of the door. After ringing each in turn, without response, I walked into the piazza and rapped smartly on the entrance door, with a small, dingy knocker, that may have been brass, but locked like iron.
After a long interval the door was opened by a lanky, overgrown boy. Who sulkily said in reply to my question, that he believed the Watkins lived on the top floor. After climbing three flights of stairs, guarded by a handsome old mahogany balustrade, I arrived at the Watkins' apartment.
Unlike the halls lower down, which though neat were quite devoid of decoration, the little attic entry to the Watkins' home was gay with potted plants, which, in striking contrast to those in the garden below, were blooming away in the bright sunshine that flooded in through the crisply curtained window.
This time the door was opened by a tall, bent old lady, with bright brown eyes, luxuriant white hair, and vary large horn rimmed glasses. Or perhaps it was because her face was so thin and small, that the glasses looked so large.
Yes, Mary was at home; she would call her.
While waiting for Mary's arrival, I looked around the room in which I eat. It was a cozy, sunshiny place, right up under the eaves. The walls were papered in an old fashioned green and white design, and creamy curtains hung at the tiny windows. Potted plants bloomed on the deep window-sills. A large oil burner made the room comfortably warm.
The only other occupant of the room was a tall, dark-eyed young man in his late twenties, who, lounging at ease in a great armchair, had interrupted his reading to acknowledge his mother's introduction with a pleasant word of greeting. Now and again he would look up from his magazine to make some short, detached remark:
"How do you like our attic? I'm going to calcimine this roam as soon as I can get a couple of days off."
He returned to his story without waiting for a reply, but in a few moments he continued as if there had been no interruption:
"Mama doesn't want me to. She likes things old fashioned. But I like to have everything modern around me. Mama, now, she has a fit whenever I want to change anything."
Mama entered, murmuring that Mary would be here in a minute, and Mary soon appeared, clad in what she termed her "lounging suit," - an old gray skirt, and a still older sweater, with both elbows out.
A true olive skin; enormous brilliant green eyes under heavy black brows; a quantity of jet black hair hanging down upon her shoulders in a long bob; small, upturned nose, and a well proportioned, plump little figure. That was Mary. She was perhaps a year or two younger than her brother in the easy chair.
"Hello," she said abruptly. "I lost my job since I saw you last. I'm trying to get on the WPA, but I don't know whether I can or not, because Dick is working, and Bill has temporary employment on a dredge. But we certainly need the money.
"We can't get along on what Dick makes. And Bill never helps at all. He spends everything he earns on himself.
"I certainly was disappointed. After they put me on full time in the department store, I thought of course they were going to give me steady work, but they gave me the pink slip Christmas Eve Night.
"I was so proud of having a real job! While I didn't like being a department store clerk so awful well, and standing all day long, yet I had a lot of fun!" Mary giggled reminiscently.
"I was in the 'men's wear,' and we really had a good time, even if we did work hard. I was always telling one of the boys to 'Step to -' and one night just before closing time he upset a box of socks and got them all mixed up, and then he said, quick as a wink:
'Miss Watkins, I'm going home now, before you get a chance to tell me where to step.'
"Another day a customer came in, asking for something I knew perfectly well we didn't have; but the floor-walker insisted that we did, so I started in to hunt, like a good girl. After a while the customer said:
'Lady, next time I come in for you to wait on me, I'm coming early and spend the day.'
"I learned a lot, though, on that job. For instance, I never knew a thing about Scotch clans and plaids before. But we handled a special Christmas number of plaid ties for men, and each box was labled with the name of the clan to which that plaid belonged.
But now I have to start job hunting all over again. Honestly, it will most kill me if I have to go back on relief. I expect it's a throwback to my proud, old ancestors," laughing, "though really and truly, I don't give a hoot who my people were. Mama's the one who goes in for all that.
"Now, don't misunderstand me. I'm awfully grateful for WPA work. Only I do like a private job best.
"Once I was on a project for copying old records. I liked the work and the girls a lot, and my supervisor was lovely to me. But my eyes aren't strong, and while I was using them so much in that fine work they got so bad I had to get awfully strong glasses. They cost me $22, but the doctor lot me pay $8 a week on them and after a long time I got the bill settled.
"But for that reason I was glad when they transferred me to 'Recreation.' I really enjoyed that work a lot. I was crazy about my little 'gnats' and 'midget' basketball teams, and I liked the morning work in the kindergarten, too. One little boy used to bring me lunch along with his every day. I like children," she concluded.
"Let me show you a picture of my little niece," said Mary, taking a framed photograph from the mantle. "She came down to see us last summer, and she was the sweetest baby! It's too bad Mama hasn't either of her grandchildren with her. She has two. This girl, Martha, and a boy, Sonny. Jack, their father, is my oldest brother. He's manager of one of the dime stores in a little town up in North Carolina. But we hardly ever get to see them. We don't like his wife much.
"But going back to the subject of job-hunting. What I really want is to be a newspaper reporter. The professor at High told me I had a lot of talent for writing, but I never have had the chance to give it a trial.
"I wouldn't mind leaving this town one little bit. I've my name on file with a newspaper in Columbia, and I've pretty nearly worn out the steps of the office here. But no luck so far!
"The Job I liked beat of any I ever had was when I worked at the Radio Shop. I liked that a lot. The Boss let me write my own letters and all he did was sign them. When I worked at the Southern Crystal Company I did that sort of work too.
"Of course, I didn't get much money at the Radio Shop. They only paid $5 a week. But it was the kind of work I like, and that's a lot. I made $12 a week at the department store."
Brother Dick stopped his reading long enough to say:
"Well, I only make $20 a week at the Telegraph company, but at least it's permanent, and it's enough to pay the grocery bills, and water, light, and fuel. I'll tell the world, this family eats a lot.
"Mary pays the rent - that is, when she's working," he added chuckling.
'Yes, and I buy all Mama's and my clothes, such as they are," said Mary. "It's a long time since I had anything decent, though. I certainly am tired of being poor."
"But haven't you another brother who lives here with you?" I asked.
"Oh, yes, Bill. He's the deaf one," said Mary, quite impersonally. "He's the one who upsets the family. My brother in North Carolina, the father of the little baby in the picture, paid for Bill to take a course in accounting, and Bill passed the examination and got a civil service appointment, and then wouldn't take the job."
"He makes me sick," she said in disgusted tones.
"Another time Jack bought him an acousticon and when he uses it he can hoar perfectly well; but some idiot girl told him it made him look funny, and now you can't get him to wear it. That's why we talk so loud," she explained, "we get in the habit of shouting at Bill.
"He's the one who keeps the rest of us down," she went on, looking me straight in the eye, as is her habit when speaking. "Say he takes a job with the Produce Company, apple shipping time, up North. We'll all put in and get him a thick overcoat and a nice outfit. Than this la the kind of thing he's apt to do!
"Last year at the end of the shipping season managed to save a little. He bought a brand new suit of clothes, and he had the overcoat we had given him when he got the job. Dick did without a new one all winter, so Bill could have a really good, warm coat. Then he decided to ride home with a fellow who had advertised for passengers coming South. There was one girl and two men in the outfit. Well, when they got to some little jumping-off place, Bill decided he had to eat. I tell him his stomach will be the death of him yet!
"Anyway, the other fellows said they didn't want anything, so Bill and the girl went into the restaurant and got themselves the kind of dinner Bill always has to have. Well, they took their time eating, and when they went outside again to join the others, there wasn't anybody to join. They had simply disappeared, and along with them had gone Bill's two suitcases, the brand new suit, and even the overcoat that the big silly had left in the car. He had to wire home for money, and had to stay at the hotel until we managed to scrape it together for him someway or other.
"Oh, yes," chuckling. "The worst part of it was that the girl hadn't a cent to her name, and Bill had to pay her way at the hotel, too, and loan her money to go home on.
"But that's the kind of thing Bill's always doing. Then he'll come back and stay on us for months at a time. Dick and I get awfully cross about having to support a big, husky man. I get worst mad than Dick does became I make such a tiny little salary. Twelve dollars a week is the most, and sometimes I've only made five. But Mama's sorry for Bill because he's deaf, and being deaf makes him nervous. So as long as Mama's alive, we have to put up with him, because it upsets her so much if we fuss. It brings on her bad headaches.
"No, I don't know what causes her to have such terrible headaches. She won't have a doctor, but she takes a lot of 'B-C' tablets, and after a While they get batter. I think they come from her stomach.
"Mama never will have a doctor. It isn't because of the money it would cost, either, because she knows we'd manage to pay the bill somehow. It's just that she doesn't think a headache is important enough to see a doctor about. But I feel that there must be some cause for them, and it worries me that she won't let a doctor check up on her health. But she's just one of these self-sacrificing people who never will take any care of themselves. Sometimes she drags about the house, cooking and sweeping, when she's moat dead on her feet.
"Now me! I'm just the other way. Any time I get the least bit sick I run to the doctor's office. I get seared I'm going to die. Last year I had kidney trouble and I was in the doctor's care for about three months. He cut the bill right in half for me because I was a WPA worker. Charged me $6 for six visits, when he could have charged $12 or maybe more. I went to his office every other Saturday for three months.
"But usually I'm quite well, except for bad colds. I have a lot of them, though. I feel as if I might be getting one now," she concluded, blowing her nose violently on a crumpled linen handkerchief which she retrieved from one sleeve of the ragged sweater.
"Bill makes so much extra work for Mama," Mary went on. "The rest of us don't mind what we eat, so there's enough of it. But when Bill's home he demands big dinners and suppers of steak and vegetables. Even in the mornings, when Dick and I often rush off with just a glass of orange juice or a cup of coffee - sometimes I just get a dope down town on the way to work - so as not to wake Mama after one of her bad days, he's got to have a heavy breakfast, no matter what time of day he gets up.
"It certainly is aggravating," she concluded with a sigh. "But," brightening," it's nice that he's got work on the Dredge now. He gets his meals and can sleep there, too, if he wants to. He likes the men on the boat, so he stays right often, and they play checkers and cards in the evenings."
Taking a cigarette from a package on the table nearby, she started it, and smoked in silence for a few moments. Then breaking into laughter, she cried:
"Dick! Did I ever tell you how Mama found out I was smoking?" Puffing away in evident enjoyment of her cigarette, she told her little story with gusto:
"I'd been smoking for a long time but I never told Mama, because she's old fashioned and thinks it's terrible for a girl to smoke. It's really immoral, to hear her tell it. But anyway, one day about a year ago I was taken ill very suddenly while I was at work - I must have been poisoned by something I ate - and they rushed me over to the hospital. Well, after they pumped me out I began to feel better, and after a while I felt so good that they let me alt up in bed. I asked could I have a smoak. The interne gave me a cigarette, and there I was, propped up against the pillows, smoking, and laughing and talking with him, when Mama walked in. Honestly, she liked to have had a fit.
"But anyway, that sick spell did one good thing. Now that Mama knows I smoke, I smoke at home. I don't like to deceive Mama."
Thrusting out a pair of small, high-arched feet, shod in dull kid slippers, Mary commanded!
"Look at my fashionable new slippers! When I was working in the Department Store my feet swelled up so from standing all day long, that I couldn't wear my high heeled shoes, so I got these, and wore them all the time I was working there, in the street, and everywhere. Nobody seemed to notice they were bedroom slippers, and they certainly helped my feelings.
"You see a day in a department store is pretty tiring. We opened at 8:30. That meant being at my counter around 8:15. Dick and I had the same dinner hour, from twelve to one, so we all ate together, thank Goodness! It makes it so much easier for Mama when we can have dinner together. But by the time six o'clock cane and I put the cover over my counter, my feet felt like boils!
'During the Christmas rush we kept open until nine, with thirty minutes out for a snack at supper time. But like I said, I liked it fine."
Just then Mrs. Watkins opened the door, and announced that supper was ready. They had to have it early, she explained, because Dick had to go back to work at the Telegraph Office at five. She had laid a place for me.
We filed out into the crowded little dining room. Dick courteously pulled out a chair for me, and we sat down. That is, all sat down except Mama, who kept stirring busily about, seeing that everyone had everything possible piled upon his or her plate. As she caredqfor the wants of her family, she kept up a steady flow of conversation. Being slightly deaf, she kept right on talking even when the others were speaking. Indeed, is seemed to be a kind of game, for whenever Dick was ready to add a word or two, he would make a waving motion of the arm, as if flagging down a train, and then Mama would laugh and atop for a moment, and Dick would have the right of way.
A short time before Mary had slipped out and put on a gray tailored suit, quite light and easily soiled. Rather pettishly, as her mother kept moving about, first with the teapot, then with the gravy bowl, Mary decided to move her seat:
"Before Mama spills something all over me," she said in explanation. But she was too late. It was a case of "out of the frying pan, into the fire," for she 'sat right down in a sizable puddle of tea, which had already been spilled into the seat of the chair. Taking it in very good part, however, and as one accustomed to such accidents, Mary mopped heeself and the chair with her napkin, and the meal continued without further interruption.
There was a large pork ham at one end of the table; a dish of steaming buttered potatoes at the other; and cranberry jelly, pickles, a bowl of salad, and plates of bread and butter, were generously sandwiched between. A choice of tea, coffee, or milk, was given, and gelatine and cake served for dessert.
Mama evidently not only knew the value of a well-balanced diet, but how to prepare an appetizing meal. The salad was crisp, the pork was neither too dry nor underdone, and the coffee hot and strong.
"Mama's a good cook," said Dick appreciatively, serving himself to a second helping of potatoes," though we would rather have less to eat than have her tire herself out fixing it. But she believes in eating right, and most of our money goes on the table. I expect that's why Mary and I keep so well," he concluded.
Mama kept urging food on everyone, until Dick remarked humorously.
"If anybody comes round here, Mama makes them eat. I thought she was the worst in the world for that, but once I went round to my girl's house for supper, and her mother was worse than Mama. She didn't want you to leave anything at all on the table."
During supper Mary called attention to several small water colors on the walls, mostly sea-scenes, and a handpainted vase on the buffet.
"Mama did them," she said proudly. "Mama really is the talented member of this family. We children only finished high school, but Mama is a college graduate. Back in those days it wasn't so usual for girls to go to college as it is now.
"Mama writes, too. I guess that's where I get my love of writing. She won two medals for composition at college, one in her Junior year, and one when she graduated. She's written lots of stories, that are ever so much better than many of those you read in the magazines. But she can't seem to get one published. It's all in getting started," she sighed.
"I wish I could have gone to college," Mary went on. "If I had, I would have majored in English. Maybe I could get work on a newspaper easier if I had a degree. But it takes a lot of money to send four children to college, and I think Mama did mighty well to get us through high school.
"My daddy was a cotton broker, but he died a long time ago, and Mama had the whole family to take care of, and hardly any money. She kept a Gift Shop once, but she didn't make anything with that. There's so many gift shops.
"Mama wasn't raised to this kind of life, either. She was brought up on a big plantation and was accustomed to every luxury. But she's had a lot of knocks since those days.
"I'm going to church tonight," Mary said, when the meal was almost ended." I'm Baptist. I always go to Sunday School and stay to church afterwards. I belong to the Amona Class, and we really have an awfully nice group. "I don't take my religion very seriously though," she said. "I expect I'm not a strict Baptist, for I do lots of things that Baptists are not supposed to do. For one thing, I love to play cards. Any kind of card game appeals to me. Mama loves Bridge beet. At our last apartment it was easy to get enough people for a rubber moat any time. I was glad during the Christmas rush when I was working late, that she had congenial people to play with. It kept her from worrying about me.
"We don't know the people in this house yet," Mary continued "so Mama hasn't had a game for over a month now.
"I don't think it's wrong to take a drink, either, but I'm careful not to go beyond my limit of two cocktails. Sometimes Dick comes home rather high from a party," she added, "though not often. He's a good, steady boy and brings Mama almost every cent he makes.
"Do you know," she went on wistfully, "I have a girl friend who is making $80 a month. I'd be willing to work day and night for $80. If I could make that much Dick could get married, for I could take care of Mama OK on eighty bucks. My real goal, though, is to earn one hundred dollars a month. Then Mama and I could have some good-looking clothes once in a while. At present our backs have to suffer for our stomachs.
Every Saturday, rain or shine, Mama and I go to the pictures," Mary continued, when we were again settled in the living room. "Sometimes Mama is so tired she can't walk, so we get a taxi. But unless one of us is sick in bed, we always see a show Saturday afternoon.
"But the thing I like to do beat of all la to have my fortune told. You don't know any good fortune tellers, do you?"
Mary says she would like to be married and have a home of her own. But, she explained, she doesn't go out very much with men because she doesn't like petting parties, and all the nice men she knows are "already married anyway."
Sometimes Mary goes to a dance. She says she loves to dance. Indeed, so well does she enjoy this pastime that every year she takes a few lessons just to keep up with the changing steps.
Dick, according to Mary, is the member of the family who steps out. He and his "girl friend," Ethel Jennings, take in all the big dances given by the "Elks, the "Legion," and other similar organizations.
Dick's friend has a car, and Dick and Ethel, and often another couple, take many trips to the beaches in the summertime.
No, Mary doesn't go with them. She always gets car-sick when she goes for a long drive. A car is one thing Mary doesn't envy anybody owning. But Mama now! It would do her a lot of good to get out in the sunshine in a car sometimes. But people don't seem to bother much about old ladies.
"I don't care much for fiction," said Mary. "I like books on finance best. This is a good book here," producing a fat volume from the small bookcase. "Mama says I'm much more like a man than a girl in my literary tastes. But I like detective stories, too.
"Politics? I'm a one hundred percent Roosevelt man, and what pleases Roosevelt pleases me. All this family are firm believers in the New Deal. That's the one thing we agree on, and we all vote the Democratic ticket every election day."
Speaking of how she spends her day, Mary said briefly;
"I get up and eat breakfast and go to work. I come home, read the paper, and go to bed.
"If I'm not working, I help Mama round the house.
"Nothing interesting ever happens to me. I've nothing to look forward to. I'm utterly dissatisfied with life."
When the time came to leave, Mary offered to show me through the little apartment. The late afternoon sun was still flooding the windows of the bedroom, although the back of the house was dark.
Plainly furnished as it was, with a double bed, a dressing table, a closet curtained off with bright cretonne, and a couple of chairs, the gay lineoleum rug and the flowers blooming on the window sill, gave the room an air of cheerfulness.
On the dresser lay an elaborately carved teakwood box, inlaid with mother-of-pearl flowers, and trailing vines.
"Mama's antique, Great-grandmama's jewel box that Sherman's soldiers broke open when they ransacked the old home," said Mary. "She buried all her jewels and a liver to keep the soldiers from getting them, except some gold chains and trinkets that were in this box. The soldiers broke the gold hinges off of the box and took them along with the chains and pins, but left the box itself. See, here are Mama's medals.
"Mama used to have some lovely old jewels too," continued Mary, "but 'Little Jennie', Mama's niece, gradually bought them all. Mama needed the money, and in that way they stayed in the family.
"Mama has a lot of old furniture stored at Little Jennie's. Sometimes she wants to send for it, but moving around from one apartment to another the way we do, it's better not to have any heavy stuff of your own.
"We get this whole place furnished for $20 a month, including hot water. Of course, it isn't much to look at, but it's a lot for that money.
"The last place we had was much nicer. It was $35. But when I lost my job we had to get something cheaper.
"Mama and I have this room, and Dick sleeps on the daybed in the sitting room. When Bill's at home, he has a cot.
"Dick pays for the groceries. I pay the rent, and Bill's our guest. But like I said, as long as Mama is alive, it can't be helped. And of course, we want her to live forever. She's the backbone of this family, all right.
"If you hear of a job, let me know, won't you? I'm a good typist, and I know book-keeping too.
"Yes, I can take dictation. I finished a course in 'Speed- writing' at the Murray Vocational Night School last year. But I don't like it. It makes me nervous.
"But I can write an awfully good letter without dictation, and that's something every girl can't do. So don't forget to listen out for a job for me."