All names changed
by writer
NC-436
Date of first writing	June 9, 1939
Person interviewed	Everlina Jane Cotton (Negro)
Occupation	Housewife
Address	Cary, N. C.
Name of writer	Nancy T. Robinson
No. of words	About 2,500
TILL DEATH DO US PART
"Well, Ma, look who's coming! If it ain't Mabel Brooks ! No it ain't Ma; I kin see it ain't now. But for de life of me, dey's enough alike to be twins. Howdy, Stranger, come right in. I jest knowed dat you was my old friend from Winston----, Mabel Brooks, she used to be. I don't know what her last name is now. I ain't seen her in about five years now. But you shore had me fooled for awhile. You look like her, and walk like her. Now, your voices are different.
"Hilda, bring de lady a more comfortable chair. I jest knowed dat rooster was crowing up company. I told Ma so. He's been crowing all de morning. I kin always tell.
"So you wanna know about my life. Ain't dat jest fine ! I'll be glad to tell you anything dat you want to know about Me and Bennie, but you'll have to ask me what you want to know about. I ain't ashame for anybody to read about it. Course dey ain't much to tell you. But dat Me and Bennie's ez loving today ez we was years ago. Usurally when you see one of us you see de other'n somewhere near. I guess we'll always be like dat till death do us part. Sit down. Dat you husband out dere? No? Well, call him in anyway. De sun's too hot for him to be sitting out dere in de car. Hilda, git another chair.
"Hilda? No, she ain't my chile. She's my sister's chile. De one dat lives in New York. I got two sisters and two brothers. Dey's five of us in all, and we're all living. Ain't dat fine? Freda lives in New York, but Beulah lives in Asheville. Dat's way up in the mountains.
"Ma went to see her once. Jim, my brother who lives in Dudley, took her up in de car. She said dat going up in de mountains shore gives you a funny feeling. Dey's a lotta curves and each one gits higher and higher--- jest winds up and up, and when you git on de top and look down, cars and trains looks like toys and you can't even see people. I shore would not like to be on a mountain, would you? Ma says dat de roads are very narrow and it looks jest like you will fall off any minute. Course, I don't reckon I have to worry about going dat far though; she lives too far for me. I don't like to go much like Ma do. Visiting my brother what lives here in Rockburg and Ma is about enough for me. Ma even went to Dudley, Pennsylvania, and spent three and a half months with Jim and his wife. But me and Tom, my brother, here, is home loving folks.
"I was born here in Rockburg and I've been so happy and satisfied here dat I ain't a'ra'ing to leave. It is peaceful and quiet. My Ma and Pa farmed for awhile, den dey moved to Fleetsville.
"Dat's where I got my education. I went up de eighth grade, and in a private school too. Yes, Sir, Ma sent me to Mr. Hailey's school. I coulda went farther, but I got tired and stopped. Soon after dat Ma and Pa come back to Rockburg to live. Now don't think dat I quit school to git married. No, Sir; long den I wasn't studying de men folks. I kept telling folks dat I wasn't never gonna git married; I didn't for a long time.
"Den I saw Bennie. He had got grown den. So I decided dat I won'ted a railroad man. After about two years, we got married. If anything should happen to dis'n, I wouldn't have another'n unless he was a railroad man.
"Bennie's Ma and Pa died when he was a little boy. His sister raised him, but she was ez nice to him ez if he had been her own chile. She farmed, you know. Every day when she would go to de field, she'd take him right along with de others so dat she could watch 'em, and keep 'em out of mischief. But Bennie jest wasn't cut out for a farmer. He was born to be a railroad man.
"Up in de day, he'd slip off from de field and run to de station. If de station needed sweeping, he'd sweep it. When dere was a lot of mail, he'd help de mail man to carry it. Dey didn't pay him. He jest liked to do dat kind of work. Bennie went every day ez though he was hired. Well, he kept dat up 'til he was most nigh grown. When he got large enough to do de job alone, dey give it to him. I reckon he's been carrying de mail for mighty near forty years.
"When we first got married, it was so lonesome for me to stay at de house while he went to work dat I begin following him to work. At first I jest went to have company and watch de trains. All of dem don't stop here, but a lot of dem pass through.
"Then one day, during de Christmas rush season, he was bent with mail sacks and he still had more upon de ground. So I decided to help him carry them so he could take 'em all in one trip. De next day, it was de same way and several other days. I kept helping nim; and I've been helping him every since. Guess I jest got in de habit. I never miss. We git up every morning in time to make de five o'clock train. Rain or shine--- even when it's snowing, we're dere.
"I only help him catch three mails now. One at rive o'clock in de morning, one at two-thirty in de evening and de other'n at five in de evening. Dem's de heaviest ones. Most of de other time I jest sit here and talk to Ma.
"Bennie got a increase when we got married. Now he makes $15 a month. He's not like some men; he brings his money home to me every month. We spends it together.
"We gits along like you sees us all de time. Me and Bennie's been married for twenty years now, and we never is fell out like some folks does. Course Bennie ain't got no bad habits like most men has. He don't drink, gamble or none of those real bad things.
"Now you take Hilda's Ma. Her man had one bad habit dat went too far. He jest drunk and drunk. No woman won'ts her husband to be a drunkard. Dey does so many things when dey gits drunk dat dey wouldn't do if dey was sober. She soon got tired of his mess and left him. Dat was de only thing dat kept dem from gitting along. Now she's done bought a divorce and paid for it. She works in New York and sends some money home to Ma to take keer of Hilda with. She stays here and goes to school.
"Dese public schools is shore much better now dan dey was when I was going to school. Public schools den wasn't no good. Now dey is doing a fine job, I think. They passed my niece to de high school dis year. Jest think of it. I stopped school jest where she is now, and was most grown. Now look how young she is. De schools shore is better all around dan dey use to be; ain't dey, Ma? And look how long dey run---- eight months. When I was coming on and in school, four months was a long term.
"Lawd, it's raining. Let's go in de house outer de rain. I had no idea de cloud would come up so quick. Jest have a seat. Bring de chairs off de porch, Hilda. Make yourself ez comfortable ez possible, if de flies will let you. Looks like all de flies in town is at our house today. I wish I could take a sack and gather all de flies in de world and put 'em in de Mississippi River. Dey sat dat ever thing was put on dis earth for a purpose, but I be blest if I kin think of a reason for de flies being here.
"Ain't dis funny weather? A few minutes ago, dere wasn't a cloud in de sky. Den it begin raining right quick. Now it's raining and de sun is shining ez bright ez if 'twon't raining 'tall. Dey say dat when de sun shines while 'tis raining, de devil's beating his wife. Did you know dat de devil had a wife, Ma?
"Lawd, no, chile, I ain't got no chillun. I ain't never had none, and ain't never won'ted none. I don't like chillun---- never did. Dey is too much trouble and bother. Dey hold you too tight. Jest think, if I had any younguns, I'd always have to be a doing for dem. I could never have time to help my husband like I do. Ez it is, I am scot free. Being married for twenty years and never having any is lucky,
I calls it. Some folks thinks dat it's a shame to not have chillun. Now days it's almost a shame to have um. De way most of um acts when dey grow up, ought to cause de mothers to be ashamed to claim um.
"Folks used to make me so mad talking about me not having none, and pitying me. Now dem dat's got um needs de most pity, Cause all I got to worry about is Bennie and three cats. Dey're not much trouble. I only keeps de cats to Keep de rats down.
"Lawd, dat rooster is crowing agin. Hush, rooster, de company's here; can't you see um. It's too early to be crowing for sister Freda. It's a month before time for her to come. Freda comes down every summer to see Hilda and us.
"Jest wasn't no younguns for us, cause I believes dat what's for you, you gits, and what's not for you, you don't git, no matter now bad you wants it. But I am shore glad dat 'twon't none for me. Our little home is so quiet-like with jest Bennie and me.
"Bennie's been working on de railroad so long dat I think dey oughta give him a pension. Wonder if dey will give me a pension if he should die? We own our little home, but we need a little money for our food and stuff.
"Politics? I don't know much about dem things. But I think dat everybody oughta be allowed to vote if dey wants to, since dis is a free country. Course it don't matter to me whether I votes or not. But people dat can't vote oughta be tax free, I says.
"Ma, you better call dat rooster before he gits in de road and gits killed like dat other'n did. You know you done had to eat one dat de cars runned over, ain't you, Ma?
"Chile, you oughta come down here some Sunday. We has a good time at our church. I goes to de Christian Church. I hardly ever misses a Sunday. Next Sunday is Chillun's Day. We'll be having a mighty big time. You've been to a Chillun's Day exercise, ain't you? Dere'll be basket dinners served picnic style, preaching twice during de day, a program dat night, and a chance to see all of our friends and neighbors. We have recesses between meetings to talk. You and your fellow come on down. Dey'll be lots of young folks dere; and plenty of food.
"We'll be dere if our health keeps good. I guess dat I won't have to worry about dat though, since I ain't never been sick. Me and Bennie's been mighty lucky about our health. He ain't never had to stay off de job on account of being sick so far.
"We don't do much visiting except coming here to Ma's 'till Sunday. If you all comes, we'll see you. We takes dat day to see all of our friends, all except de times dat we has to take de mail. Dat has to go every day; even Sunday. Den we both go. I guess we'll be going together, 'til death do us part.' One would be lonesome without de other.
