THE THREE SISTERS
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Area Supervisor
Federal Writers’ Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
April 5, 1939
March 24, 1939
Julia Campbell Buggs
Mary Campbell(Negroes)
Delah Campbell(Negroes)
259 DuBose Avenue
Athens, Georgia
Washerwomen, Ex-maids, Ex-cooks
S.B.H.
THE THREE SISTERS
One of the Smith sisters was sitting on the porch. The yard was enclosed by a privet hedge, reinforced by a chicken wire fence and the gate swung on an iron post. Purple violets on each side of the brick walk, and a pearl bush at the corner of the house were in full bloom. There were slight indications that the dingy frame house was once painted brown trimmed in white.
"Good morning," I greeted the little old woman.
"Good mornin' Mistess," she replied, "come in and set in the swing." I accepted the invitation.
"Is this where the Smith sisters live?" I asked.
"Yes mam, it sho is, and I'se one of 'em 'cept now I'se named Brown, Jane Brown. I'se the onliest one of ’em what's been married. I can't work much no mo'. All I'se fitten for now is to set around and crochet. My eyes are so bad I has to put on these dark glasses to keep the sun from hurtin' 'em. I'se had somepin in one of 'am for a long time and it looks like I can't git it out. I calls myself takin' a sun bath for my strength. It hurts my eyes to take more'n a few stitches at a time. Then it looks like I have to put it down for my arms gives out too. The doctor 'lows I'se got a big heart, anyhow I sho has got somepini has to turn 'round and lose it all. It don't do me no good to git a bait of somepin t' eat atter I'se been hongry too long. It makes me feel so bad."
She left the room in search of her finished piece of work. In the disorderly room where the women were ironing, the conglomeration of furnishings included trunks, a dresser, a cupboard, a laundry heater, a home-made bench, chairs, clothes baskets, and clothes which were scattered all over the room. Dinah pointed to a wooden bed with a white spread, and said, "Does you see all them pillows on that bed. Well, Mandy and me can't sleep on just one pillow; we has to have a heap of 'em. I cain't git my breath, if I don't have 'bout five. I takes some of 'em off in the daytime." Mandy chimed in, "That's the truth sho. One day, I was stendin' at the ironin' board and I had a pain what struck me in my head. I thought sho I was gwine to die. Then somepin what sounded like a pistol popped off in my head. Seemed like one side of my head went up yonder to the roof of the house and the other side never stopped going down 'til it hit the flo'. I ain't never felt like washin' and ironin' since, but we's poor critters and cain't stop no matter how bad we feels.
"I ain't never done nothin’ but wash and iron. Dinah and Jane has worked out in the white folks’ houses. Me and my sister what died done the washin’. Since Sister Jane done got no 'count for work, Sister Ann come along here and sated us to take her in. We done it, and when she ain'tworkin’ out she holpsus with the washin’ and ironin'. No, mam, she ain't no kin to us. We just calls her Sister Ann so'se she will feel at home lak."
Jane came back in the room. "Who's that doin' allthat loud talkin' on that porch out yonder? What's she talkin' 'bout anyhow?"
"The funeral," said Ann, whose ironing board was stationed near the door. "I wonders if she cried at that funeral. I knowed she went to the big house 'cause it was her white lady she worked for what died."
"One thing sho, death is one thing you cain't git 'quainted with," said Jane, "and I am one what knows 'cause I lost my pa, ma, my child, and husband. I sho seed the death angel come to our house more'n once."
Ann began to sing:
"'I Want to See my Lovin' Father,
When the World's on Fire'r
Glory Hallelujah
When the World's on Fire'r.'"
"Yes, mam, honey, I sho does mean that thing. I'se gwine to see my lovin' Father sho as you is born.” I asked her to sing more of the song for me, and she said, "You don't want to hear that. It's a Negro song and white folks don't want to hear it. But it sho is a pretty piece when you gits a crowd of colored folks to singin” it."
Jane interrupted Ann, "Miss, here's my piece I crocheted. I sho needs the money. If you can't buy it, I wishes you'd tell somebody what can. I makes baskets too. My pa was a basket maker and I larnt by watchin' 'im. Cane reeds makes the wrong with my insides.
"I’se got a heap of these crochet pieces. Don’t you want to buy one? I sells ’em to git a little money to buy somepint’eat with. Come on in the house and I’ll show ’em to you.” I followed her into the room where three women were busily ironing. "These are my sisters," Jane announced. "I can’t holp ’em no mo’.”
"Are all four of you sisters?" I asked.
"No, mam, dar ain’t but three of us. This is Mandy, and there’s Dinah. This here ’oman - she’s named Ann - is just visitin’ us and holpin' with the ironin’. Have a cheer, Miss. I sho hopes you’se brung us somepin, ’cause we ain’t had a sack of flour since Christmas. The fire department give us some stuff then and one thing was a sack of meal. We stretched it to last up ’til now."
"I am sorry. I have nothing to give you." I said, and electrified them with the assertion, "I came here for you to give me something."
The women stopped ironing, turned, and looked at me. All four of them spoke at one time:"Lord, have mercy, Miss, we cain’t give you nothin'. You’se come to the orphan’s home, we calls it. We’s old and worked down and has to struggle to git a little somepin t’eat and we’s hongry now."
"Oh," I answered, "I don’t want you to give me anything like that. I want each of you to tell me about the things that have happened to you."
"Well, what good is that gwine do you?" asked Mandy. "Lord, have mercy, does you see this here funny paper? Well, when you gits through with that story it'll be sorta like that."
After much persuasion they finally consented to talk, Dinah said: "Jane, you do the talkin' for all of us, whilst we irons, 'cause we's got to git these clothes out so we can git a little money to buy somepin t'eat. I'se so hongry now I cain't hardly stand up, much less do this here work."
Thus prompted, Jane began:"Miss, all of us sho has been here a mighty long time. We was all three borned on mypa's marster's plantation, nigh Maxeys, Georgia. That was Old Man Barney Maxeys' place. Marse Jesse Maxey was his pa and he fit inthe Resolution War, and Marse Barney fit in the war what sot us free. My ma told me I was born two years atter that war was over. That puts me most nigh seventy-three years old, I 'spects. Dar was a heap mo' chillun twixt me and these two sisters. After we had lived with my pa's marster 'bout seventeen years, we moved on my ma's old marster's plantation.
"Lord, have mercy, Miss, I ain't never done nothin' else but work in the field ever' since I can recomember. My pa used to take me to the field with him to pick cotton long befo' I was big enough to tote a cotton bag. I used to pick cotton and put it in his pocket. When I got tired I would sneak away when he wasn't lookin' and run to the house. Then he would miss me. Heallus lit out to find me and when he did he brushed me down and made me go back to the field. Pa had a little hoe made for me to chop cotton with when I was 'bout nine years old. And God-a-mighty knows, I don't, how old I was when they put me to plowin'.
"Did I ever git any money when I worked in the field? What did they want to pay me for? No, Lord, I ain’t never got no money for nothin' when I was comin' up. My pa put a shelter over us and fed us 'til we got big enough to do for ourselves, and he made us holp him.
"Miss, we ain't had no meat to eat in a week. Don't you want to buy one of my little crochet pieces sho 'nough? sells 'em for 50¢ and 60¢ apiece. You know you white folks has heaps more'n us Negroes has. Lemmegit out a piece I'se got already finished. That is what I fotched you in here for - to show it to you - and you wanted me to tell you a story. Then I slap forgot about it. I sold a piece to a white lady yistidday. She gimme 50¢ for it. I needed some medicine so bad for this here swimmin'-in-the-head what I'se got that I took 40¢ of it to git that medicine to make me feel better and tried to git a little scrap meat with the dime, but the sto' keeper didn't have none. Sometimes I does right good at buyin' scrap meat, I don't never have the money to buy no good meat with. I do wish I could sell a piece of crochet to get me some oranges and grape-fruit. I gits a bad stomach when I ain't had nothin' t'eat in a long time. Then when I gits a chance to fill my stomach up, best ones, I means small baskets. There is a lady here in town what has bought most nigh thirty of my little baskets. I got 25¢ 50¢, and 75¢ for 'em, and made 'em in ever' shape you can think of. I used to make clothes baskets when my old man was livin', and got the oak splits for me. I got $1 apiece for them. Seems like when he died everythin’ went wrong and nothin' comes out right no mo'."
Jane is a little woman, weighing less than a hundred pounds. She is about 5 feet tall, very black, and was wearing a black dress, with shoes and hose to match. Her apron, she said, was made from an old black and white dress. Although she says she is "most seventy-three" she has very few white strands in her kinky black wool. Her sisters are much taller and heavier.
Mandy, the middle sister, thinks she will be sixty-five her next birthday. Her hair is snowy white. Beneath her skimpy blue apron she wore a faded blue outing dress, which had been patched until it appeared to be quilted with black thread. She is of medium height, light in color, and weighs at least two hundred pounds.
Dinah, the youngest, is fifty-five. She is taller than the others, and lighter colored than Mandy. She has large protruding eyes. Her dress, made from coarse meal sacks on which the lettering could still be seen, was partially covered by a heavy tan sweater emblazoned with, "Athens High School," in red letters across the back. The women wore men's shoes that were run down at the heels.
I asked them how they knew their ages. "Well, Miss," said Mandy, "It's like this, we ain't never had no schoolin' and never larnt much so the onliest way we can keep up with it is from what the white lady, what we used to live with in the country, sot down in a book. Atter they said the old folks could git the old age pension we got her to git our ages up for us. But that oldage pension ain't never done us no good. I knows the white folks what looks after it has give it to other folks, but us sho ain't never got none of it. We ain't got nobody to holp us. We has got one brother what lives right in back of us here, but he don't holp us no more'n that cat you see by that heater does. We did have a heap of old things what the white folks liked and bought from us - folks call 'em antiques now - but all we's got left is a few old dishes we got with soap wrappers. A lady what Jane works for, when she feels like walkin', goes all over the country buyin' old things to sell. She makes a heap of money out of that kind of work, she told Jane."
"That's the truth too," said Jane.
"You know I'd been washin' for a white 'oman a long time, when one day I went to her house to git the washin', and she told me she was going to stop sendin' her wash out and do it herself. That sho did hurt me. I wondered what I was gwine do. Then somepin inside me said, 'Trust in the Lord and He will see you through,' I went on down the street thinkin' 'bout what that somepin done said in me. I hadn't gone far when I met a 'oman and she axed me if I didn't want a wash. I told her I sho did. I took that 'oman's clothes, and on the way home I kept sayin’, 'Thank you, Lord, I’setrustin’ in You and will 'til my dyin' day.'
"We ain’t never done nothin’ else much but wash and iron since we's been livin’ in town. We 's been livin' here gwine on thirty-nine years. I'se cooked and maided, but just to say I done it for a regular thing, I didn't, 'cause my husband didn’t want me to work out."
"I sho has worked out," said Dinah, "up to 5 years ago. Atter my health give out on me and I had to give up workin' out. When my sister, what stayed home with Mandy and washed and ironed, took sick and died I had to take her place at the washboard."
Jane said, "I married befo' I left the country, and when I come up here to live I used the money I made, myself, holpin’ my husband pay on ’spenses. He worked all right ’nough but it took us both strugglin’ to git on and pay on the house we was buyin'.
"I washed for one lady nigh twelve years. When she moved to Floridy I sho did miss her, she used to give me all my clothes and paid me $4 a week for doin’ her washin'. Them was the good old days. I washed for another lady 5 years, and she was good to me. At Christmas she give me all the Santa Claus we had. Well, them days are gone and I'se played out too.
"Folks don’t pay no 'tention to you now lak they used to. When my husband died we was livin’ next door here to my sisters. We didn’t have that house paid for and that white man come and took it away from us, and we had to come and live with Mandy and Dinah. I worked for the rich white folks, myself, and when I'se able to work I still works for then kind of folks. You ain’t catchin’ me foolin' 'long with pore white trash. If you does they work, they can't pay you nothin', and ain't got nothin' to give you besides. My lady I works for when I can gives me all my clothes. I sho hopes she gives me a Easter dress. If she don't that’s all right 'cause I'se got on one of my dresses, and the other one is hangin' on the back of that door.
"I ain't never had no trouble 'bout losin' anythin' belongin' to the folks I washed for, like Mandy and Dinah has. I believes their white folks 'tends to lose what they ain't never had."
Mandy interrupted. "Oh, I reckon they did have it, but it was lost at they houses and they laid it on us. Sometimes, me and Mandy does leave out a piece, but when we finds it, we takes it to 'em.
"One time Dinah and me, and my sister what died, had 20 washin's at one time. We ain't never washed for nobody but the factory folks. We got good money when we washed for 'em durin' the big war. Now the mill has cut 'em down 'til they’s lak us, they don't have much to pay with. But we can't give up. We used to git $2 and $3 for a fambly wash in'. Now we don't git but 75¢ for that same size washin'. And where we used to git 75¢ for washin' for one person, times has got so tight now we can't git but 25¢. It is a tough old go, but we can't die 'til our time comes so we might as well keep right on.
"Once we had got out all our washin's and was restin' when the law come and knocked on the door. I went to the door and the man axed me, 'Is this whar the Smith Sisters live?' I said, 'Yes, sir.' He told me he wanted to sarch the house. 'What's that for?' I axed him. 'Well,' he 'splained, 'A woman in one of the famblies you washes for has lost lots of her things she says she sont you. She has got tired of it and sont me to sarch your house for them things.' That skeered us 'most nigh to death. I knowed us didn't have nothin' that b'longed to nobody else, but I was just natchel born skeered of the law. Well, the man started out for to sarch our house. All the time that white 'oman was hid out in his eyazr. He called to her, 'Come on in and see when I finds the things these 'omans done stole.' I said, 'Mr. Law Man, we ain't took nothin', so you can sarch all you wants to.' That 'oman come in our house and followed that man sarchin' all over the place. He went into everythin’ we had, even cut the bedticks open. That beat me, havin' our bedticks cut open from one end to the other. Anyhow they never found nothin', 'cause we didn't have nothin' what b'longed to nobody 'cept us. That law man made us wash for that 'oman a whole month, and she had twelve in her fambly, for nothin’. After that, one day that same law man come back. I wondered what in the name of the Lord he come back for that time. He told us to make that 'oman pay us for all the washin' we had done for nothin', 'cause she had found out that some of her own folks who had visited her took them things, end all the time she had blamed us. She never paidus, and we didn't never wash for her no mo’."
Dinah said:"That was the beatenest thing I ever heered tell of, but that 'oman will have to 'count for that when the judgment day comes, sho as you is born to die.
"Yes, mam, I means us sho has had a hard time. Pa made us work in the field like mules from sunup to sundown. Then we moved to Athens and started takin' in washin". We washed many a day from the time we could see, 'til way up in the night. We bought this house and meant to pay for it. We got all we could do and I've ironed many a day 'til four o'clock next mornin’, went to bed a few hours, got up and cooked breakfast for our brother who was livin' with us then holpin' us to pay for the house, and then started washin' and ironin' again. We's broke ourselves down workin'.
"Mandy and me use to run the cyards to make a little extra money on the side, and we made good for awhile, but the Good Lord got tired of us workin’ for the devil and he took a hand and cut us down. I took sick and stayed sick for a long time."
"That's the truth. He sho did," said Mandy. "I took sick and thought I was gwine die. The doctor 'zamined me and said I had a tumor. When they operated, that tumor what was cut outen me filled a little washtub. The doctor said it weighed 28 pounds. I ain't never been no good since. Me and Dinah done give up workin' for the devil a long time ago, 'cause I'se 'most ready to press that dyin' pillow, and when the Lord calls me I don't want them cyards lookin' me in the face."
"That’s the truth sho. I ain’t gwine fool with ’em no mo’ myself, sho as you’s born,” broke in Dinah. "Did you ever have your fortune told?"
"Yes," I admitted.
"Well, don’t you do it no mo’, ’cause that’s the devil’s own works and the Lord won’t let nobody come to no good what fools with folks that tells fortunes end runs them cyards. You know that house you stopped at down the street and axed the ’oman whar we lived? Don’t you go dar no mo'. She runs a sho ’nough roughhouse. She ’tends she takes in washin’, but she just does that for a blind. She stays drunk most of the time, and sells whiskey, and tells fortunes too. You can see folks goin’ and comin’ from her house all the time. The Lord done sot a goitre on her neck but she don’t pay no ’tention to that.”
"Look here, Dinah," said Mandy, "you better talk ’bout somepin you knows 'bout. How does you know that ’oman ain’t done heered somepin you done said 'bout her? First thin’ you knows she’s gwine put her mouth on you. She ain’t none too good to do it, if she takes a notion. These folks is pow’ful mean 'round here. They don’t keer nothin’ ’tall ’bout the Lord, but first thin' they knows He is gwine to cut ’em down.
"Does you know Mrs. Anderson, what lives up here on the corner in that big two-story house, Miss?"
"No," I told her.
"Well, she sho is a good white lady. She brings all her pieces to us to wash what she don’t want to do herself. Lord, have mercy, when you talks 'bout folks here they comes," said Jane. Mrs. Anderson came in with a pair of overalls. "I was just tellin’ this lady how good you is to us poor critters,” Jane greeted her, "and here you is with somepin’ to be washed so ’se we'll git a little mo' money."
"Well," said Mrs. Anderson, "you can wash them when you get ready just so I can get them back by tomorrow."
"All right, we sho will, and thank you for bringin' 'em to us," the four women answered together. There were a few minutes of silence after Mrs. Anderson’s departure. Then Mandy began:
"We never got to go to school much, and since the Lord took a hand in our devil-ment’ and cut us down for runnin' cyards, we tries to live good Christian lives. I never will forgit one Sunday when I got my onliest dress down to put it on for to go to Sunday school, and found the skirt had done ripped off from the waist, so I sot down to sew it back and ever'time I took a stitch, somepin said to me, ’You is stitchin’ that needle in the Lord’s side.’ Right dar and den I put that dress down. Seemed lak I couldn’t sew no mo’ on Sunday. I put on a old dirty dress I’d done my work in all the blessed week and went right on to that church house just lak it was brand new.
"Didn’t none of us gals marry ’cept Jane. We had plenty of chances when we was young, but we had ’nough to do without takin' care of a trafflin’ man, and then too, ma was so strict on us. She wouldn’t let us go with who we liked, so we ’cided to let ’em ’lone. Yet and still, we did slip out and git in a little devil-ment' once in awhile."
Jane filled her mouth with snuff and asked me if I knew where she could get some snake root. I told her I was sorry but I had never seen any. "Oh, Miss, you ain't. Well, I declare, it's the bestest medicine in the world to have when you'se got a mis'ry in your stomach."
Dinah finished ironing and sat down in a chair close by the ironing board. "Miss, I knows you think ours is the worst story you ever took but it’s lak this, we's been sick so long and worked so hard that what little we did know has done up and left us."
I was about to leave when Jane asked, "Miss, does you know who this picture is? I betcha cain't guess, so I’ll tell you. That's me." She continued, "And this other picture is my dead sister. We was young and foolish when them pictures was took. She holped Dinah and Mandy pay for this house what cost $1,300, and that sho was a heap of money to pay out but they done it." Several other pictures of Negroes, and an assortment of calendars lined the soiled plastered walls.
Ann, the visiting Negro woman, was anxious to get into the conversation. She attracted attention by shuffling her feet and clearing her throat. "Are you tired, Ann?" I asked.
"I reckon I is, and hongry too," she eagerly replied. "Miss, don't you want to see my quilt I started? It's called a tu-lip." She placed exaggerated emphasis on each syllable in the name of her quilt pattern.
"Yes, I would like to see it," I told her and followed her into the next room. Clothing was piled high on chairs; mattresses were stacked in a corner; other chairs, a dresser, a washstand, and a bed were crowded in the room so that it was difficult to find space to walk. There were clothes hanging on the wall, and soiled curtains at the windows. She fumbled in a battered suitcase and pulled out the prized quilt top. It was made of strips of cloth of every imaginable color, crudely sewed together to form very creditable outlines of tulips. She held it up for me to see. "Ain't it pretty?" of course I had to praise her handiwork, and that pleased her very much.
Dinah came forward with one strip of an unfinished quilt top. "I done this when I was sick 'bout five years ago,” she told me. Before she could explain its pattern she was interrupted.
"Dinah," called Jane, "You'd better git to washin’them overhalls. We needs ever" cent we can git and that white 'oman is pow’ful good to us." Dinah went into the kitchen and returned with a kettle of water which she placed on the stove. A howl was raised by the other three women. "Don't you do that bilin' in here. It's too hot today. Just put 'em in that tub of water on the back porch and scrub 'em real hard with a heap of washin' powders.”
I followed Dinah through the kitchen to the back porch.”Lord, have mercy, Miss, don't you come out here. I'se 'shamed for you to see this house; It's so nasty." In the kitchen was a wood-burning stove that was laden with unwashed cooking utensils. Other soiled vessels, as well as a few food-smeared dishes, were scattered around indiscriminately on tables, chairs, and window sills. The label of an empty can on the table indicated that beans had been an item on a recent menu. Pieces of cheap china, glassware, and cutlery were piled in untidy array on the open shelves of the cupboard. Space for a few chairs had been reserved in the general conglomeration of things that crowded the kitchen.
Jane told me:"We cain't go in that next room, 'cause t'aint nothin' in it but just my old stuff. We put it there when I moved here. With all the five rooms in this house, there never seems to be nowhere to put nothin'."
We proceeded to the back porch where there were several wooden washtubs filled with filthy looking, soapy water. Dinah began briskly submerging the overalls in a tub of the apparently much-used water, and I went back in the house to take leave of the others.
When I walked out of the gate, they were all standing at the door. ”Good-bye, Miss," they called as they waved fare-well. A thin voice piped, "I sho is glad you come. This is been a short day." lane had managed to get in the last word.
<text not clear>
