PERSONAL LIFE HISTORY
Subject: Jno. W. Twiford
Address: East Lake, Dare County, N. C.
Occupation: Ex-moonshiner
Writer: W. O. Saunders
Date First Written: June 4, 1939
"... AND SET ME UP A HELL-BUSTER."
REAL NAMES	CHANGE OF NAMES
East Lake	West Lake
John W. Twiford	Big Bill Binnett
Milltail Creek	Bobtail Creek
Dare Lumber Co.	Brown Lumber Co.
Dr. Manees	Dr. Mc Clees
And so this was West Lake, a coastal wilderness, remote from any railroad and into which our State Highway System had but lately penetrated with a fair dirt road. It was once a primitive forest of pine, juniper, cypress and hardwood, cut up with creeks, lakes and bayous teeming with speckled perch, big mouth bass, water moccasins and alligators. Early in the present century big lumber companies went into this wilderness and denuded its vast acreage of timber. Today it is but a shabby wilderness of second growth pine and small growth juniper and hardwoods that were spared the lumberman's axe. There is an air of wretchedness all over the place; the houses generally paintless, shabby and in disrepair. The people, too, generally shabby. Thousands of acres of once fertile farmlands lying fallow; few hogs and cattle in the fields; some little poultry running around. Few automobiles in the sheds in which automobiles once were sheltered. Two small ground saw mills and a few shingle cutters are picking over the remaining timber.
The lumber companies in the early part of the century gave employment to hundreds of natives at fair wages and raised their standard of living. These simple people had previously subsisted by fishing, trapping and cutting shingles. They lived in small houses, many of log construction, produced most of their food, were unused to any but the plainest clothing, had few contacts with the outside world. They were a happy and contented people. The soil a rich, black muck, hardly more than five feet above sea level in the settlements, produced fine yields of corn, potatoes, beans, peas and garden vegetables. Cattle fattened and thrived in its reedy fens and hogs found ample forage in an abundance of succulent roots and small wild life.
With the advent of the lumbermen and the release of money in the community, the log cabin and the rude shanty gave way to more pretentious homes and home furnishings. But when the lumbermen moved out, having harvested the Relable timber, hard times came upon the region. The men who once had fished and farmed and hunted and trapped for a living found themselves in a changed world. A fisherman's rig cost more money now, and the fisherman who was once content with a small sail boat must have a boat powered with a gasoline engine to compete with the modern fisherman. And the men had forgotten or wanted to forget all they had ever known about farming. Most of the fields had grown up with weeds and brush anyway; most of the tillable soil remaining being the small garden plots that had been worked by the women and children while the men were working in the log woods.
The lumbermen moved out, dismantling their skidders, tearing up the narrow gauge rail roads on which they had moved their logs from the woods to the loading station on the water. Hard times came upon West Lake. But the great thirst brought about by the enactment of the 18th Amendment had created a demand for corn whiskey, with the manufacture of which many of the natives were familiar. To stave off poverty and maintain something of the standard of living to which they had been introduced, many of them embarked in the hazardous business of making corn whiskey. Only they didn't call it whiskey; they called it "white lightning", "white Mule" or "rip gizzard".
There were those among them who had learned the technics of plumbing and steamfitting while working with the modern logging equipment used by the lumber companies. Now, all it takes to rig up a crude still for the production of an alcoholic beverage of high potency is a copper coil and its cooling vat, several lengths of steam pipe with the necessary joints and valves, a few yards of rubber hose, a pitcher pump and an open well. A gasoline drum, properly bricked in serves for a boiler; two or three stout oaken barrels to hold the cooking mash and a few square wooden boxes in which to ferment the mash, plus a little knowledge of steam fitting, and there's your moonshine still.
The West Lake moonshine industry became the talk of the Atlantic seaboard; its liquid fire was transported by trucks and boats to many metropolitan centers where it found a ready sale at $1.00 to $2.00 a gallon for a five gallon container. West Lakers again knew the feel of money, they bought automobiles, although they had no roads worth mentioning; they bought marine engines to install in their boats; they bought radios.
So notorious did the industry become that the Prohibition Enforcement Unit staged a drive against the West Lakers and destroyed scores of their stills. The enforcement officers faced a difficult task; the region was only accessible by boats and it was impossible to navigate its narrow, tortuous water courses except by daylight. The moonshiners worked at night and were never on the spot when a raiding party descended upon a still in broad daylight. The moonshiners took the precaution of removing their precious copper coils when they had completed a run of liquor at night. When the enforcement squad had dynamited one of their rigs and moved on, they busied themselves and set up another rig over night. But the enforcement officers made headway against them nevertheless; the repeated tearing up of stills was a heavy drain upon the resorces of the distillers. And a lot of them were being caught in the toils of the law. They quarreled among themselves and would give evidence against their neighbors; and while the officers seldom caught a man at a still, they apprehended many in the act of transportation, confiscated their conveyances, poured out the liquor, smashed their jugs and filled the Federal prisons with violators.
In the meantime the State built a road into the region, making the illicit liquor industry more hazardous. Enforcement officers could now work night and day.
And then came the era of government relief for the unemployed and scores of West Lakers threw themselves upon the CWA, later the ERA and now the WPA.
I went to West Lake to get the personal life history of a typical West Lake moonshiner. I knew those people to be a friendly, hospitable and forthright lot. I had no doubt I would get my story. I picked a day when WPA work was suspended in the neighborhood. The man I sought was Big Bill Binnett, who was notorious or famous, according to the point of view, back in the Prohibition era.
I found my ex-moonshiner, hatless and barefoot, lying in the grass under the shade of a tree in his front yard.
"I aint seen you in a coon's age," he said by way of greeting, scrambling to his feet, and wiping a trickle of tobacco juice from his chin before extendin his hand. "You're going to spend the night with me, aint you?" I told him that I had hardly come prepared to spend the night, but that I hoped to visit with him for the better part of the day. And then I told him my mission.
"Well now, if you want my life history I can tell you a plenty. My folks were the first settlers in these parts; they were ca castaways, come from England. They were wrecked over on the beach and in lookin' around for some place to settle, they found this land with nobody on it except some families of friendly Indians.
"My paw said his grandpaw told him there was thirty seven families of them here and he thought that when they left here they went up into one o' the mountain counties somewhere. I reckon this place looked mighty good to those first settlers; plenty of big, soft wood to build houses and boats, plenty o' fish, woods full o' furbearing animals from which to get the skins for all the clothes they wanted, and the richest soil on earth; why, man alive, you could live on the mayberries, huckleberries and blackberries that grow wild around here in summer time, right now.
"Yes sir, nothin' but Indians here when my folks fust come here. Why, I remember when I was a boy you could pick up Indian arrow heads and tomahawks all over the place; I remember one o' their old pots and a lot o' round stones that paw said his paw told him the Indians used to heat and put in the pot to cure their yopon tea. But I don't reckon you could find anything like that on the place now. There's a little mound up the road a piece where a family o' Indians wunst lived and I reckon if anybody took the trouble to dig into it they might find somethin'.
"Yes sir, if you want my life history I can tell you somethin'. I aint much of a man now, since this neuritis got me. Used to be tough as blackgum and could throw any two men in the county. But I broke down with dysentery seven year ago and then this neuritis got me and I aint no 'count no more.
"I had eight hundred and forty six dollars when I took sick, and spent almost the last dollar on it for doctors and medicine. I went to Duke, I went to John Hopkins, I went to other places. After they had been dosing me for this, that and t'other, one doctor told me I had pelagry. I didn't feel good about that. My money was about gone then and I went to see Doctor McClees, a doctor the government had sent down here with one of its park service camps. I tuck along the boxes my medicine had come in, and showed 'em to him.
"He said, 'If you got any more o' that stuff, throw it away; it aint nothin' but dope and won't cure anything; and you aint got no pelagry. I can tell you what to do for that dysentery, but there aint nothin' can be done for your neuritis; you go back home and eat sour clabber and drink whiskey and you'll get rid o' your dysentery.'
"I said, 'Goddlemighty, doc, I aint teched nary a drap o' likker in seven year and everybody tells me that it's the worst thing for me!'
"Doctor McClees says, 'Don't pay no attention to what nobody else tells you; you do what I say.'
"Well sir, I came back home and got me a five gallon jug o' 'white lightnin'. I used to have six or seven cows, plenty of milk and cream and butter and clabber; but I had to get rid uv 'em when I got down. But I had some hogs and I struck a bargain with a woman up the road who had a cow; I give her a hog for her to keep me in clabber. I'd eat about a gallon o' sour clabber a day and drink my whiskey. An' didn' that clabber taste good! 'Specially when you take a good swig o' likker fust.
"Twant long afore my fust five gallon jug o' likker was gone. The boys had found out about it and would come around and help me drink it. And my dysentery got better every day. Soon I was all right from that, and when the boys had helped me drink 15 five gallon jugs o' likker, I thought I'd better lay off the likker awhile; it was expensive business furnishing likker for the boys. Bless gawd my dysentery came back on me again a spell back and I went back to sour clabber and likker again. Dysentery cleared up too, same as before. Maybe you'd like to have a little drink."
Without waiting for my assent he called to one of his small children and said: 'You go and pump us off some cold water, bring us some cold water and that jug o' likker.'
The child wanted to know where he would find the liquor? "You'll find it in the weeds alongside the fence, this side o' the henhouse," he directed. Presently the young one came with a gallon jug and a tomato tin full of cold water. The water was fine. The 'white lightning', which must have been only a few weeks old and had never seen the inside of a charred keg, was sweet and hot and potent.
"Since I got no 'count, there aint nothin' in the world gives me such pleasure as lying around out here in the yard with a jug o' likker and takin' a drink when I feel like it. I lay out here sometimes until bedtime. You'd be surprised at the wimmen that come around after dark lookin' for a drink. I always accomodate 'em.
My pappy was a half-ass preacher and a mighty good man; had a lot o' good hawse sense, and knowed his Bible; and knowed the books that used to be in the Bible, the ones they leave out now. But paw he liked his likker. Liked a good stiff drink before breakfast, but didn't bother much with it the rest o' the day.
"I remember when I was a boy they was goin' to have a big Union meeting and I had to go over to the mainland to get the preachers. I had a boat load comin' back. Paw had a jug o' likker and a jug o' wine settin' out for 'em when they got there. Those old timers didn't look on likker like most church folks do today.
"But you came here to git my life and I reckon I better begin at the beginnin'. I told you I was born here and how my folks got here.
"I never had much schoolin'; warnt much schoolin' to be had; only about two months in a year. I got about six months in all -- just readin', ritin' and 'rithmetio.
"I went to work when I was about 14 year old -- fishing. It warnt many years before I had my own rig and was fishing on my own. I owned one time 37 pound nets and six or seven stands o' gill nets. There were shad in these here waters back in them days.
"And then the Brown Lumber Co. came in here and offered me a job as foreman of a logging crew, with $150 a month pay and a house to live in. I took the job, sold my nets, married and settled down. I was with the Brown folks 16 year when they quit. I had bought this farm, 235 acres, and built that house over there." He pointed to his two-story eight room house, that had once been painted and which was adorned with lightning rods.
"Built that barn too," pointing to what had once been a stout two story structure approximately 30 feet wide by 100 feet long. It, too, had its array of lightning rods.
"I owned at one time about 20 head o' cattle and six or seven head o' hawses and mules. I put most o' my land in corn and potatoes. But prices got down so there warnt nothin' in farming and then I played out. See how things has run down now! See that hole in the pizer roof where a tree fell in on it in that storm o' '37. Aint had the money to spare for shingles to patch it.
"Now I'm workin' on WPA when I can work a-tall; but I got a good foreman an' he aint hard on me.
"But I aint makin' but about 89 cents a day and you can't feed a family o' eight on that. I reckon I'll have to rig me up another still and make likker to keep the madam and the younguns from starving to death. I've just about sold off all my farm machinery and live stock. Aint got but one hog left. Goverment pays me a little somethin' for the land that I aint croppin', but it aint much.
"I was the fust one to make likker over here. It was about 34 year ago. A goverment man that knowed somethin' about alcohol, and a fellow who had worked in a brewery were stoppin' at my house and they got to arguin' about how to make alcohol. I took it all in and told 'em we might rig up a little still in the kitchen and try our hand at it.
"I rigged up a still to set on the kitchen stove, made a mash o' corn meal, sugar and yeast and set it back o' the stove to ferment. When the mash was right we started the still up and the white lightnin' came out.
"The madame cut up about it; she said we was all headin' for the penitentiary; but I kept right on makin' my likker. Could sell all I made.
"I had been just messing with a little rig when Prohibition came along. After that I went out on Bobtail Creek and set me up a reglar hell-buster.
She was a whopper. E'en put a whistle en her an' a flag. That flag with its red, white and blue was a purty thing amongst the green trees all around. Never worried much about the Law until they repealed the 18th Amendment. If Prohibition officers caught you, you stood a good chance to get off. Juries didn't want to convict and judges didn't have the heart to send a poor man up for makin' an honest livin' the only way he knowed how.
"But when they repealed that Amendment and put a tax on likker, I knew Uncle Sam wouldn't be foolin' with we little fellows in competition with him. Revenuers dynamited my last still and I decided to layoff. But I don't see nothin' left for me now but to get back into the business. I know where there's 80 foot o' copper coils that won't cost me nothin'."
The sun was high over head now and Big Bill had shifted over near the tree where we could get in its now narrowing shade.
"'Bout time to eat," he said. He called to one of his children and said: "You run up to the house and tell your mammy to rig us up a mess o' wittels and let me know when it'll be ready." The child scampered off toward the house.
"Been married 34 year," said Big Bill; "had ten" head o' younguns and took three orphans to raise. All of 'em living and the older ones doing pretty well; only six livin' with us now. Me an' the old lady had never had much sickness until I got laid up seven year ago. Her health's still good. Havin' babies never hurt her; an' she knows more about midwifin' than most o' these midwives. She can pull a baby as good as any doctor.
"She's one o' the best wimmen you ever saw. We got eight mouths of our own to feed and she's always feeding a lot uv the neighbors' children. The little rascals know she's allers got a pan o' biscuit settin' around for 'em."
A colored man had come into the yard and I saw him pick up a stick and walk over to a ditch bank within a few feet of where Big Bill sprawled in the grass.
Thwack! Down came the stick. And again, thwack.
"I declare, Cap'n Billy," said the black boy; "You all sho mighty careless lyin' out here with a moccasin snake apt to bite yuh!" As the Negro spoke he lifted the lifeless form of a poisonous reptile on the end of the stick with which he had killed it. Big Bill showed not the slightest interest in the snake. "I aint afraid o' snakes as long as I got a jug o' snake-bite medicine around," he said. And then:
"I know you've come over to borrow somethin'; what you want?"
"I cum to see if you'll loan me your mule and one o' your plows," the Negro replied.
"Mule's loaned out, but you can go under the shelter and get you a plow. Might get the mule back in time for you to use it tomorrow."
"I reckon I mout ez well take the plow; ole Mister Wilson got a steer he'll loan me," said the Negro. All this time the colored man was eying the jug of corn liquor in the grass beside Big Bill. Presently:
"Cap'n Billy, aint yo all goin' to give me a drink?"
"There's the jug, nobody aint stoppin' ye," said Big Bill.
The Negro's face spread in a broad grin and he picked up the jug.
"Got a glass for me to drink out uv?" he inquired.
"Hell no, I aint got a glass to drink out uv myself," exclaimed Big Bill; and then, "What ails you, bein' so damn particular; kaint you drink out o' a bottle?"
The Negro pulled the corn cob stopper from the jug, and sheepishly wiped the mouth with a grimy hand, turned it up to his head and rolled his eyes with rapture as the hot liquid gurgled and the fire of it spread through his esophagus to his innards. He set the jug down, but didn't cork it with the corn cob which he held in his hand. He was fumbling in his shirt under his overalls and, presently, fetched out an empty flask. "I wundah efen I caint git you to fill this up fur me, Cap'n Billy?"
"Fill it up yourself," said Big Bill.
"How much I owe you, Cap'n Billy?"
"Owe me, hell!" exclaimed Big Bill; "You know damn good an' well I aint sellin' likker!"
The black boy grinned and shuffled off to the shed to get his plow.
"That's the way it goes all day long," smiled Big Bill, nodding toward the retreating form of the Negro. "This mornin' 'fore you got here, one man had come over to borrow my disc harrow an' another borrowed my mule. Them boys you saw here while ago wanted me to borrow twenty one dollars for 'em. I just had to tell 'em I couldn't do it."
"But as long as I got anything my neighbors want, it's a pleasure to let 'em have it. It's a mighty fine thing, when you git my age, to know that everybody likes you and that your children love you."
The sun was well past the meridian when we moved up to the house at the suggestion of Big Bill that "it's gittin' erbout time the old lady was stirrin' up suppin t'eat for us."
We walked over to the house stepped up on the porch and Big Bill led the way through a screen door that no longer served as a screen. There were holes in the wire mesh through which one might throw a cat.
We entered a wide hall, bare or furnishings, but the floor of which was firm under foot; we passed into a living room in which there was an old army cot on which rested a thin mattress and a pillow. There was a rocking chair and several cane bottom chairs in the room; a whatnot in the corner in which reposed some painted sea shells, gilded pine cones and a basket contrived of pop bottle caps strung with wire. An onyx clock stood on the mantelpiece.
"Paid $22 for that thav clock, twenty year ago," said Big Bill, noting my gaze resting on this one evidence of luxury in the room.
Two empty tomato tins, serving as spittoons reposed on the floor. On a window sill were two boxes of snuff. Big Bill walked over to the window, picked up a box of snuff, removed the top, turned it up to his head and emptied a generous quantity into his mouth. "Kaint do much bitin' off a chaw o' tobacco since I lost my teeth," explained my host; "but I sho likes my snuff; tastes better too; I swear to gawd a fellow never knows how good nothin' tastes until he gits rid o' all his teeth."
Big Bill wasn't given many minutes to enjoy his snuff before Mrs. Binnett announced that dinner was ready. We repaired to the kitchen, a room of generous dimensions built on the back of the house.
There we found a long table, covered with oil cloth, on which was spread a feast of ham and eggs, hot biscuit, fried potatoes and canned baked beans. Mrs. Binnett stood by the kitchen stove with a half-gallon-size coffee pot in her hand.
"I can give you hot coffee," she said apologetically; "maybe you'd rather have ice tea, but we can't get ice around here. I'm sorry my vegetables aint up good yet, or I'd had a vegetable for you. We can't run out to a store and get anything we want like you folks in town can."
The biscuits were good, the ham looked like good country ham, and the eggs were fried just right for me. I soon had Mrs. Binnett at ease when I praised her biscuit and the ham and eggs, and remarked the evidences of a good housekeeper. For a fact, I never tasted much better ham. "Tell me," I said to Big Bill, "Where did you stumble upon this ham?"
"Cured it myself," said Big Bill; "that's another thing I know, how to cure my meat. A lot o' folks around here don't know it, but it takes more than salt to cure a ham right; you got to rub a lot o' sugar and pepper into it to get the taste."
I enjoyed the meal. Mrs. Binnett, a neat and comely woman spite of her 55 years, all of her childbearing, household drudgery and a hapless environment, is a good housekeeper.
Having finished our meal, Big Bill and I repaired to the front yard where we, both sprawled on the grass, talked about a number of things.
"Bill," says I; "You say you are thinking of going back to distilling; will you find the market that was open to you in Prohibition days?"
"It's like I'm telling you," said Big Bill; "I can sell every drap I c'n make. My likker won't give you the headaches you get out o' this A. B. C. store stuff, and it's cheaper. There's fellows at Durham and Chapel Hill that'll buy all I can make. Costs them six dollars for every five gallon jug. That's twenty quart, retail at a dollar a quart. Good money into it for 'em.
The day was wearing away and thunder clouds were gathering in the west. Remembering the miles and miles of dirt road between Bill's place and a paved highway, I prepared to leave.
"I sho wish you'd stay with me all night; if you like frog legs I'll have the boys get out tonight and catch a big mess o' frogs for breakfast."
The suggestion of frogs legs for breakfast was tempting, but I was thinking what would happen to that dirt road after a heavy rain.
"I'm afraid you won't remember half the things I've told you," opined Big Bill as I climbed into my flivver. As I pulled out into the road he ran up behind me to remind me not to forget that for a year or so, before he married and settled down, he let his fishing rig out on shares while he traveled for a wholesale fish consignment house in Philadelphia. "I seen some o' this world in them days; traveled all the way from Morehead City to Southport, and from Morehead City this way as fur as Chesapeake Bay."
As I turned a bend in the road above Big Bill's place I looked back, and through my cloud of dust, caught a last look at his homely figure standing in the road to see me out of sight.
