Rose Shepherd
March 24, 1936.
Interview #37
II-HISTORICAL (Early Jacksonville)
PERSONAL INTERVIEW
Mrs. Phena Hudnall Love (No. 2)
216 West Miami Road,
South Jacksonville, Florida.
"My father was directly descended from Elias story, who was a passenger on the "Mayflower" and whose name is engraved on the "Faith Monument" at Plymouth Rock, Massachusetts, as being a member of the passenger list.
My grand-father, Ezekiel Hudnall, was the owner of three sailing vessels, which plied between the United States and Liverpool - he was the Master of one - engaged in handling hard woods. In the year, 1811, he moved with his family t St. Mary's Georgia, an exclusive settlement at that time, and here my father was born two years later. Shortly, an Indian uprising took place, and the Indians became so violent, grand-father abandoned the large new home he had built there, and <text not clear> his family to St. Augustine, placing his family under the prospection the Spanish Government. When Florida was ceded to the United States from Spain, my grand-father took out his naturalization papers, becoming an American citizen in 1821. He established his ex claim for eleven Land Patents in the State of Florida, for which he qualified, among these <text not clear>questions were 275 acres in East Jacksonville, 200 acres at Jacksonville Beach on the Ocean front, and a large acreage on the St. Johns River above Palatka. These patents are on record at the Government <text not clear> inesville. (Grandfather died in St. Augustine in 1323).
"My mother's father, Ernest <text not clear> and his wife, Marie Helbert, game form Hamburg, Germany, in search of health, then to New York, in about 1829, from where they located in Baltimore, but the <text not clear> did not agree with my mother, and they came on to Florida in 1832. He brought letters of introduction to Judge John L. Doggett, where family still has this letter.
"In the meantime, one daughter, Matilda, married a professor of Fresh in a private school in Albany, N. Y., whose name was DaIissy and she remained in that City, but the rest of the family came on, and located at Mandarin, where my grand-father, Coeme, bought land. He had himself appointed Post-Master at Mandarin, where he also ran a General Store. It cost 25, at that time to send a letter by post.
"Florida moss on the old trees at Mandarin attracted my grand-father, and he conceived the idea of using it for upholstering purposes, <text not clear> large quantities with the help of his neighbors and negroes <text not clear> was cleaned and cured, it was placed in large pens to be shipper to various ports. He made a trip to New Orleans in 1834, and <text not clear> there contracted the yellow fever from which he died. He had gone on business in connection with the marketing of the moss, and my mother, who was in New York visiting my sister, Mrs. DeLissy, became ill and died a week or two previous to the death of my father.
Traveling then was a slow and tedious matter, and dangerous as well on account of the hostile Indians, and my father who had become. Fast friends with Judge Doggett, had taken the precaution to place his children legally under the guardianship of his trusted friend. Judge <text not clear>. He went to Mandarin and moved my mother who was about 12, and her little sister, Maria, who later became Mrs. Dr. Miles Murphy, and three brothers, Alfred, Henry and John, to Jacksonville.
"Alfred went to Kentucky, while Henry and John joined the <text not clear>rmy minole War, becoming members of the Band, one playing the flute and the other the piccolo.
"The old furniture in my grand-father's home, which had been brought from Europe, was also moved along with the other family belong<text not clear> to the home of Judge and Mrs. Doggett on East Forsyth-st., and <text not clear> my mother, Eliza coeme, grew to young woman<text not clear>. When my Uncle, Alfred Coeme, had married and established himself <text not clear> farm, at Danville, Kentucky, he came on here and took little Maria then about 12 years old back with him. He put her in a boarding school and later a special school where she prepared herself to be a teacher. She came to Milledgeville, Georgia, where she taught and later married Dr. Murphy, and became the mother of the two girls, later Mrs. Graves and Mrs. Cooley, of Jacksonville.
"Judge and Mrs. Doggett were the prime movers in the establishment of St. Johns Church, giving the ground on which it is built, and my mother at 14, assisted Mrs. Doggett in the activities of the women of the Church to accumulate funds for the first building.
"My mother met young Francis Shelton Hudnall, whom Judge Doggett considered a very fine young man, and they were married from his home in St. Johns Church in November, 1836.
"The day they were married, they moved into their own home in South Jacksonville, the house being built in the section now known as "Locarno" and there they lived and prospered until 1862 - during which period nine children were born.
"When the Federal gunboats anchored in the St. Johns River on March 12, 1862, and later my mother made her fateful trip to these boats under a flag of truce to obtain needed food for herself and children are my father had taken the slaves to prevent their whole sale decoration, to the plantation of our relatives. Dr. and Mrs. Murpey <text not clear>together with my older sister, Nellie, and their return was <text not clear>by the moving in of Federal land troops, my mother was at her <text not clear> and to provide for the family.
"The officers came and transferred my mother, her family, and my viewed sister. Mrs. Shad, and her three small children, to Mrs. Swart's property - two houses they had confiscated on East Forsyth- St between Laura and Hogan and there she started to cook for the officers of the fleet - there were between thirty and forty of these RANKEES - who paid her $3.00 per day each for their meals.
