
Rose Shepherd
March 20, 1936
Interview # 35.
II - HISTORICAL (Jacksonville during the War)
PERSONAL INTERVIEW
Mrs. Phena (Hudnall) Love,
216 West Miami Road,
South Jacksonville,
Florida.
Mrs. Love's family, the Hudnall's, were early settlers on the South side of the St. Johns River, their plantation embracing <text not clear> is now "Locarno."
Mrs. Love says: "In the early Spring of 1862, when rumors <text not clear>ached Jacksonville that federal occupation was imminent, many of the <text not clear>aves ran away and joined forces with the union soldiers. My father, <text not clear>ticipating further desertions, took all of the slaves - with the execution of a few house servants - with wagons, farming implements and ether equipment to Middleburg, intending to return later for the family. However, Federal troops moved into the territory between Middleburg and Jacksonville in large numbers, cutting off his return, so that he was obliged to stay on in the Middleburg section until the close of the War.
"My married sister, Mrs. Jack Shad, whose husband, an officer in the Confederate Army, had just been killed, was living on what is called the Stephenson's place further down the River. My mother, Mrs. Eliza Hudnall, insisted that she come stay with us.
"At that time I was about six years of age. I had three older members, sister three years younger than I, and the baby was a boy <text not clear>rly two.
"My widowed sister, Mrs. Shad, with three small children, moved <text not clear> our home. Later the other servants deserted, and I remember what a task it was for my mother and Mrs. Shad to try to handle the housework and cooking for such a large family of young children - the washing was particularly hard for them. They allowed the soiled linen to pile up for several weeks, hoping to be able to get negro servants to replace those who ran away, but when they found this was impossible, they did this work themselves, for the first time in their lives.
"On the morning of March 12, 1862, the Federal gun-boats which had crossed St. Johns Bar the day before and anchored in the River, steamed up to Jacksonville.
"My mother stood on the Piazza with field glasses, looking at the ships in the harbor. Supplies of food and necessities were running short, and she said: "I am going to cook some chickens, make cakes, pies, and row out to those ships and exchange the food I have for things I have not."
"She fried chickens, baked the cakes and pies, put up a supply of jellies and Jams, and with the baby in her arms and my young brother of about twelve, set off in the row-boat with a large piece of white cloth raised on a standard in the bow, to show that she was on a friendly mission. She rowed the boat, to the "Maheda" one of the transports DuPont's squadron. The officers took their field glasses, viewing with much concern the approach of this small boat containing a woman with a baby and a young boy gradually approaching the fleet. They assisted her to land, and once on deck, she said: "I am come on a Mission of peace. I would like to exchange the food I have brought with me - fried chicken, eggs, milk, cakes, pies, jellies, and jams, necessities which I am <text not clear>. The officers were delighted, and they took all of her offerings and gave her in return, flour, salt, coffee, tea, sugar - and noticing that my small brother was bare-footed, they fitted him with a pair of brogans, at which he was delighted.
"This was the fore-runner of other trips. She was always kindly received, the officers seemingly glad to avail themselves of Southern home cooking," and she always brought back plentiful supplies of articles of food it was impossible to secure, and especially, did she keep the salt supply replenished - which was particularly necessary, and I may say that all during the remainder of the War, ours was the only plantation which had a surplus to divide with the neighbors.
"Using the brogans given my brother as a pattern, my mother learned to make shoes. She had the heavy leather soles cut to measurement, punched, holes for the pegs, and fast had on the tops of heavy cloth other material.
"These same officers later on, visited the plantation and <text not clear>sming the straightened circumstances to which my mother had been reduced, they moved her with her family of children and grand-children m<text not clear>her furniture and other personal belongings to a big house on Forsyth St., where they took their meals with her, paying her generously, and in this way she was able to car a for us."
NOTE: Mrs. Love is not able to talk long at a time, and has made another appointment for Tuesday, March 24th, at 2 p. m. for another interview) R.K.S.
