In an otherwise identical version lines three through seven on page 9579 have been deleted. Also, the first sentence in the other version reads: "On the north hanks of Patico County, by the waters of Manhattan Sound is the little village of Hatley." All names of persons and places have been changed. The places mentioned in the version included in the project are listed in the North Carolina Gazeteer; those in the version deleted are not listed. Thus it seems likely that the version included in the project has the non-fictional names of places and persons.
From: W O. Saunders Life Story of J. C. Curies,
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Duck, N. C.
NC-443
A FISHERMAN AND HIS LUCK
On the North Banks of Dare, by the waters of Currituck Sound, five miles north of Kitty Hawk, sprawls the quaint little village of Duck, Nameless until when a post office was established, the natives unanimously favored the name of Atlantic. But there was already an Atlantic post office in North Carolina, Other names were suggested, all duplications of existing post offices, except Duck, And so Duck it became.
The width of the banks at Duck is only about three quarters of a mile. A range of sand dunes lies close by the sound, forming an effective wind-brake against the chill northeast winds that prevail in winter. In places these dunes, covered with live oaks, scrub pines, yaupon and gallberry have crept down to the very waters of the sound; but here and there, where the dunes have halted in their drift, there are pockets of level land fit for human habitation.
In one of those pockets or hollows one finds the home of Flotsam Basnett, fisherman. On an Indian Summer afternoon I came upon the house of Flotsam Basnett. Spread out in front of the place was a seine, and seven or eight women in slat bonnets, an elderly man, and several children were busy with wooden needles and skeins of linen thread repairing jagged holes in the net.
Eleven persons, all told, had been laboring at the business of repairing that seine since sun-up that morning, and their labors were not yet finished.
"That's what sharks did for my seine last night," said Flotsam in explanation, as I stopped to chat with him.
"Does that happen often?" I asked,
"No, not often; but when it isn't sharks its crabs or storms; there's no end of mending nets and, with fishing as poor as it is now, a net is apt as not to be worn out before you've got enough money ahead to buy a new one.
"There's no fishing in the sound any more; rock quit coming up in Currituck Sound when they put that bridge across the sound; its against the law to catch bass for market any more; all cur fishing is ocean fishing now.
"It takes about 300 yards of seine for ocean fishing. We keep a little under 300 yards, because the tax on every hundred yards of seine goes up from 50 cents to 75 cents when you get up to 300 yards."
"What is your average daily catch?" I asked.
"Now, I just wouldn't know how to answer that one," he said. "We think we have done a good week's fishing when we have fifty to seventy five dollars to divide on Saturday. There are lots of weeks when we don't make ten dollars."
"Well now, just what do you mean by 'we'?" I asked.
"I mean my crew," he replied.
"You see, one man can't handle a seine; it takes four men to put out and haul aseine. The owner of the seine gets one fourth of the catch and the crew divides the other three-fourths. Not many crews own their seines any more, and sometimes one of the crew owns the seine and gets his fourth for the use of it."
"A seine like this costs about 70 cents a yard, counting the cost of netting, lines, corks, sinkers and everything, A seine like this one you see here costs just about two hundred dollars.
"But the cost of the nets and the mending of them isn't all of it. You've got to have a truck to get the fish to market, and that calls for gas land oil and tires. And you've got to have ice to save your fish. Everything costs money."
"What do you get for your fish?"
"From one cent and a cent and a half to three cents a pound, depending on where we take 'em. If we take 'em to Elizabeth City we get about half what we get if we take 'em to Norfolk."
"Do you mean that you sell a catch of spots and croakers in Elizabeth City for a cent and a half a pound?" I asked incredulously.
"That's what I'm telling you," he replied.
I couldn't help but reflect upon the ten, twelve and fifteen cent prices I had paid on the retail market in Elizabeth City for those same fish.
"But why be at the mercy of a few wholesale fish dealers?"
I asked him; "You have to have a motor truck in your business anyway; why not put a little more money in your truck, equip it with refrigeration and send that truck inland and retail your fish at fancy prices to fish-hungry folk in the uplands. There's no law to prevent a fisherman peddling his own product, is there?"
"Man alive!" exclaimed Flotsam Basnett, "if I had the price of a refrigerator truck, do you think I'd be in the fishing business?"
And then he reverted to the ups and downs of the small commercial fisherman.
"I have put in around 25 years fishing. Sometimes I've been disgusted and quit and looked for another job. But I always come back to it. You can make more money away from home but it takes it all when you live away from home.
"The best catch I ever made brought me in $1,000 from two stands of nets. That was 18 years ago. Once since I had luck with a haul and cleared $500. Mostly gray trout. And then came stormy weather and nothing coming in for more'n a week."
"Fishing aint what it used to be when I was a boy," put in Flotsam's uncle who was helping mend the torn seine. "I been fishing ever since I was eight years old and I'm now almost seventy. I remember when my father took 1800 pounds of rock with one little net. I was about twelve years old then. We were loaded to the gunwales and heading for Croatan where there was a market. All of a sudden the wind shifted to the northeast and blowed such a gale that I thought we would capsize any minute. Heavy seas were breaking over us and it was all my brother could do to bail the water out by the bucket full while my father had his hands full trying to steer the boat. My brother bailed out fish along with the water. We finally managed to get under Roanoke Island where we laid up all night and part of next day until the storm blew over. We had only 700 pounds of fish when we got to Croatan about two o'clock next day."
One of the women net menders stopped her work and came over to Flotsam and said: "I got to be gettin' home to my younguns now; I've made seven hours." He counted out seventy cents, ten cents an hour being the prevailing rate of pay for the neighborhood women who lend a hand in mending nets.
When Flotsam counted out the money I noticed that one of his hands was badly crippled, which explained why he wasn't helping with the mending. "How did you come by that bad hand?" I asked him.
"I was tarring some nets two or three years ago and in handling a heavy barrel of tar, I got the wrong hold and the thing came down on me. My hand got caught under the sharp edge of staves and was pretty badly cut. I bled like a hog and was laid up at home for two weeks before I went to the hospital. Infection had set in and I might have died if I hadn't gone to the marine hospital. The doctors said the tendons in my hand were cut and they had to lance it several times before they were through with me. I was in the hospital two months."
"That must have been an expensive hospital bill for a fisherman," I remarked.
"My hospital bill didn't cost me anything; I went to the Marine Hospital in Norfolk. You see, I had worked some on a boat that summer and the captain of the boat gave me a certificate. Any seaman who works for as much as sixty days on a registered vessel can get free hospital treatment if his captain will give him a certificate."
"And how did your family get along in all those weeks that you were not able to work?"
"Oh, they got along all right, because of the neighbors. The neighbors never let anybody go hungry. The neighbors looked out for my family while I was laid up, just like they'll look out for anybody who's up against it."
About that time a truck drove up with two fishermen in canvas coats and hip boots. They had brought in their day's catch. With a three hundred yard seine they had taken from the ocean that day, less than 200 pounds of fish and perhaps a dozen blue crabs. There was an ice house and loading platform at the store bear by and there they threw out their fish to be boxed and iced. But before the boxing and icing got under way a number of the villagers had come out with tin pans and gathered up messes of fish for their suppers. Fish, among these neighborly fisher folk, are a commercial asset only after the community wants are satisfied. Nobody paid for the fish taken from the loading platform. For one fisherman to take pay from another fisherman for a mess of fish would be unthinkable. The same way with their gardens. They share freely the produce oftheir little gardens; and when there is a house or a boat to be built the neighbors lend a hand.
Flotsam Basnett, only 42 years old, is still the head of a considerable family. He has seven children and there is his Uncle Van who lives with them. The oldest of the children is a boy 17 years old who will soon be taking a wife and building a shack of his own in the lee of a sand dune by the shores of the sound.
At the present time this family of ten is housed in a drab, weather-beaten, unpainted shack, or rather elongated cabin of three tiny rooms. The house is about 30 feet long, perhaps 12 feet wide and has no porch. A platform about three feet wide runs the length of the structure on the front; a convenient place to sleep on a hot summer night when the mosquitoes are not too bad.
"How do you sleep a family of ten in a tiny house like that?" I asked him.
"We manage to stow them away somehow," he said with a smile. A tiny brick chimney protrudes from the shingled roof. The only heat in winter comes from a sheet iron heater. Their fuel is often but driftwood picked up on the beach, or from fallen trees which they are permitted to take from a neighboring woods owned by "some city folks." In the severe winter weather that comes to that exposed beach in January and February, they have to go thirty or forty miles to a saw mill in Currituck to buy slab wood or board ends for fuel, for which they pay $3.00 a cord.
There isn't a cow in the neighborhood. A few families have small flocks of chickens or ducks, a few have a pig or two, and most of them have little gardens in which they grow principally collards and shallots. The shallot is a hardy onion that is the making of fish stew. Some gardens have beans and potatoes. Their summer diet consists of fish and collards, supplemented by beans, beans, beans and soda biscuit. They are particularly fond of beans that come in cans, a fact which is understandable when one sees the tiny stoves the average fisherman's family cooks on. It takes hours of heat to cook beans properly.
In the yard between the house and garden is a big iron kettle in which the family wash is boiled. The only outhouse is a crude ground privy remote perhaps 150 yards from the house. It isn't a pit privy at all. With all the millions of new pit privies that the U. S. Public Health Service, cooperating with government relief agencies, has built in rural America since 1933, they haven't gotten around to most homes around Duck.
Flotsam has his small garden and a few hens, but no pigs. It a duck or a brant for his table. The wary wildfowl are easier to kill at sundown when they come in from the open waters to seek the protection of the coves for the night. takes a lot of corn and swill to grow pigs. They raise little corn around Duck and there isn't much swill from its humble homes. Most of the pork they use is Western fat backs or salt side meat for frying and seasoning their collards. "A chunk of sow bosom with the buttons on it" is considered by some families a prize addition to the pot of collards.
Before the advent of the automobile, most of the fishermen went to town but two or three times a year, and in the fall an average family would lay in two or three barrels of flour, enough to last until spring. They buy their flour now in 12 lb. bags.
I chatted with the store-keeper and fish merchant near by. His entire visible stock of merchandise would hardly inventory $50. But he had two mechanical refrigerators, their gleaming white porcelain in sharp contrast to the shabbiness and gloom of the store.
"I can't keep enough pop cold for 'em with one refrigerator," he explained. "And then too they all want the double size bottles that take up a lot of room in the ice box." Several customers came and went while we chatted, each customer helping himself and paying as he departed. A box of two-for-five cigars stood open on the counter. Most of the sales I noted were these cigars -- and pop.
Darkness was falling. I moved to be on my way. In the gathering dusk a youth with a shot gun under his arm passed up the road that skirts the sound. I did not have to ask his business; he was out to get meat for the family larder. Your average fisherman has no batteries, no blinds, no decoys for duck or goose shooting. He is no sportsman He kills a goose.
