West Durham Cotton Mill.
West Durham, N. C.
September 17, 1938
I. L. M
DESCRIPTION OF MILL VILLAGE
Between 1500 and 2000 people are employed in mills one and four of the Erwin Cotton Mills. These mills are located in West Durham off Ninth St. and between Mulberry and West Pettigrew St. They are large brick structures surrounded by heavy steel fences. Beds of Cannas and other flowers adorn the green yards enclosed within the fences.
Ninth St. may be designated as the beginning of the mill village where live the majority of the people who work in these mills. The Company does not have adequate housing facilities for all of its employees and a considerable number rent houses anywhere from Ninth St. east through Broad St.
As one comes out past Woman's College of Duke University, down St., and turns to the right of the underpass, Ninth St. opens up as a combination business and residential street. On the right side are cafes, grocery stores, drugstores, a drygoods store, a bank, and other business places which draw their patronage largely from the mill village beginning on the other side of the street.
The houses on the left side of Ninth St. are mostly two-story, five room houses perched close to the edge of the street. Some of them are approached by short flights of steps leading from the street below. In most of these houses anywhere from two to four boarders find lodging places.
Ninth turns left into Hillsboro Road which forms one dividing line of the mill village. On the flat, low land to the right are located small houses of not-so-good appearance belonging to the mill company. The approach to them is over rough streets which follow in the main the numbered designation of the parallel streets on the other side of the road. Numbered streets run back of and parallel to Ninth all the way through Sixteenth St.
On the right side of Hillsboro Road village houses faced the road. One house larger than its neighbors is used as a small boarding house. At the point where Sixteenth St. meets Hillsboro Road is located a large stone Baptist Church whose membership consists principally of the people living in the mill village.
From Thirteenth through Sixteenth Sts. neat yellow and gray houses almost identical in size and design are set back a little distance from the street's edge.
A small stretch of green lawn fronts nearly every house, and in most of the yards are flower beds, bright with color during the growing season. Here and there well-grouped shrubbery adds a note of difference to a house which otherwise would have been like its neighbor. All yard improvements are made by the people who occupy the houses. Encouragement is offered by mill officials who award each year nine prizes to the families having the most attractive yards. Several yards give evidence of considerable expenditure in both time and money. In a few instances plots not belonging to any house but adjacent to some yard have been improved.
Lombardy poplars, maples, and umbrella china trees, some planted and some native to the soil, grow along the streets. Each house has its garden plot and practically all of them have been cultivated the past year. Approximately one third of the places have neat garages built by the company and rented to employees at 25 a week. A few of the houses are equipped with bath tubs for which a weekly rental of 25 is paid. All houses have a lavatory and commode.
The parallel streets end in Mulberry St. which is lined with Mulberry trees, and runs perpendicular to the numbered streets. This street faces the railroad tracks and on the other side becomes West Pettigrew. In the houses east of the Auditorium, a big building which, is the recreational center of the village, live mill officials. Below the Auditorium the houses are occupied by workmen. Most of them, six room houses set well back from the street, are skirted by green, tree shaded lawns. Similar houses are located on Erwin Road, the street just back of West Pettigrew.
Perpendicular to Erwin Road are Case, Oregon, Chase, and Anderson Sts., the latter two running as far as Duke University Road (or Myrtle Drive). Here and there on Chase and Anderson Sts. are houses not belonging to the mill company. In fact, those owned by the company have been bought from individuals or real estate companies and not constructed as a part of the original mill village. Next door to a family living in a mill-owned house there may be a family making perhaps the same wage in the mill and living in a house no better than its neighbor's for which it pays $20 a month.
Case St. leads into that part of the mill Village which is locally known as Monkey Bottoms. It is that part of the mill village of which other villagers say, "A person don't ever know what they'll be brought to in this life, but I sure hope I'll never have to move to Monkey Bottoms." It runs down into a desolate looking hollow and its houses are shabby and dirty-looking. It is lacking in the tone of respectability which characterizes the section of the village between Thirteenth and Sixteenth Sts., and Mulberry, West Pettigrew, and Erwin Road.
In any attempt to describe this mill village one's thoughts are inevitably drawn back to the Auditorium and the recreational facilities offered there. The building is set well back from West Pettigrew St. and is a fronted by a smooth green lawn. The building is a spacious end attractive three-story brick structure.
On the first or basement floor is located a 60-ft. tiled swimming pool, a bowling alley and a non-profit cafeteria. Admission to the swimming pool is 10 for adults and 5 for children. A swimming instructor paid by the company is on duty while the pool is open.
On the second floor are located the library, -- a general reading room and a boy's reading room, -- game room and theater. The game room is equipped for shuffle board, ping pong, checkers, and other games.
On the third floor there are domestic science rooms equipped for instruction in both sewing and cooking; an assembly room containing a piano; and a large classroom in which textile classes and general adult education classes meet.
The building is in charge of a director who has four assistants. One is a social worker whose duties in part consist of visiting the homes of the people and of directing the activities of the Woman's Club, which has a membership of sixty or seventy women. One is the librarian and the other two serve in instructional capacities.
The library dates back to 1915, seven years before the present building was constructed. It began with a group of persons interested in the community who bought what books they could with private donations. In addition to this they secured books from the public library for limited periods end made them available to the community. In 1917 the mill company took over the financing of the project and when the new building was constructed in 1922 special space was provided for it.
The librarian finds that travel and biography are almost as popular as fiction. The library is equipped with reference books end dictionaries. It contains in all between seven and eight thousand books. Among the magazines found on the tables are American, Good House-Keeping, Ladies Home Journal, National Geographic, and Collier's. In the boys' reading room are such magazines as Popular Mechanics and American Boy.
Each month the company appropriates $25 for additions to the book list and for replacements. Magazine subscriptions are not included in this amount.
The Flower Show in November, the Household and Arts Exhibits in October, community plays and folks dances are some of the community projects directed by those in charge of the Auditorium.
Pictures are shown on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday nights. Admission is 15 for adults and 10 for children.
Back of the Auditorium is a well-kept tennis court which is frequently in use. Beyond a grove of trees close to the Auditorium is a fully equipped playground which is under supervision during certain hours of the day.
The librarian and social worker when asked to make some comment on the condition and attitudes of the people in the village responded in this manner: The librarian said, "Some of the best people I know live in this village. Let alone they'd be as contented as people anywhere. But there's always somebody in any group wanting higher wages, and when one starts he can get others discontented. They took the cut last month awfully well though. There was some talk of striking and then they seemed to come to a decision that they were getting along pretty well and conditions could be worse. Yes, we have mighty good people at this village."
The social worker said: "So far as I know most of the people here are getting along well. They are the best housekeepers in the world. A great many of them have gone to the beach for a week-end this summer and some for a week. They all seem to have good food too. Why, I've been in plenty of houses this summer when they were having rice and chicken for dinner."
