I Lak's A Good Livin'
Written By:
Miss Grace McCune
Research Assistant
Federal Writers' Project
Athens -
Edited By:
Miss Grace McCune
Research Assistant
Federal Writers' Project Athens -
WPA Area - 6
September 9, 1939.
August 4, 1939
Cornelia Peterson, (Colored)
Sewing woman
Liberty Dry Cleaning Place
646 Hancock Avenue
Athens, Georgia
Grace McCune
I Lak's e A Good Livin'
A shower of rain brought me to the long, low building which was very odd looking with the sides and roof covered completly with heavy corrugated tin. A sign over the front door, painted in large red letters read;
FIRST CLASS DRY CLEANING
GIVE US A TRIAL
WORK CALLED FOR AND DELIVERED.
I was met at the door by a tall, rather stout, light mulatto. She was dressed in a clean, neatly made voil dress, of a white background and figured with small red dots. Her straight black hair was combed back from her face and done up in a twist on each side of her head. A small red bow was pinned in her hair. She didn't have on any hose but her black oxfords were clean and neat.
"Is there anything I can do for you, or did you just stop in out'er the rain he asked.
"The rain brought me in," I replied, at are you the owner or manager of the place.
"No, I shoain't, Ed Smith, he owns this place' ut I do all the sewin' and repairin' of the clothes. And I can use the press, too. But Ed, he ain't here now. He had'er go down to his other place of business. Yes'm he owns a fillin' station too.
"When will he be back?" I asked.
"Oh! I just looks for him at any time now. Did you want to see him 'bout somethin'?"
I explained my work and told her that I would like for him to tell me something about his work, as I was sure it would be interesting.
"Won't you have a chair? he will come back and I knows he will tell you 'bout it."
She placed a chair for me near the machine where she did her sewing. There was a coat lying on the machine, and she started to sit down when a negro man came in the door with his arms full of clothes.
The woman took the clothes and started to check them over. The men pulled out a pair of pants from the bottom of the bundle and said the man wants these back today. And as they discussed the work I looked around the room.
It was covered completely with heavy cardboard.' walls and ceiling were cardbord. Small windows along the side furnished light for them to work by at large electric lights were burning also to make a better light. On one side near the front was the desk and table that they were using to check the clothes on. The rest of that side of the room was filled with large presses.
The other side had a large cabinet with glass doors, and it had a number of hats in it that had been cleaned and blocked. The sewing machine was next to the cabinet. It was a heavy NEW HOME machine with the foot pedal. A large light with a green shade was placer to give a better light on the machine. An Ironing board for the hand ironing, was built against the wall just on the other side of the machine, and an electric iron was on it.
Calendars of all sizes and kinds were hanging around on the walls, and the majority of them were calendars from various insurance companies. There were. also two <text not clear>. and one read:
NOT RESPONSIBLE
FOR WORK LEFT OVER
THIRTY DAYS FOR
THEN IT WILL BE
SOLD TO PAY FOR WORK.
The other was this:
NOTICE
THE WORLD
IS COMING
TO AN END
PLEASE PAY NOW
SO YOU WON'T HAVE
TO LOOK ALL OVER H---FOR ME.
At the rear of the long room was the table and equipment for dry cleaning. Long racks up and down the center of the room were full of clothes A that had been cleaned and pressed ready to be sent out.
As the men went out a young negro boy, dressed in a clean white wash suit came in the door. The woman handed him the clothes and said, "Sam-you had better see what you can do with these, for Ed is late gittin' back, and some of them has got'er go back today.'
She came back to her machine where the coat was lying and after she threaded her needle, she looked up with a grin and said, "I just can't git a thing done today, I'm all excited, but it's my birthday and I'm goin on a picnic barbecue after dinner time.
"We're goin way out in the country close to where I was born b'longs to our Community Club and we have one of these every year, and this time it hits right on my birthday. Ed's wife is comin in at twelve o'clock to work in my place BO'S I can git off. That's the reason why I'm tryin’ to git all the work done up before I goes.
"How do you like this work, and have you been here long! I asked.
"Well, I laks to sew, must'er got that from my mother, cause she was sewin' when I could first remember. And she could jut make anythin', Even suits of men's clothee. I was all'ers pesterin her to learn me, but she'd say, I ain't got no time to fool wid youse.
"And one timeshe had done made up some new pillow slips when she had to go out to do some sewin'. I 'cidedtat was the time for me to learn how to sew. I hunted up some shirtwaist patterns and do you know what I did. Well honey I tried to cut out a shirtwaist out'er her new pillow slips.
"Was my mother mad] Well I guess she was ’cause things was hard to git then. And them slips was cut to places. But she didn't raise no ructions. And she bought some outin' cloth and larnt me how to make peicoats. That was my startin' in to sew. But I still laks to sew.
“I has been here with Ed for five years, cause I went to work for him when he opened up this place. Yes'em we're pretty busy most of the time, of course. now it's rather alowut when school opens up then we'll git a grand rugh. Some of the boys that comes here to school works with us, to help pay for their schoolin'.
"Now Sam, back there workin won't be with us much longer 'cause he is just here goin' to summer school. And then some of the boys goes round and gits up work for ladies, 'cause they just wear, in most cases wash clothes now. Cauee you know that work is all'ere dull in hot weather and folks just don't have the money for dry cleanin', so's they just wear what they can wash out at home.
"I was born'd down in Morgan County, on a farm. And I stayed in the country it. I was round eighteen. Yes'em it is hard work on a farm, we rented the landbut we owned our stock. I have done every kind of work that is to be done on a farm. Why I was plowin' when I was round thirteen or fourteen. But my daddy was sick the reason I had to plow, and some body had to keep the work goin'. And I didn't mind it, for I was crazy about my daddy.
"I went to country schools and that was only for out six weeks in the summer and for three months in the winter. We stayed all day, went early in the mornin' and carried our dinner with us. It took a long time, but I got through the ninth grade and that was pretty good schoolin' for chillun then. But we shohoe'd and picked that cotton between school times.
"My mother sewed most all the time and sometimes she would do some of it at home. And then she would sew in the white folk's house. But we had a good livin' with our farmin' and what she made sewin'.
"But times was different then, folks had'er make what they had, least ways most of them did, for won't so many stores, and ready made clothes was high. It was cheaper to have 'em made up. But now you can buy things cheaper ready made than you can get the cloth to make 'em up. And if you have to hire somebody to sew for you it costs lots more.
"We had good times, we had a club, it's name was the Royal Club. it was just for 'musement 'mong ourselves. And we had parties and sometimes picnics, 'cause we had’er make our'musements, won’t all these shows, and automobiles then to ride round in.
"And I'll tell you something else too, we won't allowed to go out, not even to church lessen some of the older folks was with us. And if we had company at home, we had better leave all the doors open in the room where we was at. The old folks didn't turn us free to galavant round all night, we had to git to bed cause we had to work.
"Chillun won't raised lak they are now. Why when we went some'ers to play, we was just the same as the chillun where we was at. And if we done anythin' to need a whipoin' for, we got it right then and there, it was the same way when chillun was at our house. Didn't make nodlfferenc where we was, and the old folks didn't fall out over whippin' chillun. We was raised to mind, and we had better do that thing. Now if you was to whip somebody else's chile, they would have you up in court fore the day was out.
"This is somethin' else too, if I went to church even in the day time with a boy that had a mule and buggy I had to have some older person right long in the buggy with us. Yes'em, that's the way how we courted.
"No I don' think they was too tight on us. Course we thought they was awful then, Just couldn't see why we couldn't run round at least on Sadday nights.
But it shodidn' do no good to kick'bout it, cause that just made it harder than ever. And I can see now where they done the best thing in the world for us, and that is the only way to raise chillun. 'Cause there sho won't no galavantin' round with the boys and none of all these diseases that us has now, and gals won't all'ers findin' babies either ause that was a disgrace then, one that you couldn't live down. "But now, the gals am just as bad as the boys. they drinks, smokes, and don't think nothin' of havin' babies, and just as quick as they git over havin' one they are ready to try it again. Why even what we called just babies back then, are runnin' round and havin' babies now. No'm folks ain't tight on they chillun these days, And the young generashion is to fast now.
"I was round sixteen when I got married to Bill Raylson, and he asked my daddy for me. I won't never for git that, ’cause I cried when my daddy told him he could have me. I thought that he didn't love me and that was why he was givin" me away. I was crazy 'bout my daddy, and I guess I just didn’ have no better sense.
"But I was married in our White Boss’s house. My mother had worked for him and had just what you might say raised his daughter. And his girl wanted me to git married in their house, so that's where I got married and our Boss done the Job of marrgin' us.
She had to get up again and take care of some more clothes that a Negro man brought in and as she checked them over, she said, "It won't be long now fore I gits off," and taking the clothes to Sam she came back to her machine, picking up the coat that she had been lining sleeves in and some pants that she had fixed also, she carried them back to Sam and came back with several more pairs of pants that she had to fix. Changing the thread in her machine, he said.
"Mary, that's Ed's wife, don't lak to sew much, and I'm tryin' to git it all do he, but where was I at? Oh, yes, I member, It was my weddin'.
"Well I married on the 10th day of February back in 1916. And it was sho a cold day in February, and I know that you will be tickled, when I tells you that I got married in long unions and long drawers, that's the God’s truth, It sho is, but folks wore clothes them days to keep ’em warm. But I had a new blue weddin' dress, I don't' member just how it was made, but it was the latest thing out then, ’cause Boss’s daughter done picked it out. But I has a good reason to ’member them unions and long drawers.
"Yes sir, we had a big enfare, with plenty of eats, the white folks seed to that, and they sho was good folks, We lived on with them for two years after we married and then we come here to town and I has been here ever since.
"The first work that done after I come to town, was sewin', and I went out by the day. Won't so many sewin' then lak they is now, and you could really make good at that work. It wasn't many days that I didn't make $2.50 a day and dinner. I just wish I could do that now. But we was young and we spent our money fast as we made it. Never thought about savin' for a rainy day.
"I worked at sewin' for’ bout two years. Then I went to work at a barbecue place down on Broad Street. Now I sho did lak to work there for I made $18.00 a week and all my meals. I cooked all the pastry for the place. A white man owned the place and he was good to work for. But he had divorced his first wife and married agin. He had three chillun by his first wife, but none by the last one.’
"His wife helped at the place, and she sho was a worker to; and she expected the help to work, but she would keep right up with us, and she sho was good to do for us, and she made us all take out on of them savin' counts that payed off every Christmas. We didn't want to at first, it started at a dime a week, end was a dime more every week the first few weeks won't so had, but in the last few weeks it really hurts. But when Christmas come and we got all that money at one time, I'll tell you it sho look'd good to us, and she didn't have to beg us any more, we was ready to take it out the next year.
"Lot'er folks didn't lak the oss's wife, but she was good to every one that worked for her. And she was good to his first wife and chillun. I ‘member one time when the chillun come up to the place and said that they maw was sick, Boss wouldn't do nothin', but his wife sont the doctor over to see bout her, and she paid for all the <text not clear> that was needed, and she would send big baskets of groceries too, as well as meals from the place for the chillun. And she was good to the chillun, all'ers buyin' them clothes and things that they wanted, and givin' 'em money for shows and anything that they wanted it for but she didn't let the Bose know anything bout it. And many a time I has carried things to the chillun and they maw for her.
"She was one of these trained masses, and she was good when any of us got sick. I sho did lak'er. And I worked for her several years, or just as long as they stayed there. But we had the best of everything they had to eat and all of it that we wanted. But honey, you can git mighty tired of that kind of eatin' when it is every day for three time a day.
"And I would just git so hongry for vegetables, till I would bile a big pot of greens or some kind of vegetables and cook a corn pone to go with it. I'll tell you that I had plenty of company to eat with me when I done that, for they would git as tired of meat as I did. And that corn pone and pot of vegetables would go way from here.
"After they left here, they went to Florida and opened up a place there. The Boss's wife didn't live so long after they went to Florida. But that man's done married agin, I ain't never seed his last and third wife he was here last year and he come to see me. And he said that he was doin’ better now, cause he had done jined up with the church and was tryin’ to live a Christian life. I hope he is, sho does need to change. And he said that he had some chillun by his last wife. But I bet they ain't no prettier than his first wife's chillun, cause they was fine lookin' and good chillun too.
“I rested up a while fore I started workin' anywhere else. And then I went to work in a laundry. I mended and repaired the clothes and sewed on buttons, just all of that kind of work. I laked that too, for I was back to my old work of sewin'. And I Just worked for five days a week, or you might say four and a half, for I was off every Friday at dinner time. But I didn't make the money that I did at the barbecue place, for I Just made $6 a week at the laundry. But it wasn't as hard work and I had more time to rest.
"And I worked there for a long time, and then went to a dry cleanin' place and I have done this kind of work ever since. But I have worked in more than one place. And for the past five years I has been right here with Ed. My husband works here he drives the truck to git up the work. We don't make no big wages no more, but we does have a good livin'.
"We lives just across the way, so we don't have no ways to come to work. And we ain't got no chillun, no bodyceptln' Just ourselfs that makes us free to go and come, just when ever the notion hits us to go. We both belong to the Baptist church, and we goes to our church and Sunday school right regular at times. Course sometimes we is tired out on Sunday morhin and feel lakstagin' in bed and just restin’.
"Some folks tell us that we ought to be owning our own home Instead of payin’ out rent. But we don’t see it that way, for rent is not high where we live, and nothin' is higher than the taxes that folks has to pay on property now. No, we thinks it's cheaper to rent a house than to own one. And then, you know its this way, when you rents a place and gits tired of it, all you has to do is pick up and move off. But if you owns a place, you is sho stuck right there. And you shocain't take nothin' way from here with you, and I had rather have a good living and a good time, while I'm here, than to leave something for some one to fuss over after I'm gone.
A small negro boy came in. he was apparently around four or five years old, and he had on a clean dark blue play suit he stopped when he saw me, as if he didn't know whether to come on or not. Carrie laughed and said, Come on honey and tell me what you wants at I knows that its money."
She got a hander chief out of a pocket that had some money tied up in the corner. It was tied in several knots and while she worked with the knots very careful not to tear the handerchief, she started talking again, "This chile here is my sisterschile, and his mother is fixin up our basket for the barbecue today. I just knows us is gon'er have a good dinner.
Giving the boy some money she told him to hurry back now eo's his maw could git everything ready, cause she would be long quick as Mary come.
"Well, Mary is right here," said a very pleasant voice. We looked around and I saw a small', very neat, young negress, a light mulatto, and her straight black hair was combed back from her face and none up in a twist low on the back of her head. She wore a dark print drees and white shoes.
Carrie laughed and said, "This has sho been one long mornin to me. But it won't be long now!'
"Are you go in' to fish any?" Mary asked.
"Huh, what does you think I has done got them two fishin' poles ready for, and I sho is got plenty of bait to go with them to and they is all right on my back porch waitin' for me to git ready.
Mary laughed and said, "This is Carrie's birthday, and she is kinder up in the air. But she won't tell us how old she is. Did she tell you?”
"No, I shoain't said how old I is, and I ain't gwiner for git and say it neither. Carrie answered before I had time to answer Mary.
"Now, Carrie, you will make us think that you are gittin' old' anyway you was shocryin' in the picture show last night. Mary told her.
Carrie grinned and said, "That don't make me old just cause I cries over a sad picture. But I really does enjoy a good show, and if it makes you cry, it makes you think that the show is better. And I bet you cried just as much as I did. And you know I cried bout that picture after I had done got in bed last night. I just got to thinkin' how sad it was and what a hard time the folks had, and you know I just let out to cryin' agin.
She laughed and said, "William listened to me for a while, he said he couldn't sleep, so he got up and eat some watermelon. And that cured me of cryin' and I had to get up and help him eat. We both eat that ole watermelon and went to sleep. I sho didn't cry no more after that, is Mary laughed and ask if she couldn't go long to look out for the baskets df lunch while they fished.
"Ain't a bit of use in that' Carrie told her, for them baskets will be looked after mighty well. Won't nothin' git away.
"Well I'll bet you git a whithin' cause its your birthday, Mary said. Or do they know that its your birthday?
"You bet they knows it. somebody done got smart and told I am’ I Carrie replied.
"Will many members of your club be at the barbecue, I asked.
"Yes'em, they will sho better be there. We has a membership of round twenty-seven members, and every one that can make it, will be right there. But they'll have a job when they tries to whip me. Cause I ain't go in' down there aimin' to take no whippin'!'
"Well, you can go on now and be restin' or get ready either one that you want'er, Mary told her. Ed won't be here for he had to go to Atlanta on some business. But some of the boys will be in a little while and we'll make it, alright.
"Any way I has got all the sewin' done that has to go out today, and you won't have to do any of that, Carrie told her. And she picked up the last of her work that she had been sewing on and went to the back to give it to sam.
Coming back to where we were, she said, "Well, I'll sho be thinkin' bout you all while I fishes and eats way down on the Old Apalachee River, and now I'se gone’ goodbye. And she went out the door.
Mary laughed and said, "She is as bad as a child. But I hope she has a good time, for she sure is a good worker. Ana she never complains about her work. I don't know just how we would get along if it won't for Carrie.
