In an otherwise identical version, entitled "Life History of Eliza Hall Colored," a list of original names and changed names is provided, and the following additional information is given on the top of page 3640B: "Date of First Writing: April 4, 1939," "Occupation: Washerwoman," and the handwritten comment, "Rather good."
Original Names	Changed Names
Matt Wall	Eliza Hall
Walnut Cove	Jamesville
Edna	Janie
Sam Wall	John Hall
Peter Hairston	Alec Hawse
Dan River	Red River
Rising Star Primitive	Holy Cross Primitive
Baptist Church	Baptist Church
Walnut Cove, N.C.
Matt Wall (Negress)
Louise L. Abbitt, writer
Claude V. Dunnagan, revisor
RECKIN' I'LL BE WASHIN' AN' IRONIN' TIL I DROP DAID
"Lawsy, Missy, I bin washin' an' hangin' out clothes so long I don't reckin' I could do nothin' else if I wanted to........’cep' maybe raise some purty little flowers like them you see in the yard.........."
Aunt Liza lives with her sister and several grandchildren in a dilapidated, three-room house on the highway near Jamesville. It has been her home for twenty-five years. In the front yard there are so many lilacs, red bud, iris, tulips, there is room for little else. At the side and behind the house are purple and white wisteria, climbing over a rickety, white-washed trellis. The yard is conspicuously free of weeds. Aunt Liza's gardening tools are neatly placed in a corner near the chimney, under a tin shelter.
"Yes'm, I works with my flowers whenevah I gits time. 'Course, washin' fer so many folks don't leave much time fer nothin' else, 'cause I got to boil, scrub, rinse an' hang 'em out, an' sometime iron 'em too. That takes a lot o' time. I have to keep the pot boilin' 'most all the time, an' the clothes lines are 'most allus full." Aunt Liza stirs the embers under a boiling pot.
"Up 'til 'bout two years ago, I had to tote all my wash water from way down 'cross the street. It was awful heavy work and gave me a misery in my hack so I decided to have a well dug here in the yard. It's saved me a heap o' work.
"I git awful tired o' washin' sometimes, but I don't reckin I've missed a single day in the past forty years. You can't make so much takin' in washin' nowadays as you used to could....the laundries'll do it so cheap. But I've allus managed to git along on what I tuk in, though it ain't bin so much. I know I've done more washin' an' ironin' than any other livin' colored woman 'round here. Sis does the cookin' but she ain't much help when it comes to boilin' and hangin' out clothes. 'Course little Janie........that's my niece........she holes a heap 'cause she's so young and strong. "I reckin we ain't no different from other colored people our folks was slaves jest like the rest of 'em. I recollect my Paw belonged to Marse John Hall he owned a heap o' land an' a lot o' slaves, too, up in Dan County, near Calvary Church. In them days, the slaves all had their master's name, so my Paw's name was Pete Hall, and my Maw’s name was Lucy.
"After slaves was freed, Paw tuk Maw and moved to a place called Middleton right near the old Alec Hawser place on the Red River. After that, me an' eight more chillen was horned. Paw was a tenant farmer right up till he died.
"I nevah got to go to school much. I 'member when I was a little girl, though, when I used to walk three miles to an old church building that we used for a school, part time. They wasn't many scholars....eight, as I recollect and we only had one teacher his name was Uncle Will Bailey, an' he'd teach whenevah he-wasn't gittin' in crops or workin' in he field. I recollect ole Uncle Will only had one eye, but he could see more out o' that one eye than most folks can out o' two. Whenevah some o' the young 'unds'd start gittin' noisy, he'd rap down on the table with that ole hickory stick he used to carry 'round durin' school, an' if anybody done wrong, he'd tan somebody's hide, an' he sho’ could lay it on, When it got awful cold, the older boys tuk turns about bringin' in wood an' buildin' the fire in the ole pot-bellied stove in the middle o' the room. Some of us'd bring sweet 'taters to school an' roast 'em in the ashes under the fire, so they'd be done in time fer dinner. I don't reckin I learned so much in the time I tended school, 'ceptin to print my name an' figger a little. Most o' the time, we'd jest draw pictures an' sing songs, 'cause couldn't nobody hardly read an' write anyhow. But we had a heap o' fun, an' I reckin I'll never fergit it........Most o' them that went to school with me is dead an' gone now, an' the ole buildin' is tore down, but I still know where the spot is, 'cause a piece o' the ole stove is still layin' there in weeds an' rocks........ I reckin I went to school 'bout five months in all. That's more'n some o' the rest o' 'em got. I could've went to school longer, but soon as I was big enough to work, I hired out an' went to washin'. Colored folks don't need so much learnin' nohow. They gits uppity and dissatisfied. They's plenty to learn outside o' books. Maw learned me to wash an' cook and tend garden an' her Maw learned her, I reckin. I can worm tobacco an' chop cotton too, but washin's ray real Job. Maw allus said 'Take pride in your work, Liza'.
"I was eighteen when I got married, Ed worked in a brick-yard ovah near Alton when I met 'im an' we stayed there a while 'fore we come back here. He kept workin' at the brick-yard far a while an' comin' home week-ends.
Finally he quit at the brick-yard and come home. A new factory had jest bin put up in town then an' me an' Ed got Jobs stringin' tobacco sacks. I recollect we earned 'bout ten or fifteen cents a hundred fer them. That wasn't enough to live on so we quit an’ Ed went to farmin'. One day he come in from the field awful sick. It'd loin rainin' that day an' he had a had cold. I sent one o' the young'uns after the doctor but he wouldn't come less'n we had the money, an' we didn't have none, so I jest put Ed in hed an' figgered to take care o' 'im myself. 'Bout a week later I knew he had pneumonia, 'cause he got so hot an' coughed so hoarse like. Then, that night, I went out an' borrowed two dollars from a neighbor an' went after the doctor. When the doctor looked at Ed he said he had a case of bronical pneumonia. He gave me some pills an' said put some mustard plaster on his chest, then he left. I gave Ed the pills and done ' zactly what the doctor said, but it didn't seem to do no good. I didn't sleep much that night 'cause I was 'fraid to leave my husband's bedside. 'Long 'bout three o'clock I laid down.....I didn't meant to but I dozed off to sleep. When I woke up, it was dawn. I went ovah to see how Ed was gittin' along. I felt his hand. It was icy cold an' I knew he was daid. I went back to washin' so I could pay the bury in' expenses, but it tuk me a awful long time to git it paid.
"I've spent a lot o' money fer sickness an' doctor bills. Not on myself....but fer my two daughters. They was sick a long time 'fore they up'n died. One of 'em, that's Sadie, she worked fer a white family here, an' when she died, they holped bear the buryin' expenses. They sent her some real purty flowers too. I guess I couldn't've done it by myself. I had to pay when Elsie died, though, an' it tuk me a long time undertakers cost a lot o' money, more'n it seems like a body can make. But one thing I allus keep up payments on, an' that's insurance. I aim to have enough insurance to give me a decent buryin' when I die, an' maybe leave the young’uns a little if they's any left after expenses've bin tuk out.
"I go to church 'most every Sunday......seems like you can work better when you've bin to meetin' and got religion. I'm a member of the Holy Cross Primitive Baptist Church an' I give somethin' whenevah I can 'cause the Lord loveth a cheerful giver. Our preacher ain't got much eddycatlon, b`ut he's a good man, an' he can make the sinners git down on their knees an' pray. It takes a good preacher to do that, 'cause they's a lot o' sin in the world today.
"We nevah have had a car, but we listen to the radio a lot. The young'uns like the string music an' plays about the Lonesome Rancher. Sometimes they broadcast the church meet in's from the Holiness Church, an' the singin's awful good.
"I ain't nevah voted much, 'cause it takes so much time an' one vote don't seem to make no difference nohow. Sometimes the white folks come out from town an' ride us in so we can vote. It's hard to tell who's the best man to vote for, but the people who take us in 'most allus tell us who to vote for, an' sometimes they give us a dollar, so we jest vote for that man. Ed......that's my husband that's daid now....he made four dollars one day jest sayin' he'd vote for certain ones, an' when he voted, he voted for another man. 'Course I don't reckin that was 'zactly honest, but Ed got a big kick out of it, I reckin the white folks'd skint ' im alive if they'd knowed what he done after takin' their money.
"You ain't got to go, have you? Mighty glad you come by. Let me cut you a few posies. My Dorothy Perkins will bloom 'fore long. Maybe next time they won't be so much washin' to do. I don't know though. I reckin I'll be washin' an' ironin' clothes till I drop daid."
<text not clear>
