
Mary A. Hicks
Why she gold his Greeks
Raleigh, N.C.
Paul Manos Appollonia, proprietor of Raleigh's Dixie Diner, was born in Asiatic Turkey, in 1890 where his father was in the army. Paul had better advantages than most Greek children in Turkey. He attended the public schools and received a fair education there. His mother, a Greek lady with at least one Turkish ancestor, was a proud beauty who got what she wanted out of life. Noblemen as well as peasants bowed to her when she passed, and because of her, Paul lived like a little prince for awhile.
In 1913 Turkey went under a new regime, and his mother's beauty and his father's military record had very little influence on the new executives. They were reduced to poverty and were in constant danger, besides. His mother had saved a few of her jewels, and these she sold to send Paul to America.
He knew no one in New York where he landed, and being unable to speak a word of English, he had a hard time buying food and renting a room. The next day he found other Greeks and then he felt more at ease.
He worked for awhile in a lunchroom in New York, and then he left for Chicago where, it was said, business was much better. While he was in Chicago some of his new friends left for Raleigh and he never forgot the name while he went from state to state working here and there. In 1929 he went to Asheville and after a summer there came on to Raleigh. He worked in several cafes here before he saved enough money to open his own place nearly two years ago.
He married Anna Manos, a distant cousin, who was sent to him from Greece, and they have two children, Chrisanley and Johnny, of whom he is very proud.
He speaks good English and thinks that it is very impolite for one Greek to speak to another of his race in their native tongue if an American is talking to one of them. If the man he wishes to speak to can't understand English, then he should ask the American to excuse him.
He takes very little interest in politics and never has voted, although he says that if he did vote he would be a Democrat. He likes the Government of the United States, and he thinks that Roosevelt is the best president the United States has ever had, and he has read about them all. He reads very little besides histories and a Greek newspaper published in New York.
He belongs to the Greek Orthodox Church, but he hopes that when his children are older the Greek priest will speak English entirely and the Church will become more American, or that his children will join the Presbyterian Church.
He is planning and saving to buy a lot and build a ten-room house. At present he and his family occupy a twelve-room house with ten others.
wg
