January 21, 1939
Dr. H. S. Willey
318 Kramer Bldg.
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Dentist
W. O. Saunders - Writer
"WOMEN CAN TAKE MORE PUNISHMENT THAN MEN"
"I graduated in Dental Surgery in 1903, here and opened an office in an inexpensive location. It was a mistake. Two older dentists located on Main Street had established profitable clienteles and were doing well. Presently I got myself a Main Street location too.
"A dentist in those days was not just a dentist to the public. He was called a 'tooth dentist'. The words dentist and dentistry had little meaning for rural people in the early part of the century; generally they sought his services only when there was a tooth to be pulled. If you suggested to them that they had teeth that could be saved by filling, they often resented the suggestion. I have had my feelings hurt many times by ignorant patients accusing me of trying to make work for myself by suggesting fillings.
"And when they did submit to fillings they wanted gold and a lot of it. Gold fillings were considered stylish. The conspicuous gold filling is still highly prized by most colored people and by the Japanese.
"Times have changed. I do not think that the advances in dentistry have been so marked as the advance in public interest in oral hygiene and preventive dentistry. I have patients who come to me two or three times a year for dental checking up."
"I have heard that you do not make extractions," I said.
"No When I started out I tried to do it all. There was a time when I thought I might specialize in extractions and dentures, or plates. But I gave it up when the profession adopted the technique of 'nerve blocking.' The new technique called for the use of a long hypodermic needle and the injection of a powerful local anaesthetic to deaden the nerves in the area of the tooth to be treated. I am a sensitive sort of person - call me timid if you like; I couldn't accustom myself to the use of the long needle and the pain it inflicted on my patient. I gave up extractions and, along with it, the making of dentures. If I have lost by it, financially, I have been compensated many times by the greater pleasure I have found in the other branches of dentistry. After all, this is an age of specialization and there is plenty of work to go round.
"I make a modest living in my profession and that, after all, I suppose, is about all one should expect. You can't do conscientious work, charge reasonable fees and accumulate much money in the practice of dentistry. There are some dentists in large metropolitan areas who make big money by establishing reputations attracting wealthy patients who can pay big fees. Then there are the unethical dentists who by advertising, employing young graduates in dentistry to do their work, and by making plates in large quantities by factory methods, seem to make big money.
"The greatest annoyance in my practice is the credit business that so many patients force on me. And, as a general thing, the better able they are to pay their bills, the slower pay they are. I'll give you an illustration:
"A woman comes into my office for an examination. I find that she needs $12.00 to $15.00 worth of work.
"'Well, I haven't that much money this week; I'll be back next week,' she says.
"She comes back next week, has the work done and, when I have finished, she tells me that she has no money now, but that she will pay half the amount in a few days and the balance in two or three weeks. That was last fall. More than four months have elapsed and she hasn't paid me a cent yet. And yet this woman figures prominently in the society news, with her bridge parties, and only recently threw a big party that must have cost her several times the amount of her bill.
"I sometimes wish I had the nerve of my friend P------, (naming a fellow dentist in town). He made several extractions and some bridge work for a patient who asked for credit after he had got the work in his mouth. My friend reluctantly took his promise to pay in two or three weeks. A month went by and the man who had carried off $40 worth of bridge work had not paid. And then one day he rushed in and said, 'I have been called to Washington and I can't go up there with this bridge work; it has made my gums sore and I can't eat with 'em; can't you ease 'em up for me?"
"'I can give you all the relief you want,' said my friend, removing the bridge work from the man's mouth and dropping it in his coat pocket. 'You pay me before I make the adjustment.' The man set up a howl, but he didn't want to face a Congressional Committee in Washington with several of his front teeth out, and he paid his bill.
"I have on my books people who go to the movies three times a week, who take long motor trips and treat themselves to summer vacations. Maybe that is why they have to keep me out of my money.
"They ask me when I am going to take my vacation. I never seem to be able to get enough ahead to afford a vacation. I have an automobile; by careful use I make a car do me three to five years before trading in for a new one. My wife and I enjoy short motor trips on Sundays; we drive slowly and save gas and oil. We seldom go to the movies. I guess movie going is a habit, after all."
"I have noticed that you always walk to your office?" I remarked.
"Yes," he replied, "and my wife walks when she goes shopping or pays a social call. You see, we, both lead sedentary lives and we need the exercise that walking in the open air gives us. We often stroll downtown nights for the same reason.
"But if I didn't feel the need of the exercise, I wouldn't bring my car downtown anyway. It's true I live better than half a mile from my office and it would be pleasant to use the car on rainy days; but I would be taking up parking space that some visitor could use and exposing my car to all sorts of accidents. I notice that my neighbors who drive their cars to work have a lot of battered fenders.
"Speaking of the credit business, there are times when my receipts in a week will not take care of my grocery bill. And there are only two in my family, we have never had any children.
"Country people pay their bills better than town people. You would think it would be the other way round, with farm prices low as they are. At the present time I haven't a single country patient on my books, while probably two thirds of my patients are country folk."
"Do you consider the dentist as important as the medical doctor in the alleviation of human suffering?" I asked.
"That is hardly a fair question," he said; "the two occupy respectively important fields and often work cooperatively. The old time genera' medical practitioner practiced dentistry of a sort and carried a pair of dental forceps in his little black bag. Today the physician sends his patients to the dentist, recognizing that many human ailments are traceable to diseased teeth.
"I do not go all the way with the medical school that attributes 80 per cent of human ills to defective teeth. It is my observation that the fault is often in the gums merely and if the gums can be cleared of pus, excess tartar removed from the teeth and the gums hardened by massage, not only can teeth be preserved in many cases, but insidious poisons eliminated and the cause of many physical ailments arrested. To illustrate:
"A woman came to me for treatment. I found the two front teeth, of which she complained, perfectly sound, but they were caked with tartar and pus pockets had formed in the gums near the roots of the teeth. I removed the tartar, scraped the pus from the pockets, told her to use salt water and massage her gums, and to report to me for treatment every few days.
"The woman was suffering from backaches and a rheumatic condition of her legs. She had been taking medicine for rheumatism and, every so often, she would have to resort to doses of calomel to rid herself of the drugs she was using. After a few treatments her rheumatic pains left her and she threw her medicine away.
"A woman came in the other day to consult me about stains on her teeth. A glance told me that her trouble was nicotine stain. "Best way to get rid of it is to avoid smoking,' I suggested.
"'That's what my husband and my mother, both, told me,' she said, 'but I told them that now that I am a grandmother I'm going to do as I damn please. So that's that.'
"I have found hundreds of patients in my experience whose physical ailments and, ultimately the loss of their teeth, was due to that baffling condition known as pyorrhea. Science has never found any cure for it. But I am sure it could be prevented by the intelligent practice of oral hygiene persisted in from early youth to old age.
"In the treatment of pyorrhea the good old forefinger of the right hand and a little salt are the best preventives. Massage stimulates, salt hardens the gums. If salt were a dollar an ounce I believe its beneficial effects in oral hygiene would be universally appreciated.
"The tooth brush itself is often provocative of trouble; it is harsh to tender and sensitive gums; then too it is often as not loaded with harmful bacteria. I tell my patients to use two tooth brushes, alternating them in use; and to keep a little tray of salt handy, to dip the moistened bristles in salt after use. The salt will kill the bacteria and can be rinsed off in an instant when the brush is called into use again."
"What tooth paste or other dentifrice do you recommend to your patients?" I asked.
"I usually recommend sodium perborate or a milk of magnesia dentrifice, although one of the widely advertised acid pastes seems to be the best cleanser. But the trouble with that particular paste is that the acid in it leaves the user's teeth sensitive to cold and to pain. I sometimes find a patient's teeth so sensitive from the use of this paste that I have to put him on an alkaline dentrifice for a week before he can submit to a drill. I bet I have switched so many as 500 patients from that one tooth paste. A man comes in and says: 'Since the weather has turned cold, my teeth give me fits every time I open my mouth and expose them to the wind.' I tell him to throw away the toothpaste he is using and get a paste containing milk of magnesia. He manifests a good deal of surprise when I name the tooth paste he has been using.
"Tooth pastes and powders are highly ballyhooed and, in some cases, almost criminally rated over. One of the cleanest mouths I ever encountered in all my practice was that of an old man who had never used a tooth brush or a manufactured dentrifice in all his life. He used plain bicarbonate of soda when he used anything, polished his teeth and massaged his gums with his forefinger and, occasionally, rinsed his mouth with salt water."
And then, in reply to my question, he said:
"No, I don't use laughing gas to produce anaesthesia; having discontinued extractions I would have little use for it. It has its elements of danger; anything that produces unconsciousness in a person is not without danger. And my dentist friends who use it frequently run into trouble when unwittingly administering it to an alcoholic. An alcoholic is apt to go wild under this form of anaesthetic and wreck the office."
And then the subject of our life history got back to his personal history.
"In my thirty six years practice I have adhered to a live and let policy in respect to fees. I have never charged an excessive fee, even in the case of a rich patient or a transient whom I could hardly expect to see again. I own my home and I have two farms and a tract of 1,300 acres of woodland upon which I am relying to help me in my old age.
"I have had little success in recent years with one of my tenants. The taxes on the place were ninety dollars lacking a few cents last year. It turned me in only $104, just a few dollars more than the taxes. But I am not replacing the tenant; he is getting old and won't have many years to live now. When he was strong and before his boys grew up and left him, he turned me in good money in most years - $500 in one year.
"My other and larger farm contains about 200 acres and has turned me a profit of as high as $1,800 in a peak year. Of course, it doesn't begin to do anything like that now. But, with a good tenant, it helps a lot.
"My woodland is giving me a headache right now. I had counted much on it helping take care of me in my old age; but with timber thieves and careless persons starting woods fires, I am getting uneasy. People think nothing of going into your woods and cutting and hauling out enough timber to build themselves a house. And they don't even call it stealing. I could show you two or three houses that have been built of lumber taken from my woodland without my knowledge or consent.
"I can show you acres and acres of young stands of second growth pine killed by the wantoness or carelessness of persons with matches. There are persons who will set fire to a field of broom straw just to see it blaze, indifferent as to its spreading to your woodland."
"I have never cultivated expensive habits, although I smoke moderately. I married thirty-one years ago and am blessed with a congenial wife whose life tempo is the same as my own.
"We, both, enjoy our automobile, taking leisurely trips on Sunday afternoons, or making a day of it. We like to explore side roads, off the beaten path of traffic. Sometimes we get lost quite, and that's a thrill. We spend our evenings reading or listening to the radio.
"We get our greatest kick out of our radio; we have a good one, ten tubes and three bands. We have explored the world on that short wave band, London, Berlin, Rome and South American stations coming in just like domestic ones. We get the news before it breaks in the daily papers. On hot summer nights we tune in on the aviation band and listen to the radio men on transcontinental planes telling how cold the weather is up where they're flying. Makes a fellow wonder what sort of world he's living in.
"And we hear better sermons and get better church music than we could ever hope to hear any other way.
"We set a modest table, neither of us having acquired a taste for rich foods. Fruits, cereals, milk and vegetables are our principal items of diet. That we are both blessed with fairly good health, may be attributed to our simple living - that and the fact that we don't fight. We, both, abhor excitements of any sort. If we live much to ourselves and avoid crowds, it's not because we don't like people, but because we have accustomed ourselves to a quiet manner of living that doesn't seem to be quite in tune with the rush of modern life. We think our way is the better way, although it would bore some of our neighbors to death. People generally have gotten into the way of requiring so many stimulants and excitements that they have lost the art of just enjoying one another.
"I spoke of my two farms. I am not a dirt farmer, have never done actual farm work, and sometimes find myself discouraged over the returns from my farms; but I think I should like to spend my last years on the farm. I wouldn't go in much for staple crops; I would go in for grapes, berries and small fruits. I am thinking of starting a vineyard of several acres on one of my farms this year. That old bible prophet who spoke of every man living under his own vine and fig tree hit me in a soft spot.
"There have been many advances in dentistry since I entered the profession in 1903. Most small town dentists in those days were still using the old treadle type drill operated by the foot. Many small town dentists in those days couldn't find enough practice in their offices to keep them busy, and many of the smaller towns had no dentists. Some of the more enterprising practitioners had regular itineraries. They would pack along their treadle drill, a pair of forceps and a few incidentals and set themselves up for one or two days in first one little town or village and another until they had made the rounds of their trade area. I knew one old timer who made himself highly popular in the rural districts hereabouts by taking along a guitar and harmonica, both of which he played well. He had his harmonica rigged up with a headpiece that enabled him to play it without hsing his hands. With his free hands he strummed his guitar as an accompaniment to his mouth harp and entertained crowds in country stores and village inns, always with an idea to business.
"The X-Ray today plays an important part in dental surgery that it didn't in those days. Many of the more advanced dentists will not treat a tooth today until they have used the X-Ray in their diagnosis. And they check up on their work by X-Ray before discharging the patient. I try to spare my patients that expense.
"There has been a great advance in the making of dentures. In the early part of the century practically all plates were of vulcanized rubber. Some few dentists were experimenting with gold and aluminum plates, which generally proved highly unsatisfactory.
"Dentists today have a greater regard for prophylaxis. Many old time dentists never bothered to sterilize their instruments after use. If the average germ wasn't a puny, short-lived creature I shudder to think of the deviltry the carelessness of some of the old timers might have provoked.
"The techniques of modern dentistry have been greatly improved. The public has helped in the education of the dentist; a vast literature has grown up on the subject of oral hygiene and the public is tooth conscious. The schools are doing a great work with the young. One of the first thing a child learns in Primary School today - if he hasn't learned it at home - is the importance of brushing its teeth."
"In your experience, Dr. Mildman, "have you found men or women the more satisfactory patients?" I asked.
"I can't say that I have any choice; but, as a rule, I find that women can stand more pain, take more punishment than men. I have had men patients who broke out into cold sweats and turned white in the face at the sight of a pair of forceps. Few women are that panicky; but I once had a woman in my chair who got panicky and slapped my face when my drill struck a nerve and caused her a sharp paroxym of pain."
