In an otherwise identical version, additional information is given. The following handwritten note and the information listed below are on the cover sheet of the deleted version: "Excellent cut or eliminate middle section dealing with visit to his home and talk with his wife." The date on the top of page 2423B is "Februrary 16, 23, 1939."
Written by: Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby
Area 6--Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6--Athens
John N. Booth Area Supervisor Federal Writers' Project Areas 6 and 7 Augusta, Ga.
March 6, 1939
Athens, Georgia
1011 2 E. Clayton Street
Joseph Eliot Webb (white)
Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby, writer Mrs. Sarah H. Hall, reviser
THE LIFE OF A LAWYER
James Earl Doolittle, Attorney-at-law, was the wording of the "shingle" at the street entrance to the long flight of steps that led to the office of this young barrister.
"Now really," he began, "I'm not old enough to have a very unusual life history, but I don't mind talking about some of the experiences I have had that might be of interest to people not familiar with the life of a lawyer."
The rather large room contained several desks, all littered with papers.
At one of these desks a man was typing away at a rapid rate, apparently oblivious to the fact that he was not alone. Bookcases filled with legal volumes lined the walls. A coal heater going at full blast radiated warmth and comfort on this cold rainy day.
"Well," he continued, "I suppose you would like for me to begin with my birth. I was born on July 4, 1907 in a little middle Georgia town, where both of my parents still live. Father still operates his machine shop there and, let me tell you, it's modern and up-to-date. It was just a blacksmith shop when he first opened for business.
"College educations for my sister and me meant considerable sacrifice on the part of our parents. Mother did her bit by selling milk, butter, and eggs. After one year at Mercer University, I stopped to teach school for a year, and then I enrolled at the University of Georgia. My sister went to Bessie Tift
College at Forsyth, Georgia, after she finished high school. She left Bessie Tift to go in training at St. Joseph Infirmary in Atlanta. Her experiences as a nurse would probably be much more colorful than mine as a lawyer. She has nursed in Atlanta, in our home town, and she was on a case in Gainesville, Georgia, when that terrible storm struck there in April 1936. That catastrophe caused so much suffering that it was months before she could get away from Gainesville. It may have been the experiences of the tornado and the emergency needs that followed in its wake that influenced her to go to Washington, D.C., for special graduate training. How she is working in a hospital in Virginia.
"Long before I had the slightest conception of the actual duties of a lawyer, I had. definitely determined to follow that profession. Before I left high school my only experience with the legal gentry was confined to the small town lawyers in our own community, is possible that the experience I am going to tell you about had something to do with my choice of a career.
"While I was still in high school, I answered an advertisement that stated, among other things, that certain books I wanted could be ordered on trial, and, if the purchaser was not satisfied after inspection, they could be returned within ten days. They came, I inspected them, found I was not interested, and promptly returned them. Shortly after that I received a letter from the advertiser stating that I had made a binding contract with the company and threatening suit unless I accepted and paid for the books. At first I did not know what to do, and my visions of what it would mean to be sued were vaguely terrifying. I was so frightened that I did not show the letter to my parents. Fortunately, when it came I had met the mail carrier and neither father nor mother knew that I had received it. After worrying about the matter for several days I chanced to see a local attorney who was a family friend and often visited in our home. I told him all about my troubles and showed him the letter. He laughed and told me not to worry any more, for I was a minor and could not he sued. He advised me to ignore the letter. I told him that I was afraid not to answer it for fear they would write again and my parents might find out about the matter. He agreed to write them for me. I suppose he did for I never heard any more from them.
"This incident cemented my determination to study law, so when I attended the University of Georgia I enrolled at the Lumpkin Law School. Fortunately.
I had one especially good old teacher there. He was a very peculiar old gentleman, hut by means of sarcasm, cajolery. Insistence upon incessant reading and, in the case of some of us, by pure luck, he managed to instill the principles of law into first year students. He was fond of telling the unfortunate youngster who had failed to prepare his lesson that in his (the professor's) opinion the student would make a better farmer than lawyer. Although this professor was not popular with the students during the period they were in his classes, yet after they finished school and began actual practice of law, all of them that I have talked to admit that they learned more in his classes than in any of the others.
"July of 1929 was an important month in my life, for that was when I received my Bachelor of Laws degree, and shortly afterward I was admitted to practice before the courts of this State.
"Notwithstanding there were 30 or 40 lawyers already practicing here, I as determined to start my practice of law in the same city where I had studied, so I rented an office, bought furniture, supplies, and books, and put out my shingle.
"Unfortunately, I entered partnership with another young man who was a native and resident of this place. I had known him throughout my law school days. It never occurred to me to doubt that he had already been admitted to the bar, so we printed stationery and began business. The first business that came our way consisted chiefly of collection matters; small claims on which we received fifty percent of the amount collected. We were doing fairly well. Surprisingly enough, we were even able to meet all our office expense, when someone informed me that my partner did not have a license to practice law, Naturally, I did not believe anything of the sort, but when I mentioned it to him, he admitted it was true, but stated he was preparing to stand the State Bar Examination again shortly and was sure he would pass. This occurrence led to other misunderstandings and we soon dissolved our partnership.
"Now, that I was entirely on my own, I began my practice in earnest. I had to get knowledge that can only come by experience, step by step. I had been practicing only a few months when I got my first actual court case. A young lawyer's first appearance in court is always his first 'big case.' No matter how petty the matter, it is a big case to him if it is his first appearance in a real courtroom as a practicing attorney. In this instance my landlord and his wife had a disagreement which finally led to divorce proceedings. He determined to gain control and custody of his two children and also to contest her application for alimony. He and I were close friends and he employed me in the case. I was so young and overconfident that I would not associate with an older lawyer. I wanted to win the case all by myself. The wife had employed two of the best lawyers in this city. There was hearing after hearing, and trial after trial. Finally, after months of litigation, the judge awarded one child to the husband and the other to the wife. I could not say that I won my first case, but I did not lose it either.
"I don't feel that I have accomplished very much in my ten years of practice, but at least I have survived, and have built up a practice sufficient to support my family. Hadn't I told you I married before the end of my first year's practice? We have two young daughters and a son now.
"Except in the very large cities an attorney seldom confines his practice to any one branch of law, for the small town lawyer rarely has the money or opportunity to specialize in any one particular branch of his calling. Criminal and civil cases have been indiscriminately mixed in my own practice.
"Summoned by the small county courts, I work on criminal cases, suits concerning land, divorce cases, and all kinds of collection work. The legal profession in the small southern cities forms a free and congenial body, fraternizing without the bitter jealousies that seem to separate and individualize the lawyers of the large cities, and those of some of the suburban areas. Usually when several lawyers here are concerned in a session of court in some other county, they will go together in one ear. Then too, procedure and practice in the average county court is informal, free, and easy. Of course there are exceptions. For instance, chamber hearings are usually held in the judge's office. Lawyers, clients and all parties attending the Superior Court's regular Saturday session are allowed to chew and smoke tobacco, and very few rules are enforced at these particular sessions.
"The greatest trouble that lawyers in the small courts have to contend with is getting their cases to trial. If one or the other side does not want the case tried it sometimes goes on from term to term and from year to year until it wears out --- parties die, get together, or it is finally dismissed for lack of prosecution. The main cause for this is that attorneys in small towns have to depend on the good will of fellow attorneys and of the judge in order to make a living, and they do not care except in exceptional and very rare cases to incur the displeasure of their associates by insisting on a trial in the face of a motion for continuance from the other side. Of course, as procedure is being constantly simplified and 'streamlined', this objection is "being overcome "by the modern reforms.
"As to my religious activities, I couldn't be anything except a Baptist, as all of my people have been of that denomination and I grew up in that faith. An uncle of nine is pastor of one of the largest Baptist churches in South Carolina. Before I left my home in middle Georgia to go to college I was a member of all the boys' organizations in our church and taught a Sunday School class. Because mother actually thought I could sing, I had my voice trained, and sang in the church choir every Sunday. This last was merely to please my mother. I have no illusions as to my voice. I served a term as deacon in a Baptist church in this city, and at one time taught a Sunday School class in that same church. However, I don't go to church as much as I used to. I am subject to call at any time and it seems to me that it is my duty to serve my clients whenever they call on me.
"Tell something of your experiences as a practicing attorney," I suggested.
"Well to tell you the truth," he answered rather wearily. "I've been so busy today that I'm afraid I can't collect my thoughts enough to give you any sparkling personal anecdotes. Let me rest and think a moment."
He closed his eyes and leaned back in his chair, but in another moment he had straightened up and his eyes were shining with excitement. "Take this one," he said:
"This was the strangest murder case I ever defended or was engaged in. It was in 1933 when I was employed to defend a middle-aged Negro man who had been indicted for the murder of a younger Negro. The tragedy had taken place at one of those Negro 'hot suppers' where there was a good deal of drinking going on. During the meal a free-for-all fight began and the younger Man was stabbed in the heart with an ice pick.
"My client vent on trial maintaining his innocence. He admitted his presence at the hot supper, but insisted that he did not commit the crime. However, the evidence was against him and he was convicted and sentence to die in the electric chair. I immediately appealed for a new triad. In the Supreme Court the judgment of the lower court was affirmed. I annealed to the Governor of the State for executive clemency and a date was set for the hearing before him. On the morning I was to go to Atlanta and appear before the governor I came to my office early in order to have time to glance at the morning paper over a cup of coffee. Imagine my surprise when I opened the paper and the first thing I saw was a news item stating that a prisoner bearing the name of ray client was to be electrocuted that morning at the State Penitentiary. I came near strangling on a drink of hot coffee, but grabbed the telephone and tried to reach the governor. Hot being able to get connection with him, I called his secretary and talked in a disjointed manner, for I was highly excited, trying to tell him what it seemed had happened. Imagine my relief when he laughed and said, 'A reporter was around here getting facts for a news article, and he evidently didn't know that execution was automatically stayed until after the hearing before the governor.'
"So I went on to Atlanta. I believe the governor really felt sorry for me, for he knew that newspaper item had scared me out of my wits. After he had heard the recommendations of my client's character from various reputable witnesses and had read the evidence that had been adduced at the first trial, he commuted the sentence to life imprisonment.
"So my client was sent to the penitentiary for life. He soon became a trusty and was allowed full privileges of the prison. After two or three years his wife began asking me to apply for a pardon for him, "but each time I would tell her that I thought it was a little too-early. Finally, in 1938 after he had served nearly five years I did apply for a pardon.
"Just before I could get a hearing before the proper commission I received news that my client had been killed. When I investigated the matter I learned that another prisoner, a trusty, had stabbed him in the heart with an ice pick. He had died in the same manner that he had allegedly slain his victim five years before.
"As you very well know, there are two things the average Negro can be expected to do --- steal and lie. Well, one day two peglegged Negroes came here from Atlanta in an old ramshackled truck to collect scrap iron. They were indicted for stealing. The bailiff called me on the case. When I reached the scene I found one half of the truck was filled with scrap iron and the other half contained bottles of various sorts and sizes. When the case came to trial, the president and general manager of a dairy plant was put on the stand.
"'Are these your bottles?' he was asked.
"'Yes,' he quickly replied.
"'How do you know they are? Is there anything on the bottles to identify them as yours?' he was asked.
"'No,' he admitted, 'but just the same I know they are mine,'
"'You sell milk, don't you?' was the next question.
"'I do.'
"'You get 13¢ a quart for your milk. Isn't that true?'
"'Yes, that is right.'
"'How do you get your bottles back?'
"'My deliveryman picks them up daily as he delivers milk.'
"'When anyone enters your dairy to "buy milk what are your terms of sale?'
"'The milk is 13¢ and a 5¢ deposit must he made on the bottle.
'"That makes 18¢ total for milk and bottle.'
That's correct.'
"'Well, do you insist that the person who buys the milk and makes the deposit on the bottle return that bottle to you?'
"'No, it makes no difference to me what they do with the bottle after they have paid the 5¢ deposit on it.'
"'Well, then,' I stated, 'you have no case against my clients unless you can prove that they went to your place and deliberately stole the bottles without your knowledge.'
"That case did not even go to the jury. That dairyman won't speak to me today if he can get out of it. I lost about $30.00 on that case. They paid about half of their bill, and gave me a mortgage on the truck for the balance. When I checked un I couldn't find any trace of them in Atlanta. Their truck wasn't even registered at the State Capitol, at least not under the license number shown on the tag.
"All lawyers have trouble collecting their fees. Sometimes they are paid in such small installments that they don't realize they have received anything much when the bill has been paid in full.
"A middle-aged woman once came to me for a divorce. 'Where is your husband? ' I asked.
"'Out of the State,' was her response. I succeeded in getting the divorce for her.
"About a year later she came back. 'I want another divorce,' she announced.
"'Another divorce! I stammered, 'Whom did you marry this time?’
"'My first husband,' she calmly stated. 'After I was divorced from him I married again, You got me a divorce from my second husband and then I remarried my first husband. Now I want another divorce from him so I can marry my second husband again.'
"'Good heavens, woman! I asked. 'Can't you make up your mind which one you want to live with?'
"'Yes sir,' she insisted, 'I mean to remarry my second husband and live with him the rest of my days.'
"They were married and left the State. I lost track of then, but I have heard that she lived with him until her death. Her first divorce had taken place before I began my practice, but I had actually gotten two divorces for her in a very few years.
"You may not want to hear about a rape case. It was ridiculous. The boy's father employed me to represent his son, who was accused of raping a woman who lived in another state. The woman was much older than the accused youth. When the case came up for trial her testimony was positive and emphatic. She stated that he entered her bedroom in the absence of her husband and assaulted her. Both parties were of low character. My client had no witnesses. Her statement sounded so logical and convincing that I decided not to cross-examine her regarding the actual crime but to try another plan to save the boy. I had been seeing her around the courthouse all the week, so I asked her how she managed to get transportation from her village to the county site. She said that she had to pay someone a dollar a day to bring.
"'D "'Do you realize,' I shouted at her, 'What it is costing the State to pay the witnesses and jury?'
"'Yes sir,’ she meekly answered.
"'You and your husband expect to get about out of this suit, just for hanging around this courthouse seven days, don't you?’ I asked.
'"Yes sir," she parrotted.
"'So you swore out a warrant against this boy so you could get this money,' I kept on.
"'Yes sir,' she stated again.' She had answered ’yes' to so many cuestione that she said it again without stopping to consider the meaning. I put my plea before the jury. The judge was mad as fire about it, but I cleared the boy. The jury was out only about five minutes before they came back with the verdict of 'Not Guilty.' Of course the victory wasn't quite as easy as I have pictured it. It was proved that she was mad with the boy about something else.
"I believe I've told you about all I have time to go over now, and anyway, things happen over and over again in a lawyer's life until anything else I might try to recall would probably be very similar to what I've already told you.
"One last incident might be of some interest. A very young couple asked me to file divorce papers. It was posted, and the case was to come up in the next term of court. She sued for alimony, which he agreed to pay. She went her way, and he went his. Just a few days before court was to convene he went to see her. They patched up their misunderstandings and went back together, asking me to withdraw the case. How, years after, they are a happy couple. This was just one case of many, where young people marry before definitely making up their minds as to how it will work out.
"Now, truly, I have no more time to talk with you, but I do hope that I have been able to picture to you the life of a lawyer."
Four men entered the office, evidently in accordance with appointment. I left them busily engaged in earnest conversation.