AN, OLD FARMER
Original Name	Changed Name
Mr. Boykin	Joe Blain
Person interviewed:	S. P. Boykin (White)
Address:	Route #2, Wilson, N. C.
Occupation:	Farm Owner
Name of writers	Stanley Combs, Wilson, N. C.
Revisers	Edwin Massengill
No. of words:	3,520
AN OLD FARMER
Joe Blain lives on a farm, having farmed all of his life. His father and grandfather were farmers, and the present farm has belonged to this family over 100 years. A public road runs north and south through it, and a small stream borders it on the south. The farm buildings are all on the west side of the road thus affording an east front.
Joe was near the house trimming his fruit trees.
"We are having lots of rain," he remarked. "I thought I'd trim these trees a little while everything is so wet. It ought to have been done several weeks ago, but I couldn't get at it. They ought to have been sprayed with that lime and sulphur, too. It makes better fruit when they are sprayed every few days after the blossoms come one. My pappy had all the hillside in orchard once. We always trimmed the trees early in the year, then begun the spraying and always had lots of fruit, too. The grog shop stood there beside the house. My pappy sold lots of vinegar and brandy. In fact, we paid for the farm that way and by the sale of bacon and corn. Brandy brought ten cents a quart then, and selling was legal.
"We used to bud our own fruit, but I never could get a pecan to grow. It saves money to do your own budding and grafting. I'm a-going to try it again this spring. The agricultural teacher will help me and furnish me some of the tape they waterproof the incisions with. We need more pecan trees, and we'd just as well have them for shade around the house as them oaks. I wanted to set out some trees this spring. I have better luck transplanting trees in the spring than in the fall; it seems like they grow better when set in the ground just before the sap rises. I always trim the tops back with the roots, then set them deep and pack the soil around the roots carefully. Trees planted in the fall seem to wither up before the next growing season. I've let the orchard and shade trees go down since the children was at home. When they was here we had lots of time and could trim them proper. It makes a lot of difference with them not here.
"I was seventy-six years old last January, and my wife is four years younger than me. We have had seven children, and raised six of them. The oldest one, he died in his teens. All the rest is married and doing for themselves on farms.
“My youngest son's wife and daughter are in the hospital now; been there four weeks. He has paid the hospital $150, and it will cost a lot more. I don't see how they are going to make it, but the doctor told them to try to keep the hospital and nurses paid up and he would wait for his.
“My pappy raised nine. He bought this land all around here from my grandpappy. Goes way back to them buildings you can see through the woods there. There was nearly 1,000 acres, and he paid $990 for it. It was all timber then.
"My grandpappy had over 300 slaves, and they cut the timber and built that house in 1799. It's just like it was then, except we added two rooms and a hallway in 1878. The slaves cut all the logs and prepared them in the woods. The sills are mortised and pinned together, and all the nails were home-made in the blacksmith shop across the road. Everything in the house was made at the farm except the glass in the windows.
"When I was a boy my pappy always had plenty of work to do; worked most of the year then. Schools and things were not like they are now. We had a little one-room school. It run about four months during the winter. I didn't get much learning, for I usually only went in the worst weather. I went as far as the multiplication tables. My wife was brought up in right much the same way, but she got a little farther than me.
"Things have charged a heap. Our kids rode trucks to school; didn't have to walk through mud and stuff like we did and we let them go to school most all the year. They all went through the grammar grades. After that they wasn't much interested; mostly wanted to get married. Guess they got enough learning to get by with, anyhow they're married and getting along fairly.
"It takes more money to run a family than it did when I was a-coming along. People want to go places and see friends. It costs lots of money to run an automobile, and everybody has to have one, too. When I was a boy we went to town on a mule and wagon and that not every day. The mule ate hay and stuff we carried along for him from the farm. We made our own clothes, too, and raised our own meat and lard. About all we had to have was money enough to pay for a little oil, sugar, and coffee.
"It's different now. The land is poor and has to have fertilizer. We ride into town in an automobile, and it drinks up gas and oil. Of course, we have a cash crop now that we didn't have when I was a kid. Tobacco brings a lot of money; cot ton used to be a good cash crop, too. Seems like the crop control didn't do much for it. Some folks think that tobacco would have sold as well without control as with it. I reckon we'll know about that in another year now that control is off. With me, I guess it don't make much difference. I'll plant about the same acreage I've always planted.
"We never did anything much but farm. We don't know anything else to do. We've done about as well as anyone in the neighborhood, and there’s no reason we can't go right on with farming. Farm life can be made as convenient as that in town. We have electric lights that only cost about $4 a month, and we could have a water system and sewerage. Besides, we have room for a good garden, pasture, and feed for a few chickens and a cow. One can always have fresh air on a farm. There may be some social advantages in the city, but we prefer it on the farm where we was raised.
"Times change during one's life time. I think the churches and the schools have changed the most. There's nearly always something going on at one place or the other. My wife and me discuss it every once in a time, and we think the good roads may have caused it most. Sometimes we wish we had had the chances young folk do today, but they live too fast today. A little liquor can do more damage than all the good schools and churches put together can do.
"Politics don't have a thing to do with the way people live. Of course, I vote the Democrat ticket when I vote, just like I always did, but it's the big companies that run things. I guess that there'll be a change at the next election, but folks'll learn that the Republicans can't run things any better than the Democrats do."
It began raining, and Joe suggested going to the house. There he had a basket on which he was working.
"These splints," he said, “are some I made two years ago. The worms have damaged some of them. They was stored in the attic and are so dry they need soaking. My uncle made a lot of baskets for sale, and he would make one for what corn it would hold. He could make them tight enough to hold water. I never make any but for my own use.
"Pappy taught all us boys to do for ourselves. We always made our own shoes for the mules, and we repaired all the harness, tools, and wagons that we used. He always had a place to store everything not in use, and it was up to us boys to see that they was there. I guess it was a pretty good idea, and I try to keep all my things where they belong and under cover same as he did.”
Joe’s wife is of medium build, and she was dressed in a plain dress that showed some wear. Her eyes are of a faded blue, and she wears her youthful knot of hair in a simple turn at the back of her head. She was preparing the noon-day meal. The kitchen stove is small, so she was laundering a few odd pieces on the living room stove.
"It makes lots more work when a person tries to keep two fires going when they ain't nobody but us two here to do for," she explained, "but I wanted to hurry these things along."
The floor was covered with linoleum, and the walls and ceiling had recently been repapered. The paper, light in color, had cracked in places. On the mantel was a clock that recorded the day of the month as well as the hour of the day.
"That old clock you see there has been running a long time. It stopped only once in the last forty years, and that's the time I forgot to wind it," he said. A radio was in the room, also a two-drawered dresser, and an old secretary having three drawers. On the walls were two calendars and a thermometer.
Near the stove was a gallon can half-filled with sand which served as the family cuspidor, as both the old people are profuse users of snuff.
“That chair you’re setting in," Joe explained, “is one my pappy made. See how the rounds is, what’s left of them. The kids and us wore them half-way through like that with shoes. These other chairs was made here, too. Pappy would steam the backs and bend them in clamps until they dried, then he'd finish them. These rockers was made that way, too. When we was married I went to the furniture store and bought me six straight chairs. I paid twenty cents a-piece for them, but they don't last like them home-made ones."
There were more rooms and more home-made treasures. The house was in good order, all the beds made and neatly covered with quilts made by Joe's wife and daughters.
"Speaking about something to eat, we always have a plenty, such as it is," Joe remarked. "We always have a big garden, and it saves us lots of money. Lots of people in the neighborhood buys canned goods, but we don't. My wife always has lots of canned tomatoes, corn, peaches, pears, huckleberries, jellies, preserves, and the like. She has gone preserves back in that little closet under the stairs that she has kept ten years. Not many folks can say that. In addition to the garden, we have a cow that milks. From her we gets all the milk and butter that we need. The chickens keep us in eggs, and we grow all the pork we need for meat and lard. We always have a plenty of white potatoes and sweet potatoes, too. The sweet potatoes are harder to keep than the white ones. Ours are about gone now. We don't care for them so much anyway. We don't have a house to cure them in because we don't raise enough to make it worthwhile to build one. About all we have to buy is our sugar, rice, grits, coffee, tea, and a little oatmeal. We try to grow the rest of our food. We don't do much with this modern cooking. Some people reads a lot and know more than we do about it, but they's got more schooling than we've got. I reckon we can live out our time without it, being as we've lived this long. My pappy and grandpappy both lived long lives, and I don't see any reason we can't if we take care of ourselves."
<text not clear>
