Rose Shepherd
No. -193
April 17, 1937.
JACKSOBILLE (SUBURBS)
RIVERVIEW and RIVERVIEW TROPICAL GARDENS.
Lem Turner Road,
Personal Interview,
Dr. E. H. Armstrong
Dr. E. H. Armstrong, owner and developer of "Riverview" of delightful medium priced home suburb of Jacksonville - a tract of Approximately six hundred acres - with twenty-five acres of swamp and drained and developed into "Riverview Tropical Gardens" - is a native of Khode Island. He humorously says: "The first loud sound that impressed itself on my memory, was that of the high waves of the rock ribbed Atlantic Shore of Rhode Island, slapping against Narragansett Pier! But that did not last for long, as while a still very small boy, I came with my parents who settled in Marion County. That was over sixty years ago, and the little towns of Altoona, Umatilla, the larger cities of Eustis and Leesburg, have sprung up in the prairie-lake section where as a young man I heard cattle.
"I was never able to make much headway as a cattleman, and with $15.00 in my pocket I arrived in Jacksonville in 1880. Mechanics had always interested me as a boy, and I was fortunate in securing a place with the S. B. Hubbard company, then a going concern in the lively metropolis of Jacksonville, and was placed in the shop. This experience was of untold benefit to me, as I was there during the period of much progress in mechanical development. I had the pleasure of working under Mr. John Eining who, white connected with the Hubbard Company, worked on his automobile inventions and also the steam whistle, the latter making him famous.
"I saved my money, as I had met a most wonderful, girl, and she still is - the present and only Mrs. Armstrong, and we were married in pensscola in 1880. I then went to New York and studied Opthalmology, and came back and practiced for many years in Jacksonville. That's Why they call me "Doctor."
RIVERVIEW:
"However, I had a dream - a dream of medium priced homes for future citizens of Jacksonville, and so I began to look around for a place to start. This section North of the City limits of Jacksonville a wilderness then of winding cowpaths and hog trails - was on the mark and I bought six hundred acres and stared. That was twenty-five years ago - and my dream is just being realized.
"The property has a mile frontage on Ribault River, which of miles down empties into Trout River, a tributary of the St. Johns.
"In this sub-division, no water accumulates in the low places we have hills in Riverview that are 90-ft. high, and from these hills on a clear day one can see the tall buildings in the down-town section of Jacksonville spread out like an air-plane view.
"We have all city conveniences - streets, 16 miles of them, two of them paved, and the rest graded and graveled. We have two big artesian wells, one of them furnishing all the water supplied by the "Good Hope water company," operated by my son, a $100,000. a year business. In fact, it enjoys the largest sale of any bottled mineral water in Florida. During the world war, when thousands of men and officers were housed at Camp Johnston, (SIR) the Government paid us on a yearly contract $10,000, for water supplied the officers, men, Hospitals, camp kitchens, etc" We hauled it out by bus and trucks by the ton.
"These two wells furnish two and one-half million gallons of water every twenty-four hours, with a natural pressure of 28-lbs. There are 60,000-ft. of water lines and mains thruout Riverview.
"We have one hundred homes, all occupied, and a $65,000. Drammar School.
"The homes built during the last year have been under the Federal Housing Administration, totaling around $100,000. The entire Riverview development represents an outlay in cash of approximately $200,000. - buildings, structures, and developments - work in general.
"The development has been laid out with the idea of easy identification - the Streets running East and West and the Avenues North and South.
"Riverview is one and two-tenths (1.2) miles from the city limits of the Northern boundary of Jacksonville. There is double bus service from the Northern side of Hemmimg Park, the fare being 15¢ each way.
"Records in the county Tax Assessor's office show that the development has added $10,000,000. In taxable property to the rolls of Duval County."
CRANKLESS ENGINE:
Dr. Armstrong has found time in his busy life to invent a "Crankless Diesel Engine" - (See drawings attached) - which created qui a stir in mechanical circles and was written up favorably in different trade magazines. Plans were formed to manufacture it, the company organized, but the "Black Friday" stock market crash of 1928 brought an aprupt close to a promising business venture, and nothing has been done about it since. Dr. Armstrong says the shock was so great, he suffered a complete nervous break-down, was sent to New York City for treatment, and while seriously ill, was erroneously pronounced "dead," a wire was sent to the Jacksonville papers, and a few weeks later he returned home much improved. To read his own "obituary."
RIVERVIEW TROPICAL GARDENS.
These unique Gardens, adjoining Dr. Armstrong's Home place, and a short distance from the business section and stores, are patterned after a similar development at Rio Janeiro, Brazil, South America.
A twenty-five acre swamp has been drained, the surface water being carried off into the Ribault River a mile away. A driveway passes thru to the River, bordered on each side by palms, which in a few years will meet overhead, forming in reality "An Avenue of Palms," as it is rightfully named.
One hundred tons of sand mixed with cyster shell has been piled in to make the winding trails and foot-paths thru the tropical verdure of native growth. There are an estimated 14,000-ft. of these trails covering the spongy root-growth of the swamp bottom, and walking along them gives a delightful springy effect of treading on tan-bark.
One can spend hours in this tropical garden, the view changing with each direction. It is estimated there are 100,000 each of lilies, both the rod and yellow, which will be in full bloom about the middle of May different specie of palms, and many different kinds of Azaleas.
On Valentine a day, Feb 14th, of this year, the Azaleas were in full bloom, and the public was invited to Come and view them without charge. Over three thousand people passed through the "Golden Gates" With the beautiful sight. There are fifty varieties of Azaleas.
One trail is marked - "Trail to the circle of Roses," and there they are, 1,000 of them, all varieties, soon Blooming thruout the summer.
One unique attraction is a tall century old red bay-tree, called "The Mystery Tree" with pure clear water flowing out of the trunk from an opening 16-ft up. In a niche to the left of the opening is a bust of president Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Dr. Armstrong says a similar tree in Virginia has been flowing for 100 years.
There is also a magnificent specimen of Brazilian Rubber Tree, while towards the center of the gardens is A group of sweet Bay trees, which bloom in June, July and August, the white petals falling on the ground like snow and spreading their sweet odor for a mile around.
An attractive artificial lake is called "Lake Pocahontas" the surface entirely covered with "parrot moss" in great demand for fish-bowls, and visitors are good-naturedly permitted to take all they wish.
There are many rod-bay trees, cypress, yellow pine, in addition to palms and other native growth, all in the greatest profusion and in their natural setting. Italian cypresses 20-ft-tall. Native honeysuckle, Wisterias, ivy, and the lovely Coral-vine are being trained on overhead wires and up the tall trees and in years to come will present a picture beautiful to behold.
Other plantings include satsuma orange trees - 100 of them -from which were harvested last year 2,000 oranges, and a considerable grove of Chinese Tung trees several years old.
To make the Gardens more realistic, Dr. Armstrong has "built" tropical animals as a setting for some of the scenery - a giant white elephant of concrete - 6-ft. high and weighing twenty tons - stands <text not clear> chained to small stake. great American eagle weighing around a quarter of a ton, perches high on an old live oak stump, and there are lions, tigers, bear, and in unexpected quarters tiny Imitation dwarfs keeping guard over secluded sections.
Dr. Armstrong is very much enthused that the Director of the united States Geological Survey in the Topographic map of Jacksonville and vicinity in September 1928, included the well platted area of "Riverview" and the "Riverview Tropical Gardens." Estimated 15,000 visito last year. Public is invited to visit the gardens, no charge.
An automobile-drive around the property starting at Soutel rive which leads into Avondale in a 15. S.B. directions on a two mile "loop" thru the sub-division substantiates the claims for its high look tion and the beautiful water frontage on Ribault River, along which are many modern homes of various types of architecture. Some frame building of two and three stories, with spacious porches, sun-rooms and living quarters, others of the "Argentine" style - of hollow tile and concrete construction, with flat walls, recessesd entrances, low hung windows and flat tile roofs; Also Spanish homes and bungalows in profusion, but all in good condition.
Dr. Armstrong estimates an upkeep cost of $15.00 to $20.00 per day is the present average expense to his company, and mentioned having just purchased three tons of paint to re-condition some of the older dwellings.
The River-front lots, the most valuable, are 300-ftt deep. A modern "sea-walls of steel and concrete construction protects the property from overflow or erosion. This extend the whole mile of the River frontage.
A corps of workmen are kept busy throughout the year in building designing and repair work, and five men are constantly at work in the "Tropical Gardens.

