Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Davis (white)
North Birmingham, Alabama.
N. S. McDonald
Editorial Department
GREEN FIELDS FAR AWAY.
"When I turned the corner, I could see my father pacing the porch. I knew he was troubled, but I didn't expect the tirade that followed.
"'Dera Bledsoe', he said, 'you haven't got one bit of marryin' sense in your head. To think of Al Bledsoe's daughter even speaking to a coal miner! You know very well that miners are all a bunch of ignorant, profane, crapshooters with no ambition. I won't stand idly by and let my daughter keep company with one of that crowd, let alone marry one of 'em.'"
Dera Davis is a short, swarthy woman of robust appearance, with graying, unruly bobbed hair and light blue eyes. Her mouth is large and her teeth irregular. She is almost ugly until she speaks, and then she's almost pretty.
"'I forbid you ever to see him again, and if he keeps on seeing you after what I've just said--well, I guess there's nothing left but to shoot him, and damned if I won't do it.'
"And I was afraid he meant to do just what he had threatened," said Dera Davis.
"My father didn't know Davie very well, or he would never have said those things about him. You see, he was judging all coal miners by the ones that came up for trial in his court at North Birmingham. He had been justice of the peace there for twenty years, was a member of the Chamber of Commerce in Birmingham, and was influential in politics. He had given all his children a college education and had instilled in us all the highest ideals, yet he looked down on the laboring class.
"In our home, his word was law, but he didn't have the understanding my mother had. Somehow she always seemed to know just how I felt about everything almost soon as I did. It hurt me to disobey my father and keep on seeing Davis, but what else could I do? I was in love with him.
"I loved Joe Davis the very first time I saw him. It was funny how we met. I was teaching school in the country and had come home for the weekend. We had the only 'phone in that part of town and all the neighbors used it. While I was at home, a young man came to use it. All the family had seen him in the neighborhood, but nobody seemed to know his name. I watched him the whole time he was 'phoning, and he wasn't backward about using it, like so many were.
"He picked up that 'phone and talked with such assurance! 'My, 'I thought, 'this man is worth knowing.' He was a big, strong-looking man with broad shoulders, and his face was kind. I guess his friendliness is what really struck me first. He had on a good-looking blue serge suit, with blue tie and blue socks to match, and neat black shoes. You see, I didn't miss a thing. I noticed that he looked at me, too, every time he caught me looking away.
"I didn't meet him that day, but I soon did. I knew then and there that I'd met the man I would marry if I could get him. He must have felt the same way about me, for in less than three months he had told me all about his wife dying and leaving him with three children, one three, one eleven, and one fourteen--and about his trouble in trying to keep a housekeeper that would be good to them. Soon he started talking about how lonesome he was, and every body knows that when a widower starts talking about that, a woman's battle is half won.
"Sure enough, after we had been going together for eight months, we slipped away and were married. My mother and sisters knew all our plans, and strangely enough when my father found out that we were actually married, he changed completely and invited us to come to see them whenever we could. Later, he learned to admire Davis, too.
"I took a great deal for granted when I thought that I could go into that home and easily make well mannered, right thinking, useful American citizens right away out of those children that I had only seen a few times. I guess that's a good illustration of the old saying, 'ignorance is bliss.' But I really did it and without much trouble. They'd had a good start. They certainly had a fine father anyway.
"A few days after we were married, Davis said, 'Dera, Rachel needs a new pair of shoes. She's 14 now, so supposin' you tell her to go down and get a pair and charge them to me. She'll like 'em better if you do the tellin'.
"Well, I did that very thing and Rachel couldn't get to the store fast enough. That night, as soon as her daddy came home, she showed them to him and he asked her where she got them. Grinning from ear to ear, she pointed to me and said, 'She told me to.'
"I knew I had won my first victory. My husband had helped me, of course.
"The very next morning while I was cooking breakfast, the baby came to the kitchen and stood, half-ashamed for a minute, then he said, 'If you let me be your grocery boy, I'll let you be my mama.' From then on, he was my grocery boy, and we were devoted.
"I had lots of ups and downs with those children, but they're all grown and married now. Two of them are doing well in Georgia, and Buck, the youngest, one, is working in Sayreton mines and lives just five blocks from us. Any trouble the children ever gave me faded away a few years ago, when Rachel put her arms around me and said she wanted to die before I did. 'What in the world are you thinking about, Rachel?', I asked. 'Oh', she said, 'I want to get to heaven first so I can be there to get my mother's hand and put it in yours and tell her how good you always were to her children.'
"By that time we were both crying. That will always be one of my 'mountain- top' experiences.
"After I had been married three years, my first baby was born. In the three years that followed, I had three more babies, but they were all premature and lived only a few months. Then for two years I didn't have a baby. A little later, I discovered that another one was on the way. When I told Davis about it, he was disappointed. He's sixteen years older than I am, and he was afraid he wouldn't live to see it raised. The whole time, he made me very unhappy about it. I didn't show him any of the little clothes as I had always done with the others, because it seemed to worry and fret him just to mention it.
"Finally, when my little girl came, I let them put her over by herself and I didn't pay any attention to her. After a while, Davis came to me and said, 'Dera, do you know you haven't even asked to see the baby?'
"'I haven't felt like it,' I said, still not looking toward the baby. All the time, my arms were fairly aching to hold her.
"Davis went over to her crib and picked her up gently and placed her close to me. 'Just to think,' he said, 'this little baby gal didn't have a thing to say about being born, and she's not wanted by her daddy or her mammy, either'. He put his arms around us both then and nearly smothered us with kisses.
"'Well', he said, 'from this minute on, she's wanted by her old daddy. Dera, I've got a lot to make up for.' Davis never knew why I cried then.
"We named that little girl Barbara, and called her 'Bobby'. She's always been happy and carefree, and she grew up fast. She's sixteen now, and she's been married a year. I hated to see her marry so young, but she married a fine young man, a graduate of Auburn Polytechnic Institue. He's 25, and is an engineer working for a good company. Their success almost convinces me that early marriages aren't so bad after all.
"Buddy, that's my boy, is 21 now. Five years ago he stopped high school and went to work in a machine shop. He simply refused to go to school another day. Well, I kept right on hoping that some day he'd realize his responsibilities and go back to high school. He was a good worker and everybody at the shop liked him.
"Suddenly he began talking about saving his money to go back to school. I didn't discuss it because I wanted him to make his own decision. Then he made his own arrangements about books, clothes, and spending money and went and back to high school where he graduated with good grades. He got a scholarship to a two-year course in a Georgia college by playing football, and last March, he graduated with honors.
"He thinks now that he can't afford to work in the shop that hired him before he went back to school. He can't get the jobs he wants; and he won't take the job he can get; so I'm not so sure that extra schooling helped him as much as it hurt him.
"I was giving Buddy money for haircuts, picture shows and clothes when Davis began to warn me that I was going to ruin a perfectly good boy. One day he said, 'Dera, you'll have to break that boy's 'plate' before he'll be worth a damn.'
"Well I stopped giving him money and in less than two weeks he had a temprary job and was about to get a permanent one.
"Davis has no patience on earth with people who won't work. It is probably because he started to work so young. His father had eight sons, and he was a Methodist preacher on Sunday and a blacksmith on weekdays. They lived in Tennessee where seven of those boys went to work in the mines and the other worked as a blacksmith. Not long ago, there was a picture of Davis' blacksmith brother in a Tennessee newspaper saying that he was the oldest blacksmith in Tennessee. Davis, the youngest one of the brothers started at the mine picking slate when he was only 12 years old, and he's been coal mining ever since.
"He went to school only nine months before he started to work. Twenty years later at Brookwood, Alabama, several of the miners went in together and hired a teacher to come to teach them and get them ready to stand mine foreman's examination. Davis passed that examination, and his grades were second to the best.
"Since we've been married. I've helped him a great deal, because he is so anxious to learn. Of course, his English is still bad, but I have drilled him so often with sentences leaving blanks to be filled with 'see' or 'saw', 'took' or 'taken' that he never makes those mistakes any more. He still says 'foire board' for 'mantel' and 'chist' for 'chest', but I love him so that I don't want him to change altogether, or he wouldn't be the same man I fell in love with.
"I can't for the life of me see where people get the idea that coalminers are rough and brutal. Why, Davis is the most tender-hearted man in the world, and that's one characteristic of coal-miners in general, especially where widows and orphans are concerned. Davis has been a steward in the church here in North Birmingham for years and years, and I've been a teacher of the matrons' class for about as long. Davis is a good men, but he never believes in letting his 'right hand know what his left hand does.'
"I remember one time, there was a widow with three little children at Sayreton mines, and they didn't have a bite to eat and nowhere to get it. Well, Davis heard about it and he went to the commissary and bought two big baskets full of staple groceries. He took them to her back door, and slipped them in without a soul seeing him. He always was in his glory when doing just such things.
"It made no difference who had a streak of bad luck in his family or mine. He would always send for them and say, 'Come on and stay with us until you can get straightened out, and think nothin' of it.'
"I remember one time we kept my cousin and her three children for a whole year. Now lots of people have the heart to do for others, but not the money, and then lots of people have the money but not the heart. Occasionally, you'll find the man with the heart to do and the money to do it with, and Davis was one of those few.
"You'll hardly believe it when I tell you how much money he had made. The first month after we were married, he brought his envelope to me, and all deductions had been made--such as groceries from the commissary, doctor's fee, and cuts of other kinds. He still had $204 left. Davis brought me the evenlope and threw it in my lap. 'There it is, gal, ' he said. 'Take it and do what you can with it. If it takes it all, that's O. K. by me. That's all I'm working for, a living for you and the kids.'
"He made as much as $900 a month, and he averaged $600 a month for many years.
"I used to take Davis to work and go after him every day. On paydays, I'd park the car where I could see everything and wait for him. All around, collectors would be scanning each group to see if they could find their man and collect some of those 'easy payments'. Three or four big slick Negro women would be busy selling barbecue. I can shut my eyes right now and almost smell that barbecue and have always wondered if it could possibly taste as good as it smelled. Then there was the company deputy with a big gun on each hip, and eyes that could spot trouble a block away.
"On one end of the commissary porch was a preacher and singer, for they could always be sure of a crowd on payday. Some of the miners would be grouped here and there telling jokes and eating and drinking. There were always two lines of miners going up to pay window, one for the whites and one for the colored--no pushing, everybody waiting his turn. Somehow or other, they have always reminded me of faithful mules going home after a hard day's work. They have earned their pay, and they've come to get it.
"Negro girls, wearing their 'Sunday best' would be switching this way and that way, trying to attract the Negro boys. Well, on the payday just before the last Easter, one of the Negro girls attracted just one too many boys. It was the Saturday before Easter and Spring was in the air. A boy took his girl into the commissary and bought her a pair of Easter slippers. Later on, that same afternoon, another boy did the same thing. To each one, she gave her word that she would wear his slippers to preaching on Easter Sunday morning.
"She had a terrible time deciding which pair to wear first, but finally she decided to wear one pair to preaching in the morning and the other pair to preaching in the afternoon. You see, in mining camps on special days, the Negroes have preaching just about all day. One preaches till he gives out, and then another takes his place.
"Well, the girl had just come home from preaching and was eating dinner, when one of her beaus came to the door and asked her if she wore his slippers to church that morning. She confessed to the awful fact that she had worn the other boy's in the morning, but added that she was just fixing to put on his slippers to wear that afternoon. All the time, they talked he had a gun in his hand.
'Well, gal,' he said, 'Put yo' foot out dere and let me be shore. I heard all about what you went and done, but I wanted to see with my own eyes. You see you tol' me you wuz gwineter wear mine, but you lied to me. Well, you won't never lie ag'in, 'cause I's gwineter kill you right now,' and with that, he shot her straight through the heart. The sheriff's still looking for him.
"Each payday, we always set aside a certain amount for saving. Seven years after we were married, we had bought and paid for a nice home, paid for a good car and had lots of Insurance, didn't owe a cent and had $3,00 in the bank. Then we built more houses. I remember one year when Davis figured his income tax, he reported that he had collected $2,300 in rents.
"The last house we built for ourselves cost $6,500, as the Negroes would say, 'scusin' de lot. ' It had a hot air furnace that dried out my throat so bad that Davis had it replaced with gas heat. In winter, our gas bills ran from eighteen to twenty dollars a month.
"At the time Davis built the home, we had five houses in the clear. Then Davis mortgaged them all and built four more. That was in 1930, and just about the time the company did away with the contract system and threw Davis out of a job. The company offered him a job as shift leader at $6 a day, three days a week. We only had $1,500 in cash, and we had set such a high standard of living that we knew we couldn't possibly live on the job they offered, and we knew that our savings would be gone in no time. Davis refused the job, and because some of them were leaving their jobs our renters started slowing up with their rent. We had payments we couldn't possibly meet. We finally sold our own lovely house for $2,500 and tried to save the others; but we couldn't. We ended with one house clear and a debt on another one.
"Worried and wondering what in the world to do we finally decided to buy a farm while we still had enough money for the first payment. None of us knew a thing about farming, and we set out to learn.
"We went all the way from the Georgia line to the Mississippi line, trying to find exactly the right place. Finally, one day we went to a forty-acre farm at Corner, thirty miles from Birmingham. I didn't pay much attention to this one, for by this time I thought I knew what kind of a farm Davis was looking for, but I was shocked when Davis said, 'Well, Dera, I think we'll take this one. I can fix up the house and I'll wire it.' I thought at first I was imagining things. The place was 'no man's land.' The nearest neighbor was a mile off, the water in the well was muddy, and the front porch was as unsteady as a chair. I could see Davis was worn out looking, and that his mind was made up, so I sawllowed twice, and told him that I had always looked to him for a living, and that he had never failed me, so I would keep on.
"Well, we moved in. Davis screened the house, wired it, fixed the roof, built a new front porch and painted it. We had a nice house when he finished it. We had pretty good furniture for the country. All of us had plenty of good clothes, rain coats, galoshes, shoes and we had an ample supply of linens and bed clothes.
"We all worked morning, noon and night, simply for something to eat, after two years of this farm drudgery our clothes had become worn and shabby and we had no money to buy more, because we had paid a thousand dollars down on the farm and much more for the improvements. Davis seemed to think that if we worked hard enough and long enough after a while we would get straight, so he not only cleared land, but he dug up the stumps. None of us ever worked as hard before or since as we did then.
"When feeding time came, we almost needed a traffic cop. One was going this way to feed the cows, another going that way to feed the mule, another to feed the chickens, pigs and rabbits.
"There wasn't a single minute to sit and rest, from early till late, except after supper, and then my conscience hurt because it didn't seem quite right to sit. When I think about that place I know why people like the little rhyme:
'I wish I was a little rock
A-settin' on a hill;
Without a single thing to do,
But just a-settin' still.
"My, those were heavenly times when I could finally relax at night, sitting in front of the fire and listening to Davis play the guitar and sing. Davis had been playing that same guitar and singing the very same songs for years and years, but I never paid any particular attention to them. Those old songs, 'Spanish Fandango' and 'Love, oh Careless Love' somehow seemed beautiful while I was rocking, and eating roasted peanuts. I was tired and the warm fire made me feel at peace with the world. I'm sure when the angels sing, 'The Hallelujah Chorus', I won't enjoy it any more than I did Davis' singing on those long winter nights on the farm.
"Early one morning, I was standing on the front porch, when I looked up the road and saw our nearest neighbor, old Josiah coming. He was riding a big gray mule. Josiah had one foor tied around and around with yards and yards of string. His head was tied up and around with an old flannel scarf, and his lip was full of snuff. He had an old dominecker rooster under one arm. I asked him what he meant to do with the rooster.
"'Wal,' he said, drawing the mule to full stop and leaning way over to spit between two fingers, 'I'm takin' hit to the store to swap hit fur some o' that store-bought snuff. I'm plumb wore out a-dippin' this here homemade stuff. Yes, I knowed I wouldn't get much fur it, but I shore want one more good dip afore I die.' And with that, he went on up the road, his long legs dangling, and part of the string hanging down.
"Swapping gets in a person's blood after staying in the country awhile. One day I told Buddy to take some eggs to the store and swap them for some salt, coffee, and sugar. That nearly killed him, he was ashamed to let the storekeeper know we didn't have the money to buy what we needed. I explained how thankful he ought to be that we had something to swap. Even after all I said, he went away resentful, talking to the mule and hoping he'd fall and make him break every one of the eggs. Just to show how he changed--six months later, he'd swap eggs for anything, even a ticket to a picture show.
"There are things about those three years on the farm that I'll never forget, one in particular. Late one afternoon, old Mr. Stephens, our nearest neighbor, came to tell me that his wife had died that day. When I got over to his house, the neighbors had already 'laid her out.' The coffin was a plain, pine box, covered with black cloth and lined with white sheeting. It was trimmed all around with paper lace--the kind that's used for kitchen shelves. Six brass dresser handles--three on each side, completed the job.
"There old Mrs. Stephens was, all dressed in black, with her hands folded across her bosom. She had nickels on her eyes to keep them shut, and a rag tied under her chin to keep her mouth closed. A camphor cloth was across her nose and mouth so she wouldn't turn black. It was a very cold night, but the windows had to be kept open, add every once in a while, a neighbor would get up and saturate the camphor rag again. Toward midnight, I went to the kitchen with one of the neighbors to cook a midnight meal. Everybody except the cooks enjoyed it thoroughly.
"The next afternoon at two o'clock, the funeral started. It was a cold, drizzly afternoon in late October. All the care, buggies and wagons stopped as close to the church as possible, but even then nobody missed the red mud that was all around. As we went into the church, the men went to the left and the women to the right. The fire had just been started, so the room was still chilly. The dust from the last sweeping was on the rough, splintery pine benches.
"There was no use on earth for that family to try to be brave and not break down, for the preacher took his text and proceeded to preach a sermon about getting ready to go to meet their loved one. Things were entirely too peaceable to suit him, so he started reciting story after story from Mrs. Stephens' life, until he had every man, woman and child in that church crying, some wailing at the top of their voices. Success at last had crowned his efforts! Then he moved a little toward the front and with a benign smile said, 'Everybody can pass around and view the remains of all that's left of the earthly body of dear old sister Stephens!' Between wails and sobs, they managed to get around while they sang, 'Oh, Bear me Away on Your Snowy Wings, to My Eternal Home.'
"It was almost dark when I finally got home from that funeral, and I noticed that there was only one dim little light in my house. When I got inside, I found that the electricity had been cut off because the bill hadn't been paid. I'll never forget that night.
I played the victrola while Davis held the kerosene lamp for me to change the records.
Things had gone from bad to worse. That same fall, after we had been on the farm three years, we couldn't afford school books for the children. That year, we made 80 bales of hay, 150 bushels of com, 100 gallons of syrup, 60 bushels of sweet potatoes, besides
Peanuts and popcorn. Oh, yes, we did make two bales of cotton, but the Government paid us to turn under one of them.
"Well, the end of our farming came when Davis at last realized where we were headed. It was Sunday morning in October, and I was out in the garden cutting tender collard sprouts for dinner and Davis came out to help me. There was no preaching that day, as we only had preaching once a month. When he stood in the garden without saying a word for a few seconds, I could tell Davis had something on his mind. 'Well, Dera,' he began, 'What kinda shape's our clothes in? If they're not ready, press 'em up and get ready, for you and me's goin' to town by sun-up in the mornin' to look for a job. When it came to the pass that every one of us works as hard as we can from sun-up to sun-down, and sometimes later, and then we can't buy school books for the kids, I think it's time to call a halt. I haven't got a thing ag'in' my kids, but you'd think I did by keepin' 'em out here workin' 'em to death. I've always been used to puttin' my hand in my pocket and findin' a dollar. We will just let this place go. We owe more on it right now than we could get for it, even if we could find somebody that wanted it, and I doubt if such a person could be found. We've sold everything but the hay, and we'll save that and give it to somebody to move us back to town.'
"Now, all that was music to my ears, for I had been wanting him to say it for months, although I was determined to let Davis call 'enough' first. I never enjoyed anything more than the job of pressing our clothes. At least we could both say that farming was out of our system once and for all.
"Well, the next morning we got out our old ford and started bright and early, to the place that had grown dearer to all of us every day.
Davis drove straight to Sayreton Mine and they seemed as glad to see us as we were to see them.
"Davis vent to work the very next morning and I went back to the farm to move. They gave Davis the rock foreman's job at $3.80 a day. We moved into the house that wasn't quite paid for. We had to use kerosene lamps until Davis could get a payday, and the children wanted me to leave the house dark so their friends wouldn't know. I didn't do it though, because I wasn't ashamed of something that couldn't be helped.
"Without telling me a thing about it, Davis changed his work from a foreman's job at $3.80 a day, to a coal loader's job at $6 a day. He was a martyr for the food that went on our table and every time started to eat I'd nearly choke. By this time, his health was failing fast. The company had passed him for company work, not loading coal, and as soon as the doctor found out what work he was doing, he stopped him from all work. He had high blood pressure and arthritis and was forced to rest and diet.
"I slipped off to Birmingham and applied for a place teaching in an F.E.R.A. adult education class. They put me right to work and I organized my class at the Sayreton mine school. I had only men in the class, for it was a kind of specialty work. They wanted to get ready to stand the mine foreman's examination and they all worked hard for they had a reason. I taught English, spelling, and mathematics, and there was an average attendance of twenty.
"At first I had to handle them carefully for miners are very sensitive, but in no time at all, they'd speak in class and answer questions. They even got to the point where they would speak up before the 'visiting teacher.' On Friday nights we always had a short spelling match.
"That class was a life saver to my family. I taught it for a year, and his rest had improved Davis so much that he went back to work, and they let him work every day at $6 a day as rock foreman. That's the job he has now.
"I'm so glad to be back at Sayreton, but there's one thing that I really enjoyed on the farm, and that was the thought that Davis was safe--that he wouldn't he brought home burned or crushed or crippled for life. Saturdays and Sundays now are really the only days I can enjoy to the fullest. While he has only had one injury in all his experience, and that was a minor rockfall injury, every woman worries about her menfolks in the mine.
"Buck, that's my stepson, got his arm caught behind a rock the other day, but he didn't report it, because an accident goes against a miner's record. The company takes the attitude that if a man is careful and obeys the safety instructions, he won't have an accident. All mines have classes in safety, and the men are required to attend them.
"Not long ago, I had a terrible fright. I heard an awful noise, just like an explosion, and the mine whistle blew loud and long. I got in my car and went to the mine as fast as I could, and found that the big engine in the boiler room where the electricity is generated, had blown up. It threw the engineer out of the window and only scratched him up a little.
The ventilation stopped in the mine as soon as the electricity was off, so all the men had to come out as soon as they could get out. I waited right there until I saw Davis come out safe and sound.
" I guess I wouldn't have been so scared if an explosion hadn't occurred at Dogwood mine a few months ago. We could hear the whistle blow from here, and the sound of terrible shrieks was awful. Only those who have somebody they love in the mine knows the fear those whistles cause. The whistles blow in the morning at five o'clock, then at twelve, and again at quitting time. Somehow we get used to those; but let another blow, and you hear it the first time. You know at once that those shrieks spell disaster of--maybe an explosion, the most feared of all.
"AS soon as Davis heard there had been an explosion at Dogwood, he went over to help if he could. I'll never forget the expression on his face when he told us about it. He said if our house was paid for, he wouldn't go on the inside of a mine again for all the coal there was.
Here comes Davis now, and I'll get him to tell yu about it himself.
Mr. Davis is still a big man, but I would hardly have recognized him from his wife's description. He is a tall man, stopped and with one shoulder higher than the others; and he walks stiffly. His hair is thin and gray, and his eyes blue and soft. He looks squarely in the eye of the person with whom he talks.
"Sure," he said, "I'll try to give you a description of what I saw, but I'm afraid I can't find words enough to tell it as it really was. When I got there, the hillside above the mine was filled with women, wild-eyed and dazed. Some of them had their cook aprons on, for it was about time to start supper. Little children with red eyes was holdin' onto their mammies for dear life, and the littlest ones crying' and didn't know why. There they was, their eyes fastened on the mouth of the mine--not speakin' a word, just waitin'.
"The track leadin' out of the mine and up to the tupple was cleared. Volunteers to go inside was called for. Gas masks and safety lamps and first aid material was all ready. Once a man volunteered, he didn't know what he'd find when he got inside. In fact, he didn't even know whether he'd come out alive, for sometimes other explosions follow.
"Well, at last the rope that pulled the cars started to move, slow at first--then a little faster. That meant that a body was on the way out-- whose, nobody knew. They were put on stretchers and covered with blankets. Well the fact is, those bodies was burnt so that you couldn't tell whether they was black or white, and one of the bosses straightened that out right quick for he said there wasn't a single Negro in that part of the mine where the explosion occurred. I heard one Negro woman say, 'You know, I feels just as sorry for these folks as if they was my own color.'
"The only way you could identify those men was by the check number on them. They all have a brass number they get if they go inside every day. As each body was identified, it was turned over to relatives. In all my life, I'll never forget the look on those faces--they just couldn't be convinced that the charred bodies were actually their sons, sweethearts, or husbands; but when they were finally convinced that they had the right body and all hope was gone, they just looked sort of numb.
"Altogether, 32 men was killed and 18 burned so bad they died a few hours later in the doctor's office. It was no use to take them to the hospital. The sufferin' and groanin' was awful. I don't know which was the worse, those dying or those who were losing their loved ones.
"Rescue business is mighty slow. Every minute seems like an hour. Some of those men had to be taken out from under rocks, and some of them was trapped in that mine for two days. Now that's the thing I hate worst of all about the whole thing.
"If I can be killed in a mine outright, then that's all right--but don't let me be trapped for days and days--slowly starvin', and knowin' that death is almost certain unless help comes in time. It just naturally gives me the creeps to think about it. I always tell Dera to put plenty in my dinner bucket--enough to last two or three days. It's much better to have too much than not to have enough.
"We work in a stooped position so much of the time that indigestion is common among miners, and they always take soda into the mines with them. I carry mine in a little tin can. We don't take anything heavy like peanut butter and we can't take crackers either. They get soggy in just a little while. We have water, coffee, or tea in the bottom of the bucket, and the food in the top. Workin ' in a stooped position so much has caused my right shoulder to be higher than my left.
"There's not much in or around the mine that I haven't done at one time or another. I started pickin' slate when I was just a kid, then I started spraggin' at 75 a day. Then I was a mule driver, a track man, and later a coal loader, and then a digger. About thirty years ago, I got my first contract here at Sayreton. At first, I made from $200 to $3 a month, then I began to make from $600 to $900 a month. From 1914 to 1931. I made my highest money.
"The mine superintendent gives out the contracts. I usually got good contracts, because I was always considered a good 'pillar puller.' The pillars in the mine are the big props of coal to hold up the roof. Later when the mine is worked out in a fasion, you go back in the mine and 'pull' the pillars. The whole trick in that job is to pull them in such a way, that the roof won't fall. Of course some other props have to be put in, to take care of the protection that is taken out. You would hardly believe how much coal is in one pillar.
"The size of the pillars is dependent on the coverage. The distance from the roof of the mine to the ground above is what we mean by coverage. You can see that if the weight overhead is heavy, you need to leave bigger pillars to protect the roof. Here at Sayreton, the coverage is usually about 500 feet. The pillars for that are 50 feet wide, and 300 feet long. I If there are five feet of clean coal--leaving out the rock and slate--there will be 3.500 tons in that one pillar. In getting this coal out, you shoot as little as possible, because that cracks the coal too much. We pick it and work with it, so as to get it down as easy as possible. The workers always keep in the clear--that is-- with backs toward the mouth of the mine.
"I hired from 8 to 15 men, depending on the size of my contract. I always like Negro labor best. At first the superintendent would let the contractor hire and fire all his men, but later on, the superintendent began to have more and more to do with the hiring, but we still did the firing. They would do better work for a man that they knew could fire them.
"During the World War, the price of coal went way up. Steam coal that wasn't worth anything much, sold for ten and twelve dollars a ton. I had a shift leader for the day and one for the night. I paid for everything that had to be bought--such as tools, picks, shovels, dynamite; in fact I stood every expense and the miners' money was clear. Each man's task was five cars a day--three cars for the worker and two of the contractor. The price the company paid us varied slightly but was usually two dollars a ton.
"Long about '28, the miners at Sayreton came out on a strike, and since I am more or less a company man, I didn't have to come out. But I am and have always been a union man, so I came out with them. Well, the 'up-shot of that strike was that the National wouldn't recognize the strike, and we lost. That wouldn't happen now, because they're better organized.
"Anyway, I felt so bad about the way the strike turned out that I wouldn't go back and ask for my job. In a few days, they sent for me to come to work, but I didn't go. Then they sent again, still I wouldn't go, but the third time I went. A few days after I went back to work, the superintendent met me and said, 'Joe, I was mighty disappointed in you during the last strike. I know you belong to the union, but you are kind of a company man, and you didn't have to come out. I've got a fine place that I was thinkin' of givin' to you when you worked out your presnet contract, but it looks like I can't exactly depend on what you would do in case of a fight. I don't exactly know what to do.'
"I didn't like the way that sounded one bit. What he wanted me to say was that I was sorry for comin' out and that I wouldn't do it again, but I don't run my business that way. I just turned around and looked him straight in the eyes and told him that he knew how I ran my contract, and if he wanted to give me the good place, I would do my best and I'd be mighty glad to get it, but I wasn't makin' no apologies for the past and no promises for the future. Well, when the time came, he gave me the place.
"I always tried, to help the company in every way I could. For example, the inside track was always laid right up to the pillars. I moved that rail every night to take care of it in case we had a rock fall that would cover it up and cost the company money to place more.
"In 1931, all the companies did away with the contract system. It was done because of the new rule about collective bargaining. It was decided that no miner should make money off of another miner. The contractor didn't hit a lick of work and he drew from $300 to $900, and sometimes lots higher than that a month, while the ones who did the actual work earned only a meager living of $6 or $7 a day, I guess it was right to stop it, even if it did cost me lots of money to give it up.
"Well, I'm not making much money now, but then I haven't got the responsibility that I did have. Anyway, it's not how much you make, but what you do with what you do make. I can't see where we have any less than we used to have when I was making so much. Dera always has some left over anyway.
"We have a comfortable house--living room, two bedrooms, dining room, kitchen, and bath. We don't have a furnace, but you'd be surprised how the coal stove in the kitchen and the heater in the living room keep the whole house nice and warm. Dera has an oil stove to use in the summer, but I think food cooked on a coal stove, especially boiled victuals, just naturally tastes better if it's cooked a good, long time on a coal stove.
"We're gettin' along all right now, and all right's hard to beat. All of us are well and we enjoy what we've got. Those 'green fields far away ' was green all right, but the green happened to be the grass that had to be hoed out of the same mighty poor corm and same cotton that had to be plowed up, out on the farm."
11/10/39
L.H.