STATEWIDE WRITERS' PROJECT
Miami, Florida
Socio-Ethnic Study
The Greeks in America
Cora Lee Taylor
February 7, 1940
Mabel B. Francis,
Editor
Mrs. Mary G. Manos
823 Southwest Fourth Street
Miami, Florida
Mrs. Mary George Manos, age 35, is a brunette with very dark eyes and hair, short of stature, pleasingly agreeable and neatly dressed in a white uniform. With her husband and daughter, Constance George, they are sharing the home of their friends, Mr. and Mrs. Demos.
Mr. Manos is the head waiter at the Don Lanning Tavern. He has been with them for 14 years and is so well trained that they always take him along with them when they go North, either to Atlantic City or Hew York City for the summer, but they always return to Miami for the season. So they will not buy a home until they can stay here all the time.
Constance, age 14, is also a brunette, large and muscular for her age. She is captain of the girls' basket ball team in her room. When she first came to Miami, her grades were not so good, but now she gets good grades in every subject.
Mr. Manos who is several years older than his wife, appeared in tuxedo, ready to go to work. His grooming and courtesy were so noticeable that Mrs. Manos seemed very proud to introduce him, though some might not consider him a handsome man.
Mrs. Manos explained, "He is a Spartan but I was born in New York. My mother was an Italian. She adopted four lovely girls and is a mother to one of my cousins. I like it here in Miami, but I'd like it better, if my mother could be here, too.
"It is so quiet here in the daytime. The bouganvillea hedge in front gives us privacy and in the evenings we can sit here and enjoy Mr. Taylor's orchestra practicing in the hall across the street. We are so fond of good music. The Demos boys have all taken music lessons and some of them play quite nicely."
"Is your husband's name, George?" I asked curiously.
"Yes," she replied in surprise. "How did you find that out?"
"I noticed that you and Constance have taken George for your middle names," I replied. "Is that the usual custom?"
"Yes, we are supposed to that way. Single girls take their father's name for their middle name, although they usually use only the initial. For instance, Constance signs her name Constance G.
"I sign my name, Mrs. Mary George Manos, I am an American citizen, but many who are citizens keep up the custom. Before I was married, I used my father's name and took my husband's. That's the way it works.
"My father used to tell me a story that happened about the year 1435 when the Greeks were trying to free themselves from the Turks. There was a woman who lived in a house built by the water. She would go out near the water, make a fire and do her cooking there. Her husband had caught three fish which she put into a pan over the fire. Two of the fish browned very nicely, but the other one stayed raw and flopped about in the pan alive until, finally, it flopped out into the water.
"It was a Holy day. He said it was the first day of Passion Week when no one was supposed to eat meat-or fish of any kind. The fish that refused to be fried frightened them so that they never ate meat on that day.
"Some said that this incident was also a token that the Greeks would conquer the Turks at last, even if they should be defeated this time. All the Greeks were gathered together in the great Mosque of St. Sophia.
"It is alleged that when the Turks came into the church, the massacre was so great that the blood formed a pool in a low place deep enough to drown a cow. The Turks made the attack just at the time when the service was half over. They destroyed nearly all the church property and plastered and defaced much of the beautiful architecture.
"However, it was impossible for them to get to the Holy Place for a large stone slab moved across the front of the church, just as if it were moving on a track and upheld by invisible hands. No Turk could penetrate this wall. It was set with precious stones that could not be chiseled out of the wall.
"Once a Turk was determined to find an entrance to the Holy Place which the priest entered only on the Day of Atonement. So he knew a very pious Greek boy who had never been in the church. He promised him that if he would dress as a Turk and go in with him on that day, they could go into the Holy Place.
"They succeeded to pass the guard, because he took both of them to be Turks. Once inside, they felt carefully along the wall for an invisible opening. The Greek boy led the way and all at once an invisible door opened and closed behind him much to the disappointment of his friend who could not follow him. So the Turk came to the place every year and tapped along the wall, hoping that It would open again. Years after that, the Turk saw the door open and out stepped the same boy, now grown to manhood. He did not recognize his friend and could not believe that he had changed, for he did not think he had been in the Holy Place more than five minutes. He was so holy that he did not need nourishment."
Mrs. Manos said that her father used to say there is a prophecy that "the Turks can never get into that part of the church. That door can never open again until they conquer Constantinople, or Istanbul, pronounced East-an bool, as it is now called. Then the second half of that service will have been completed just before the world comes to an end."
"There is a beautiful legend of the basilica plant that I heard when I was a little girl. We called it the "Holy Plant" or "Sweet Basil." -ccording to the legend it was first discovered growing over the place where the cross of Jesus was buried. It seems that the three crosses had been carelessly thrown on the ground at the foot of the hill where the soil washed over them for more than 200 years. Grass grew all over the place and they were forgotten.
"St. Constantine's mother, St. Helena, was a very devout Christian, but her son was not a Christian and often made fun of her. His attitude toward her made her feel very sad, but she never doubted that something would happen to bring him to believe as she did.
"One night she dreamed that if she could find the Holy Plant, she would know what it was when she saw it and the place where it grew it would look just like it appeared in her dream. It was also clear to her that the Holy Plant grew directly over Jesus' cross..
"Early the next morning she set out with her son and grubbing tools to find the place. They searched for days and days until they were attracted by such a sweet smelling odor and when they found the plant that gave off this odor, they knew they had found the place, for it looked exactly as she saw it in her dream.
"St. Helena gathered together all the men. She could find to help her dig for the cross. They all thought she was foolish, but just to prove that she was wrong, they dug until they had uncovered two crosses.
'How do you know whose crosses these might be?' they asked.
'These might be the crosses of the two thieves.'
"Then she remembered that in her dream, she had placed the cross over a newly made grave. Accordingly they took the two crosses to the grave of a man who had died only two days before. They promised to believe her, if the cross of Jesus would bring the dead man to life again. when the first cross was placed on the grave, nothing happened, but when the Jesus cross was placed on the grave, it opened and the man came out alive.
"This incident had a great deal to do with the conversion of Constantine, the Great, who changed the whole history of Greece and Turkey. At about the same time a war broke out in Greece. Constantine was losing on every hand when he looked up in the sky and saw a flag floating in the sky bearing the emblem of the cross and the words: antutonica (an-tu-to,-with this; neca, win) meaning "By this sign conquer."
"So he made a flag like the flag he saw in the sky and whatever he did after that was on the winning aide. The Greeks took Constantinople on September 14 which is called the "cross day" in honor of the day when St. Helena found the cross and St. Constantine, the Great introduced Christianity in Greece.
"St. Helena gave sprigs of the Holy Plant to her friends and it passed from one to another until every Greek family had a plant growing in their homes.
"On January 1, they threw the cross into the water to purify the waters for baptism. This was done until the cross was broken. After that they made small crosses that were thrown into the water. Whoever was sent after the floating crosses would never drown. Later the priests would throw a branch of basilica into the water after nuking the sign of the cross with it. The water would then be pure until Christmas time. There is no baptism between Christmas and January sixth.
"My mother told me a story of the Evil Eye that really happened. My little brother, Stephen, was such a beautiful child that he was kidnaped three times in New York City. My father had charge of three restaurants and my mother was so good at figures that she took care of all the books, going from one to the other for a few hours every day.
"One afternoon, the Spanish maid took the child down street and left him in the baby buggy while she went into a store for a few minutes. When she came back, the baby was gone. She notified the police and it took them two weeks to find the child. A millionaire woman had stolen him, not for ransom, but because he was such a beautiful child and she had no child of her own.
"The police wanted to arrest the woman, but my mother was so glad to get Stephen back that she said: 'Don't do anything to her. She might do something worse to us and I am too busy to go to trials. It was a long time ago and laws were not like they are now about kidnaping.
"The poor child seemed to be so changed when they brought him back. He didn't like his mother any more. He acted homesick and wouldn't eat. He had a high fever and the doctors couldn't do a thing for him. Mother was so worried. She knew that the millionaire woman had cast a spell over that child and was bound to have him. So in a short while, he was stolen again.
"This time they did not want to accuse the millionaire woman, unless they were sure she was the one who kidnaped him. As my mother knew a woman who said she could break the Spells of the Evil Eye, she invited her to come over, before she would tell the police to go after the child.
"The woman placed 18 saucers on a table and in the 13th saucer she placed a broken egg. In the egg yolk there was a picture of the Evil Eye. Then she was sure that the child was under the spell of the Evil Eye. The next thing she did was to sprinkle salt over the egg and then she tore a piece from the child's clothing and waved the piece of cloth over the egg in the shape of a cross while she said a prayer to herself. She dared not say the prayer aloud, for if anyone should learn what she said, she was in danger of losing her power.
"Just as she said the prayer, the Eye jumped out of the egg in the direction of the millionaire's home. This time, instead of arresting her, my mother asked the police to bring the woman to the home with the child. Ly mother made the woman spit on the child three times.
Then when she kidnaped the boy for the third time, my mother told the police that she would stand it no longer. So they arrested her and she was given a long sentence in jail. I guess she is still there and my brother lives in Augusta, Georgia. He is driving a truck but he might have been a millionaire.
Socio-<text not clear>thnic Study
