Athens, Georgia
Samaritan Bldg. W. Washington St.
Dr. Ida Mae Hiram (Negro)
Miss Grace McCune, writer
Mrs. Sarah H. Hall, reviser
THE WOMAN DENTIST
She is said to be the only Negro woman practicing dentistry in the State, and her office is on the second floor of a modern, steam-heated office building that was built in 1917 by a Negro insurance organization.
A very professional looking sign on her office door reads:
"DR. BLAND
DENTIST
RECEPTION ROOM
WALK IN."
The door was open so I entered the reception room, where I found myself the only occupant. On a door marked "private," a sign proclaimed:
"DOCTOR IS IN
PLEASE BE SEATED. "
The reception room was clean and attractive. A bowl was the single ornament on the centrally placed library table, a settee extended along one end of the room under the windows overlooking the street, several large rocking chairs were placed about, and in one corner I saw a large mirror. Light tan window shades and ecru lace curtains were hung at the windows. While I was wondering at the lack of newspapers and magazines, my attention was drawn to a well-filled bookcase.
The group pictures on the wall seemed to be of college assemblies. I noticed a label on one of them proclaimed it to be the graduating class of 1910 at a Nashville, Tennessee, college. There were two framed diplomas. A motto hung over the door announced in large clear letters:
"HONESTY - INDUSTRY - ECONOMY
WOULD REDEEM THE PAST
WOULD MAKE THE FUTURE HAPPY."
The door of the private office opened and a tall Negress emerged. She was holding a handkerchief over her mouth, and behind her another woman was telling her, in a very professional and kindly manner, that she did not think the tooth would give any more trouble.
The patient departed and the other Negress said, "I am the doctor. Is there anything I can do for you?"
I explained the purpose of my visit, and she laughed: "Well," she said, "I don't know what I could tell you that would be of interest. Ask me any questions you like and I will try to answer them, but I don't really have the time today for I have appointments covering ray office hours. If you will return after 6 o'clock - that's when I close my office for the day - I'll be glad to talk with you. I seldom have any patients after that time except emergency cases, and they don't come often. Will you be here this evening at that time?"
Two patients entered. I quickly assured the dentist that I would come back at the appointed time, and left.
At 6 o'clock that evening I found the dentist awaiting me. "You are very prompt," she greeted me. She is of medium height and her plump form was encased in a white uniform that remained crisply fresh after a day's work in her office and laboratory. Her straight black hair was coiled low on her neck. A close observer would notice a slight sprinkle of gray over the temples. "I have not even had time to change from my uniform to street clothes, but I won't take time for that now. I'm very tired, and I'll just rest as we talk. I suppose you want me to start at the beginning of my life.
"I was born and reared right here in Athens. I had the misfortune of losing my mother when I was about six years old, but father did his best to be both mother and father to me. He did his best for me in every way he knew how, and saw that I got what education was possible in the schools here. I don't recall anything about those school days here that was particularly interesting. It was just the ordinary life of a school child.
"My grandfather was a native African, and when he was brought from that country to America as a slave he couldn't speak or understand English. My father and uncle said that he was a tall, broad-shouldered man and that whenever the white people went to ship him for anything he would run away and hide out in the woods and bushes for weeks at a time. In those days there was just a little cleared land about on the plantations, and the rest of the land was covered with original forest trees. Grandfather is said to have had a very secret cave out in the woods where he could stay until he got tired of living alone, then he would come back to the plantation and everything would be all right for awhile. They never whipped him for running away, for they were probably afraid that if they did punish him he would run off and not return.
"I have been told that my great, great, grandmother was a full-blooded Indian. I wish records had been kept of those things then, for I would like to know more of my ancestry, but then, my people were just poor and ignorant. They had no education and those things didn't seem important to them at the time. I wish my mother could have lived longer, for I'm sure I would have been able to get a complete record from her.
"I don't even know where my father came from. He said that he was just a little boy when freedom came, and according to the custom at that time he was bonded out. He didn't like that so he ran away and came here. After he got settled he went back and stole his sisters from the people they were bonded out to and brought them here to live with him. How I do wish I knew more about their struggles and experiences in those days!
"Why, I don't even know exactly how old I am. Father always said, and I really think he ought to know, that I was born during laying-by-time, and that is usually in August, but he didn't remember the year. One of my uncles said I was born in the fall of the year, but he couldn't recall which year either. As I grew up it was so embarrassing not to know how old I was or when my birthday came that I decided to do something about it, and do you know I just counted back as accurately as I could from what various relatives had told me and gave myself a birthday." She laughed and continued, "I guess it does as well as any, for I don't suppose it really matters after all.
"When I finished at Knox Institute here, I had gone as far in my education as would be possible in this place. I'm glad to say that our High and Industrial School gives Negro children a much better foundation for higher education than we received in old Knox Institute. But then all schools, those for the whites and well as the Negro, have advanced considerably since my school days.
"All the time I was in school my ambition was to be a teacher." She indulged in a hearty laugh at this recollection before she resumed her story. "But don't things change our lives from what we plan? I had no idea then of ever being a dentist. I guess the reason I am one is because I married a dentist. "
There was a merry twinkle in her eyes as she continued: "I was already married and the mother of a daughter when I entered college. That would seem like lasing a lot of time from school, but I had made up my mind that as I had married a dentist I would fit myself to help him in his profession, so I went to college for 4 years. Of course, I spent my holidays with my husband and baby.
"I graduated at Meharry College in Nashville, Tennessee, and then stayed right on there for my dental course. I can't say that I'm the only Negro woman doctor, for there are quite a few of them, but, so far as I know, I'm the only Negro woman practicing dentistry anywhere. Of course there may he others, but I have never heard of another.
"When I graduated from the dental school in 1910, the only other woman in my class was a white woman. We both passed the State Board Dental Examinations. I don't know what became of her. I would really like to know if she is still practicing.
"When I finished dental college I worked here with ray husband in his office. We worked on together until business slowed up so bad here that he went off up the country and opened up another office. Now we both have our own places. However, we visit each other often, and those visits are lovely, just like vacations.
"My one child, who was just a baby when I went off to college, has grown up and married. Her husband is a traveling man so she lives with me because he is away from home so much. She works in an insurance office now, but she has worked with me and she still helps with my laboratory work when igget real busy. When my daughter finished school here, I gave her two years of college in Alabama, and then sent her to a college in Brooklyn, New York, where she took a course in prestholic dentistry. After she graduated from that school, she did all my laboratory work for a long time. She has her diploma and certificate and could open up her own shop for laboratory work at any time she might want to. When business got bad she taught school for 5 years before she started in the insurance business. She still helps me when I need her. I have worked right here in this town ever since I graduated in 1910.
"Don't you think this is a nice office building? It was "built by Negroes in 1917 and is still owned and operated by Negroes. It houses the home office of a strong fraternal order, and the son of its founder has an apartment on the top floor.
"People just don’t have the money now to have the work they really need done, I do more extractions now than anything else. They think that because a tooth that has been culled will never ache again and my charge for pulling a tooth is often a little less than for filling a large cavity, that extraction is the cheapest way out. I just can't seem to make my people realize that extractions cost them more in the long run, for after a few teeth are out there has to be expensive bridge-work or perhaps a plate, and you seldom find anyone who doesn't regret the loss of their own teeth after it is too late and they have to resort to plates. I do all kinds of dental work and I do it all by myself, except for the times that my daughter helps me.
"I remember once a man was brought to me with a crushed jawbone. It did seem that he was just born for hard luck. He was a farmer, and when his mule kicked him in the head his jawbone was badly broken. I found it necessary to put in a gold splint before I could get his jawbone to grow back in place properly, and I was proud of that job for it didn’t take many weeks for him to get well. Do you know it wasn't much more than a month after he was well again before he was out cutting down a tree and it fell on him and crushed him to death. As I said, that man was just born for hard luck.
"Another time, a small boy was brought to me in almost as bad a fix as the man was when the mule kicked him. This child had fallen and broken his jawbone. The family doctor brought him to me, and I had to put a gold splint in his jaw to get it to heal properly. I guess he got along all right for I have never heard any more from him.
"Unless I have a special appointment for an early morning hour, I don't come to my office before 10 o’clock. All of my people work out, and most of them work for white People. The mornings are the busiest time of the day for most of them, in fact, it’s hard for them to keep an appointment, for they never know just when they will be able to get away.
"I think I can say that I have made a fair success of ray work. Yet there have been times when it was hard, when I didn’t think I would be able to make a go of it, and when it seemed like I would lose everything. I have worked hard and managed to keep going, and most of the time I am kept pretty busy. I do the best I can for everyone that comes to me, and my charges are as reason able as I can make them. Collections are pretty good. I get a lot of it on completion of the work. However, I have been stung quite a few times, but that doesn't happen so often, and I guess, considering all things, I can say I have made a fair success.
"The dental profession has advanced considerably even in the time since I first began to practice. We have newer and better equipment offered us every year and we are constantly learning more modem and efficient methods of doing our work. I try to keep up with it all. As rapidly as I can obtain the latest equipment, and I try very hard to teach all of my patients the advantage of caring for the teeth. I stress daily care and cleaning of the teeth and the importance of keeping all cavities filled. As I said, I make an earnest effort to keep up with new methods and equipment and I use every precaution to protect my patients from infection. Come, I’d like you to see what a modem workroom I have."
The room was immaculate and attractive as well as business-like. The dental chair was placed by the huge double windows. A large cabinet at one side held supplies and tools of her craft, and conveniently at hand on at table near the chair was a small sterilizer.
The laboratory adjoined her workroom. It was also neat and clean, and the dentist explained that this was where her daughter worked when she could spare time from her insurance business to help her mother. Plates, bridge-work, and other jobs of this kind are done in her laboratory.
"I am buying a home," the dentist informed me, "and of course I would think so, but it is really a very nice little house. The monthly payments are like paying rent. I only hope that nothing happens to prevent me from finishing my payments on it."
"What do you do for pastime and recreation?" I asked.
She grinned. "Why, I don't have much time for pastime. My church gets most of my time when I'm not busy in my office, and I'll admit I really do en-joy my church. My daughter and I sing in the choir at our church, and we are really very proud of that choir for it is called the 'Champion Choir." We were in a program at one of the white churches just a few nights ago. We often have these requests to sing in the white churches and we enjoy doing it. My daughter is superintendent of her Sunday School and is captain of one of the finance groups. We both manage to give part of our time to God.
"We get out to the shows occasionally too, and that helps us to relax after a hard day of work, but we don't go to shows as often as we attend our church service and other religious programs. We have a very pleasant life together, and we are always together, in work and in pleasure too.
"I'm just a plain Negro. I guess that's what you should call me with my mixture of African and Indian ancestry. God made all colors and races of people, and I find that in every race you will find both good and bad. Each one of all of us has our own place to fill in life, and it is up to each of us to stay in our own places. All that I ask is to be given a chance for myself.
"I remember a salesman that came here in my office - he was a white man too - while my daughter was in college in Brooklyn, New York. He asked about her and wanted to know how she was doing in her studies. "'Just fine,' I told him, and then he said:
"'Well, she is up in God's country now where the Negroes and the whites go together.'"
"'I'd better not catch her doing anything like that,'" I said, "'for I sent her up there to study, and she has been reared better than that.' That hushed him up right then; he didn’t have anything else to say."
A slender young woman entered. She wore a black crepe frock with a white collar. Her lustrous black hair was dressed in the latest style, the upswept coiffure, and the top of her head was covered with tiny curls.
"This is my daughter," explained the dentist. The young woman is smaller than her mother, but resembles her and she has the same polite and friendly manner.
I knew that these women were tired after their day's work and, after chatting a few moments, I thanked the dentist for a pleasant interview. My thanks were sincere, for I had really enjoyed my stay in her business domain.
