Names not changed. Man is well-known and it appears that story will have to be used as it is if used at all Mr. Ward has no objection to the use of his name.
Date of first writing:	June 8, 1939
Person interviewed:	Hallett Sydney Ward (white)
Address:	Washington, D. C.
Occupation:	Lawyer
Writer:	W. L. Vaughan
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 3,000
AN UNRECONSTRUCTED REBEL
Born within less than a decade after the Civil War, even before nature had been able to erase the physical marks of conflict, Hallett S. Ward is today an unreconstructed Rebel. Always keenly interested in current events and public affairs, from childhood he was political-minded and early in life became a strict party sympathizer. Even now he has little tolerance for local Republicans, and with him, subconsciously, perhaps, that party is identified with Southhaters and Yankees. Indicative of that attitude is his own reference to one of his political life experiences:
"In 1920 I was elected to Congress and rushed bows- on into the damndest hoard of Republicans and Southhaters this side of Hell."
Voluble, fluent, always vivid, he speaks rapidly, his words often rising to the heights of eloquence, his arms swinging into easy, graceful gestures.
"If ever you should go to Gatesville, in the upper part of the Albemarle section of North Carolina, run out nine miles to Trotville, a little settlement on a branch line of the Norfolk Southern Railroad. Here you will see no marks of history, so also it would be with you if you stood over the place where once towered the swinging gardens of Babylon and other such abandoned spots. But, looking across the field toward the South where some ancient cedars still survive, you will observe the last home place of old Quinton Trotman.
"In his ninety-seventh year, Colonel R. B. Creasy, of Elizabeth City, then the Nestor of North Carolina Journalism, editor of the Elizabeth City Economist, wrote editorially that Quinton Trotman was 'the greatest Baptist preacher that ever smote a pulpit.' I, then young, and as usual prying into the thoughts and experiences of intellectual men and making familiar with their learning, ventured the criticism to the aged and learned editor that he had forgotten that John Bunyan was a Baptist. To this came the quick reply, 'My son, I thought of Bunyan when I wrote the sentence.'
"In that same reminiscence with the venerable editor, I heard, perhaps for the first time, the expression descriptive of characteristics of a man as 'an uncut diamond.' He used it in reference to Whitmell Stallings, twenty-six years in the North Carolina General Assembly, alternating between the two houses, of whom he said beneath a rough exterior Stallings had in him the highest qualities of human value he had ever seen in a man.
"These two were contemporaries and neighbors, members of the same church and of the same political faith, the Jefferson party. The old preacher and the Old Man 'Whit' passed out the same year, just before the War guns began to roar. Close friends, they were, yet their lives lay along different lines and in different surroundings. In the Trotville community they lived where today there are no foot marks of departed grandeur--the swinging gardens gone without perceptible trace. There, in the shadow of one or two of those same old cedars, this great old preacher lived for some forty years and reared a family of nine children. In 1860 there was not in all eastern North Carolina, and hardly on the eastern seaboard, a more elaborate and splendid outlay of ante-Bellum pomp and scenic display. But today it's all gone with the wind, except here an old cedar stump or there an ancient mill-runner formerly turned by manpower of slaves to make corn bread for some 300 Negroes, or perhaps also the rusted remnants of an old brandy still, still sheltered by cedar shingles that do not yield to time, save to only warp and wear.
"Halfway between the two old homesteads, and the beginning of their decadence, finds Nathan Ward, my great-grandfather. He did little for history and left no visible mark, but, instead he spent his last fifty years reading the classics, especially his Bible and Hale's Commentary, and drinking apple brandy and whipping 'Niggers.' But he was the 'brain truster' for his more prominent neighbors. In the winter of his eighty-fifth year he was driving the old 'tumbler cart,' sometimes called a cart dump, hauling a barrel of flour, and in some way the catch which held the body down had become unfastened and dumped the old man and the barrel of flour on the frozen road. He never survived it. The two old friends and neighbors had been gone a year or so, and Lincoln had just put an end to 'Nigger whipping.' It was time for him to go, too. Today there remains not a Trotman from the nine, not a Stallings from the immediate eight, nor a Ward from our fourteen direct descendants of old Man Nathan, save myself.
"In 1870 in sight of the 'old place' I came on to succeed him. Let him who lives in touch with bathrooms, electric lights and refrigerators, and gas and oil stoves talk hardships indeed to a country boy of the seventies. In a speech to farmers on the subject of the Sapiro Tobacco Growers' Association, I said in part: 'If I do not know sufficient of great trials and difficulties, what then has gone with the memory of mine as one who came into life in the seventies, the middle baby of a run of fourteen on a one-horse farm, thirty miles from town?'"
Out of the library of Old Man Whit they had moved his books and scattered them off among his heirs and descendants, and in the home of young Ward when he came on to read was a mutilated copy of John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, Peter Parley's History of the World, and a Bible. Everything else was borrowed in a community that did not have an unabridged dictionary nearer than Gatesville, ten miles away.
Young Ward had received from his father, partly by inheritance and partly from absorption and association, something of vastly more value than material wealth. Of this he tells of an incident which occurred some years ago. A group of hotel loafers compared the late George Ward and H. S. Ward. They were remote kinsmen. The material difficulties in early life opportunities were noted--Judge Ward an alumnus of Wake Forest College, and Hallett being referred to as a self-made man. Judge Cook broke in to say, "Hallett Ward ain't no self-made man. I heard him say his daddy made him read the metropolitan papers and the Congressional Record to him for ten years, and that he once memorized Sam Tilden's letter to the Committee declining the nomination in 1884, and Grover Cleveland's first inaugural address. Anybody's got a daddy like that ain't self-made. He was a heap better off with that sort of boyhood never to have seen college than to be raised like George Ward was by a daddy that couldn't read and write."
Into Hallett Ward's life also came the influence of an old maid aunt who dwelt in his home. Of her, he said: "She had gotten an early touch of culture from Quinton Trotman, her uncle, and the said Whitmell Stallings. She taught in what was then called the county schools, and, although she was badly deficient on her mathematics, she carried this seventh boy through Smith's Grammar, once again, where he learned the fourteen rules of parsing sentences until he became an accomplished grammarian and linguist. The traces of that early training are still admirably visible in his sixty-eighth year. Colleges are of great service, but maybe Judge Cook was right, after all.
"I supplemented this grammatical training by my own reading. Always enamored of learned men and their charm of conversation, at about twenty my ideals and aspirations were touched and fired by contact with Captain Julien Henri Picot. This extraordinary man was of pure French stock, his mind stuffed to overflowing with classical learning and linguistic attainments. When I left Gates County's log woods and went to Como a met Captain Picot, I began to shoot off long quotations from such masters as Shakespeare, Burns, Goldsmith and Byron. He said, 'In our coming six months we'll journey through the isles of Greece, where beaming Sappho wrote and sung; where grew the arts of war and peace, and Delos rose and Phoebus sung.' Here at Como, where the old schoolmaster labored and taught, is another spot of hallowed memory where North Carolina ground has a lost history. There today in distant view of four old plantations stands a store, service station, and garage."
For six months they journeyed together--the learned old pedagogue and young Ward--and the latter picked up sufficient knowledge of Latin, as they thought, to help him through and over the maxims and legal phrases of' Blackstone. Then he attended the summer· course at Chapel Hill of the late Dr. John Manning. Likewise, he became to young Ward a guide and an inspiration. Dr. Manning's certificate of examinations covering the required subjects was then accepted as the assurance of license by the Supreme Court. Of his first experience with a written test, Hallett now says:
"I had never before known of such a thing as an examination, and my reading of the classics had not exactly prepared me or equipped me for systematic study or analysis, so I fell flat on my first examination and suffered tense humiliation. However I decided to stick for one more course and so came to the examination on Adam's Equity. When I unrolled my paper and at the top saw that Dr. Manning had written thereon 'Excellent,' because his writing was awful, I read it as 'Excelsior.' Expecting nothing but failure, I associated it with the familiar words of the poem, 'A banner with a strange device, Excelsior,' and at first thought he meant sarcasm or ridicule. I declare that it was grace--unmerited favor on his part. The kindly old doctor had observed depression from the first failure and had wanted to life me up, and that he certainly did. That summer Chapel Hill was all yellow and perfumed with Mimosa, and to me today the sight and odor of Mimosa brings back to me the old town and the man second to none in my memory.
"Charles L. Pettigrew, nephew of the General and of distinguished lineage, had just left Plymouth, and I stepped into and tried to fill his vacancy at the Washington County Bar. After a few disappointingly lean years, during which I was restive and discouraged, I was married to Aileen Latham, a woman of culture and education, the daughter of a strong local family. That marriage proved a fortunate one for me, for it brought me much favorable notice and recognition in the community. Two more years, and I am in the midst of the surge of that great political revulsion and surprise that overthrew fusion and almost swept away Republican influence permanently in the State, and which put the Democrats back into power. It carried me into the upper house--the state senate."
During this, his first political campaign, young Ward, because of his oratory and bitter invective against the opposing party, gained the soubriquet, "Hot Stuff" from his initials H. S., which stuck tenaciously to him during all his politically active years, and until now, when he is as he says, living self-chosen retirement from public life. Reminiscing of his days of service in the state senate of 1899, he says:
"I gravitated, naturally and as usual, to men of prominence and ability like Frank Osborne who had, I think, the finest mind I have ever personally known; Captain Bill Day and Mike Justice, who afterwards became superior court judge; and Charles Manly Busbee. Snow covered the capitol square all January and February. Captain Day, a crown prince of ornate language and legal learning, kept open house all through the session, in the block next to the capitol. He entertained in groups so that each group returned to his convivial board every third day. These parties taught me sociability--how to drink Scotch, which I am now in these days of sparse income and high-priced liquor, entirely unable to afford, much as I enjoy it. One day while waiting with him on the capitol steps for some others, I said to him that I thought it exceeding strange with our disparity in age and learning he would be socially so generous to me. Quick as a flash he snapped back, 'My God, Ward, I know a gentleman as old Falstaff knew a Prince.'"
In 1904 he was elected solicitor and served continuously until 1911 when he voluntarily retired. Later he was elected to the United States House of Representatives and served for two terms, four years. At that time the Republican party held all branches of the Federal Government. Hallett found the situation intolerable to him personally and was very restive under it. He did not stand for reelection. He announced that he would not return. That there was disappointment that he did not make a career, is certain. His friends and political admirers were many and strong, and, under custom in this district, members were continued in office for many years.
"The most agreeable hours of those four years," he said, "during active sessions, were spent by me with men of the type of Bourke Cochran, Tom Watson, and Senator John Sharpe Williams. They seemed to like to have me around them. Sometimes Cochran would send for me for only an idle chat. Watson soon found that I had read his story of France and Jefferson. When I was able to quote passages from his life of Napoleon and told him he had attempted to make the whole world think Bonaparte was a damned Georgia Populist, he was greatly amused. Once when I chided him for calling Julius Caesar a bastard, he repeated it was true and referred me to Maitland's History, but I knew, and so told him, that Maitland wrote no history of Rome, but only of Greece, and did not live long enough to ever hear of Caesar. So we argued with each other with mutual admiration. But I will now say, as I believe with truth, that Watson had less regard for accuracy of statement than any, prominent man in my personal knowledge.
"But the opposite was true of Senator Williams. There was scholarship, with accuracy of learning carried through to the last, of politics and public service that with most men drifts far away from books and university cloisters. We roomed in adjoining apartments and had many pleasant social hours together. My contacts with him have left some of the most pleasant memories of my life."
Today in his Sixty-eighth year he has practically retired from politics. Except for his practice of the law, now without a partner, he lives a quiet life at home. Perhaps his chief interest in life now centers in the future of his young son, his only child, the child of a second wife who was his former secretary. But his interest in political affairs remains, and in spite of his frequent resolutions to remain inactive, he, now and again, becomes freshly involved in interest in spite of himself.
