Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
ELOISE DAVIS RUFF
78 YEARS OLD (WHITS)
Mrs. Eloise Davis Ruff, a widow, lives at #3 North Palmer street in the town of Ridgeway, S C. This place is her home in her own right. It is a two-story brick structure. The first story contains four rooms, two conservatories, a kitchen, and a lavatory. The second story contains four rooms, two bathrooms, and two sleeping porches. A hallway divides the rooms in the first and second stories. In front, sloping towards the street, is a well cared for lawn.
The house is embowered with blue cedars, junipers, arbor vitae and orange pyracantha. Euonymus creeps up the walls, its coral berries gleaming like swaying gems. In the rear are lilacs, snowballs, and tea olives. On the wall, an ivy vine curls its tendrils over the red bricks. This vine is from an original cutting of the vine that grew on the grave of the great Napoleon. It was given to Mrs. Ruff's grandmother, Isabelle Means. Mrs. Ruff is a woman of wealth and fine connections, and, in spite of her years, is still the arbiter in whatever pertains to Ridgeway's society and cultural development.
"My father, Henry Campbell Davis, was born in Columbia S. C. He was graduated from the South Carolina College in 1844, and was, for three years thereafter, college librarian. In 1848 he married Isabella Means, moved to Ridgeway, and engaged in farming. At the State Fair, in 1858, he received the prize for the best sorghum syrup produced in the State. (It will be remembered that this product was one of the mainstays upon which the army of the Confederacy and the citizens of the South subsisted during that period of four years). He was a member of the Secession Convention from Fairfield County; was captain of Company C., 12th S. C. V at the commencement of the war, and rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel. Ha was elected to the legislature in 1664.
"My mother was Isabella Harper Means of the distinguished Means family of Buckhead section of Fairfield County. My brothers ware Prof. R. Means Davis, James Quinton Davis, and Colonel Henry C. Davis of the United States Army. My sister was Katherine Ross Davis, who became the wife of Colonel David DuBose Gaillard.
"I was born at Longleaf Plantation, December 20th, 1860. I grew up in my mother's flower garden, quean in my own right, the fairies my subjects and each box-bordered bed a castle. I would peep through the hedge and watch the gardener feed the open earth with seed, wondering if they would, like Jack's bean stalk, reach the sky, and if the envelope impaled on a stake at the end of a row pointed the way to the homeof the giant. I climbed the Judas trees to gather the unopened buds, to be eaten with a delicious concoction of hard boiled eggs, a dash of vinegar, bacon grease, and crisp bacon. Do try it some fine spring day.
"The lean years following the War Between the States saw the garden fade and die. It was still my playground, but the beds ware like prison cells to me. Of course, I was too small to remember much about the problems of economics and labor connected with the change from slave labor to free labor, but I have some tender recollections of particular slaves of my father's. I remember 'Mauma Mary', the head cook, and her valiant husband 'Daddy John'. They had sixteen legitimate children, none of whom ever went hungry or ill clad. 'Daddy John' and 'Mauma Mary' rejoiced in their progeny, never thought of a divorce or separation, as so many blacks and whites do now, and were as happy a couple as the 22d day of June is long. One of their children, Emma, lived to nurse and help rear all of my children. Our home was called 'Longleaf from the beautiful grove of longleaf pine trees that the 'big house' was among.
"Apart from the 'big house', as the Negroes called the master's house, were the kitchen, the smokehouse, the dairies, the sobeeroom, the spinning and loom rooms, the stables, the cow sheds, the barn, the cribs, and the ginhouse. Andaa long way from the dwelling house were the Negro quarters and the overseer's house.
"The food, when cooked and put in covered dishes, was brought from the kitchen on large waiters into the house by trained servants. It was brought on the run, I tell you. The fried chicken, hominy, rice, beaten biscuit, and waffles were always htt and delicious. 'Mauma Mary' was head cook. She had been given to my mother by Grandmother/Means as one of her wedding gifts.
"A big red letter day in my childhood was the 4th of September, when I was three years and nine months old. Early that morning, grandmother came into my room to tell me I was to go to church that day. I had not been to church since the day I was christened 'Sarah Eloise Nott Davis'. (Nott was placed in my name by my aunt, Mrs. Richard T. Nott, in honor of her husband, one of the circuit judges of the State). Maria, my big nurse, was told to get me ready for church. She bathed me, arranged my red hair into curls, and dressed me in a soft white frock. She carried me to the front gate where 'Daddy John' awaited us with the carriage. Cornelius, the footman, opened the door, let down the steps and helped us in, and off we went. It was communion day, a Sabbath for old people to join the church and for babies to be baptized. It was a long service. Finally it was over, and again we ware on the road home. On arriving home, I learned why I was sent to church. It was the big surprise of the big red letter day. Grandmother Means took me in her arms, telling my brothers, R Means, James, Edward, and Harry to follow. We were ushered into a darkened room. There lay our precious little mother, smiling. In her arms, wrapped in flannels was something wriggling. The boys rushed forward to see what it could be. And there was a baby. Its little fingers and toes curled like pink rose leaves.
"The boys left soon, but I remained. I peeped at her, anxious to see what she was like, and then and there she got her nick name, 'Teensee', from me. I felt she was mine to love and to hold as long as she lived. She grow from day to day, prettier and prettier. When she was about five months old, Sherman and his Yankees came swarming over our section, burning, robbing, and ruthlessly destroying everything of value. It was a terrible time for women and children!
"When we heard the Yankees were near, all the silver, jewels, plates, ornaments, watches, china, and precious things were hidden. The boys found a hurricane tree stump in the woods, and, beneath its red clay, all these things were buried. I remember mother placed her wedding ring in one of little sister's 'didies', and it went with the miscellany under the hurricane tree stump.
"One day, my brothers rode their horses 'Bijou', 'Rosine', and 'Couch' to the post office for the mail. I was playing in the front yard with four little slave girls, Susan, Abbie, Penelope, and Easter. The boys came racing home, shouting 'The Yankees are coming! The Yankees are coming!' We all flew to the house. The Yankees came, hundreds of them it seemed to us. Just how many days they were passing in and out of our home and quarters I can't remember.
"One day 'Mauma Mary' heard we were to be burned out of house and home. She put as many suits of clothes as possible on us. We looked puculiar, resembling cocoons. I was standing on the top piazza, leaning over the bannistersrailing. I had on a straw hat with a blue ribbon and a palmetto star on it. A Yankee just under me, pointing to the star, said to his partners. 'Look at the damn little rebel!' I bent further over the bannister and spit right in his face, and I have never regretted it. An officer interposed (some of them were gentlemen) and begged mother's pardon for the insulting language of the private soldier. He then asked her not to leave the house, else he might not be able to save it from destruction. So we unwound and went to bed. All the other buildings, save the Negro quarters, went up in snake that night. In grandmother's room there was a wardrobe filled with beautiful things, including the material for a silk quilt that was to be made of minute, octagon-shaped bites of silk, with bits of paper basted underneath them. The little pieces could be whipped together and become a wonderful quilt. I had often sat by her and Aunt Sallie, watching than sew and arrange the octagon pieces into what promised to be a priceless bed decoration. The Yankees plundered the wardrobe and strewed the bits of silk everywhere. After they left, I bent down and saved as many as I could. Years, afterward, Aunt Sallie finished the quilt, making a crib quilt for my first baby. Yes, it was a terrible time for babies. No proper food, scant clothing, and anxiety and fear!
"My little sister, 'Teensee', fell ill. Sherman's soldiers had taken the flour out of twelve barrels, leaving the empty barrels. Grandmother sent me and my brother, Harry, to scrape the barrels, as the baby mum have 'pap'. By dint of hard work, with silver spoons, we scraped a cupful at flour from the barrels and the baby had her 'pap'.
"I pass over the readjustment times from slave labor to free labor. It was a hideous time for both races. The Negro had no self confidence, no experience in providing for himself and his family. Neither race had any idea of the value of a day's manual toil nor the value of an hour's labor. The whites in the face of the past, and the population being largely Negro, thought it a disgrace to work in the fields. But the whites had no money to pay wages to the Negro, The whites possessed the lands; the Negroes possessed the ability to labor. Faith only could set things to work. The whites had faith in the productiveness of the land; the Negroes had faith that the whites would remunerate them for their labor. The wheels of readjustment were started. Things might have worked out all right had the Negro not been prematurely granted the right to vote. Designing carpetbaggers from the North and West and scalawag white residents of the State seized upon the situation, tickled the Negro with the bait of social equality, flattered his vanity, and frustrated the well-meaning plans of the whites.
"I began to learn my abc's at my mother's knee. My schooling was continued at Uncle William Davis's knee. He was papa's brother. I remember studying McGuffy's First Reader, Moss's Geography, and the blue-back speller. It was too early for history and grammar, but I learned the multiplication tables, and learned to write letters and numerals on a slate with slats pencils. The private school building, in which my uncle taught, was contributed by my father and General Edward Y. Palmer, President of the Charlotte, Columbia, and Augusta Railroad. The site was exactly where the Ridgeway High School stands today Next, I attended a private pay school, taught by a Miss Simons. Afterward, all the children in our family attended a school at Mt. Hope, taught by Miss Henrietta Thomas, daughter of Colonel Jno. P. Thomas, who was at one time superintendent of The Citadel, Charleston, S. C. Papa had at this time moved from Longleaf to Ivy Hill. Eight or ten children, including my brothers and sister and myself walked the two miles to Mt. Hope in the morning, each studying the blue-bask speller along the way. The classroom was in the basement of a house that was owned by Colonel Jno. P. Thomas. Recess lasted from 1o'clock till 2 o'clock. At that interval, we played town ball and antony-over. I could knock the ball further and run faster than any other girl in school.
"We girls wore out stockings below the knee, but they were well covered with our dresses. Sallie Campbell and I bought new garters one day. They were elastic, pink and blue, with fringed edges and lovely silver buckles. A young girl, seemingly unconscious of such things, is, in reality, very conscious and proud of them. We jumped rope at recess just to show our garters, and I fear the garters got a little lower each succeeding day, until they could actually be seen. Miss Henrietta Thomas came out one day and was shocked at their display. We were kept in, at the next recess, and reprimanded about the display of the garters. We were also required to learn this verse of scripture, 'When Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them on the fire, then came a viper out of the heat and fastened on his hand'. Why this verse, I have never been able to fathom. The lessons we learned in this school, not in books, but in gentleness, truth, kindness, and honor, were never forgotten. Do we hear much about the instillation of such qualities and their evaluation in the public schools of today?
"On the death of my mother, in 1871, my brother, R. Means Davis, went to Mt. Zion College, in Winnsboro, as a teacher. I went with him and finished school at Mt. Zion four years later.
"When I was sixteen I put on long dresses, wore a bustle, and learned the round dances. I had made many friends in Winnsboro, by this time, and exchanged visits with many delightful girls. I participated in all the public social affairs of Ridgeway and Winnsboro, such as horseback tournaments, charades, tableaus, skating, and dances.
"In 1876 we were all keyed up over the 'straight out movement' to elect Hampton governor. I made a flag and presented it to the Hampton guards of Ridgeway and to the Ridgeway Democratic Club. It was carried by them in all the parades during the campaign. What elected made Hampton in 1876?
1. The organization of Democratic clubs, and the red shirts worn by these members on all public occasions.
2. The grandeur or these clubs on horseback in military formation gave heart and thrill and hope of success to white people, while it curried fear to the Negroes and low-down white men, their leaders.
3. Sympathy and enthusiasm of the white women - their willingness to endure hardships and make sacrifices for the cause of white supremacy.
4 Multiplication of votes by white individuals, for instance, there were nine men at home who first voted ten tickets each at Ridgeway, then went to Jenkinsville and voted the same number of tickets. From there they, went on to Feastergille and voted ten tickets each, again.
5. Many votes by minors.
6 Voting dead people their names secured from the local graveyerds.
7. By election managers arranging the tally sheets at the precincts to correspond to the number of the votes. My brother James was and expert at all such manipulations, and I am sure God has forgiven him for all such chicanery, with the purpose we all had in view.
8. General Hampton's tour of the State, escorted to the speaking points by local committeemen and large numbers of men and boys in red shirts.
9. The greetings of young girls who strewed his path with flowers, and the bands of music that were a part feature of all the public occasions.
10. The purchase of a few hundred Negroes votes.
"In January, 1877, my brother, Means, was married to Sallie LeConte. The bride and groom had a warm reception on a freezing day in our home in Ridgeway. Her clothes were marvels of beauty for the times - gorgeous furs, Parisian hats, dresses, shoes, gloves, embroidered gowns, pantalets, ruffled tucked chemises, and underbodies. They moved to Winnsboro in 1878.
"Hampton was reelected in 1878. He spoke in Winnsboro that year. The platform from which he spoke to the large crowd was built underneath the spreading branches of the old Cornwallis Oak in front of Mt. Zion College. Twelve girls were chosen to ride in a Jersey wagon behind the Hampton carriage. My sister Kate (Teensee) and I were among the favored twelve. We sat on the platform with the dignitaries, and, needless to say, we were greatly pleased.
"My sister, Kate, (Teensee) returned to Mt. Zion Institute, in Winnsboro, in the fall. Then and there she met her fate, David DuBose Gaillard. It was a case of love at first sight. When he returned from West Point, she married him, a hero in war and a distinguished citizen in time of peace.
"Among the native boys from South Carolina, who have graduated from West Point with honor and distinction are my brother, H. C. Davis, and my brother-in-law, D. D. Gaillard.
"In my young days, sleighing was a great amusement in the winter. During the Christmas holiday, in 1879-1880, the town of Winnsboro waked up one morning to findlall the unlovely things covered up with a blanket of feathery snew, and the sky was like soft gray chiffon. The thermometer began to tumble, soon reaching zero. Sleighing became the rage - wheels were removed from wagons and buggies, and runners were put in their place. Happy was the girl who got an invitation to ride.
"Heating of homes became a serious problem. Two home were fortunate -those of Jno. S Reynolds and my brother, R. Means Davis, editors of the News a Herald. They had stored away numbers of the Congressional Records, messages of the Presidents, and other public documents. Those went up in smoke to keep the home fires burning. A leap year dance was scheduled for New Year's Eve, but no fire, no dance! Rides were taken through the countryside. This was before the 'fence law' was passed. Picturesque 'worm rail' fences ran around the cultivated grounds, and numerous rails were snatched by the boys. These rails were carried into the back yard of the Winnsboro Hotel and cut up for fueld There was warmth and cheer in the parlors of the hotel and dance hall that New Year's Eve night, and the dance went on.
"In those days when the fire bell rang, morning, noon or night, everybody in Winnsboro turned out. There was no quick flash of an electric motor truck, with its siren, moving 60 miles an hour through the streets, instead, there ware book and ladder companies, bucket brigades, and a steady plodding of faithful horses, which were harnessed to an old fire engine. One day during this cold week the skating on McCants' pond was interrupted by the ringing of the fire bell. Arriving on the scene, it was found that old Fort McAlister (Louis Lendecker's bar) was in flames. The cold water from the engine as it ran down the building was frozen into icicles, from the eaves to the ground. Tradition has it that one barrel of whiskey was found with its staves burned completely off and the whiskey left frozen in a solid mass. And we thought we had cold weather last December:
"My Husband's ancestors came to this country from Holland before the Revolution. His father, D. W. Buff, entered the Confederate Army and fought in the Virginia campaigns until his death, which was caused by typhoid fever in 1863. He left a widow and three small children. My husband was one of those children. He first went to school to a one-legged Confedarate soldier, Zebulon Mobley. Later, he came under the influence of Dr. James H. Carlisle of Wofford College. He didn't graduate, but returned to Ridgeway as clerk in his uncle's store. He fell in with the political excitement, the campaign speakings, and thettumiltuous days of 1876 that ousted the Republicane and Negroes from the control of the State. Later, he became president of A. R. Ruff & co., a mercantile company at Ridgeway.
"We were married on September 28, 1882, at the home of my brother, R. Means Davis, After our marriage, Herbert was made president of the Ridgeway Bank, which position he held up to the time of his death. This sad event occurred at the Columbia Hospital on the afternoon of October 23, 1926. (Here I might state that my grandfather, Dr. James Davis, was the first physician of the State Lumatic Asylum, and that another grandfather, Robert Means, at one time was the pastor of the First Presbyterian Church Columbia, S, C.). We had one son, W. H. Ruff, Jr., and three daughters, Isabelle Means, Rhott, and Sara Eloise. Isabelle married Hartwell Traylor; Rhett is now Mrs. T. C. Cork, Clermont, Florida; Sara Eleise is now Mrs. Hammond Salley, of Salley, S. C.
"Since my husband's death I have taken an interest in community work. I was made, over my protest, vice chairman of the Fairfield Department of Public Welfare. For a great number of years, I have been a correspondent to the Fair-field News & Herald, published at Winnsboro, writing mostly society events. Society is a very fine thing, if you do not overestimate or underestimate its worth to a community. Its conventions are necessary for the protection of its worthwhile members, good families, and groups. There are still many hogs among the males and many cats among its females, in the population of every state. Good society is a stimulus to individuals to improve themselves, in order to be cordially received in its fold. Many buy and study books of etiquette, but the best treatise on the subject, that I have found, is that given by Jesus in His sermon on the mount."