July 20, 1939
Mrs. J. C. Helms (White-textile-worker)
Huntersville, N. C.
Mary P. Wilson, Writer
Original Names	Changed Names
Mrs. J. C. Helms	Mrs. J. G. Horne
Ford Plant	Automobile Plant
"I was born in poverty and unless there's a great change I'll die in want, but I've always been happy.
"It hurts me to hear people complain. I know from my own experience that I would liked to have had a lot more, but I had so much to be thankful for that I couldn't find it in my heart to complain.
"I was raised on a farm. My mother and father didn't love each other and our home was none too peaceful. The eight children were very healthy. If there was ever a doctor got for any of us I don't recall it.
"I never will forget how excited we all were when our horse stepped on my Pa's foot and mashed one of his toes. We were more interested in seeing a doctor than we were in Pa's welfare. We all got run away from the house as soon as Ma saw the man coming, and all of us crawled up under the house and peeped through the crack. Pa's toe wasn't quite off and Ma heard us all grunt when the doctor cut it off and the next thing we saw was Ma with a hickory switch a yard long. It's no use saying anything about the threshing she give us for being under the house.
"Pa didn't believe in sending us to school. He said he wanted us to stay ignorant so we would have to stay at home and help him. He and Ma always had a big fuss when school started, but Ma always got the best of him and took us in the buggy to school every day. If we had listened to her we would have got an education, but all of the oldest ones got tired of hearing Pa rave about payin tuition and quit. My youngest sister is the only one he didn't care for going to school. We all petted her and Pa seemed to worship the ground she walked on. I've heard him say a million times that he thought more of her little toe nail than he did of all the rest of the world put together. She must have felt the same way about him for they were inseparable.
"I didn' lack but one year finishing high school when I got married. I told Ma- she didn't mind-, but I slipped off from Pa, because he said I was the best hand he had to work in the field. He raised tobacco, and he had us work from dawn till dark and most of the time it was more than that.
"I didn't know the first thing about housework. Ma had'nt had the patience to try to teach me, what little chance she had. My husband took me to his father's home and I soon had to learn; for his mother had pellagra and died about a year after we were married. She left a large family and it fell my lot to cook for them.
"I've been married fifteen years now and I have been happy. I've felt like I was in the wrong by marrying so soon and leaving home, but I'm not sorry that I did. I have five children and every one of them are the picture of health. I am so very proud my parents gave me good blood when I was brought into this world. It's pretty hard to feed and clothe my family properly, but life wouldn't be worth living without them.
"I try never to quarrel and fuss because I saw and heard enough of that fom Ma and Pa. I loved them but I don't think they should have ever married without love.
"My husband worked seven years at the automobile plant here. He got his back broken and sued the company. They compromised but he hasn't had a good job since. He is whiteheaded and crippled up with aches and pains. He's had pellagra several times but I try to feed him the right kind of a diet and he hasn't been bothered with it for several years.
"We certainly agree on giving our children an education. We want them to be able to meet with their nighbors and know how to talk to them. We can both see the value of an education in helping people make a living. The illiterate ones just have no chance at all. They have to drop out and leave a place for children who are educated.
"I work in the mill. My Ma thinks it's awful. She calls mill workers' common white trash'. She never has treated me the same since I went to the mill to work, I don't mind. I know that as long as I can work I can provide for my family. I don't know why Ma feels like she does for she has never been inside of a mill. I don't see anything to be ashamed of in making an honest living and I intend to stick to it as long as I have to.
"I don't feel like talking so much now. I'm trying to get my children some clothes made to wear to school. I've got a good sewing machine and it sure saves me a lot of money. I only wish everyone could have as happy a home life as I have.