June 14, 1939
Earl M. Lasker (white)
Newton, N. C.
Nurse and weaver
Ethel Deal, writer
Mary Northrop, reviser
“I’m a Good Nurse.”
Original Names	Changed Names
Newton	Whitesboro
Ada Moses	Lou Padgett
Morganton	Taylor's Point
Dr. Davis	Dr. Traywick
Statesville	Carlieville
“I married Lou Padgett the day I met her thirteen years ago. It was the first day I come to Whitesboro. I was a perfect stranger and went to her house and got her and took her to the parsonage where we was married. We'd been corresponding through a matrimonial paper. We have sure had plenty trouble but I have never regretted it.
"A few days after we was married I got me a job in the same cotton mill where she was workin', but a few months later we moved to Taylor's Point and that's where my wife got the first attack of hiccoughs. The disease was new and the doctors couldn't do much about it so they advised me to take her to Dr. Traywick's famous hospital outside Carlieville. She had several weeks treatment and then they let her go. We come back to Whitesboro.
"I had the bill to pay and wages wasn't good so we moved in with her folks. When I got the bill paid up I decided we'd better strike out for ourselves. We rented a little three-room frame house.
"Well, Lou got the hiccoughs again. I had to work so I got a job in the silk mill as a weaver. I wasn't meant to work in a mill. I'd had hospital training as a nurse. Worked in Johns Hopkins a long time. I'd work in the weave room during the day and let the neighbors tend her and then I’d nurse her at night. Many a time I was up all night waiting on her.
“The mill people was real kind and even loaned me money to tide me over when I couldn’t work at all. Well, Lou got over it.
“In 1928 we went up to Maine where my people had gone but we only stayed three months because Lou got the hiccoughs again and wanted to go home. I got a job there in the cotton mill at $12.50 a week. The doctors’ bills et up my wages and many’s the time we didn't have nothing to eat.
"The silk mill offered me a job so I decided to stick with them and quit all that roaming. My pay there averaged $28 a week. I had to give it up. Lou was going to have a baby. Subject to hiccough as she was I knew I’d better give up everything and 'tend to her.
“Word had got around that I was a male nurse. Men nurses was rare in that part of the country. While I was tending to Lou after our boy was born in 1929 our mailman, instead of delivering mail one morning, ast me would I take his father's case.
“The baby was ten days old so I rustled around and got a housekeeper and took the case for 24-hour duty at reduced rates. Real low. Because I knew they couldn't pay much. The case lasted eight weeks. From then on the most work I done was nursing.
"Well, Lou got sick again. I took her back to Dr. Traywick's and she had a operation. She come back home and didn't get along good at all. Doctors in Whitesboro said take her back to Dr. Traywick's.
“This time they said she had to have radium treatments. They had to send her to another hospital to get it but through Dr. Traywick's kindness it didn't cost me nothing. I was working in the mill and every week they took out a certain amount and sent it to Dr. Traywick. I lost my home and had to move again.
“Things was in right bad shape. Lou was back but not able to work. We got along somehow and without going to the welfare for help, though at that time I was averaging about two months a year in the mill. I borrowed long as I could and then we lived by my nursing for nearly nothing.
“One morning Lou couldn't get up at all. The doctor said he didn't know what to do and said I had to send her back to Dr. Traywick's. While she was there I was doing just anything to make money--and got a sunstroke loading a boxcar. It laid me out six weeks. Lou was able to come home but I was still puny. The hospital sent word she could come back but I wasn't able to get her so I sent a friend of mine. I was so anxious to have her home again!
But when my friend got there Dr. Traywick wouldn't let her go until the bill was paid. I don't know as I can blame him. The bill was awful high. And my payments was so little and far between.
"Well, when my friend come back without her I almost collapsed. I kept thinking, 'What can I do!' By this time we'd had two children and Lou's relations was taking care of them. A housekeeper whose pay was late was tending me. I couldn't borrow another cent.
“The next day I was running a high fever. The housekeeper told the doctor what was wrong right to my face. He was taking my temperature. He walked out of the room without a word, leaving the thermometer in my mouth unread, and when he come back he said, 'Send for your wife again tomorrow. You'll get her this time!! He'd been acrost the road and used the phone.
“Well, I got all right but in six months' time Lou was back at Dr. Traywick's. This time they give her up. Sent her home with thirteen days to live. I forgot to say they had already tried to get me to send her to the State insane asylum. I wouldn't do it. She wasn't crazy. All was wrong was they'd give her too much dope. Made her act a little crazy sometimes.
“The day they sent her home to die I decided to use my nursing experience. She had on her back a sore as large as a saucer and it smelled sickening.
"I didn't give her a drop of nothing in her stomach for six days. The doctor had told me to give her half a grain of morphine at a time. I stopped that right off the bat. I bought a quart of rye whiskey and started giving it to her one drop at a time to take the place of the dope. I wasted half a pint getting the first drop down.
"For one single little dime I done away with that odor. I used a box of soda and a box of salt. Ten applications done the work. I give her a shock enema of a pint of rye whiskey and a pint of black coffee. All the time I was putting on the sore a salve I made myself . When a thin blue tissue come around the edge I knew it was healing. For nourishment I give her eggnogs. Thirty days later the sore was healed and she was well on the way to getting cured.
"All this time we lived on the charity of the neighbors. I wasn't ashamed to take it. The mill men were kindness itself. The furniture company didn't ask for payments. The grocer give us credit. And my wife got well. The doctors call it a miracle.
"In 1936 I was on my feet enough to think about buying a new home. It's the place I'm now living at. I thought at last my troubles was ended. Lou had gone from 82 pounds to 130. But she gained too fast and I become uneasy. I sent her back to Dr. Traywick's.
“Well, they said it wasn't any use operating. I made them do it. They took out a large cyst and two great big tumors. That time I couldn't seem to go to the operating room with her.
"That was two years ago. Now she seems to be in real good health. Our boy is twelve and our girl is ten. The house is far from paid for but I'm not worried. Lou does the housework and tends the garden. She has mighty pretty flowers. I'm still paying her hospital bills and expect to be paying them some years to come. The mill takes it out of my pay. The mill people are so kind. I have regular full time work there but when I get a call to take a case they give me leave of absence and when the case is over they take me back on again. I'm at home at my loom or some poor sick man's bedside.
"I'm forty years old now. I never had but one year of high school. You'll wonder how I ever managed to take a nurse's training. I didn't really have enough education for it. I got hurt up in Virginia and was in the hospital a long time so when I got well I took a job as orderly because I was so used to the place and liked it. I seemed to know how to do with sick people, so Miss Tomlinson--she was superintendent of nurses--insisted I take training and got it for me.
“I wish I could have told all this better. Not having education is an awful thing. I can’t tell things the way I'd like to. Nothing sounds like anything when I tell it.
"But there's one thing I’m sure of. I'm a good nurse."
<text not clear>
