WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION
RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA
GEO. W. COAN, JR.
STATE ADMINISTRATOR
Federal Writers' Project
Elizabeth City, N. C.
November 22, 1938
Mr. W. T. Couch
Regional Director
Federal Writers' Project
Chapel H ill, N. C.
Dear Mr. Couch:
I am enclosing herewith "A Life Story of A Negro Washerwoman" by Ruth Riddick. The piece doesn' come up to your requirements of 2,500 words or more, but since Miss Riddick has made three trips to this womans' house to get her story and seems utterly unable to make more of it, I am sending it on as is. It is still a good piece. If You Can't use it as is, please adivise me and I will personally contact the subject and see what I can do in the way of stretching out her story.
Miss Riddick, by the way, is expecting to be married next Sunday, at which time she will drop out of the project. I regret this because, while she is a rank amateur, she is eager to do good work and will accept suggestions, corrections and general instructions cheerfully and profit by them. This for you information.
WOS/b
copy to Mr. Bjorkman
Story of Betty staton
515 Green Street
Elizabeth City, N. C.
LIFE STORY OF A NEGRO WASHERWOMAN
I found Stella Winslow in a small two-story house in the slum section of Elizabeth City. The house is compactly built and one does not have the feeling that the walls may collapse at any moment, but nevertheless there is about the place that unmistakable suggestion of stark poverty.
The interior of the house was more disheartening than the exterior. Broken odds and ends of furniture were scattered about with an amazing disregard as to their usefulness. The most imposing piece of furniture in the entire house was an iron bed from which most of the paint had peeled off, with the springs and mattress sagging in the center to within several inches of the floor. Mounds of what might have been quilts at an earlier date, but long since reduced to rags, were scattered about the floor. The boards of the floor, never covered by rugs, have been worn smooth by the constant tread of bare feet. The walls, blackened by the smoke of cooking, boasts colored advertisements torn from magazines, retrieved from dump heaps. Stella pays $2.00 a week for the privilege of staying in this shack she calls her home.
he is a small, wrinkled skinny Negro who looks much older than her 48
years. The skin is so tightly drawn across the bony structure of her face that her eyes appear to protrude from their sockets. The gray wool on her head was plaited neatly in squares which added to the peeled onion effect. She had on something which looked as if it might have been a light-weight coat at one time, and I'm afraid nothing else. The collar was pinned high at her throat. Her bare feet were thrust in mens' shoes which were a good four inches too long.
Stella was born in Wilmington, North Carolina, lived there until she was eight years old and then moved with her family to Elizabeth City. Stella has four children. Her husband deserted her fourteen years ago, and she has had the responsibility of feeding, clothing and keeping a roof over their heads ever since.
After her husband had left she was hard pressed to keep body and soul together. She had a few washings a week. Some were done in the homes but the majority of her patrons wanted the work done out, so that there would not be the mess and confusion in their own kitchens. Pity they could not have seen the squalidness of the home in which their wash was handled.
"Did you first take in washing when your husband left you, Stella? " I asked.
"Law no, chile, I done been bending dis yere back over wash tubs and biling pots sence I wuz 'bout sixteen en seventeen year old."
"Did you have to take in washing when your husband was with you, or did you stop when you were married?"
A look of amazement appeared upon the woman's face.
"No, honey, I didn' stop when I got married. I started info business sakes den."
"What do you get for a washing, Stella?" I asked.
"Well, for the men folks what lived by de selves I charge.50¢ if they was just hard workin', but if dey has good jobs I charge dem a quarter more. I allus tries to figure out what dey kin pay 'cordin' to whats dey make.
Then when I has a family washin' I charges $1.50 or $1.75 and effen dey is somebody in the family what works in grease I charges.10¢ more because dat grease is mighty bad when you has to scrub and rub on it."
"Stella, where do you do these washings? There doesn't seem to be much space around here to hang clothes." I commented looking about the pitifully small plot of ground that she called her yard.
"I likes to wash in de folkses kitchens 'cause den I don't have to skimp around for wood to burn in de stove, but most folks don' like yo a messin' 'an' a biling clothes in dere kitchens."
Her lips parted in a grin to show snags of yellowed teeth in purplish gums.
"I likes to work in their houses on account of the vittuls you gets to eat, too; when hard times were crampin' my innards breakfas' n' dinner wore mighty tasty. I could save a little out and not eat it an' then I'd take it home to my chillun."
"Did the ladies you worked for ever complain about your taking food home?" I asked.
"Stella chuckled reminiscently. "Ain't never had no fuss about dat but one time. Dat was a mighty pinchy penny and choosey lady who was always telling me to not use too much soap powders in my washing, and sech as dat. We had po'k chops fo dinner and I wuz washing de dishes for her (I allus do dat when I washes at peoples houses), and I saved de bones because all de meat warn't gnawed offen em. My chillun loves to gnaw bones. Well, I had a middlin' size bag full and she spied it. She grabbed it up and when she seed whats in it, she shore did look funny."
At this point, Stella's chuckle increased to a hearty laugh.
"Tell me, Stella, how you managed to keep your children clothed and warm after your husband deserted you. Having no help at all, it must have been pretty bad for you, with fuel, clothing and food to look out for!"
Her bright expression faded as her mind retraced the years of struggle, the winters of hunger and stark privation.
"It sho wore a hard job to keep the chillun warm, but when I warn't washin' we allus walked down de rail road and picked up de cinders what warn't all burned up. Sometime we'd find lumps of good coal and dat burns mighty pretty when its mixed up with de cinders.."
"Surely, that wasn't the only fuel you had, was it Stella? I queried.
"I usta go to de backs of de stores every mornin' early before dey got to work, and pick up de pieces of broken boxes dat things was packed in, and dey helped a lot to keep warm with. I warn't shamed to go after day got there but seems like when folks throws somin away and den sees somebody come along and pick it up, dey thinks maybe dey shouldn't oughta throwed it away, and den right away dey wants it back."
Stella shook her head in resigned bewilderment over the idiosyncrasies of human nature.
"Do you have three meals a day, Stella; and what do you eat, usually?" I asked.
"Law, no, I only has one meal a day, and dats 'cordin' to how lucky I is, what I has. Sometimes some of de neighbors what has gardens gives me some greens, and I biles a pot of peas when I has dem. We eats salt pork when we eats meat."
"Don't you ever eat fish to vary your diet of peas, beans and salt pork? " I asked.
"Yas mam, I goes to de fish markets and dey allus gives me de fish dat dey can't sell. I biles 'em and dey're right tasty too."
"Wouldn't they taste better if they were fried in lard? I would think that boiling would make the fish less tasty," I commented.
"They would be better, but I has to save de lard for frying my corn bread, and fish just naturally soaks up de grease when you try to fry dem."
With the heating problem and food situation disposed of, I began to delve into the mysteries of clothing.
"What did you do about dressing the children, Stella? How did you manage to keep them clothed?"
"Well, I could sorta change de dresses and coats and pants around amongst dem, but I had a mighty hard time about de shoes. I want to bring dem up right just as effen dey had a daddy to look after dem, so I allus taken one to church wid me ever' Sunday."
"Why did you take only one with you. Why not all four?" I asked.
"I never could buy but one pair of shoes at de time so couldn't but one go with me. Shoes allus has been a pester to me." She said looking ruefully down at the make-shift on her feet.
"How did you manage with only the one pair, about fitting?"
"Dat wuz easy; I allus got dem kinda tight for de biggest chile and mighty loose for de youngest. I allus get de kind dat has strings so I could kinda loosen out or tighten up to fit. We doan never miss a Sunday going to church nuther."
"Just what does religion mean to you, Stella? What do you suppose Heaven is like?"
She hesitated a moment formulating her thoughts before giving utterance to them.
"I goes to church somedays and I feel just like any nigger, den after de sarmon I comes out and I feels like I'm different from de ones what hangs around and don't go. I guess I feel sorta 'fraid of Heaven but then I'se scared I might not go when I die, so it makes you mixed up like. I
shore do like to hear our parson talk though."
"Speaking of dying, Stella, do you have any insurance?"
"I did have a policy on all of my four children. I paid. 35¢ a week, but I had to drap it in August and I ain't been able to catch up on it again."
Her children are well grown now and should be helping their mother, but she still struggles on with her washings. A little old woman; ancient at 48. Gnarled and withered with the drudgery and starvation of practically her entire life.
By the way I asked as I was leaving, What's that I smell.
What's dat you smell cooking? Why dats black-eyed peas biling and co'n pone frying.
