Jacksonville, Florida
28 East Bay Street
Rev. W.C. Sale (White)
Mrs. Lillian Steadman, writer
Veronica E. Huss and
Robert Edwards, revisers
REVEREND W.C. SALE
For 16 years the Reverend W.C. Sale has been a well known figure in the religious life of Jacksonville. He was pastor of the Margaret Street Baptist church for the years, and now conducts the Jacksonville Citadel Mission at 28 East Bay Street, where he serves refreshments twice daily after the services to anyone attending, and coffee throughout the day. He also conducts WPA adult education classes in the Mission.
He is six feet tall, weighs 150 pounds, and is a slender muscular type. His high forehead is topped with thick dark brown hair sprinkled with gray. He wears glasses, and his heavy eyebrows shade clear blue eyes. Neatly attired, his tie, handkerchief and suit make a harmonious combination.
The Mission consists of one room on the second floor of an old commercial structure one block from the waterfront. The walls of the room are very dingy and so also is the furniture, although it is well arranged. A large one-gallon coffee pot of blue enamel shows signs of constant use. A piano, the most impressive piece of furniture in the room, shows little sign of wear. In this room, one frequently hears the creaking stairs in the old building.
"At present I am using one large room not only as a classroom and employment agency but as a place where hungry men may come and eat; where tired men may sit and rest; and where troubled men may tell their needs.
"This is no church, no hotel lobby, nor is it a flop-house; it is a spot where men can feel free to come and find immediate aid. I am proud of the fact that help is instantly given with no prolonged investigation. This present location, which I recently acquired, is ideal because it is convenient to the greatest number who might seek aid. Being near the harbor and only a few blocks from the heart of the city, I am able to help men in all walks of life. I plan to redecorate the Mission and expect to be able to secure a smaller adjoining room for use as a kitchen."
I explained the purpose of my interview, and he readily responded: "I will be glad to share whatever material of value I can furnish.
"I will tell you the story of my life in one sentence. I was born in Alabama, reared in Tennessee, an Oregon exile, a Virginian by adoption, a Kentuckian by permission, an overseas chaplain, and a Floridian by migration. But I have stayed, and not gone north in the summer; I have stuck or maybe I am stuck, perhaps both.
"My father and mother married shortly after the War between the States, and reared seven girls and three boys on a farm. All learned self-support, self-respect, and self-control. We owned our own home, and helped father pay for it. I made the last payment on it one year after his death in 1904. You know it is easier for thrifty parents to rear a large family than it is to rear a small one--that is, it used to be, and I believe it is yet. It should be the ambition of every young married couple to have 18 children.
"The Sales for several generations have pointed with pride to lawyers, doctors and preachers in their ranks. The pastor of the First Methodist church in this city back in 1893 was my father's first cousin of whom he often spoke with pride, and I understand that Rev. J.C. Sale was a good preacher. Many of his family still live in Florida today. Judge Sale lives in Bronson, Florida. My people came from the British Isles by way of Virginia, thence to the South and West. There are so few of us that we are willing to claim kin when we meet.
"I went through grammar school in Tennessee and later took five years in the Union University, Jackson, Tennessee, with special courses in oratory and theology, graduating in June, 1904." At this point Mr. Sale shows me the gold star he wears on his watch chain, the gift of the faculty for being an honor student.
"A few years later while pastor in Richmond, Va., I took two years of special work in Union Theological Seminary, an excellent Presbyterian school. That is unusual for a Baptist to attend a Seminary of another denomination, but I found it to be a good thing. It makes one broader, more considerate, and a better thinker. I seriously doubt that our present school system is turning out educated boys and girls. They all go through the mill and graduate. I do not see how they do it. But I presume education has been so popularized that it has become a game and they play the thing through. Then they make a larger appeal to the eye by means of maps, charts, pictures, and demonstrations than they once did. I think I have heard that about 85 percent of what we learn comes through the eye.
"One must be ambitious, with high ideals, in order to make the grade in life. Much of this depends upon vision. 'Where there is no vision the people perish.' I made my response to the first awakening of conscience. I answered the call of God! To be a Christian! To be a minister! To live for others! I have had many experiences in what is known as the spirit-filled life.
"My ambition has never been to accumulate wealth. I like the good things of life, but have always expected them to come as a result of sacrificial services for others. I have understood that if one lives for others he need not fear; he will he cared for. But I have learned that one must be a good, financier if he succeeds in life. One must keep the home fires burning if he is to entertain strangers. Certainly one must live within his income and not try to keep up with the crowd. One must either own a home or pay rent if he never owns a car. I have owned two cars that I bought and paid for and wore out. I am convinced that two-thirds of the people driving cars do not need them, and would be better off without them. This is evidently true of people living in the city where transportation is easily accessible.
"When you speak of income you make me laugh. It is better to laugh, though, than to cry. Our first income in 1905 was $50 per month, and we lived in a furnished home. That was out in Heppner, Oregon, this side of the Cascade Range of mountains, 5,000 feet above sea level in the arid section of the West, where one feels most excellent, but where your dreams are a long time coming true. But if you go from the South to the Pacific Coast you must learn as quickly as possible to fit in.
"At one time my income was $4,000 per year, but like all the rest I had my reverses. The hardest pull financially of my life has been during my sojourn in Jacksonville. But I guess I am to blame. If I had hustled for a larger church it would have been different. But I am stronger because of my struggles. I would say that not less than $100 a month will provide adequately for a husband and wife today in Jacksonville. I know many live on less than that, hut it is a hard pull.
"The supreme right of man is the right to live and the right to work, and the right to show the marks of a man. Nothing is more honorable than work. We should never be satisfied with our system in the social order, until it provides every eligible man with work. Capital and labor must cooperate, with this slogan, 'work for every man and every man at work.' I was taught to work, and have worked ever since. I do not work for the amount of money I receive but for the joy there is in it, for the good I may be able to do, for what I may be able to accomplish through the work.
"My mission work is soul-satisfying and gives me a complete feeling of effort well spent. When I lie down in my bed at night, perhaps a little weary from the physical strain of the day, I am able to find full compensation when I review the events of the day and know that tonight there are fewer discouraged, depressed and hungry men because of my work.
"The earnest desire of my life has been to relieve suffering humanity and to meet the needs of my brother-man. In this field I am able to reach the man furtherest down--the man that won't come to church is the hungry man, and the man made bitter because of some possible experience with a church-goer, and the man that can't make a decent appearance because of unemployment.
"Christ went after the man that was furtherest down and that is my aim, but the churches are not after that class today, they want a well-dressed crowd on parade. I am not sure that you will find very much Christianity, of the primitive type, among the churches today. Christ was moved with compassion for the multitudes. I am wondering what Christ thinks of the churches of this age.
"Getting back to my mission, for more than a hundred years Jacksonville has been merely a commercial city. But many things have converged to make it so. She has an ideal location on the historic St. Johns, with the best harbor, with the advantage of sea and land for transportation, undisturbed by storm and fog. Ours is the subtropical climate luring people from the North to the commerce of the South. We take off our hats to the past as we salute the men that planned and built our city, in spite of famine and fires, wars and fatal diseases. All praise to municipal ownerships of the waterworks, the electric light plant, certain docks, the stadium, radio, and many other projects that make for the financial success of our great city.
"Yes, we are happy to praise the police and fire departments, the park and sanitary departments, recreation department, great school system and our magnificent churches for their great cultural and spiritual program. But there is no provision for helping the man that is down on his luck. We have welfare agencies that are doing a great work but they must adhere to specified rule and follow-up investigations. That is why I prefer to continue this mission, for I am able to immediately aid the man that is detached--the man that really needs a friend.
"A mission is the only institution I know that reaches the man that is down in the most effectual way withoukt embarrassing him.
"This is the only agency in the city that gives direct relief immediately; including medical aid and everything that one man may be able to do for another without charge. Everything is absolutely free, with no strings tied to it, except the promise to be a real man and try for self-support and self-control.
"A mission enables one to work with his hands untied, and untrammeled, using his own best judgment, without interference on the part of outsiders. It is a simple problem--not complex.
"The great needs for such a mission are:
"First: it relieves suffering men out of work, that is no fault of their own in most cases. They are stranded and absolutely alone. They need a helping hand to find health, to find work, to find God, and to find their proper place in the social order.
"Second: so many people come to Florida, both tourist and transients, one with money and the other without. They both have the same purpose in that they are seeking 'life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.' The tourist looks out for himself. The transient must have some one help him on his way.
"Third: "the poor are always with us' and there will always be room for this kind of work.
"Fourth: sudden relief is greatly needed for seamen in Jacksonville. Seamen are our second navy, our ambassadors of good will.
"All food is a contribution which I have promoted by contacting business heads and organizations. We generally have sufficient food for all.
"I feel that in this mission work I am able to stop crime at its source to a great extent. A hungry man will commit a crime quicker than a man that has three regular meals each day. We are told that hunger is the greatest human urge.
"I am convinced that the mission work has relieved the burden and gloom front many a lonely, helpless, struggling soul. This is evidently true with some men past 60. They say that cold harsh treatment makes men worse. And that is divinely true. Hear David saying, 'Thy gentleness hath made me great.' And Paul saying, 'The love of Christ constraineth me.' And the song writer saying, 'Love lifted me.'
"I am fully convinced that the ministry of this mission is surpassing the work of the prison farms and all that is connected with them. The new approach to the cure of crime is not punishment, but mercy, kindness and instruction. We are called upon to be real builders in the Kingdom of God.
"The best advertisement that could come to this city is that even drifting men that come this way could go their way saying, 'Jacksonville has a heart of love.' That is exactly what 13,000,000 Negroes of America are saying about our city, who were represented here in their National Baptist Convention two years ago. That is what 8,000 white men are saying who have been cared for in our Jacksonville city mission during the past twelve months.
"We have not only met their physical and spiritual need, but during the past year we have taught the following topics: 'History of Florida,' 'History of the United States;' 'American War Myths;' 'The Power of the President;' 'Red Cross First Aid;' 'World Patriots;' 'The New Frontiers of Democracy;' 'Hygiene or How to Live;' 'Communism, Fascism, Dictatorship versus Democracy;' 'The Rights of Man;' which are the right to live, and the right to work and the right to show the marks of a man. We carried on an independent course of study without a book, on self-respect and self-control. We are now studying the history of Jacksonville, featuring the thought of building a greater city.
"We have found, too, the study of human relationships is an inexhaustible course of which, each and every man can take a part. We, also, very frequently have round table discussions of current events. Reflecting a moment I recall that 'How to Prevent War' was a most interesting topic. The forum plan of discourse and teaching is the best that I have tried. This plan calls for the selection of a topic by the class, and the teacher giving the first short introductory address, giving all the class a chance to ask further questions and discuss the question in hand.
"I am interested in making every man's living conditions as good as we enjoy at home. The government is doing a remarkable thing for both white and colored on housing projects of Jacksonville.
"My wife is from one of the oldest families in Memphis, Tennessee, the Porter family. She attended Brownsville Female College, the Cincinnati Conservatory of Music, and studied dramatic art in several other colleges.
"We had three children, all of whom died in infancy. Later we adopted a girl, Rose Valley Rupard, whom we raised. She is now married, has three children, and lives in Virginia. My wife is an energetic person; she conducts classes in dramatic art, piano and voice; she has twenty pupils. I realize there is quite a contrast in our work; however, she feels that in her work she is aiding humanity also.
"I heartily approve the New Deal. Christ went after the man that was furtherest down and that is what the New Deal is meant to do. At present the political parties do not amount to much, they are nearly the same. Being a Democrat I stick to my party. I flew the track one time and voted for Hoover. It was due to Hoover's popularity as a World War humanitarian and food administrator. The liquor question was a great issue at that time. Some think that Al Smith being a Catholic had much to do with many voting for Hoover. It may have been with others but not with me. I thought at one time that Hoover was the stronger of the two men, but to tell the truth, neither one was a giant. Personally, I think that the two Roosevelts are the strongest presidents that America has ever had.
"I have always voted religiously. I never fail to vote on every issue. I am a politician. I believe in the science of sound government. I always advise people to vote as they pray and pray as they vote. I have never discussed politics in the pulpit.
"Neither do I tear my shirt over an election. I allow political campaigns to be my time for fun. I am always for the present administration, until I go to the polls. As a rule the ticket I select wins. Just a few times have I voted on the wrong side. I do not wait to see which way the wind is blowing but I am generally on the winning side. I find that one man is about as good as another, and all liable to make mistakes while they are in office.
"The word 'religion' is a hackneyed phrase. It has been over-worked. It is ambiguous. You cannot tell just what one has in mind when he speaks of his religion. It may mean his church creed, meaning denominationalism, I prefer the word Christianity, Christlikeness. As you know for one to have the mind of Christ has all to do with one's morale. Christianity doesn't hinder one from having a good time in life. Christ turned the water into wine at a marriage feast in Canaan of Galilee.
"I do not believe in trying to enforce what is known as Sabbath blue laws, where one is not allowed to buy a loaf of bread or make a purchase at a drug store. 'The Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath,' said Christ to the critical, self-righteous Pharisees. I like a good picture show, but do not believe in Sunday movies, because the movie is purely a commercial enterprise, just like any other business. If it is right for places of industry to close, it is right for the movies to close, too. Being in competition with the churches has not one thing in the world to do with it. The churches have no competition from any source.
"Since you are holding me up at a point of a pencil and I must show my personality and politeness, push, and perseverance as a pioneer, I will make a few miscellaneous enervations, as I look at myself in the glass and see the house I live in 'by the side of the road while I try to be a friend to man.'
"One gets nowhere without a plan, a blue print that he makes for himself, if he is capable; if not capable, follow some one else's blue print. A free lance has started nowhere and certainly will get nowhere. I plan ray day before I get up in the morning. In fact, thinking on plans and programs is the thing that brings me from a dead level to a living perpendicular.
"I am in a great movement. First: I am in the Kingdom of God movement, with all the lovers of the Lord. I am in adult education work under the Works Progress Administration, which is definitely here to stay. If the WPA should cease to be, adult education would go right on in one form or another, by one agency or the other. It is a fellowship forum with at least a hundred thousand of them in America. It is a field all its own, that must be worked daily. And if properly pursued it will defeat every ism that may pervade our shores, such as Communism and Fascism. Here we teach men to plow and plant, cultivate and Harvest. We practice and teach that one must spend some time each day in the realm of the beautiful, and in the field of frolic and fun. Tea, we must have places of amusement, wholesome visiting, cautious courting, if we would have happy, lasting marriages.
"Unless right-thinking people look out for the well-being of our young folks they will be left alone to bring themselves to shame. Thoughtful men will spend, their leisure hours in learning at a school of adult education where real hospitality is shown.
"For myself, I am well most all the time as I am constantly using preventive measures that keeps one well. Such as plenty of fresh air, with its eleven health-giving qualities, good food properly masticated, due attention to poisons within and without the body, and the right exercise. With proper knowledge of hygiene one becomes his own best doctor. Work is all absorbing and is conducive to right thinking, which makes for the best of health, other things being equal.
"As the hour approaches for classes, I find myself anticipating the prospect of sitting through part of the session. One by one the men arrive, then by twos and threes, and finally groups arrive together. Each finds individual welcome as he is told to 'come in and get something to eat, and help yourself to the coffee; there is more sugar back of the piano and open up another can of cream, there's plenty. Oranges end tangerines over there, too, help yourself, boys.'
"Some of these men are large and strong, others small, tired and worn. The young and the old share the same hunger and the same disappointments, but they may come here twice daily and find welcome, week in and week out, for that is the purpose of this little mission."
Reversed N.C. Sale
Florida
Good
Conducts mission, serving refreshments to those attending meetings, and coffee all day - near harbor and center of city - tells family history, education, pastorates, philosophy of life - 'God will provide' attitude, but "one must be good financier" - labor and capital should cooperate to provide work for all - lives to relieve suffering and help underdog - mission of churches - <Text Not Clear> on city government and welfare purposes and management of mission.