January 23, 1939
Myrtle Cunningham (white)
Young Womens' Christian Association
Knoxville, Tennessee
Industrial worker
Della Yoe, writer
Revised by Lipscomb and Aswell
TN50
"The room's kind of messed up. Reckon you know, though, how young girls is. Use to be a cot in here besides the two beds, but it was so crowded we couldn't hardly turn around. When they's an extry girl stopping over here at the Y for just a night or two, they'll put the cot back and bed her down in here so's I can book after her. But I haven't had one of them extries for a couple of months now. I hope they won't be any more soon. I'm gitting fed up on them transients."
Myrtle, clad in a wine-colored satin house coat tied about her with a cord, waddled pigeon-toed back and forth across the room. The felt slippers on her stockingless feet made a slush-slush sound on the concrete floor. Stooping and grunting with effort, she picked up a bundle of soiled clothes lying in one corner and tossed them into the closet. "Them's Beulah's uniforms. She'll have to wash and iron them tonight when she gits back from her job. She's a waitress at Brisco's, the restaurant up on the next block.
"Beulah's a my roommate now. Moved in with me about three weeks ago when Mamie got married and went to Florida to live. At first the house secretary put another girl in with her. But she didn't like the new girl and so she come in with me. I hope I can keep her and not have to make no more changes. She's fun and we git along fine together. They all say I can git along with anybody. Reckon that's why they choosed me to catch all the extries that's been coming in here of late. They give me the name of Counsellor after I'd been here a year or two. Ever since then I gotto to keep my eyes on them problem girls. Them that's a runaways, or ain't got job and don't seem to try find any kind of work. The Y executive board says it's more friendly-like for one of the old residents to take a interest in them, and not let them think the secretaries is watching them too close.
"But me and Beulah's going to ask them to let me off that job now. We'd heap ruther be to ourselves. Beulah's kind of careless-like. She wallows on the bed and don't always hang up her clothes when she ought to. But it's like I was telling you--that's the way girls is. At least, most girls. I never so more think of using the bed of a daytime, than I'd think of flying. Reckon that's because I'm from the country."
Myrtle picked up the stuffed wire-haired terrier and set it against one of the pillows on the bed. She spread out the lace trimmed dress of the French doll and leaned it against the other pillow. She straightened the cushion in the plain pine rocking chair and dropped into it,
"Yes, I was born on a farm thirty-two years ago. My mother died when I was a little girl and I went and lived with my grandmother for four years. Then she died and I went back to my father's house. He didn't live on a farm but it was country all right. Our house was a way off the side of a dirt road about twelve miles outside of Knoxville. He'd married again and when she died he married another. That makes two step-mothers for me. Him and her's got two children. They come here to see me sometimes, and I go see them now and then of a weekend, or when I'm laid off from work.
"When I come here to the Young Women's Christian Association--that's been seven years ago--I was twenty-five years old. Hadn't had much schooling and all the kind of work I knowed to do was housework, washing and ironing, cooking, and looking after my little step-brother and sister. I knowed I wouldn't have to work no harder in the city than I done at home. My father was willing for me to try it, so when I got to making money maybe I could help him some. He's gittlng too old to work much, end my stepmother she's going blind. My married brother helps them some, and I send them a little now and then. They got a good garden and the children is big enough now to help about the house. They make it somehow.
"So the Young Women's Christian Association got me a job right away with a shirt factory. I've been working there ever since. Never worked nowheres else. They lay us off every once in a while, but they carry me here if I git behind in my rent, and give me some kind of work to do to make up for what I eat. I get up at six o'clock every morning and help serve breakfast to the residents. They give me a good breakfast for that. And then I help the Food Director serve her Club dinners twice a week, and sometimes four or five times a week, depending on the number of Club Meetings. Breakfast's the onliest meal served to the residents."
Myrtle sighed, changed sides for her chewing gum, and went on. "Then I take turns keeping office. I mean answering the telephone and calling the girls or putting down their call numbers on the blackboard in the hall on both floors. More than seventy residents on the two floors and Just one telephone. It's a busy instrument. Keeps the 'phone answerer jumping at night. I just take me a rocking chair in the office and set there and look at the funnies, or read the romance magazines, or visit with the girls that's always dropping in waiting for their calls or their turn to telephone, or maybe just to visit.
"Enjoy the office work too. Lots of times I eat ray lunch in there when I'm laid off the factory job. I most always eats my supper either in the office or my room. I don't eat much, scared of gitting too fat. They fuss at me a lot about not eating enough, but I don't pay them no mind. You can call up the drugstores anywhere in this neighborhood and they'll deliver your order right now. I always git a sandwich of some kind. In summer I mostly eat fruit. I'm just a fool over strawberries. Saw a box of red-ripe ones in the A & P today. Made my mouth water. But they was too dear. Besides they ain't in season and not so tasty.
At the factory we have a big room where we can eat out lunches. Unless we have a thermos bottle, though, for soup or hot drinks, our lunch is a cold one. They's a man comes around every day with made-up sandwiches. He makes right good money. Bought the franchise, they say, from the factory boss.
"This shirt factory where I work is the S. Leibovitz & Sons, Inc., the only union factory in the city. Belongs to the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America. It's growed considerable since I went to work there. Reckon they's about one-hundred and fifty more workers there now than they was seven years ago. They employ around three hundred regular now, and pay better wages, too. And shorter hours. It was the Union done it. Before we organized and they had to admit themselves into the Union, we couldn't make no money no matter how hard we worked, and the hours was too long for a body to have any time at all to theirselves.
"They was a time when I worked from seven of a morning till five of an afternoon. Sometimes from seven to eight. Since we got to be a closed shop, we ain't allowed to work but forty hours a week on a eight hour day base. I punch the time clock in at seven of a morning and punch out at four afternoons. Them's the hours we're supposed to work. But if you make your production, you can go home by three in the afternoon. If you have to work overtime, the factory has to pay you time-and-a-half. My minimum wage, about the same's the others, is thirteen dollars and twenty cents per week. I've made as high as fifteen a week and once I made sixteen dollars.
"Some workers is slower than others and the bosses try to time it so's all of us gits the minumum wages. Then that's been there longest and can more than make their proauction is told to go home, but they let the slow ones stay and make up theirs. My production is forty dozen garments a day. I can easy do sixty. I stitch together the shoulders, back and front, and fell the under-arm seams. They pay six and six-tenths cents for a dozen garments.
"When you're a learner your wage is twenty-five cents an hour. They give you four weeks to loam, and then youhave to join the Union. The dues is a dollar a month. We have meetings twice a week, They's a factory committee represents the Union, and if things don't go right they take it before the boss. If he don't right it, they take it up with the New York headquarters, and they have to make a settlement with the Union headquarters, which is also in New York.
"Of course, when you change jobs you's just like a beginner. You got to learn something different. That slows you down in your production, but just the same you draw your same wage. Why, when they sent me downstairs,--let me see, that was back in July--and took me off of jackets and put me on coats, it was two or three weeks before I made any money. But they had to pay me my same old wage just the same. It was the Union done that."
Smoothing her brown hair, arranged in curls on top of her head, she gave a little giggle. "Let me tell you something funny about how we got into the Union. We'd been talking it for a long time. I disremember just when it did happen, but it's been about four, maybe five years, I reckon. Well, they was six workers already joined us with the Union, The boss found out about it. He called them to the office and fired them. He didn't know then that they was a lot of others belonged too. So when he wouldn't take back the six he fired it was up to the rest of its to walk out. And we done it, too. We'd all gone in and put on our uniforms but hadn't gone to work. So we changed back to our regular clothes and everybody beat it for home.
"Was the boss-man mad! He roared like a bull. He swore he'd not take one of us back, never so long as he drawed breath. But he called up the New York headquarters and he found out he'd have to make this a closed factory. So in about a week's time we was all called back. Funny thing about it was that at that time we didn't have to pay to join the Union. But they was twenty of the workers stood by the boss and hadn't joined. When we had the walkout they had to go on home, too. But they went saying they'd never join the Union. Well, when they was called back, too, them twenty had to pay two dollars dues instead of one.
"I reckon you might say I done my bit to put the Union across. And it is the only Union factory in this city. Ain't I somebody?
"Well, you see Miss Annie Doty was General Secretary of the Young Women's Christian Association at that time. She was a swell lady. Me and her had talked it over. When it come time to have the meeting to organize we couldn't git the W.O.W. hall because others was using it that night. She said we could have a big basement room at the Y unless another party that had spoke for it needed it the same night. That party would pay six dollars for use of the room, but she said I could have it for my meeting for two dollars.
"As bad luck had it, the party that had engaged it spoke for the room that morning. Miss Doty, she telephoned me to the factory. They wouldn't call me to the phone. Not knowing that the boss was so mad and trying to stop us from organizing, she went and told him to give me the message and told him what it was all about. She didn't mean no harm. Just trying to help me out, So when the boss talks back short and tells her workers ain't allowed to talk on the 'phone in work hours, she just ups and sends me a telegram. The boss-man called me to the office and says, 'Look here. They's a telegram for you, You got to read it in the office and then put it back in your pocket. Don't show it to nobody and don't tell nobody about it.
"I looked at the telegram and then I looked at him and I asked him did he want to see it. He just hollered out, 'Not! Then he told me to go back to my machine.
"As I was walking back, slow as I could, I kept studying how to tell the others that we got to get another place for the meeting. You see, I couldn't walk around none, nor speak to nobody. So I just started to work for a few minutes, then I pulled the best of my machine. Now the machinist, he goes everywheres. He has to when they's something has to be fixed. I knowed he was already joined and when he come to see about my machine I told him the trouble and he got the word around before quitting time. That night we was organized.
"Oh, the boss, he's all right now. He was fighting mad for a long time. He'd glare at us like he could chew us up and spit us out. But he gits his benefits from the union, too, now. Just here lately, the union placed a great big order for him. It works both ways. But we didn't have no advantage over him until this NRA come along and we got organized. After they wasn't no more of that NRA he'd chucked us back in wages and longer hours quick enough if it hadn't been for the union.
"We git all the main holidays that other businesses git. But then we can be made to make up the time if the company's a mind to make us. But the company can still be fined for overtime. We all have Social Security. They take it out of our wages. Ten cents on the dollar. Then the company has to pay the Social Securities three cents on every dollar we make. In lay-off time we don't git nothing. No sick benefits, neither. I'm laid off now, maybe for a month. It's dull in winter. Boss says he hopes next year to give us a full eleven months work, straight running. If that happens it'll be the first time we worked that many months in any year since I been with them.
"The workers at our factory seem to like it well enough, Lots of them has been there as long as I have and some of them longer. They's a lot of girls that's married and keep on working. They claim two wages put together is better than one. They go in at sixteen and most of them go out at fifty. They don't like to hire older workers. Ruther have young girls. They have lady foremen too. I like them all right. Never bothered me none. They's mostly ladies that has worked at machine first. But they don't have no rules about promotions. They just pick out who they want for the jobs.
"The woman in the office, she has a first-aid kit and tends to you if you git hurt and it ain't bad enough for a doctor, Sometimes a machine needle breaks and you git hurt that way, or maybe you run the needle through your hand or finger, if you ain't awful careful. They really ought to have medical examinations, but they don't, You know, supposing somebody is diseased how they could spread it when goods and finished garments passes through so many hands. Oh, if some of the girls gits bumps or pimples on their faces reae bad, a then they have to go git a health card.
"Sure, they's a health, what you call it, hazard in the work. Just inhaling the lint from the woolen goods is bad for you. It's awful dirty work, too. In this town they's so much coal smut that everything gits as black and dingy as a chimney. Sometimes when I git to my room, where the goods has touched me and me sweating my hide's as black as a nigger.
"I got a right good complexion. I cold cream of a night and don't use much rouge. Plenty face powder, though. Like for it to smell sweet. I wash my own hair and one of the girls then they have to go git health card sets it for me. Reckon I should put something in the water to lighten it up some. It looks darker now than it is because it's dirty. Have to shampoo once a week to keep it clean. I like pretty clothes. Bright colors is my favorites, but I wear black and brown mostly for the street to save so much cleaning expense.
"I buy mostly from the chain stores on time. You pay so much down and they keep it for you till it's all paid for, or collect so much a week. Got me an awful pretty new dress for the monthly dance next Friday. The residents have a dance once a month. I don't attend all of the dances. My boy friend lives in Maryville and he can't git over here so often. And I don't date with nobody but him. Me and him been keeping company for about five years.
"If I don't marry Guilford in the next year or two, I don't know just how I will manage or what I'll do. You see they's a new rule at the Y, and after this year they ain't going to rent rooms to girls that's lived here more than three years. Rents in this city is so high, I couldn't git along very well on my wages living anywhere's else but the Y. The factory manages to keep you working for the minimum and I git about as much now as I ever will.
"I got a scheme, though. Maybe I can work to git my room back here. I aim to move out for three or four weeks, and then come back and register new again. I believe they'd let me. They all seem to like me around here. I've been here so long and know so well about everything in the residence departments, I'm just lots of help to them. I've been here under three different General Secretaries and about five Presidents. They all give me presents at Christmas. Lots of the girls do. I bet I've got fifty handkerchiefs, all kinds. Some of them never been used.
"The future don't worry me a lot. What's the use of studying about it? I just take life easy and live a day or a week at a time. I go to church. I'm a Baptist. Now and then I see a movie, and now and then I like to go to a dance here at the Y. That's about all the going I do except to visit around and go out to eat with my boy friend when he comes to the city. He don't like to come here, though. Says it's too public and they is too many girls all the time around. I tell him he ain't got no business to see other girls, anyhow. We tease each other and pretend we're jealous, but neither of us is. Not really.
"If my step-mother was to go plumb blind, I might have to go look after her and my father and the children. But that's one of them future worries that I ain't borrowing, though I do feel sorry and hope she don't get no worser for her own sake. She's got some folks she could go to, but it don't look right for them to have to take her and the best of the family, too. Me and Guilford's talked about it some, thinking maybe if he was to git a better paying job and we got married, we could all git a place together cheap somewheres near to Maryville Living's cheap there. But this has been my home so long I reckon I'd feel strange to live anywheres else. And the factory's been another sort of home too, for some years.
I'd feel strange to leave it, too. And if ever Gil- ford decides to come here and git another job I expect I'd do like a lot of the others, just keep on working after we're married. Guess I wouldn't feel right to quit work and keep house. But as I said, ain't no use trying to figure out them things till the time comes, I ain't borrowing no future worries"
Shirt-factory workers of 32 in Y. W. C. A helps with problem girls and telephone -- details about work and benefits of strong union -- assistance of I secretary in forming union -- future uncertain -- possible marriages -- possible need for going back to father's family.
