Moses Alexander
Melpomene & Poydras Sts.
Interviewed 2/28/39
Submitted 3/3/39
"AH GOT RELIGION."
"Ev'ry man's got a right at a philosophy of life, facts is ev'ry man's got a philosophy. Mine is whiskey. Ah luves it. Facts is, thats what keeps me a sinner in mah own way. Cose, Ah aint no sinner in the way of the Lawd, cause the Lawd aint never said man aint got no right drinkin'. Them damn preachers brought that mess in the world."
If the above may be considered a philosophy of life, give credit of surmising it to Moses Alexander, an old crippled but carefree Negro who doesn't quite remember his age but thinks he is about seventy-eight years old. It isn't unusual for Moses to forget. He very often forgets his address. "The most important thing for me to re'member is when that worldfare (Welfare) check is comin'," he says.
Moses was sitting on a neighbor's step with his eyes looking far into empty space when contacted. He was alone, wearing a too-big black coat, blue overalls and a brown hat. An 1874 style walking cane was leaning by his side. Moses is a fine looking old man, having gray beards, keen features and a smooth black color. He speaks slowly but positively, looking you straight in the eyes. Every now and then Moses would hum a wordless tune, but he didn't know the name of it. When questioned how could he hum a tune without knowing its name, Moses remonstrated! “That Ah don't know. But there aint nothin’ wrong wid mah memory, Ah jests fo'gits, thats all."
He continued: "Ah could say Ah was feeling fine but mah limbs is all stowed up. That rheumatism, you know. It gits you when you gits old. Boy, don't never git old. You don't know the hell of a fix you'll be in. Wish Ah'd never done it." Moses sat in idle reverie for a minute or two and then he spoke again: "I jest come down hyar to git mah stuff but it aint been issued yet. (He was referring to Welfare commodities) I got to be hyar a little bit longer. Cause Ah reckon these people got to take their time. (All of a sudden Moses became suspicious) You aint one of them mittes, is you? No? Thats right Ah done s-e-e-en you. (Moses was nervous; he was biting his words, because he slipped and told his philosophy of life) Them mittes don't want in you to drink up yo' money. They will cut you off, if they knows it. Ah'm sho glad you aint no mittee? Did you say lets take a little drink? (Moses has a very convenient way of hearing things) Ah reckon Ah drinks any thing, wine, whiskey, gin, like that. Oh well, anything thats drinkable. (He pulled his commodity card from his coat pocket) You see this blue card? This gits you the grub. The lady takes this and gazes at it. The number of them people you is got is on there. If you number one on it you git for one, if you got number two on it you git for two, and if you got three on you git for three. Mine is got two on it, so Ah git for two. Who is the two? Mah wife. Ah aint got her now though. Man, she's crazy. That fool went crazy prayin'. Used to wake up in the mornin' talkin' bout the devil says he was goin' to arrest her mind. Well, he did. She's arrested and rested right smack in Jackson. No, she aint never done me nothin'. Ah wouldn't let. Uh. Don't Ah look lak somebody whose got sense enough to git out a crazy woman's way? jest lak Ah can git out the rain Ah sho can git out of a crazy woman's way. No indeed! Ah aint never fo'got that. Man, thats jest lak fo'gittin' to duck from a Joe Louis punch."
It is too bad, but Moses forgot when all of this happened."Fo'give me, Ah done plum fo'got when mah wife went crazy. But Ah thinks that it must er been five yars ago." At this point, Moses was wiping his beards, sort of striking them like a man does who quickly finishes a strong drink. He cleared his throat too, "You know, Ah reckons that a man must not drink too much, but there aint nothin' wrong wid his drinkin' a little bit. Ah agress wid you. (His convenient memory was working again) Ah always say that men is human, they must be persuaded by their own 'pinions. Paul says that. And mah 'pinions is that a man can drink sufficient, and thats all."
And with that, Moses had us by the arm ushering us off to a barroom that was four blocks away. "Ah recollects that you is a fine young man. You looks the part. What chirch does you b'long? No chirch? A sinner! You a sinner? Not you? Whew! (Very softly) Me too. You didn't know that. Did you? b'tween me and you Ah got a better chance being white then gittin’ in some of these churches er round hyar. Man, them people don't want me in them churches. Ah know the Lawd says all must. come, but not me. (He shook his head) The last time Ah was in a church Ah took an umbrella and slammed it right smack across the preacher's head. The sisters and the brothers got to honoring and b'fo Ah knowed it Ah was whuppin’ up the whole church. Ah'm a fightin' sonofabitch when Ah gits mad. And nothin' makes me madder than a precher messin' er round wid a man's wife. Son, jest lak you see me, mah liquor makes me do some awful things. And mah liquor aint made me do nothin' wrong yet. ('We're still on our way to the barroom) This walkin' aint too good fo' me but you sho got to walk to git a drink, aint you? No indeed. Them people aint goin' to let me jine them churches. You know what they say? As soon as the preachers ask fo' members they say 'not him, Lawd, not him.' That makes me mad. Ah walk out, cause if Ah stay in and they make me mad Ah'll break up the whole church. Ah don't know how that started. Ah'm jest as good a christian as any body else. When me arid mah wife was b'longin' to the Pleasant Hill Baptist Church on North Robertson Street we had an argument right in the church. She come tellin' me that Ah was drunk and Ah wasn't. We went on and on. Sho, the preacher was preachin'. But she wouldn't shut up, and fo’ Ah knows it Ah was hittin' her over the head and she started hollorin’. Them other wimmens was hollorin' too, sayin' 'aint it a shame?' Well, the preacher come breakin' at me, come tellin' me, 'old man, if you wasn't so old Ah would give you what you gave yo' wife.' Right there Ah let him hav a punch. B'fo Ah could looker round that preacher had a black eye. Some of them sisters says 'don't let Rev. hit that old man, he'll kill him.' Shucks, man, Rev. was goin’ the other way from me. That wasn't the first time that happens. Ah used to always break up them churches. Don't get me wrong. Ah aint no sinner, or nothin' lak that. Ah Jests fo'gits when Ah been drinkin'.
"How Ah got r'ligion is a long story. Ah was a young man. Man, Ah was a mess. Wouldn't hav nothin' to do with a woman less she puts it on the line, Ah means on the line. One woman gav me a hundred dollars and stood up and saw me drink it up, treatin' the house. That happens in Lexington my boy, whar Ah made mah manhood. Ah was born in Richmond, Virginia. Sho, mah parents was slaves. Ah done fo'got them. They dead when Ah was a baby. The white folks told me Ah had good parents. The white folks took care of me till Ah left. Ah was workin' on the farm. Do in' everything. You see Ah always wanted to travel. Used to hear 'them engines goin’ by tootin’ their whistles. Ah used to say all the time that Ah was goin’ one of them trains one of these days. Sho nough, Ah got to ridin' one of them. Ah rode the bootches but Ah rode. Went to Memphis and way south Mississippi, whar the women used to meet the riverbout mens. As Ah recollects, them wimmen aint never tried to give me no lemon….thats what you calls playin' a funny trick on you to git yo' money. They treated me right, cause jest lak Ah says, mah liquor makes me do funny things. Then agin, Ah always had mah. gat (pistol) which would shoot. All Ah had to do was pulled the trigger, thats all. Them prutty high yallar wimmens used to look At mah gat all the time and says, 'daddy, is you goin' kill me?' Ah says, baby, Ah'll kill you and yo' mammy, the woman that births you. They'd git jest as scared! Man, jest lak Ah'm tellin’you, them wimmens wouldn't mess wid me. Ah used to git plenty money. Work? Wasn't that work? You aint never been no pimp, Ah see that? If you think keepin’ up wid three and four wimmens aint no work boy you is got plenty to leran.
"Ah used to sing all of 'um a song that goes lak this!
Mamma, baby, slick back the quilt
Ah says mamma, baby, slick back the quilt
And move yo'self as thou wilt
Ah says, mamma, baby, slick back the quilt
Black gal, move yo'self as thou wilt.
"And boy, Ah had to hold on. Them gals in Mississippi, used to move like fast train out er Saint Looie, yea sir. You is lookin' at man who moved wid 'em, too.
"But Ah aint never finished tellin’ you how Ah got r'ligion. Psck. You know Ah done plum fo’got. (Which wasn't unexpected, we had reached the barroom, a dilapidated"joint" on the conner of Galvez and Poydras) Hyar is the place. Lets go inside. And don’t be buyin' no drinks for them people inside. The last gentman Ah brought hyar treated all them peple inside. B'fore Ah could git mah hand on the half pint them wimmens had it. Thats another thing. B'fore you go in Ah want to tell you not to pay any mind to Black Pearl. That gal can lie lak nobody's bisness. Aint never told the truth in her life. Cose, A man's got to be happy, so Ah got to put up wid her. But she's the lyin'est woman you ever laid eyes on. You'll see. (This looked like a warning, the kind that leads you to beleive that something would be pulled on the old man)
"How do you lak this place? (The place was smoky; a music box was playing slow blue tunes, and several women were shaking their posterior ina vain attempt to keep in time with the music. There were only five men in the place; some of them were looking at the show while others were drinking at the bar, paying no attention to it.) Its all right aint it? Ah knew you'd lak it. (Before we could seat ourselves Black Pearl was at our table. Her ruffled blue dress was mix switching from side to side; her white teeth were consiciiously showing out of red lips. Her kinky hair seemed to have been disturbed by a hot iron.) There you is Pearl. Let us alone. (Moses was very displeased because of Pearl's presence) Its gittin' so a man can't come into this place less he's crowded with you. (And Pearl resented this) Don't call me no bastard, Pearl."
But, Pearl wasn't paying him no mind; she went on calling Moses name, "Yeah, dig me, you old bastard. Dig me. You got company wid you and you want er be cute, eh?" Pearl was rather young to be "breaking down" but she was. Pearl is only about twenty-nine years old. She reiterated! "Dig me. But what you goin' to do when you git yo’ check. What you goin’ do?" Moses couldn't answere this; he felt like moving out of the place. He wouldn' say, but we thought This Pearl was too young to try "whupping." Poor old Moses was so embarrished that he couldn't sit down straight. "Give me a nickel so Ah can play some music," he said. Afterwhich Pearl chided! “Yeah, give him a nickel and let him play some mucie." With that she was off. Moses ordered two nickel whiskies and drank both of them. "Git me a half pint wine," he begged. That was finished very quickly, and Moses wiped his beard very carefully. He wouldn't do much talking; Moses wanted to think, to think about where Peral had gone and if she was coming back. "Thats a fool, thats what Ah calls a fool. You see when a woman acts lak that Ah got a mind to knock her damn head off. Yeah, Ah know Ah had a chance to do it. That slipped mah mind, Ah plum fo'got. Man is Ah mad?"
Moses ordered another whiskey. A fellow came over to the table and told him that Pearl said she would be back and she wasn't coming with out anything. Moses surmised again, but not about his philosophy. "Does you reckon that that gal got any sense?" He timidly asked, his voice whimpering and almost falling to pieces. And old man Moses was getting drunk. It may have been a convenient drunk, because Moses said, "Take me home and don't let anybody harm me." He stumbled and leaned to the side when he first attempted to move, drawing the attention of several persons who casted a dubious eye at us. One woman said very outspokenly, "Look, that young boy done made old man Moses drunk.” But our conscience was not whipped because we knew that Moses had one objective, and that was to get out of this place.
We-helped Moses out of place and along the street. The hisses we received were uncountable. Neatly everybody charged us with "makin’ old man Moses drunk." He wouldn't talk, just held his head down, droopingly. Finally, we got back to the spot where Moses was discovered. We very cautiously eat him on the steps, and tried to talk with him. Moses wouldn' say a mumbling word. Shortly, he was looking around, surveying everybody and everything. He peeped at us through one eye, and whispered, "Is she hyar?" When he heard the answer Moses was sober again. He wanted to talk again. "Man, that second drink got me, nearly knocked me out. Ah don't know what made so drunk. Must er been sumpin' Ah ate. No indeed. It wasn'y nothin' Ah hyared. No indeed! Let me tell you sumpin' son, Ah aint scared of a bastard or bitch born in this world, not a one. There aint nothin' to scare Moses Alexander. Ah done been through thick and thin. Ah done been through a bell of fire. Thats me, Moses Alexander. (A woman who resembled Black Pearl was coming up the street, and Moses Alexander stopped talking again. Whe he was positive the woman wasn't Pearl, he commenced rolling off words) See a man lak me? A man lak me will stand up and fight till he's dead dead. Yeah, twice dead!
"Well, you see Ah'm a christian and then Ah'm not. The scripture says a man is what he confesses to be. If you don't repent you aint goin' to hebbin. Sho? Ah want to go to hebbin. Aint Ah human? Ah sho don't want to go to hell. Cose, a man can go whar he pleases. All he's got to do is make it up in his mind. But Ah never makes that up in mah mind, Facts is, Ah never plains nothing. Ah lets the things happens as they wills. A man has to change in his hart; he is suppose to be qualified to git to hebbin. This runnin’ to church, prayln' and then comin' out messin' er round aint no kind of way to git to hebbin. Ah knows that!' Jest tryin' to tell a heap of people.
"You know son, the Lawd aint goin' to let no man be fooled. He's goin' to make ev’rything plain. The way shall be made so plain that, a fool can not mutter no excuse. You'll find that in the bible. If you don't understand He'll make clar. Ah knows that. You hyar people tackin' about the Bible. But them's the ones who knows not the Bible but ev' rybody's bisness. Me, Ah don't mess up in this and that. Ah aint got nothin' to do with that. Ev'ry tub got to sit on its own bottom, and if its bottom aint no good that’s the Lawd’s bisness, not mie, not yo’s. That Ah recollects. Does you? Ah might hot be no christian lak the preachers say, but Ah can make it up the Highway. Oh yeah! Thats the way Ah plains to mahself. If Ah was goin' to be hung tomorrow Ah would say it jest lak that. They would say, well, that man plians it the best way he knows how."
Now, all of the pride that was about old man Moses was leaving him; some fellow interupted our conversation to say that black Pearl said that Moses wanted to be cute because he had one of them "high caflutin’ friends of his wid him," but that "she was goin' to show him." Yes, old man Moses was a different man now. He need sympathy. His voice broke like a tired woman; he could hardly talk. The fellow admitted that Moses was a good man; that he would fight women or anybody else, but that black Pearl was the only one who would have anything to do with him when he, had money to pay for what he wanted. And so, "What can you do when you is whupped?!' Moses pitifully asked, suggesting, "Mister, you better go, b'cause if Pearl comes and finds you hyar she is goin' to beat mah black ass." However, he managed to admit, but hurriedly, "Sho, Ah got religion."
2918 Gravier St.
Theodore Bricks
Interviewed 3/8/39
Submitted 3/17/39
"RELIGION IN DE DREAMS."
"Son, Ah aint so well, Ah got a heap of sumpin' hurtin' me. When Ah walk too much mah side hurt me, when Ah sit down too much mah back hurt me. Ah'm jest hurtin', thats all." This is Samuel Jenkins talking, and he likes to talk. Somehow, when he talks too much nothing hurts him.
Samuel is seventy-six years old. He was born in Algiers or “somewhar over that way." His friends call him Sam for short. He is a six footer of black color and knappy hair; Sam has lots of personality and lots of wisdom. "Its mah wisdom that keeps me goin," he states, grinning and bowing like a stage comedian receiving an applause.
"It was a funny thing how Ah got religion," Sam says. "Ah went along a long time. Ah wasn't studyin' er bout de Lawd. In dem days Ah was raisin plenty kane. Ah was young den, used to try de wimmens. Can't try dem now cause mah rheumatism aint goin' let me do it. Ah keeps thinkin' but can't seem to do no mo'. When Ah sits down and think over days when Ah was younger and used to gyrate, wimmens Ah gits mah kicks. Boy, Ah was a mess! Shucks, Ah aint had no time to pray den. Sho, Ah used to hyar people talkin' er bout de Lawd, used to hyar dem sayin' dat dey saw de Lawd and He told dem so and so. Aint nobody told me no so and so den; so Ah went right along. Jest lak Ah'm tellin' you Ah used to be a mess! What Ah had to offer? Man, Ah had appeal, dats what. Aint you never hyar people say dey had appeal? Well, dats what Ah had. Ah used to be a sharp lookin' dude jest lak you see me. When Ah walked down de street everybody looked around. You ever hyared people say when de wagon comes everybody goes? Well, Ah was de wagon...and everybody went. On a Saturday nite Ah used to walk into dem jints and whupped up a breeze, used to make wimmens jump naked. Ah don't mean jump naked Ah mean kick up a breeze, you know. Paid de pinana player fifty cents and let him beat on his box till somebody hit de floor. Man, you should er seen dem wimmens dance. Used to do de Eagle Hock. One old broad used to stick her BUTT so high in de air people thought it was a lamp post. Man, dat gal was black but she sho had a twang. When she started dancin' all dem yallar wimmens could do nothin’ but stop and look, Dey used to try and shake like Black Martha but dere wasn't nothin' doin’, no indeed, Man, jest lak Ah'm tellin' you, Ah r'member one time when Gibb's Place was full of people, people on top of de pianano, people on top of de chairs, on de bar, everywaar. And everyone of dem people came to see Black Martha dance against Lulu White, she was a brownskin. Martha didn't lak brownskin wimmens no how. I Used to say that dey wasn't colored people, dey was Indians. Well, deye was so many Indians over dere you couldn't tell de difference. Well, anyhow neither one of dem started dancin’ till de music got hot. Old Jack Anderson was beatin’ on de pianano, Tom Vield was on de drums and Percy Gates was on de banjo. We used to call Percy plug ugly. He was some ugly. He won the ugly man contest we put on one time, and his face was shaped lak a plug, thats why we called him plug ugly, Ha-he-ha-he! His old lady was ugly too. We used to call her Pigeon cause she had pigeon toes and ears lak a pigeon nose. She was black too.
"Whenever Ah talks er bout dem people Ah thinks about Hazel Brown. Now, dat was some woman. When she walked frontward she looked lak she was walk-in' backwards. You couldn't tell de difference. If it hadn't been for her face dere was no way to tell de difference. Why? Man, Hazel was shaped in de front lak she was shaped in de back. She had a BUTT that was big and she had a Bust that was big. One was as big as de other. When she'd BUTT she'd BUST and when she'd BUST she'd BUTT, So dere. Has you ever been on de flyin’ horsos? Well, ridin' Hazel was jest lak ridin’ de flyin' horses. You hyared talkin’ er bout Sunshine Money makin' de loop de loop? Thats de way you went when you rode Hazel!" Sam is doing a lot of "jump-talking;" now he is speaking about something else! "Take Jim Jenkins, mah cousin. What did he do when Sam Boyer bet him five dollars that he couldn't drink two quarts of whiskey. He got him a a quart bottle of olive oil and drank that on down. Ha-he-ha! Man, that oil messed er round and did the wrong thing. When that oil got finished with Sam he couldn't drink a drop of that whiskey, Ha! It was a long time b'fo he could drink too. That oil was workin', and workin' real fast. Everytime you looked er round Sam was er goin’. He aint fooled wid no oil since that time neither.
"Gittin’ back to Black Martha. Black Martha would do a thing till she had done drunk two full quarts. Ah mean full quarts. That gal didn't drip a drop. When she finished each drip she was ready to drop another drip. Anyhow, she drank her belly and her mind full. Then the music got to playin' and she got to dancin'. She was doin' the Eagle Rook and the Belly Twister, Everytime she twisted her belly some poor man went wrong. Did Ah go wrong? Man, git away from hyar! Anyhow, she was jest er dancin' and movin' er round the floor. Never-mind Alice said 'Shake that thing' and Black Martha got down to the floor and whizzed herself. Ah was standin' right over her, jest lak Ah'm sayin', standin'nright over her. Boy, that was yars ago. That was when the mules was pullin the street ears. Well, jest lak Ah'm tellin' you. We was all in this place havin' a good time, lookin' at them fool wimmens dance and shake themselfs. We was drinkin' too, jest lak Ah'm tellin’ you. When Black Martha finished her dancin' she went on upstairs wid a man. Shucks dere wasn't no contest. Lulu couldn't dance wid Black Martha. Lulu was a-sweatin’ and beckin' and Black Martha was cool as Apple Cider. She wasn't even sweatin' or nuthin’. De railroads mens used to sing her dis song:
Black Martha, is cool and cold
Black Martha, is cool and cold
Her skin is black but her butt is gold.
When you see Martha comin' along
Ah say when you see Martha comin' along
Her meat is rockin' and she's smellin' strong.
Dere is sumpin' er bout Martha Ah can't stand
Black gal, Martha, Ah can't understand
Why she's got so many diffrent mens.
If yo’ bottle is full and yo’ pipe is dry
If yo’ bottle is ful and yo’ pipe is dry
Be sho and git near Black Martha's thighs.
Black Martha can dance, can shake too
Ah say, Martha can dance and shake too
If you want to git well let her put her stuff on you.
Went down to de pool room saw what the boys was doin'
Went down to see what de boys was dpin
But Martha was wid ‘em, and dey all was screwing.'
"Everybody used to sing and dance that number. De guitar player used to be de furst one to start it. He’d git up on de chair and sing away. We was all singin' that number on de day Ah'm tellin' you er bout.
"Man, jest lak Ah'm tellin' you, that was a day. A day Ah'll never fo'git it. Ah's been a rascal. Messed wid all de wimmens in every town Ah got in. Even knocked down windows and pulled open doors to git to mah wimmens. But, man. My goodness! When de fun was goin’ on and all of us was doin’ all rite. De Sun was hot and de clouds was all pushed b'hind each other. And all of a sudden. A black man come in upon us. Ah can see him now. That man had on a black suit wid large white buttons. He was a kind of a funny fellow, too. His ears was long like his hands. Ah aint lyin' no! His eyes was small like his head, and his teeth was white like his buttons. His hair was ruft lak his skin. But he was smilin' like he had sumpin' up his sleeves. Its a good thing that man didn't come in when Black Martha was dancin’. Would he went too? No indeel Wait till you know why! Some of dem fellows don't know why yet.
"Some of de fellows had done left Black Martha and was sittin' er round playin' cards. Some of um was drinkin', and some of um was jest sittin' er round doln' nuthin'. That man, nobody knew his name, jest came in. Furst, he went to de bar and looked at de bar-tender, and den he walked er round de place ina circle like he was a flyin' mill or sumpin'. You see, Ah had done been all over Algiers and down, whar cut Off is now, and Ah had done been er round too. Ah aint never seen nuthin' lak that, and Ah aint never hyared of a man like this man. Wait till Ah tell you er bout him. He looked at me a long time, Man, is you crazy? Dere wasn't nobody who was goin' to mess wid dat man. Dats it, nobody paid him any mind at furst, jest let him be himself .He was himself too. Went to de gamblin' table and took a seat. Ah can't r'member what kind of a game the boys was playin’ but dey was playin' cards. Now, Peter Woods was a' card player. That man could cheat and outbeat anybody playin’ cards. He used to win all de money. Black Martha could play too. When that man sat down at de table and pulled out his money everybody sat down who had a dime. Black Martha sat next to him and tried to peek in his hand. She was playin’ partners wid Pete. Wait till Ah tell you! The card game got on. People started comin' er round lookin'. Ahbwas standin' right whar Ah could see everything, even gave Black Martha money to bet. Ah wasn't missin' a thing. Ah figures that that man was new and dey was goin' to sho give him a good lickin’. But, wait till Ah tell you! Shucks, Ah told um don't worry when that man won two straight bets, and went on dancin' wid one of dem wimmens. Den, after a while, the man got losin', and he started callin' on de Lawd. Everybody laughed, and relaughed, but he kept callin on de Lawd. Now, that was sumpin' that aint nobody ever hyared er bout, people callin' on de Lawd in a gamblin’ house. All of us was sinners. Dere wasn't a man in de house who, had been to church in ten yars, Ah'd dare say. Ah know Ah'd not been dere in that time, wasn't even thinkin' er bout it. Everybody else was de same way, Ah know. Well, the man kept callin' on de Lawd, and he’d win every bet. Somebody asked him was he a preacher and he wouldn't answer on that. Black Martha got to hollowin' and goin' on, screamin', 'Dis hyar man must be a preacher. He’s callin’ on de Lawd, and Ah been pushin’ myself on him but he won't even wither. Sump in's wrong. Dere aint no gamblin' man who gambles and calls on de Lawd at de same time.' Den, we got to laughin’. agin'. Little Willie says, 'Let de brother call fo’ anybody he wants to. That bastard done got mah money and Ah'm goin’ start callin' on his black ass if he don't function wid some of that money.' Then de brother got mad, real mad, Fo' de furst time the brother was mad; his eyes come poppin'n out his head and his black ears got red. He was mad, cause he says, ‘Now, fellows Ah'm hyar fo’ a good time not trouble. Ah don't want it. Don't curse me or infront of me.’ Den, Black Martha started laughin', she says, 'Dats funny. Don't curse! Well, you old black bastard!' And man, wid dat the man tunned er round and looked at Black Martha, jest looked at her, and she fell to de floor, in a faint. You could er hyared a pin drop. Nobody was sayin'muthin, not even me. Nobody was sayin' nuthin' neither! Nobody could move from de table, dey was sit struck. Ah was dumbfounded fo' ture. People was er round Black Martha wid salt, wid black pepper and all sorts of stuff, tryin' to bring her back. Nuthin’ could do no good. The man wasn't payin’ no tention to her. He was back at de table foolin’ er round wid Cards. Den, all of a sudden, Black Martha came back! She was like somebody crazy; her eyes was rollin' like she rolls her belly. Her hair was standin' straight up, she was foamin' at de mouth, and cryin' a lil bit, Martha threw her a arms up and was stiff. Everybody rushed over to her and held her tight. But the man didn't pay any attention to her. That was funny. Den, Martha started lookin' er round lak she was lookin' fo' somebody. Her eyes was gittin' whiteer and whiter, she was makin' funny movements, like when you is in a daze or sumpin' Den, she started hollowin', ‘whar is that man. Let me to that man! That man is a, Gawd sent man. He sent me a-dreamin’. Ah went straight to hebbin...to hebbin. Ah saw that man in hebbin. He came in jest liked he did when he.came in hyar. But, in hebbin he had a cigar in his mouth, and a red tie on. He was always talkin' wid Saint Peter, And dem Christian people say that Saint Peter is de man you got to do bisness wid. Ah dreampt that that man told Saint Peter er bout us...he called all our names. Mine was called from a long list of names. It was on a piece of white paper. Dem angels was all er round lookin' at dat list. Ah hyared one of dem angels say that he was goin’ to take Beaulah Mite. Den dey startin’ arguin' er bout me. One says no and one says yes. De no's won out and de yes's says dey was goin’ to try and git me anyhow. That man was dere arguin’ to; he was talkin' wid Saint Peter. Him and Saint Peter had dere heads t'gother. And Ah hyared, Ah don't need nobody to tell me nuthin', Ah hyared him say that he didn't want to harm nobody, but he didn't want nobody to curse him. Den, Saint Peter says it was all rite. And it was all rite. Cause bells startin' ringin', and horns startin' blowin’. It was like the end of time. Angels and Saints was comin' to me. Ah aint goin' lie, Ah didn't see de Lawd but Ah saw a big image comin' b'fo' me. It must er been Him cause dere was a large crowd er round Him. Ah saw that man er round him to. Somebody up dere was comin' to me, to put one of dem wings on me. But, Ah woke up. Lawd, Ah’m sho is glad Ah woke up!’
“And jest lak Ah'm tellin' you standin' hyar. That man came over to Black Martha and put his hand on her head and she was better den and dere, like nuthin' never even happened. He jest stood dere lookin' and starin' like he wanted to say sumpin' but he didn't want to say nuthin', Dere wasn't nuthin' fo' him to say. He'd done done his mission fine. Black Martha says, 'Ah don't know er bout y'all but Ah'm goin' git me some r'ligion somewhar from somebody.' Man, Ah saw all that. Ah stood right b'fo everybody and saw all dat. Maybe Black Martha had a funny way to git her r'ligion, but Ah was sho wid her. That man, we never did know his dissapeared out of dat place like this. He went right out! And de last thing he told me was, 'Fo' all you is worth, and all you can, git you'self some r'ligion.' And don't you know Mister that Ah got me some r'ligion too. Me and Black Mactha and all de rest of us who was dere and saw what happened got some r'ligion. We got our r'ligion rite away. Dere wasn't no need to waitin'. Cause Black Martha saw hebbin. And Ah know dat if dem aflgels had er took Black Martha dey was sho goin' to take me too. Den agin, if Black Martha had er gone she'd soon come and git me. Dat Ah know cause she sho did like me, and dat Ah know.
"Yes indeed! We all got r'ligion at the Mount Moriath Baptist Church t'gother. We all got in de water t'gether, told our stories and determination t'gether. It was a decorporation and a complete understandin’ between us and de preacher. He said he had had a dream er bout dat man who came into de gamblin’ place and he told him dat we was comin’ Man, Ah don't know what you calls dat but Ah calls it r'ligion in de dream!"
