Helen S. Hartley
Mobile, Alabama
Mr. L. W. Rabbie
Bayou la Batre, Alabama
SHRIMPING ON THE SCHOONER BERNEY GENEVA
The Berney Geneva as she lay tied to the Bayou la Batre’ ice-house wharf made a pretty picture, with the sun shining brightly on her freshly painted sides and deck. Bayou la Batre is a small, picturesque fishing village on the Mississippi Sound and is thirty-odd miles from Mobile by road. The Berney Geneva is a thirty-six foot, eleven and a half foot beam shrimp lugger, and a stauncher worker no man ever owned. Her cabin was aft and a large hatch forward, while in the bow two gasoline drums were lashed. On an overhead rack extending from midway of the cabin aft over the stern, the shrimp nets or trawls were hanging to dry out in the breeze.
L. W. Rabbie, the master and owner, lounging on the top of the cabin, and supervising two young men in the job of cutting a piece off a large roll of wire netting, was slowly shaking tobacco from its package into a cigarette paper, when his boat suddenly bumped against the wharf as the back-wash of a large passing boat caught it as it passed. Mr. Rabbie, idly raising his eyes from his task to see what was passing, hailed it, for the Doris White (a large pleasure boat) had a friend of his at the wheel; dropped his eyes again to the two young men and gave some directions about wrapping tape over the raw ends of the wire that they had just cut off. More important than all else, the netting mast not be left with raw edges to cut the trawl. It was to be used on the tail of the shrimp trawl as a protection against sharks.
Mr. Rabbie is a tall, heavily built young man of about thirty-eight years, of serious expression but plainly one who can enjoy a good joke at any time. His blue eyes look straight at one, giving the impression that here is an honest chap, who could be a real friend. With a clasp of the hand he makes a stranger feel welcome.
The Berney Geneva would he ready, to shove off when the work on the netting was finished, and Mr. Rabbie was letting his thoughts dwell on the list of supplies for the trip, wondering if he had everything that was needed. Groceries had been delivered on board, (these costing an average anywhere from four to seven dollars a trip), the gas drums and large oil can had been checked and filled and the small incidentals had been bought and stored away. The weather was wonderful, the warmth of the sun making the day summery, though the wind, he knew, was whipping up a swell; but he decided to shove off for good shrimping grounds and anchor overnight, ready for the next day’s work when the Berney Geneva would be out hunting for signs of a day’s run.
As the Berney Geneva chugged her way along, Mr. Rabbie’s helper began coiling the ropes and getting all in readiness for the first sign of a run of shrimp. The shrimpers have a special way of arranging their nets and the young man set about doing it. First the two trawl-boards are laid on each side of the trawling platform. All shrimping boats have this platform built over the stern about four feet, protecting the nets from catching on the exhaust pipe or on the edges of the hull of the boat. These trawl-boards are attached with ropes on each entrance to the net, which is between thirty or forty feet long the average cost of there nets is seventy-five cents a foot, for they are made of pure linen thread. The boards and at upright on the bottom when the boat is in motion, keeping the trawls wide open. The next step is to take the nets down from the back-rack. They are laid on the two trawl-boards and the wire netting the two young men were working on in the earlier part of the day attached to the tail of the trawl.
The ropes or lines leading from this trawl are lead through a singletree which is hitched about six feet up on the mast, forward in the how, then run to a wooden, hand-powered windlass which is built over the cabin on the uprights forming the overhead rack, and are slowly wound on, the brakes are applied and everything is in readiness for the first signal. When one of the young men finished this part of the work he flung himself upon the cabin and proceeded to take it easy. The twenty-horse-power Bridgeport Marine engine was making good time, about seven miles per hour, and was pulling the Berney Geneva along at such a rate that there was a slight chance of one drag before dark. She was headed south in the Mississippi Sound, and there was not a boat in sight except a few small launches or pleasure boats.
Mr. Rabbie turning the wheel over to a hand, took up a small miniature trawl, which is called a try net, and like the trawl had its own small windlass attached to the side of the cabin. He then began casting it over the side. Mr. Rabbie is an old hand at shrimping, and learned long ago that when shrimp hit the small net on flip against the ropes, it is like holding a flour sack open while pebbles are thrown into it; in other words, his touch was so light on the small line holding this net that he could immediately tell when the shrimp <text not clear> and draw it up; otherwise he would <text not clear> yet nothing had been found, so the journey was continued, a Nothing was lost if he could not find signs today, for they were only on their way so as to be ready for an early morning’s start for word had been received that there were signs of shrimp in Mobile Bay.
By now they were reaching Pass aux Herons, a narrow inland channel, which has a depth of nine feet. The beacons were all lighted as they made the turn into the pass. It was very rough, for the tidal currents which run through this pass travel at considerable velocity, <text not clear> well marked, for on the south side are lights on the black beacons and on the south side are spar buoys. Mr. Rabbie nosed the Berney Geneva north for he had decided to anchor off Cedar Point, the extreme southeastern point of Mon Louis Island for the night as the wind was coming from the north.
Long before day the men were up getting breakfast, which consisted of bacon and eggs, bread, and good strong coffee. They sat down to enjoy a good, quiet meal, for breakfast on a shrimping boat is usually, the only meal that is really enjoyed. After breakfast, the anchor was raised and the Berney Geneva was out in earnest now to get her day’s <text not clear> of shrimp. A stiff breeze was kicking up a choppy sea, but the little Bernay Geneva plowed right along. The small drag-net was again brought into use, but this time Mr. Rabbie felt the strike. Winding up the drag-net took only a minute, and stepping out on the rear platform, he threw the trawl overboard with one flip of the wrist. The trawl- boards followed, then he began to let the lines out slowly, for if the lines were played out too fast, the boards would drop to the bottom and get fouled or bog on the bottom, and the work would have to be done all over again. A seasoned shrimper can easily tell when to stop playing out the lines, as they run almost horizontal with the winder when enough line is out.
They had dragged about an hour when suddenly the speed of the boat was cut down. Mr. Rabbie reached over and gave the throttle a yank, the motor stopped and the Berney Geneva drifted along to the end of the lines. The crank of the windlass was attached and they wound the ropes up slowly until the trawl-boards were up to the platform, the brake was put on, and the trawl-boards were lifted by hand to the deck.
The next step in shrimping is to catch the tail of the trawl, which has a float attached with enough line so as to let it float on the top of the water when the net ceases to be pulled forward. The tail is then brought to about the center of the boat to be tied. Then the real work begins, and the shrimp are bailed out by means of a scoop net, which looks like a tight-made crab net, with a long handle.
When the net is emptied and thrown over for another drag, the shrimpers start in working on the shrimp, lying on the deck. First all the trash-fish or scrubbage is thrown overboard. It is fun to see the sea gulls dive for this refuse, squawking and crying as they, fly around the boat, swooping down, Wheeling up, and again circling the boat. After picking out all the scrubbage, the shrimp are washed and shoveled into the hatch and iced down. The Berney Geneva carries one to one and one half tons of ice each trip. They had had a lucky drag, for that catch had netted fifteen barrels of shrimp in less than one hour’s time.
Mr. Rabbie was able to get in another drag before the other shrimpers saw him. A boat has not much chance of trawling alone in these waters for any length of time, for the men on the other boats carry binoculars and as soon as they see a boat make a turn for a round trip, the others race toward the lucky one and almost before he knows it, the fleet has assembled and vessels are trawling along, beside and around the first boat. Mr. Rabbie has been lucky in getting good catches, for the average catch is one barrel an hour if a fellow is playing in luck, and there are times when he could run whole days and only get a few pounds of shrimp. But when a man gats over a school of shrimp the net is filled. Good linen nets are needed for shrimping, because of the weight of the shrimp that bulges out, the tail, <text not clear>.
Twenty gallons of gas per day are required for dragging and running from day break until night comes. When the lights are lit, the last drag gone over, cleaned, washed and iced down, the decks washed clean, supper cooked and eaten, it is time to get a wink of Bleep for it is sometimes nearly midnight.
On this night, long before the lights were lit, the Berney Geneva, was heading toward Bayou la Batre to unload. Her hatch was filled, and her decks overflowing with the small, slander, long-tailed and nearly transparent shrimp which were flipping around hunting a means of escape.
Mr. Babbie <text not clear> had not anticipated such a lucky day for it is indeed <text not clear> that anyone is so fortunate <text not clear> nearer the Mobile market, he seldom goes there to dispose of his fish, as he likes to return, and load them right at the Bayou, going on to his home and family with news of the day’s achievement.
Personal interview with Mr. L. W. Rabbie, and a trip out on the lugger <text not clear>
11/30/38
S.J.
