

The majority are making comfortable incomes, many own their homes, and a large number own automobiles. They are almost invariably well-dressed, and their standard of living compares very favorably with the American average.
Judging from arrests and convictions in the local courts, a number are engaged in such petty "rackets" as illicit liquor selling, lotteries, and miscellaneous gambling, along with their legitimate businesses. It is likely that more than a few derive most of their income from their illegal ventures. Their unlawful activity, however, is not regarded by them as vicious or immoral, their attitude being substantially that of the average citizen toward speeding in an automobile, or parking too long in a restricted zone: it is not inherently bad, and it is not a crime unless detected by the police. One former member of the community was in difficulty with the police so many times that he eventually returned to Greece. Another, serving a road sentence, was paroled upon the condition that he remain out of Buncombe County for a year.
Most of the Greek men indulge in alcoholics, but only a few excessively. Nearly all of them gamble on occasion, mostly with cards. Baptismal ceremonies are the most elaborate social functions, sometimes attended by Americans also.
About 35 of the men belong to the local chapter of the American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association (Ahepa), which has as its objective the teaching of good American citizenship. The president of the chapter is usually regarded as the leader of the entire Greek community. The incumbent is a business man who traveled extensively before he settled here, and who has built up a small fortune by means of a chain of shoe-repair shops and barber shops. He emigrated from Peloponnesos because he was ambitious to succeed in the New World, and because he had a distaste for military service. His parents were peasants, living in comparative poverty. There is no local chapter of the Greek-American lodge, but many of the men belong to American fraternal organizations, and some of them have held offices therein.
Practically all of the families and many of the single men subscribe to one of the Greek-language newspapers published in the larger cities, and some subscribe to the Hellenic World, "the only Greek newspaper in the United States published in English," and "dedicated to the interest of the American Greeks."
The older Greeks mostly confine their social activities to members of their own race, but the younger ones associate freely with Americans and other whites, and there appears to be no racial friction.
The Greek women have a more or less informal social organization which stresses music. Concerts and recitals are given at irregular intervals, and occasionally a play (one of the traditional Greek plays, usually, with children taking most of the parts). Instruction in music is almost universal in the Greek home.
(Real name, confidential: Asheville, N. C.) Writer - Douglas Carter
GAMBLER
A Greek Sketch
One of the local Greeks, John Anaxagoras, does not send his children to the Greek school. He was born in New England of immigrant parents from Attica, and he is proud of his American citizenship. He married an American and he wants his three children to be as nearly as possible like other American children. The Greek school, he feels, is inimical to good American citizenship, so he refuses to support it. He says that his children will have to learn their foreign languages and history in the public schools, along with the other American children. John speaks Greek himself, but whenever he converses in that language with another Greek in the presence of someone who speaks only English, he translates from time to time for the benefit of the latter.
As a young man, John moved from New England to Savannah, Ga., and entered business, but he did not prosper there, so he came here. He now operates a hat-cleaning, clothes-pressing, and shoe-shining business successfully. He owns his home, in one of the middle-class sections, and has a thousand-dollar automobile. About a year ago an automobile dealer came to him and urged him to trade in his old car on a new model. He offered John a generous allowance on the old car, but there was several hundred dollars difference. John said he did not want to trade, but the dealer was persistent, so John finally agreed to take the new car provided the dealer would flip a coin with him to see whether the difference in price was double or nothing. John was only half serious, and thought the dealer would leave him alone, but the dealer took him up, flipped the coin, lost, and delivered the new car to John in even exchange for the old one.
John is always ready to gamble, with cards, dice, anything. He also likes to drink, and a drunken card game once nearly cost him his life. There were five men in the game, two Greeks and three Americans, and all were drinking. There was a dispute between John and one of the Americans, and they fought. The American got hold of a knife, and before he could be stopped he slashed John a dozen times or more about the body and face. The abdominal wounds were so serious that several of the organs were actually hanging out when John, more dead than alive, was taken to a hospital, where 287 stitches were required to close the cuts. For many weeks no one could tell whether he would live or die, but the general belief was that he could not survive. When he began to recover, he told one of his friends that he was going to kill the American when he got out of the hospital. The American was warned, and he promptly left town. Five years later he returned, and John met him one night on the public square, quite unexpectedly. John pulled a revolver from his pocket, shot the American several times, and calmly surrendered to the police. For some six weeks the American lay between life and death, but he, too, recovered. John told the police he fired the shots in self-defense, and he was released on bond. When the American was able, he quietly left town again, and sent word back that he did not care to prosecute John, whereupon he was fully discharged. John declines to say whether or not he would shoot the American again if he had a chance.
He is not a regular drinker - that is, he doesn't drink every day - but when he starts he gets completely intoxicated, and usually after his sprees he must take a day or so off to recuperate. On rare occasions, while drunk, he gets in a belligerent mood, and has a fist fight, but usually he is mellow, and tries to sing. His companions are more often Americans than Greeks, and he belongs to one of the American fraternal orders. He does not belong to Ahepa, the only Greek lodge here. Except for drinking and gambling, he seems to have no amusements, unless short trips in the automobile with his wife and children are so considered.
