Mary A. Hicks
GREEKS IN RALEIGH
As of the 1930 census there were seventy-six Greeks in Raleigh, fourteen of whom were native and sixty-two of whom were foreign-born. It is estimated that this number by now has increased to approximately 250, including children. These people are divided among approximately seventy-three families, averaging about three persons per family and about thirty single people. There are a few Greek men married to American women, and one Greek woman has married an American.
These people are scattered well over Raleigh, some living in the best residential sections of the city and others living in the poorest, but in no case do any of them live in the Negro sections. Occasionally one finds a Greek family living in the same house with an American or renting rooms to an American. There is no so-called colony here, and a Greek home may be surrounded by American homes. The Greeks prefer simple house furnishings, but their standard of living compares favorably with the American's, some being among those who are poverty- stricken and some being among those who are rich.
The majority of the Greeks own or work in small cafes, but two of the better cafes, the Capital and California Restaurants, are owned by Greeks. Among other things, they own a dry cleaning establishment, a candy shop, a coffee shop, a grocery store, markets, rooming houses, and dry good stores. A few of the Greeks are stenographers and bookkeepers, and at least one is a tray girl at a local hospital.

The Greeks have no parochial school in Raleigh. The children attend the public schools along with the American children, and their ability to learn is placed at about an average with the American's. A few even attend local business colleges. All of the younger Greeks are literate, but many of the older ones can neither read nor write. That is the greatest reason why many of them have not been able to get their citizenship papers, but a few of them have neglected to apply for them.
The Greeks who remember their old land still love it, but they love America more. According to them, Greece has no opportunities for a young man. The factories and other public jobs are all filled, and that leaves the young man nothing to choose but the farm. The people are largely peasants and consequently own no land. Greece has a lot of culture, but most of the people there are too poor to pay for it. America offers learning to the poorest as well as the richest. The Greeks will always love their native land, for there are the only people who speak their language and really understand them. On the other hand, those who have never been to and who can't remember anything of their native land have no desire to go there.
The Greeks in Raleigh, especially the younger ones, find pleasure in all of the recreational activities of the average American boy and girl. They associate freely with all of their neighbors except the Negroes. At nearly all of the dances few Greeks are to be seen. They skate, play ball, play pool, swim, fish, go to the movies, and enjoy chatting with the American boys and girls.
A daughter of one of the prominent local Greeks in 1938 was chosen as Miss Raleigh to represent the Ahepans in the national convention. She was also chosen by the mayor and newspaper reporters of Raleigh to represent the city in the Tobacco Festival at Wilson in 1938.
The older Greeks seek very little recreation. They are content with their work, their religious activities, and conversing with each other. They usually converse in Greek even in the presence of Americans, but the younger ones speak in English.
Marriages are performed by the priest of the Greek Orthodox Church. A marriage performed by a magistrate is not considered legal by the Greeks. When the priest marries a couple the marriage is irrevokable, and a divorce is not legal in the eyes of the Church. The older Greeks discourage inter-marriage, but the younger ones think that it is all right.
The Greeks have three main ambitions: to become oitizens of the United States, to look and act American, and to make money. They also desire a good education and social standing. They have a rigid moral code, and most of them live up to it. However, their religious beliefs do not prohibit dancing and other forms of amusement. They trust strangers in general, and once you have their friendship it remains.
Since 1933 seven Greeks have been tried in the city courts of Raleigh, however each of these has been tried more than once. The charges have been such as assault and battery, careless and reckless driving, possessing illegal whiskey, receiving stolen goods, larceny, and other small misdemeanors.
The Greeks of Raleigh belong to the Greek Orthodox Church, and they maintain a building for the purpose of worship. Their services are long and impressive. They believe that this is necessary in order to impress the people with the sacredness and importance of the Church. There are no Raleigh Greeks belonging to any other church, but many of the local children attend Sunday Schools.
These people are very careful in the training of their children. The children are properly chaperoned and taught until they are eighteen years old. They are sent to bed at an early hour and are not allowed on the streets at night without their parents.
by
