March 14, May 29, 1939.
Mary Willingham (Negro)
140 Cohen Street
Athens Georgia.
Practical Nurse.
S.B. Hornsby
Revised in Regional Office.
I AIN'T NO MIDWIFE
I had to make two visits to get Mamie's story. The first time I went to her place, I found her in the back yard tending the fire around a boiling washpot. When she finished chunking the fire and the clothes, she announced, "You'll have to come up on the porch and set down whilst I washes if you wants to talk to me."
"I meant to wash outdoors in the sunshine," she continued, after we had gone up on the porch, "but my husband and daughter got off befo' I had a chanst to get 'em to move my wash bench off of the porch for me."
I sat down and watched her as she worked. Mamie is a stout woman of medium height. Her tightly braided hair framed an unusually pleasant, gingerbread-colored face. She was wearing a nurse's soiled blue uniform, a white apron, black slippers, and gray cotton hose.
"I am surprised to find you at home, Mamie," I told her. "Have you given up nursing in favor of taking in washing now?"
"No, mam, I ain't had no nursin job in gwine on a month. I'se just doin my own fambly washin, least I is this mornin. I does have two small washins. I mean I calls myself having two, but the folks didn't bring 'em last week, and they ain't bring 'em so far this week."
She spat into the tub of clothes, half-heartedly rubbed a garment across the washboard a time or two, stood up straight and said, "Miss, does you know where I can git a job?"
"No," I answered.
"What?" she ejaculated. "Outen all the folks you knows!
"That's true, Mamie, I surely don't know of a Job you could get," I told her, "but the National Reemployment Service will help you to get work if you'll register in their office."
"I done tried that place. They axed me a hundred and one questions and then some. They say: 'What did you make? What did you spend your money for? Well, why didn't you save some of it while you was makin' it?' They took all them questions and washed my face with em. I'll bet not a one of them folks that asks them questions saves none of their own wages, yet they goes right on asking other folks questions they wouldn't wanta answer for nobody else. I told the one that axed me them things that the reason I couldn't save none of my money was that me and my fambly had to eat and buy cloths and pay rent, let alone havin to holp my people when they needed it. They's been a heap of colored folks gone hongry at times in these last several years, when they own folks didn't have nothin to devide with 'em no mo'.
"I sho don't know what us pore Negroes is gwine do," she grumbled. "When I first started to work I got more to do than I could keep up with. Now, folks goes to the hawspital, but when they gits back home some of they folks comes and stays with em til they's up and about again. I reckon folks just has to do that way to cut 'spenses."
"How long have you been a nurse?" I asked.
"Lemme see now, since 1924," she answered. "You know I ain't no midwife. I'se a practical nurse. I'se holped doctors and midwives, and I'se maided and cooked. Lord, have mercy! I had to spend my money as fast as I could git it feedin my fambly, and payin house rent, and for all them things I told that man what axed so many questions at the 'Ployment Office. I got my stificate to do practical nursin in 1926. It took me two years to git it. It used to be anybody could wait on a woman having a baby. They could go ahead and cut the cord and tie it if they knowed how. Now, that's all changed. If you don't have that stificate they'll put you in the penitentiary for life. I hopes to git my next stificate in bout another year, and then I can call myself a midwife and pull down $35 a week. Then I won't have to worry bout my meat and bread no mo', leastwise not long as womans keeps on havin babies. I' means to save up for a rainy day when does git to makin what a midwife should.
"I don't know when I was born cause I didn't know nothing tall bout my ma. I recomembers seein my pa all right enough. I can guess at my age, but I really don't know jes how old I is. I tells everybody that. I spect I will be most forty-nine my next birthday. I was born on a farm down in Clark county, and all I ever done in my younger days mostly was work in the field. I'se just been in town bout sixteen years. I used to have time and money to go see my folks, but I don't no mo. Like I done told you, my ma died when I was a baby. My sister raised me part of the way, then some white folks took me up and I lived with em years and years. I lived and worked in the house with them white folks til I married.
"The first real nurse I ever seed was a white woman, what they called in to nurse one of the chillun that was took bad sick. One day that nurse went out in the yard to the lavatory -- folks didn't have them places in the house to set on in the country. The lavatory was hid back of a grape arbor. She was passin under the arbor on her way back to the house when a bug got in her ear. She went to the kitchen, twisted a little white somethin round a match stem, got some warm water and worked with her ear a long time. I thought that was fine doins. I said to myself, 'If she can do things like that, I can too.' Right then and there I decided to be a nurse.
"Gittin my first case come so easy that I thought nursing was going to be a regllar job. My husband's sister, that was nursing a white woman, took sick and give me the Job. I went there and liked the work and the white folks liked me. That $8 a week they paid me was a whole lot more'n I could a made cookin or maidin or takin in washin. She was a good lady to nurse. She had done worked her fingers so long on the typewriter that she most lost use of her hands and arms, and that condition spread over her whole body. 'Oh, please rub my legs,' she would say. 'Oh, please scratch my head. If you will only rub my back. I am so nervous.' I had to be doin something for her all the time, day and night."
Mamie stopped talking long enough to spit again into the tub of clothes, and to rub a few strokes on the washboard.
"Why do you spit into the tub?" I couldn't help asking.
"She laughed heartily. "They tells me if you spit on dirty clothes it'll take the spots out when nothin else will. So every time I sees a bad dirty spot I just up and spits on it, and it most always comes out without no mo trouble.
"This nursing business," she continued, "brings you up agin all sorts of folks and things. Why, I even lost one job I had because the sick woman told the doctor I had said her pulse was too fast. 'Well, if she has to go round tellin sick folks such things, we'll let her go,' he 'lowed. I sure aint never told no other sick folks bout theyselves no mo.
"I couldn't git my stificate to do practical nursin til I observed at least one operation, and so I got my chanst when a white woman came to her sister's here in town to have a tumor cut out. Not havin done nothin of the sort befo, I emptied out the water with the gauzes in it, and they couldn't count em right. That sho larn't me a lesson. Cause when that patient didn't get well, they scovered that a guaze was sewed up in her. Cuttin her open and takin it out never mounted to nothin. They done that out in the country in her own house.
"Now, don't you go blamin them doctors. Them was grand doctors. That little old room was too dark where they done the operation the first time, Her husband bought a flashlight most long as my arm, while the doctors was fussin cause they wasn't no lectric lights in that house. Besides they was so much discharge they couldn't half see. And it was my fault for pouring out the water before them pieces of gauze could be counted."
As Mamie rinsed the clothes in tubs of clear water, she told me something of the wide range of her experience in nursing. Maternity cases accounted for at least ninety percent of her patients, and her vivid descriptions ranged from "pore whites" and Negroes who knelt on the floor to give birth to their children, to a crude Caesarean operation performed or warning Lying on a kitchen table in a farm house. She had tended mothers and babies in the poorest of colored families, and "uppity" white folks who were able to employ a maid and cook, in addition to a nurse, to tend the mother and baby after they returned from the hospital. Patients with bladder disorders, cancers, nervous diseases, broken limbs -- come what might -- they were all accounted for in her story. But the story came to an abrupt halt as she dropped the last wet bundle into her clothes basket.
"Well, I'se done got these clothes washed, now I'se got to hang em out," she said, as she made a hasty excursion to the kitchen for clothespins. "Good Lord, Miss, it's done twelve-thirty! When does you eat?"
"Oh, not as long as you are willing to talk," I told her. "I can eat any time."
She went out in the yard to the clothes-line, singing Come to Jesus Now. Looking at me she said: "You can talk. I can hear you." I assured her I did not mind waiting until her work was finished.
"Just as soon as I hangs out these clothes, I'se got to go down town, so you better ax me what you wants to know now." She continued to hang out clothes, "so it's my schoolin you wants to know about. "I got as far as the second gande. That's how come I can't talk proper now. I didn't have enough schoolin. I went to school in Morton's Chapel. It was a church house. It was a great big Morton and a little bitty chapel. Us chillun went to school there during the week, and to church and Sunday School there on Sundays. That's the way colored folks done in them days. Now they's got a reg'lar schoolhouse.
"I don't hardly know how I met my husband. I believe when I met him he was with his first wife. I thought he was the prettiest man I ever seed, and he said he thought I was pretty too. He told me I had the prettiest legs; they was so big. I
She opened another door, saying, "Come in here. This is my bedroom." The two iron beds in her room, from which the green paint was flecking off, revealed more than one color. The room contained, without any regular arrangement, an oak dresser, mahogany center table -- with its two coal oil lamps -- two rocking chairs, several split-bottomed chairs, and a small wood or coal burning heater.
"Have a chair. I'se got to git ready to go down town, like I done told you." After several moments of vigorous wielding of the comb, she began replaiting her hair in tight braids, that somehow lay close to her head without the use of hairpins. This chore finished, Mamie put on a black hat, and said, "I'se going to get me somethin to eat. I can't do without food as long as you can."
She went to the kitchen and returned in a short time with a plate of biscuits and stewed fruit. "I would ask you to have some of these peaches and biscuits, but I knows you wouldn't eat nothin like this. This here fruit aint got a bit of sugar in it, cause I didn't have none to sweeten it with.
"Workin round doctors has done learned me that you has to eat keerful to keep well, even if you ain't got nothin to spend on eatin. Too much bread by itself ain't good for folks, and these old peaches is got somethin in em that I needs. Cordin to what I'se been told, they's better for me without no sugar. One of the best doctors I works for -- when they's any work for me to do -- evermo fusses down, if he finds any of his patients that's as old as I is eatin sugar on grapefruits even. He says middle-aged folks ain't got no business stuffin theyselves with sweets and meats. Not that I'll ever be able to buy no mo grapefruits, let alone sugar to go on em -- lessen I can git me some work to do.
"No, mam, us don't own this house. Us pays $7 a month for it. Us used to pay $9 a month, but times got so tight the colored woman what owns it had to cut the rent cause us wasn't able to pay that much. All her chillun got grown and she picked up and went off to Detroit with em. Lord knows I couldn't pay no proper rent for a place like this with a lavatory and plastered walls. I sho couldn't. But I'se been living here five years, long enough to own it.
"Sho, I belongs to the church. I'se a good old Baptist, I is. Why, I wasn't nothin but a gal when I jined up with Morton's Chapel Baptist Church most nigh 30 years ago."
She ate the last trace of her lunch, and turning to me she said, "Now I knows I'se told you just about all the spe-unces I'se ever had, and I can't stay no longer. And this is sho nough. If you wants to come back some time I'll be glad to talk to you, but now I'se got to go. I spects you to. Give me five cents to ride to town on the bus, cause I'se too tired to walk. I know you'se bliged to be hongry. You shore stayed right on without nothin to eat. That beats me how you done it, for I'se got to have my eatin on time. It's bout time for that bus too. I thanks you for this nickle."
We both took the same bus into town. I glanced back at her once during the ride where she was sitting in the rear of the bus and was rewarded with a full-faced grin.
On my second trip to Mamie's house she saw me before I reached the front door. "Just open the door and come on in," she called. "What's the use of knocking when I'se looking right at you. You sho does look hot, so have that chair over there by the window. A good breeze is comin in there. What'd you fetch me? Seems like to me if the government's payin you for this story, you ought a pay me part of what you gits outen it."
Mamie was ironing. Her Ironing board was resting on the backs of two chairs. Large field rocks were placed on the seats of the chairs to prevent their tilting under the vigorous onslaught of her heavy iron. She was ironing a white uniform of the type usually worn by nurses, and she remained silent until the garment was carefully folded and placed across the back of a rocking chair. Then she unfolded a tightly wadded piece that was a ragged pillow-case and spread it out on the board.
"If you'se noticin this pillow case you might as well know it's mine. I wouldn't wash nothin for white folks that was as ragged as this, for fear they'd charge me for it, claiming I tore it up. Colored folks has had things like that to happen, but don't ask me no questions, for I ain't soin to tell no tales like that. They's apt to git Negroes into trouble, no matter how true they is.
"Did I tell you when you was here before that a lady that works at the college brought her washing back to me, after she done took it away and give it to somebody else? She pays me 75¢ a week for it now, and it sho is worth ever cent of it and more. It tickled me for her to find out that other folks don't wash as good as I does. Sides I just bet she had to pay mo to them others what she tried out.
"The most money I ever made in one week was $14 and that was on a nursin job. They didn't want to pay me but $10 a week, and I didn't want to take $4 less than I ought to be gittin and I told him so. When I goes on a job I gives my whole time, night and day, cept for four hours a day rest period. Any doctor will tell you a nurse is got to have that much rest if she la to stay on the Job and be able to do what the patient needs her to do. Now you know $10 a week ain't nothin to pay for day and night services, and white folks wouldn't expect white nurses to work for such a little bit, and them white nurses does a heap less'n me.
"On my last Job I didn't git to take no four hours off ever day, for the patient told me she couldn't stay by herself. I was on that job day and night for two weeks without gittin no extra pay for over-time. These days nursin jobs is hard to git. I'se home more than I is off nursin. I never had but three jobs of nursin all of last year. I was two weeks at the first one and three weeks at the second job, and then I was on night duty six months straight at the last place. Them first two places paid me $10 a week, and I got a dollar a night for the night duty.
"Ellen -- that's my baby gal -- got as far as the eighth grade in school. She works just any place she can git a job. Mostly she does cookin and maidin, for that's all she knows how to do. Whenever a colored girl tries to git into some other sort of work they is always asked, "What sper-unce is you had?' If the new work is different from what they's been doin, they don't git it. How's they gwine to git sper-unce if nobody gives em a chanst? Answer me that!"
"I don't know," I told her, unless they take some sort of special training."
"My gal ain't able to pay for that," Mamie answered. Her baby goes to the WPA nursery school, and that's a big help when I'se off nursin and the baby's ma is off huntin work. She generally gits around $3 a week when she's got work, and I reckon she might work for less if anybody would hire her. But like I done told you, it's a shame for folks to work for less than it takes for em to live on. When she does git somethin to do it takes all she can make to feed and clothe her and her child and pay her part of our rent. When she ain't workin she just mopes around here with me and her daddy. She ain't got no work now, and I reckon she's out huntin a Job, for she left out bright and early this mornin.
"Our baby boy ain't married -- not yit -- and he's workin his way through a school at Macon, Georgia. I don't know what he's gwine to take up. The school gits work for him to do. Right now they's tearing down old buildings on the campus and rebuilding them. My boy cleans them bricks and does anything else that comes to hand. I promised to previde him his clothes, but I ain't been able to give him a garment this year. He writes me they don't give him enough to eat down there. You see, me bein a nurse, I knows about diet and things like that, and I has to know how to feed folks so as they eatin'll do the most good. That's how come eatin away from home don't satisfy none of my fambly.
"My oldest daughter went to the tenth grade, and since she's been out tryin to holp make a livin she's done bout everything that come to hand gusert. But it's always took all she made to take keer of her own self. She done maidin at a big furniture and undertakin store here, and made $4 a week as long as she could hold out at it, and lemme tell you them folks had lots of furniture for her to keep dustin and cleaned up. She was about the onliest one of my chillun could keep a study job. Since she got married her health been so bad she says in bed most of the
 
(Insert after word hand in 19th line.)
All my chillun holps me and they daddy with the fambly 'spenses when they's home and workin', but more'n often we has to holp them. It was this oldest gal of ours I was tellin' you 'bout.
time, and she don't give me one nickle no mo. The doctor says she won't be well til she has an operation. I don't know how she goin to git the money for that.
"Our oldest boy lives in this town. He got less achoolin than any of the others cause he stopped school to go to work in a drug store at $1 a week. He don't do much. His wife gits $2.50 a week cookin for a white woman that just keeps her half the day. She ain't had but one child since she and our son got married, and that little boy ain't big nough to do nothin but go to school yit.
"All our Chillun worked ever day after school was out, soon as they was big enough and could git the work to do. The moat I ever got from their workin after school and all day Saddays was a dollar and a half a week, apiece, but as a rule I just got a dollar. School supplies wasn't furnished by the state then, and by the time I paid out for all them things, there never was enough left to dress em. They always worked in vacation time too, if they could.
"When I first come to this town to live I didn't have no nursin job. I just took in washin for the mill folks. My prices was all cordin to how many was in the fambly, or about twenty- five cents for each person in the fambly. Takin it all in all, by and large, I'se spent mo of my time washin than I is nursin.
"My husband minus morlar. When he can git work he can make as much as $5 or $6 a week, but he don't hardly ever git more'n two weeks work in any month. White folks won't give him no other sort of work. Folks is tellin round here that the white folks is done passed a law not to work middle-aged men. That may be so, but they don't give colored folks no jobs nohow, cause if they would give my son a job he could holp take keer of us. My son knows the mortar business just like his daddy, and he could do that.
"Now, you may not believe me, Miss, but I'se gwine tell you the truth; when us don't have no work to do, us just sets around here hongry. Right now our house rent is way past due, and that rentin agent is talking bout puttin us out iffen he don't git $10 to go on back rent right quick. Us used to pay our rent direct to the woman what owns the house. She lives in Detroit, like I done told you, when you was here before. She got so tired foolin with us gittin so far behind and payin in little old driblets, that she done turned it over to a hard-boiled agent that'll set your things in the street, if you don't pay like he telle you to in a hurry. We knows now that we is got to git the cash rent, from somewheres, and give it to him on the dot.
"Right now, our water bill is on the cut-off list agin, cause us owes somethin more than three dollars on back bills. They ain't cut it off yit, but they is apt to any minute. A notice come in the mornin mail from the lectric light folks, sayin ifen us don't pay up they is gwine cut em off agin. Well, if they does cut off the lights, I'll Just start usin my old kerosene lamp agin.
"Like I done told you, things is in a worser condition now than they is been in before. When I was first married, bout thirty years ago, if things got tight in town a person could step out to the country and git a job. Workin in the fields. Now you can't git nothin to do in the country, for the white folks runnin the farms ain't able to pay out much for wages. My cousin that lives in the country has a wife and eight chillun, and he don't git but sixty cents a day. His wife has two little washins. Come springtime, the chillun totes cotton seeds and guano and draps corn. They chops cotton and in the fall they picks it, but none of them little jobs pays enough to pay for the clothes they rots out with sweat whilst they is doin the work.
"It used to be most any fambly could grow enough corn and wheat and potatoes and sugarcane for syrup, to last em all winter. Now they don't have enough home raised victuals to eat. My cousin say so many folks comin round tellin his -boss-man what and how much to plant he plumb forgits how to farm. I reckon the folks that's at the tiptop head of the government knows what they is doin when they fixes up they plans, but I don't believe they meant for the folks that carries out the adders to run things just like they does. If things was done just like they oughta be, I don't believe there'd be no hongry folks.
"White folks is gen'ral don't have no idea how us colored folks is sufferin. If us was to try to carry our troubles to em, like us used to when ever colored fambly had some white fambly to look to, they wouldn't listen to us now. We wouldn't git nowhere with our story for they's got troubles of they own. Since freedom come, the colored folks is done come so far from what they was befo the war that white folks don't feel sponsible for em no mo.
"Most all colored folks in town tries to carry insurance to holp out when they gits sick, and enough to bury em with. I'se got one polish I pays 25¢ a week on. But country folks don't have no way to make extra twenty-five cen-ses to pay on no insurance polish. It used to be they could bring chickens and eggs, or melons or fruits, to town and swap em at the stores for coffee and sugar and other things they needed. Now they don't have them things to bring, and if they does bring em, they can't swap em for nothin. When a person that ain't got no insurance and no money dies, they's buried like a cat or a dog, without no embalmin. You can't spect them undertakers to do embalmin for nothin. It's spensive.
"When us first come to town to live, $4 a week was considered big money. For a woman to make washin. It took a heap of work to make that much, I knows, cause I done It. My husband worked for the city till he fell off one of them city trucks and broke his collar bone. After he got well they wouldn't take him back, even if he did git hurt doin they work just like they told him to. Up to the time of his fall he was makin $9 a week, but since that time he makes whatever folks is minded to pay him.
"Let me tell you the God's truth! Since 1930 lots of colored folks has died hongry. Look! See how big this dress hangs on me. I've lost ten pounds, and every pound of it was lost cause I didn't have enough to eat. I'll be glad if I ever see the day again when I can put my foots under somebody's table and eat a bellyful one more time.
"Not long ago I axed a white woman why colored folks couldn't git no work to do. She say the Negro race hod brought it on theyself. She say when times was good and white folks would go to hire a cook or a nurse they would be told: 'Us ain't workin out no mo. Us is lookin for a cook or a washerwoman or a nurse ourselves.' She say our sassy ways like that is why the white folks don't pay us no mind since times is done got so tight they aint no jobs for us.
"It ain't been so long since I axed a white woman to loan me $5 to holp me out of a awful tight. She told me with a straight face that she Just didn't have it. The only way she could make me believe she ain't got it now, would be to git the Good Lord to come down as a natural man and tell me she aint got that much money, she don't need, that she could loan me. One thing sho, these folks that's got so much can't take it with em. So all right, I say, let em keep they old money. Say, ain't the government got some sort of office in this town where they can loan out money to holp pore folks to git back on they foots after they is down and out? Well, ifen you don't know about it, I don't spect they is no such place here. But if they was they sure would do a big heap of business.
"A little flour and a very little coffee is all they is in this house to eat today. Soon as I gits the 75¢ for this washin, I aims to take it and buy us some meat. My husband ain't had but one day's work this week, and he won't git no pay fore Sadday. And that'll be a dollar.
"The older doctors used to look out for us practical nurses, but these younguns, what's doin the doctorin now, don't do that no mo. And I liked the way them older doctors had of lookin after sick folks. Before one of them would leave, they'd ax you lots of questions bout how you meant to handle the patient, til they found out how much you knowed. And then they'd tell you how, in such a nice way that it seemed like they was just offerin suggestions. But you knowed better'n to fail to do just like they suggested. These young doctors rushes in and rushes out like a bat out of torment, and before you knows it they's gone without tellin you nothin. But if anything goes wrong, it's sho goin to be your fault. They ain't all the youngsters that bad. I worked with one young doctor here last year that advised with me plenty, and allus axed me questions till he was satisfied I knowed how to treat his patient. Them old doctors had plenty of time to see bout the patient. One of these younguns just stays long enough to take the temperature and feel the pulse and tell the nurse to slap a ice cap on the patient's head or a hot water bottle to his feet till the ambulance can git there to take 'im to the hawspital. Then the pore nurse is left without no Job, and the patient is facin a big hawspital bill. Give me them good old doctors -- do you hear me? -- any day in the week.
"I knows I axed you the last time you was here, but, Miss, in all your gittin around and talking to so many folks, don't you never hear of no job you could pint out to me. I ain't only a good nurse and a washerwoman, but I can cook good too. I don't like cookin, but I can do it. One thing sho, I ain't able to do no mo big heavy washins like I used to, but if I can't git me nothin else to do I'll have to git me another small washin.
"You sho don't need me to tell you no mo. For I'se done told you all I ever did know, and besides I'se hongry now, and I wants to hurry through this ironing so I can go after my money and git me somethin to eat." I prepared to leave.
"If you ever does have to come back, tell them folks you works for to send me some money for this talking I'se done for you." As I started out of the room, Mamie said, "Scuse me, Miss, for not stoppin to go to the front door with you, but I can't play with this here lectric iron, like I could with them old flat irons us used to heat on charcoal buckets." She stuck her finger in her mouth and applied it to the iron. I thanked her and left. She called after me:
"Don't you forgit to write it down straight that I ain't no midwife yit. They puts folks in jail that says they's midwives and can't sho no stificate."