Athens, Georgia
Tallassee Rd., R. F.D. #2
Mrs. Janie B. Harris (white)
Mrs. Sadie B. Hornsby, writer
Mrs. Sarah H. Hall and
Mrs. Leila Harris, revisers
A WPA WORKER
Mrs. Henry, Supervisor of the Housekeeping Aid Project, was making out reports when I entered her office in the Grand Jury room of the courthouse. All of her aides were out on duty and she was alone. It seemed an ideal time for an interview.
"Are you too busy to talk to me this morning?" I asked.
"It all depends on what you want to talk about and how long it will take you," she replied. "You know I can't take up much time with personal matters on a public project."
When she learned that I wanted a story of her life and work, she hesitated but briefly.
"Well, yes, I guess that's all right. Can you get a way to come out to my house? I live way out on Tallassee Road. But I guess you'd better see me right now, while I'm just waiting for my head boss to come. I'm not so busy this rainy day anyway."
Mrs. Henry weighs about 200 pounds. She has gray hair and wears glasses. Her stylish and well fitted black dress was made of crepe and cut velvet. Black slippers and gray hose completed her costume.
"I was raised on a farm right here in Clarke County," she began. "And I was the oldest in a family of three girls and four boys. There was nothing unusual about my childhood. We played and scrapped as children will do. When we were large enough we helped in the field whenever there was anything for us to do. I’ve dropped corn and beans many a day, and picked cotton too. I was a right good cotton picker.
"Father was overseer for a man who owned a large farm. He was also a basket weaver and made some of the daintiest little baskets you ever saw. He sold lots of them, but the most of his income was from selling cattle that he raised. We had plenty to eat and wear, and raised everything we had to eat right there on the farm. There’s a big difference in the way I lived then and our existence now.
"My sisters and I sold eggs, milk, butter, apples, or just anything we could find to sell, for money to buy a new hat or dress, or whatever we wanted. Living near Barnett Shoals we could always dispose of any surplus supplies to the people who were employed in the cotton mill there. One of my cousins worked there and often when I visited her; she would give me tin buckets she had saved up for me. We thought we were rich when we got the buckets for they were rare things for country people to have. My sister and I sold lots of buttermilk at 5¢ a glass to the men who worked to build the electric plant at Barnett Shoals. I was only fourteen years old when I bought my first sewing machine. I ordered it from Sears and Roebuck, and paid for it sewing for Negroes.
"Believe it or not, my favorite sport was horseback riding. You wouldn't think it to look at me now!
"On Sundays we attended Sunday School in the same little one-room house where we went to school on weekdays. All our people are Baptists and when I was fourteen years old I joined Corinth Baptist Church and was baptized in a creek not far from the church.
"I had known my husband all my life, as we were reared in the same neighborhood and went to school together. We didn't have any big wedding; just cane to Athens and got married at my cousin's house. Her husband was a preacher.
"My husband worked at the electric plant. He wasn't but fifteen years old when he started working out there and was still in their service when he was killed, while on the job, eleven years ago. He started in as errand boy, and when they finished building the plant, they gave him a regular job at $90 a month. He kept on until he became plant manager at $165 a month. He didn't go to war because he was operating the power plant.
"We were transferred from Barnett Shoals to the Tallassee plant and soon after we returned from a two-weeks vacation the blow fell. That night the children were cross and sleepy so I told my husband I'd bathe them and put them to bed, and then when I'd put the house in order, I'd come out to the plant and stay with him. I often did that when he worked at night. He agreed and hurried on over to the plant. The "boss from Atlanta was expected next day on an inspection trip and we wanted him to find everything shining and in perfect order. Our local boss had given orders for my husband to have them that way.
"I'd just gotten the children in the bed and was tying the soiled clothes up in a sheet to be sent to the washwoman next day, when the phone rang. A man at the plant told me to come down quick that my husband had been hurt. I ran all the way. Ha died soon after I got there. His death had been caused by a broken insulator. It probably wouldn't have killed him, but he'd been watering the grass and his shoes and clothes were damp.
"The company then paid me $50 a month until his workman's compensation was paid. That amounted to about three thousand, six hundred dollars and lasted about six years. After the last payment had been made on that, they gave me a job looking after the property at Tallassee until the new plant was built, and they put men in charge of that job. I've had to look after myself from then on. I had been getting $25 a month and a house to live in, and my lights and water had been furnished. They still let me live in the house. That is the reason I don't move in town. That free rent is an item that counts big when you're trying to raise a family. My husband left me with four children, two girls and two boys. My oldest, a boy, is now seventeen.
"The first year I tried paddling my own canoe, after my husband's death, I made just $85 selling milk, butter, chickens, and eggs. I was entirely out of work from December 1937 to March of 1938. Did I try to find work? Why, I asked everyone I knew for a job or to help me find one. Many a day I've gone back home wondering where to try next.
"Finally, one day I went to the welfare office and asked for work. They sent me to the sewing room. What a revelation that was to me! It was my first job on WPA. If it wasn't for government work I don't know what folks like us would do. In this day and time we can't get office work, or even jobs as salesladies. People who hire help now want only the young attractive people with lots of pep and energy. They can't seem to imagine that a stout person might prove to be a good worker if she had the chance.
"My work at the sewing room was very pleasant. However, I didn't stay there long before I was transferred to another project paying more and I stayed there from March until July. Then I was sent to the Housekeeping Aid Project as an aide, and in October of last year I was made supervisor of this project."
Mrs. Henry answered a knock on the office door. "Good morning.' What can I do for you today?" she greeted the worried looking man who entered.
"Carson is my name," began the visitor, "and I work at the university bam. I need some help at my house and someone told me of your work so I came up here to see about getting someone to wait on ray wife and son. My wife has been sick since Christmas and. now that my son is down in the bed sick too I sure do need some help. I went to the welfare office and they sent me to you."
"Where do you live?" asked Mrs. Henry.
"Over here on Ag Hill."
"I mean, what is your street address?" she continued.
"'T’ain't none except Ag Hill. Houses ain't numbered out there," he insisted.
"Very well. Take this blank to the welfare office and have them fill it out; then bring it back to me and I'll see what we can do for you," she smilingly instructed him.
He returned in a few minutes, "Say, Lady," he spluttered. "I took this blank across the hall to the welfare office just like you told me. A big head lady was coming out of the door and she took the paper and read it. Then she told me to take it right back and tell you they didn't have nothing to do with it."
"All right! All right! Just give it here to me," the supervisor said as she took the blank and assured him, "I'll look after it for you. There was some misunderstanding on the part of the person with whom you talked in the other office."
The man kept his hand on the door apparently poised for flight. In fact, he started out, then suddenly turned around and stuck his bald head hack in the open doorway. "Look here, Lady," he pled. "If you want a recommendation just call the sheriff of this county. He'll tell you all you want to know about me. I'm one of his dep'ty sheriffs. I've got a daughter working here in town, and my son was working for the city when he got sick. Another daughter has a job in Atlanta that she has to go back to today. She'll lose it if she stays away from it any longer. That's one reason why I'm so anxious for you to send somebody out there.
"I was married when I was 17 years old and I've worked all sty life. This is the first time I ever had to ask for help. The bills have just piled up on me since we have had sickness in our house and all this debt has got me down. I’d sure appreciate it if you could send me somebody right away to wait on my sick folks."
”Now, you must remember, Mr. Carson, that our aides are not nurses.” Mrs. Henry told him. "They do practical nursing and look after the home while the mother, or whoever is in charge of the housework, is not able to see after it and do it.”
” I understand,” he replied, adding, "but I do need to have somebody there with them, and I would like to have them come in today.”
Mrs. Henry was silent for a moment after the man departed. Then she began, "Now, I don't see why they can't hire someone to do their work. But we have to investigate every case that is reported. You know I think this is one way the government is spending money that is really worthwhile. Of course all of the projects have some useful purpose or they wouldn't have been created, but this one helps humanity in more ways than appears on the mere surface of the idea. In addition to the sick and afflicted to whom we extend help, we, the employees on the project are given the work that means a living to us.
"We have eight workers most of the time, including our one Negro helper. This Negro woman is an experienced practical nurse, and she hadn't had a job in months when she was assigned to this project. She had only been on this work with us a day and a half when she was called for outside work that paid her $15 a week, and the case lasted two weeks. Then she returned to the project. "We are all supposed to be seeking outside employment and when a worker gets it, she is automatically dropped from the project. When her work ends, or if for some reason she loses her job, she is taken back again after the case is thoroughly investigated.
"As I have already said, this project was created to help those who are not able to help themselves, and to make living conditions in the under-privileged home more worthwhile. You know yourself when everything goes wrong and we are in the dumps we need a friendly pat on the back to help us along. That is the objective of WPA.
"We train these women - we call them aides - to do necessary work in homes where the families are not able to hire help when some emergency arises, and this emergency is generally sickness. Our aides do practically every kind of chore that comes to hand in the home except the family washing, and heavy scrub work. Of course, you know, yourself, if you had illness in your home and no one to help you, and there were several little children, you would need help. You couldn't handle it all alone in this emergency, and then what would you do in case you were the sick one? Our aides clean house, cook, sew, and when it is necessary, they mend the clothes. They care for the children, as well as for the patient, and they do wash the patient's garments, but no others. While one of our aides is in charge of the household that family's meals are prepared with proper regard for the diet necessary for its different members. Aides are not allowed to give medicine, but outside of that they do about everything that a nurse and a housekeeper usually does.
"An aide does not leave a home until she has taught the mother to plan and cook meals in ways calculated to give the best food value. You know, some people cook their food just about all day, and when they are through that long cooking the food isn't fit to eat.
"We also teach the children, as well as the grown-ups, how to eat at the table, table manners, we would call that, and we give instruction in the home as to the best ways of setting the table and serving meals.
"We encourage personal cleanliness, as well as scrupulous sanitation and cleanliness in housekeeping, but there are some people that won't try to improve themselves and their living conditions, no matter what you show them and how much you talk to them. After an aide leaves the home she drops hack from time to time as if on friendly visits. That is done in order that we may know the results of our work and the progress, if any, of our clients or patients. The improvement that we find in some homes is remarkable, but on the other hand we find it very discouraging to discover occasionally that those we have tried hardest to help and to teach, don't seem to have any pride whatsoever.
"Once a week we have a group meeting in this office, and on these occasions we usually have an outsider to talk to us. Sometimes it is the director of the local Red Cross unit. She gives us instruction in rolling bandages, making beds, and caring for the sick. Another favorite speaker is the home demonstration agent of this county, who gives us new ideas in preparation of food for the sick, and in how to plan and cook for children, table setting, and table manners. You’d be surprised to know how little some people know about these things. I’ll have to confess that I didn’t know as much as I thought I did about lots of things that I've learned since I came on this project.
"At one of these meetings presided over by the home demonstration agent, one of our own workers was so impressed that she went home and began with her own children and her mother. She taught them the nicer ways of doing in the home, just as the demonstration agent had shown her. How, her home is as attractive as it can be, considering what little she has to do with.
"The other night I did get so mad at my oldest son! He came rushing in without washing his face and hands, and grabbed a cup of coffee without even sitting down to the table. 'Son,' I said, 'Why don’t you sit down and eat like you ought to, instead of gobbling your food up like a hog?'
"'Oh, Mamma!" he shouted, "I ain't got no time to fool with table manners now. To hang with ’em! I've got a go.' And off he went. Now, you know that won't the way for him to act.
"Each week we have our aides take part in a demonstration of preparation of food for the sick, and for children, as well as the ordinary everyday meals that come in for less frequent demonstration. Much of the food used in these demonstrations is furnished us by the Surplus Commodities Division of WPA, but it is necessary for us to purchase many items in order to make adequate demonstration of sickroom diets. No money is supplied by our sponsors for use in purchasing these needed articles, so I've been making marmalade at night and in the afternoons after we get off from work our aides go out and sell it. This canvassing has not brought in much money, but it has helped some, and we knew of no other way to get these very necessary funds.
"Did you know about our 'loan closet'? The aides, themselves, donated most of the linens for this, after their experiences in homes that did not own sufficient bed linens to keep the patient's bed fresh and clean. Several local organizations have given a few sheets, pillowcases, nightgowns, and towels. These articles are loaned to the sick in cases where our aides find inadequate supplies in the homes they tend. When the patient is well again, our supplies are taken up, laundered, and returned to our loan closet. You know, lots of people don't have what they need, even when all the family is well, and when there is sickness these lacks become emergencies that our aides must find a way to provide for.
"Recently, I investigated the case of a widow and two children. One of the children and the mother were sick in bed, and there was no one to do anything for them except a man who was hanging around the house. 'He's the boy friend,' the widow replied, when I inquired as to his status in the home. One of our aides took the sick woman and child in charge. We cleaned that house, washed the patients’ clothing and cooked their food. The man stayed on, doing nothing. He was just one more person for our aides to wait on. The widow didn't realize that he didn't care anything for her, but only stayed there to eat her food and to get his room rent free. I went out there and put him to work cleaning up the yard and burning the trash. The next day I made him scrub floors, and each day we put him on a different job and stood by to see that he did them, until he got tired of working and left. Of course we had to do it in a nice way, so she wouldn't get mad with us for getting rid of him, and we couldn't hare the satisfaction of telling him what we thought of him.
"Our aides wear white uniforms, and go quietly about their work in the home, just as any nurse would do. They have strict orders not to relate anything they see and hear in the homes. Their reports are to concern what they were sent there to do, and that only.
"One of the most pitiful cases on our records is a blind woman who lives alone, and as far as we can learn, she has no relatives living in this or any other place. As far as the outside appearance is concerned she lives in a very nice house, but the interior of that place was terrible to see. Her case was reported to us, and when one of our aides went out to investigate she found the woman sick in bed. There was no food in the house and the poor blind woman had not had anything to eat in several days. Our aide took charge and did everything that was necessary. She has been on this case two weeks. Every day before she leaves the aide brings in wood and coal to make a fire and places these things in reach of the patient. She leaves water and food on the table by the patient's bed. The doctor tells us that this one case is worth more, humanely speaking, than all the money that has been spent on this project in our county.
"One old woman had no one to wait on her but her two sons. There was not even a change of sheets or clothes in her house. We cared for them a long while and arranged for them to have clothing and food. Recently when we went back to see how they were getting on, we hardly knew the place. There had been such a change! When we first went there the yard was littered with every-thing under the sun. On our last trip, we found the yard and house were clean and neat as could he. Clean covers were on the beds, a clean cloth on the dining table, and -- above all things -- a flower pot in the center of it. Things like that convince us that our work is worthwhile constructive and educational -- as well as a sort of government hand-out.
"I've heard of aides in other places having doors slammed in their faces, water thrown on them, and many have told of having been cursed, but nothing like that has ever happened to any of the aides from our local unit of this project. People that we have dealt with have been only too grateful for our services, when we have gone into their homes to try to give assistance."
<text not clear>
