Jim White
Audubon Blvd. (on premises)
Contacted Aug. 4, 1939
Submitted Aug. 19
"THIS BOY GETS LACKING SOULS
Everybody knows Jim White. Be is the most popular chauffeur in torn. They call him "loudmouth," and he lives up to his name.
Jim White is a brown man about thirty-two years old. He has been a christian five times in the course of ten years. "I've been religionized, unreligionized and anti-religionized, all in the glory of whacked-headed preachers," Jim states.
"This is how I got religion the first time: Me and Reverend Elton White was the best of friends. We used to go around plenty, had lots of fun together. Upped and downed the womens and drank like fishes, the two little fishes.
I had met White in Gulf Port, Mississippi. Both of us was gambling mens, used to crooked the dice and used bad cards. I can remember when White killed his woman with an as cause she wouldn't give him fifteen cents. He was bad! Well, he had four hundred dollars. Facts is, he stold four hundred dollars from an old widow woman and paid some lawyer….and out of that mess he got.
"Well, we went back to doing the same thing. But, round the later years things got stuff….tuff. The later years sho wasn't like the earlier years. The money wasn't easy to get, couldn't even steal it. Cause there wasn't no money around to steal. The games wasn't so hot so I comes on down to New Orleans, and I leaves White in Gulf Port. I hears from him several times when he went to Biloxi. In one of the letters he tells me he had started praying and actually seen the Lawd. I didn't pay that much mind. I figures White was crazy, had a blowoff of the head and was a pure lunatic. I got a job chauffeur, aint heard a word from White for years.
"A gal friend of mine, an old friend comes down here and looks me up. She says she wants me to take her to some of our openair camp meetings. I tells her we don't have nothing like that. She says we do, so I goes with her looking for religion. Can you imagine that? Of course, the gal is oaks. She's pack a fine bit of mellowness around her waist line. I got to thinking about them old days and tries to lay ' her. Get the jive? I tries and tries. She doesn't book and call. I tries and tries to make the gal give but she won't. I says why. She says you aint no christian. And my business done got to be Christianized. I laughs. Christianized? Thats me saying that. Can you imagine that, I says. Why gal, I knowed you when you used to sit on the bed and try to pee on the wall. Remember the time I used to grab you by your ass hole and make you fot? She cities. I don't catch on. I can't understand the stuff she's giving me, not at all.
"I checks on the woman. I makes her get deep into her business. And guess what I finds? I finds that White told the woman he blessed and she wasn't suppose to give her stuff to nobody but him. Man, I laughs and laughs. That was the funniest thing I ever did know anything about. I says to myself, well-do!
"I figures the gal had some sincerety about herself, so I lets her be. Lands sake alive, I went to some kind of a religious meeting and saw them people shouting and carrying on. That gal was going to town too. She was so happy and actually didn't know what to do. She kept singing and shouting that she male up my mind for me that there was no doubt about her. She had religion alright.
"I gets to figuring and figuring. I puts two and two together and I gets four. Well, I says, the woman must really be a christian woman. She gets her dope, and she leaves me. I says where is you going babes. And she says she's going back to White. I aint said nothing right away, but in a little while I says is he really a preacher. A good preacher? Then she says, 'he done give his bad ways and don't even think about the devil. ‘Then she says that White dote bless his church so much not even a storm can move him. I says well, well-do!
That gal ups and leaves me. Away to Gulf Port she goes. In a few weeks I gets a letter from White. It says that he is doing all right but he doesn’t like Gulf Port and he doesn't like Biloxi. He says he wants to come to New Orleans cause he figures he can make it here. I says with all these churches and preachers running over each other. He says yes, cause hea’s using suppin’ what the people likes. I didn’t know what he meant, but I lets him go with it.
“Lo and behold, White comes to New Orleans with nothing but religion. He had a few bucks but not enough to amount to nothing. He comes to me and he tries to get me with that religion talk. I says, man don't you know I know you. He says quiet on the off-beat, doesn't you know that the Lawd came up to me lak a natchal man and told me to go forth and teach all nations. I says, man with that jive you got you better not to no whar and teach no nation but the nigger nation, cause if you do them white folks is going to have your ass smacks in Jail. Then he brings up some stuff about Saint Peter. I says, you can talk all you wants to about Saint Peter or any of them other Peters. You aint no man who has no business being christien cause your bad life is done been so bad you can't be fo'given.
"Old White didn't budge a bit. He kept on talking about how much of a christian he was. Then he takes up with my old gal what came down. Remember? She comes and gives me some stuff. Talking about she was revolutioningnize the world. She pulls me down in a chair. He stands over me and they beging some crazy talk about, 'Lawd...dy...dy.. Lawd...Lawdy....take ther heart of this man and move it....move....eee..... e..e..e it. She him that the earth in all of its blistering bad ness can't always go againt your preachings....Let the light from the stars shine down on him tonight; let the open face moon glitter with the happiness you gave all Jerusalem when the Son was born....oh Lawd....dy...Lawd...dy...La...w...d....dy...'
"I says why in the hell don't y'all out that damn mess out, and they stops! The gal says the nerve of him talking that away in the presence of the Lawd. I says, Y'all can't fool me. In the presence of the Lawd nothing, in the presence of two damn fools.
"Them people, let me alone, but old White says the only way to get me to his way of thinkin' was to put bad mouth an me. He says like this...I remember it well.. 'You is going to lose your job. Cose, I hate to do this Jim, but its the will of the Lawd, not me,'
"I aint paid a bit of 'tention to old "White, thought he was the biggest fool in the world till he got to talkin' with seething he says he saw up in the ceiling. I don't know just that white said he saw. I was so soared...cose he didn't know it.. I didn't know what to do. Man, I was just standing there while White was looking up at that ceiling. He was just a-talking: 'Don't do it now...don't do it now. Wait: Maybe he'll change. Don' do it now...please! If you strike him dead I just know I'll be held for it.’
"Then White and the gal turns to me, and they says: 'Jim, take our word fo' it. Come. Come while the Lawd is giving you another chance. Maybe its yo' last chance. Come now! Maybe you'll walk outside and drop? dead. Come now!
"Now, you know thats enough to make anybody soared, don't you? I was she soared! I got sick at their talk and ran White and the gal plum out of my house. Went on to work the very next day and I aint telling you no word of lie my boss started raining hell with me. Fussing up a breeze about nothing at all. I says to him, why is you raising so much hell. Here it is I've been working for you nine years and never before has you raised so much hell as you is doing today. I'll tell you sumpin. I told him. A nigger preacher says to me that you is going to fire me. And I wonder if you is going to do what that nigger preacher says you is going to do. He looks at me and he says. 'I don't know nothing about no nigger preacher but I know one thing. I'm. sho going to fife you and now!'
"Man, don't you know that man fired me just like that? I comes on back and I don't say nothing to nobody. White come running to my house all excited. He says, 'You is fired Jim. I knows it.' I looked at him. I was so mad. I says, you black bastard. You done made me lose my joh. White says, 'thats the best thing that could-a happened to you.’ I says why. He says. come on join my church. I says if that will make things better I'm sho going to join your church.
"Come to figure it out. Guess why he wanted me to join hus church? He wanted me to join his church cause go wanted to get some credit on my name. If I'd let him do that he says he'd make me head-deacon. I says, can I bless ‘em like you did Hazel? He says, 'yon can bless em and take 'em too.’ I figures thats religiou So, man me and white got together. The furst thing he did was to go downtown on Rampart street and get him some clothes. ‘All preachers got to look good,’ he says. ‘Thats the furst thing.’ I says go ahead. Me, I done been a pussy chaser all my days. And I sho did know that you can plenty of that in a church, and money along with it. My only worry was white. If would only pack square, I says. Cause White had done stold money by the carloads. And I says maybe the Lawd done fo'glve him, buy I sho aint.
“To make a long story short. Me and White got together. He opens a church right here in my front room. He was blessing 'em on the forehead and in my bed. The Gal was out bringing! ‘em in. She was the gospel saver. She was pretty straight I found out. The trouble with that poor gals was that White had her all geared up. She was beleivin’ everything. It was too bad but it was true.
"Things was getting along fine. I wasn't looking for a job in the world. I says there aint no need of working if things can keep up like this. I had done paid up my rent. Things was fone I’m tellin' you. Man. I had done fo'gave White cause he was preachin' real religion. There was time to pray and time to play. Thats religion, my religion. Man. I was laying it. Then all of a sudden Whites comes to me and says, .I kind of be. leives that we is doing too much. Our religon is getting second play and it ought to get furst play."
"Well, I says maybe White is right and I loosened up a little. I had some good gala who was streamlining it on the line. Came in with the food and the money. Man. I ' had on my long purple robe and them womens sho like them long robes. They think you is the Lawd himself or somebody like him. Man, that robe was diggin' up a mess. But Old White got gealous end came talking that stuff bout we was layin’ religion too far in the background, and me, like a fool, ceased. Man, as soon as I ceased old white stold all my gals. Took all the money and skidooo. Even left his gal. Built himself a church. and thats where I figures preachers aint no good. and to hell with them. even if they are your friends. Yeah, me and the gal made it alright. but she couldn't get rid of that religion, so I quit her dry.
"I fo’gave White. years went by. and do you know that sonofagun came back to me and jived me out of loaning him some money, ten dollars. It was a long time fore he paid me, and I didn't do nothin’ but vent to him. Just like some big banker, he tells his chief stewardess to give me ten dollars and he gave it to me. White tried to siring me into his church. Smart fellow. had one of them goodlooking gals to gun me over and invite me in. She was talking up some smart talk a-breeze. I did a lot of figurin’ and didn't do nothin’ but give in to White. I hung around his church until I got weak fo’ that woman and before I knowed it I was right in with White again. But, do you know that White fucked me again. It seems that somebody told him that the gal was alright and he didn't do nothin’ but take her plum away from me.
"So. I figures it aint no use. Religion aint fo’ me and I aint fo’ religion, cause as soon as I get religion sumpin' unrcligionizes me. What about White? Man. In all my life I was never so finish with a man like I'm with White.
"Its a good thing his name is White cause there aint nothin’ else White about him, no indeed. That boy's priok dictates his religion. yes sir, He don’t use it to pray with, but he sho does use it to get looking souls.
"This boy gets lacking souls."
