IT'S FUN TO FISH
Original Names	Changed Names
Cobb	Bester
Bettie	Lucile
Helen Jones	Cornie Ingram
Joe Cobb	Bill Bester
Oscar	Jim
Gus	Junie
Amos	Casper
Paul	John
New Bern	Fernlea
Date of first writing:	May 20, 1939
Persons interviewed:	Mrs. Susan Cobb & family
Address:	Vanceboro, N. C
Occupation:	Housewives
Writer:	Mary M. Phillips
Reviser:	Edwin Massengill
Number of words:	About 2,750
IT'S FUN TO FISH
A narrow, dusty path led from the road to the house in which the Bester family lived. The garden had been placed at the front of the house, and corn, about a foot high, was growing on one side of the walk. The land on the other side was laid out in rows, and a row of beans had been planted down by the fence.
The house, small and unpainted, was almost surrounded by beds of many colored flowers. A tall cedar tree shaded the house from the afternoon sun. A hole cut in one side of the house and covered with wooden shutters furnished one room with light, but the room on the front of the house had glass windows.
Three little girls wearing ragged overalls were playing under a grapevine near the corner of the house. A little boy about two years old had on a checked gingham dress, and a man's felt hat covered his yellow curls. An old lady was sitting by the door, rocking back and forth.
"Come in," she said. "Lucille, my darter, has gone a-fishin. That's all she studies about now. I'll bet she's a-pullin' em in as fast as she gits a worm on the hook."
There was only one chair in the room, and a young girl arose and offered that. She sat down on the edge of an old iron crib and rocked a tiny baby in her arms. The baby was neat and clean, but the girl wore a dirty print dress that almost touched her ankles. Her hair had been curly in time, but it hung to her shoulders in dirty, stringy strands. Her legs were bare and her shoes were run-over, dirty, white oxfords, still she was attractive for her eyes were dark blue, her figure good, and her complexion clear except for a few freckles across her nose.
The old lady who had come to the door was clean.
She was tall and large and <Text Not Clear> Her hair was white and was pulled away from her face and twisted in a tight little knot at the back of her head. She wore a light print dress and a blue checked gingham apron tied around her waist. Her shoes and stockings were black. She had a long brush in her mouth, and every few minutes she would dip the brush in a little box of snuff and rub it over her teeth.
"Lucile is my baby," she said. "Every since my old man died 'bout 'leven year ago I've had to stay with first one youngun and then the other. I had seven, four gals a-fishin. That's all she and three boys, and they's all married. They all live off except Lucile.
"It's funny that Lucile married a Ingram man, too, for I was a Ingram before I got married. Cornie Ingram was my name, and I was born on a farm. Mammy died when I was nothing but a youngun and Grandpappy was dead, too, so Pappy bundled us all up and we went to stay with his mammy. It's a good thing, too, for the War soon broke out and Pappy had to go.
"I can remember jest as good as if it was yestiddy. We got word that the Yankees was coming, so all the people hid everything they could. Grandmammy had been saving her goose eggs till she got enough to set, and she kept 'em in an old blue pitcher under a shelf in the kitchen. She kept the turkey eggs in a big basket in a closet. They had dug holes and buried the meat that was in the smokehouse, and the chickens and other animals had been carried down to the woods and turned out.
"Well, one morning, we looked out and seen a big bunch of men coming. Some was riding and some was walking. They come in our yard, and I knowed I'd never seen so many people before. I remember hearing Grandmammy telling that the officers stayed behind the soldiers and waited for them to find out where the horses and food was hid. Nobody went out except me, and they knowed I didn't have no sense so they asked me where the meat was hid and I told 'em I'd go find it. Some of the men took me by the hand, and I went all around the yard and showed 'em where it was buried. Grandmammy would call me, but I was having too good a time to listen. Then we went in the house and I showed where the eggs was hid. The Yankees called them 'waffers.'
"Younguns have a better chance now than they did when I was coming on. I never got much schooling, for all the schools was held in the summer and after I got big enough to go I had to work out in the field. I went a day once in awhile when the weather was too bad to work, and I learnt how to read and write.
"After I got twenty-one year old I left home and worked out for a living. I done the work around the house and washed and cooked for my board and a few clothes. I saved all the money I could and hired somebody to teach me, but by then I had too many other things to think about. I was courting a little, and it didn't make no difference then if I didn't have no education. I liked Bill Bester better than any of the other boys in the whole neighborhood, so we got married and went to keeping house."
Cornie continued to talk, but the room view presented more interest than her conversation. It was small and almost empty. A torn linoleum rug covered the center of the floor. The floor was clean and looked as if it had been scrubbed only a short time. The room had two windows but several panes had been broken, and the ragged lace curtains were stuffed in the holes. A big iron bed in one corner of the room had been painted white, but the paint and enamel had cracked in several places. The bed linen was clean, and clean white cases were on all the pillows. Over in the other corner was a child's crib with one side torn away. Both rollers at the foot were gone, and all of the enamel had been scratched until there was nothing left but the rusted iron. The mattress was faded and soiled, and an old dirty blanket was used in place of a sheet. Over the crib a small shelf had been made in the corner and held a collection of medicine bottles which were dirty and fly specked. The labels were gone and the corks out, yet the family still used the contents of many different bottles. In the room was also an old oak bureau with a cracked mirror. A kerosene lamp with a broken, smutty shade was on one end of the bureau, and a fruit jar filled with flowers was on the other end. An open 'Wild West' magazine lay beside the lamp.
The room had never been ceiled or plastered. The rough weather boards were blackened with smoke and dirt. Near the bed a few strips of wallboard had been tacked to the frame to keep out the wind. Some short scraps of lumber had been placed over the rafters, but the sky could still be seen through the holes in the top.
The door opened, and a young woman entered, leading a little boy who had on a dress. She wore a clean print dress, but it was too tight and barely covered her knees. She was bare-legged, but she wore dirty white oxfords.
"That's Lucile's girl, Cornie," said the elder Cornie. "She and her husband and three younguns lives here with us.
The girl who sat on the edge of the crib laughed and said, "There'll be four in a little while, won't there Cornie?"
"Yeah," said Cornie, "it won't be long now. I've always hearn that the skin would stretch a mile without tearing an inch, and from the way I look now I believe it. I thought three younguns was enough as hard as times is, and I didn't want to git that way agin. But slip-ups happen and I reckon we'll git along some way. Anyway, we git along better now than we ever did. Papa and Jim both work for the WPA, and they git nearly $60 a month. We never had that much money before.
"We don't have to pay no house rent and our garden is nice. We've had plenty of green cabbage and 'tatoes to eat, and salt meat don't cost much. Mama and the boys catch all the fish we can eat, and, I tell you, there ain't nothing better for supper than fish fried good and brown and a cake of cornbread and a pot of hot coffee. They's a dishpan full of fish in the kitchen now for somebody to clean, but it ain't goin to be me for it makes me sick to fool with fish when I'm this way."
A man out in the yard began fussing with the children. "What in the damn hell did you younguns pile that mess up by the door for? Git it down and tote them boards back and put 'em on the hen house."
He opened the door and came in. He was a tall stooped man. He wore a blue shirt and overalls, and he was barefooted. He had been in the sun so much that it was almost impossible to tell whether he was white or Indian. He spoke and then left.
"You'll have to excuse Jim," said Cornie. "He didn't know anybody was in here except the homefolks.
He's been out working in the garden, and I reckon he's not and tired. Them younguns are aggravating, for they tear up things as fast as he fixes 'em."
"Cornie, where's my fishing pole?" called a boy about fifteen.
"That was my oldest brother," she explained. "He thinks he's grown now, for he finished the seventh grade last week. He's about the only one of the Bester family that ever did. He says that he's going on to high school next time. I hope he will, for maybe then he can get in something so he won't be drug around like we've been. Even if you join the Navy now you have to have a high school education, and if you don't get in some kind of government job you don't have a chance.
"I wish I'd stayed in school, for maybe I would been finished by now. I never could learn, somehow. I tried, but it didn't do no good. I was in the fourth grade when I was sixteen year old, so I thought I might as well quit. I got married the next year. I ain't sorry, though. I love Jim and wouldn't take a million dollars for the younguns. My oldest girl's in the fourth grade now, and she's a lot of help to me. I wish she could have a better chance than I got for she's so pretty. I hope she can keep in school. The next one's in the second grade. He's not as smart as she is, and I know he'll not go to school long. He'd ruther set on the creek bank and fish.
"We ain't never had a chance to do any better. Nobody ever took any time with the younguns or grown folks, either, till the new preacher come here last year. He comes to see us and acts friendly. He's got every youngun on the hill in Sunday School. They go to his house and helps him work in the garden, and he treats them as well as he does any other younguns. He's starting a school next week for the young folks, and I think everyone here is planning to go. If he stays here long enough he'll make something out of us.
"How did we ever git down here anyway, Grandma?" Cornie then asked.
"Well," said the grandmother, "your two uncles got married and there won't enough land on the place fer a living fer everybody, so they said they'd git out. Junie was told about the land here being cheap, so he and Casper come down to see what they could fine They started to clearing up the land and built two houses. The houses won't nothing but one room places, and all the cooking, eating, and sleeping was done in the same place. Then we finally decided to come."
A little girl entered and went over to Cornie. "Mama," she said, "I'm hungry. Can I have a biscuit?"
"Yea," said Cornie, as she attempted to get up. "Come on out to the kitchen. Mama don't want bread crumbs on this floor, for she scoured it this morning before she went fishing."
The kitchen had wooden shutters, and, as they were wide open, the room was swarming with flies. A feather bed was piled up under one of the open windows. It looked as if someone had been sleeping on it, even though there was no covering. An unpainted table stood in the middle of the floor, and a long bench on each side of the table took the place of chairs. The dishes, knives, and forks had been washed but were almost covered with flies. A big range was used for cooking, but one leg was gone and the stove stood on three or four bricks. Wood was piled behind the stove, and a bucket of ashes stood near. The floor was bare and greasy, in addition to being dirty. The room had not been ceiled either. Straw brooms lay across the rafters, and dirty, empty fruit jars filled the rough shelves that had been stuck up around the room. A pile of rotting cabbage leaves lay by the back door, and under the shelf that held a water bucket and a wash basin there was a bucket of unwashed potatoes. Shoes and socks were scattered over the floor. There was a tin pan filled with cooked cabbage, potatoes, and slices of meat sitting on the shelf of the open safe. A loaf of bread was stuck in the corner. A jar of molasses, some butter in a saucer, and a jar of canned peaches occupied the top shelf.
There was one other room--the bedroom. Wooden shutters were used instead of windows. Both were open and gave plenty of light. Clothes were hanging all around the room on nails and pegs. A pile of dirty clothes lay in one corner, and old shoes and boots filled another. The only furniture in the room consisted of two old wooden beds and a worn sewing machine. The pillows on the beds had no cases. They were dirty and wet-looking. The sheets--one on each bed--had been white at some time, but now they were a dingy gray. The quilts on the beds were ragged and were so stained and soiled that the original color was no more. The floor was the only clean thing in the room. A thick layer of dust covered the machine and a pile of school books on the floor.
Returning to the other room where the elder Cornie was dipping her snuff, there was nothing to do but sit down and listen to her conversation.
"Most everybody down here is Ingrams. The boys and gals have never had a chance to git with other people, for the rest of the folks here in town look down on us and don't have anything to do with us. When a gal got ready to git married she had to take a Ingram. The boys had to do the same, so now the whole bunch is mixed up so it would be a hard job to git the kin straightened out. It don't make no difference to the old ones, but the young folks is gitting dissatisfied. They want better clothes, and they's gitting ashamed of the houses and the furniture. It ain't as good as some I know, but we've put up with it for a long time.
"John's gals was the first to git out and make a change. John is Lucile's old man's brother. He had five younguns, and then his wife had had one before he married her. That one went to Fernlea and went to work, and he's got a right good job with the county."
"It looks like Mama would come on," the younger Cornie interrupted. "We all want to go to the show to-night. We go jest about every night now. Papa don't care much about going, but the rest of us has enjoyed going every since the theater was built. One night last week we heard that they would be two pictures for the same price and we all went. I believe everybody here went that night. The theater was packed, and me and Mama had to set down on the front row."
It was almost sunset. Cornie had to go to pick some flowers to sell for show fare, and the grandmother had to gather in her biddies.