"YES, LORD, I'SE DONE TRIED TO SERVE YOU FAITHFUL"
Written by: Miss Grace McCune
Ares 6 - Athens
Edited by: Mrs. Sarah H. Hall
Area 6 - Athens
John N. Booth
Field Supervisor
Federal Writers' Project
Areas 6 and 7
Augusta, Georgia
July 27, 1939
July 12, 1939 Isaiah Hunter (Negro)
193 Bailey Street Athens, Georgia Ex-mail carrier, Preacher G.M.
"Yes, Lord, I’se Done Tried To Serve You Faithful"
John Harris' front porch is well-shaded from the summer sun by a dense growth of chinaberry trees in the yard. As I came up the brick-paved walk to the house an old Negro man, clad in faded and patched overalls, was rocking back and forth on the porch in a leisurely manner. He was conversing with a woman who sat in a low straight chair by his side. She stood up and greeted me in a hospitable manner. "Come in," she said, "and have a chair and rest here in the shade with Uncle Billy and me, for I know you're tired and hot."
Thanking her, I sat down in the large rocker near the old man. I recognized him as an ex-slave whom I had interviewed some time before see before I could speak to him the woman asked, "Did you want to see John Harris? He's my father, and right now he’s in the house eating his dinner, but he’ll be out in a few minutes." I agreed to wait for him.
Uncle Billy appeared to be quite feeble. He had been watching me intently and now slowly a smile of recognition spread over his kindly old face. "'Scuse me, missy," he said in his soft voice, "my old eyes ain’t good as they used to be, but it ’pears like to me I’se done seed you afore this. Did you ever come to see me?"
"I really did, Uncle Billy," I told him, and then I reminded him of the things he had told me of his experiences as a slave.
"Now, I knows you," he said, "but I was hopin’ you was our other good white missy, the one that’s seein' 'bout the pension money for us old folks. Did you know we's been cut off from gittin' our pensions? Does you reckon as how we'll ever git 'em any more?"
John Harris strode through the door and joined us on the porch. He is a mulatto of medium height and weight, and his snowy-white hair and mustache were in striking contrast to his dark skin. His blue shirt and gray cotton trousers were crisply clean and his black oxfords were gleaming as if they had just been shined. "Good mornin'! I just heared Uncle Billy askin' 'bout the pension money. I hope you can give us some news 'bout it," was his smiling greeting. I assured the two old men that I had no information as to when their old age pensions would be restored.
"We old folks sure could use that pension money right now," John continued. "As for me, I'se been sick all the year and ain't been able to make a cent."
"Now, Brudder Harris," began Uncle Billy, "you knows we can't fill up the empty places with earthly things."
"I knows you's right, Brudder Billy, but that don't keep us from wantin' to fill up when we's hongry," John answered.
Uncle Billy's faded old eyes twinkled as he said, "Now Brudder Harris, that's just one of our troubles today; we's alius wantin' too much. I'se done got to where I'se salisfried wid what the Lord sends. Course folks don't b'lieve me when I says that, but it's right, Brudder Harris, it's right. An' I 'Spects as how the next pay my Lord sends will come to me when I gits to the end of the road, 'cause I'se done been here for a pow'ful long time."
"Yes, Brudder Billy, we's bofe been here our 'lotted time," John replied, "and as I 'members back, I sees that lots of changes is done been took place in the 50 years of my service for the Lord. Is I right?"
"You'se 'zactly right, Brudder Harris," Billy answered. "Times and folks is done bofe changed. I was tellin' Susie 'bout that when missy come. Young folks ain't been no ways raised like we was. We wasn't 'lowed to act like growed-up folks till we had done passed the twenty-first milestone on the road of life. Now, chillun just 14 or 15 years in this world is plumb growed-up, and they knows mo' 'bout life and sin than us did when us was fifty."
"You sho is right, mighty right, Brudder Billy," John agreed, "And this fast life is a-hurryin' 'em out of this world of sorrow. They brings troubles on theyselves. Why, they don't even wear clothes enough to pertect the body, and just look at the shoes! Out at the toe and all fall of holes just to be stylish. They ain't fittin' for nothin' but bedroom slippers. They ain't made for keepin' out cold and rain. If I went out in winter with them sort of shoes, I'd go quick from my bed to the graveyard and, Brudder Billy, there I'd be twell the final day of jedgment."
"Brudder Harris, you ain't said nothin' 'bout the religion of our young folks," Uncle Billy hinted.
"Brudder Billy, they's headed straight for prediction," was John's opening remark as he launched into a diatribe concerning the sins of modern youth and their failure to repent and reform. When he paused for breath Uncle Billy said something about marrying a young "run-way couple a few nights ago."
"Why, Uncle Billy, you didn’t tell me you were a preacher when I interviewed you!” I exclaimed.
John’s daughter, Susie, laughed as she said, "Honey, you’re talking with two preachers and the wife of a deacon."
"I'se been a-preachin’ since I wasn’t more’n fourteen," Uncle Billy announced, and lifting his eyes, he said, "Yes, Lord, I’se done tried to serve you faithful."
"Have you married many couples, Uncle Billy?" I wanted to know.
"I reckon as how I is," he replied with a chuckle. "Now some preachers won’t marry no run-way couples. I don’t like to do it neither, so I won’t marry ’em in my house. I meets ’em outside in the big road and does they marryin’ out there. If they folks is much sot agin the marriage they’s apt to be trouble, end I don’t want none of it in my house.
"Huh," John broke in, "I marries run-way couples soon as any others. I ain’t ’sponsible if they’s got a license. That license says they can git married, so I goes ahead and ties the knot, and it don’t bother me none. The man up at the courthouse is the one what’s ’sponsible. It’s his business to know the facts ’fore he takes the money for the license. Many’s the time run-way couples has paid me as much as $5 for marryin’ ’em." "Is that the regular marriage fee?" I inquired.
"Five dollars is a rare price for a fee, very rare indeed," John replied ruefully. "About a dollar is nigher what we usually gits. Some of ’em’ll try to jew you down to 50 cents. They'll even try to git you to wait for the fee, but if they ever gits you to marry ’em on a credick you might just as well say you done it for nothin' for you sho ain't gwine to git none of it, atter they's done married and goes on. I'se got to where if they ain't no dollar-bill in the envelope with the license I axes for it 'fore I does any marryin' for 'em."
"They just gits by me," Uncle Billy admitted, "I hates to talk 'bout the way they walks off without payin' me nothin' atter I ties the knot for ’em."
"I don't let none of 'em git by me," John stated, adding slyly, "It ought to be wuth a dollar to any man to git a gal to do all his cookin' and washin', not to say nothin' 'bout all that patchin'."
I grinned and Susie laughed delightedly, "Why, to near you folks talk anybody'd think men are just hunting servants when they seek wives," she said.
"Well, ain't that what a wife's for?” her father asked. "I married your mother 'cause I got so tired of doin' ray own cookin' and washin' and patchin', and sich like. Anyhow, we had a big celebration. Her folks give the weddin' and my folks had the infare for us."
"Tell us all about the wedding and infare," I begged.
"Now, missy, I don't 'member nothing 'bout all that. I was too busy enjoyin' that 'oman I'd done married. That's one time I didn't even want to eat. They had all kinds of good things for us to eat at the weddin' supper and at the infare too." I could not get him to tell more about the wedding festivities.
After a period of general conversation Uncle Billy said he must go. "I'se got a little business to see 'bout, Brudder Harris," he said, "but I'll be comin' back next week." Before he finally hobbled off he told each of us good-bye.
"Uncle Billy’s very feeble,” I commented as we watched him. disappear around the corner. "Will he be able to walk all the way home?"
"Yes’m, he’ll make it,” John replied. "Uncle Billy’s a good man if there ever was one. He's been preaching the Gospel nigh on to 65 years, and he ain’t missed a single week comin' to see me this year."
Suddenly John changed his topic. "Well," he began, "Doc was right about you."
"I don’t understand what you mean," I replied.
John laughed and said, "Well the minute I come out on this porch I knowed you, for Dr. Mercer had done told me you was comin' to see me, and he said you was the livin' image of your father. I knowed your father from his boyhood up. He was a mighty good man. If he told you he was takin' you to jail, you’d might as well go ’long, for you had to anyway. But, if he said he was going to grant you a favor you knowed he meant that too. Negroes all trusted what he said, for he never went back on his word."
I thanked him for his kind recollections and then I sought more of the facts of the old preacher's life story. "Dr. Mercer tells me that you’re the first carrier to deliver mail in the rural area in this county," I hinted.
"That's right,” John said, "and I’d like to start back further’n that and say I was born and reared in Clarke County. My mother was a slave owned by Judge White, and I was born January 4th, 1868 at the White home-place at White Hall, Georgia. When the war ended mother was a widow with four children to rear. While I growed up in this county I have since then rolled around from place to place, and it seems like I can make more anywhere else than I can here. I’ve earned me a good name here in Clarke County, and mark my word, it follows me wherever I go.
"When I was still quite small my mother moved to Athens and she sent me to old Knox Institute for 3 months. That’s all the schoolin' I ever got 'cept now and then I got 3 months a year at little country schools. I didn’t like life in town, so mother said I could go back to the country. She hired me out to work on the farm for $12 a year, and my clothes, eats, and 3 months of school. Mother hired us all out like that and she collected the cash for us at the end of the year, but she’d always give us a little of what our work brought her. My father died before I was born - so they told me - and so, of course, I never seen him.
"Whilst mother only got $12 for my first year’s farm work, she was paid $18 for my second year and for the third year they paid her $25. That was good money for a little boy to earn them days. After that third year I left the farm and come back to town to live. I worked in a place where they made wagons and farm tools. They called it an implement company. Making $6 a month made me feel rich, it was so much more’n I’d ever had paid to me in cash before, but I didn’t get no clothes, or board, or schoolin' throwed in free with that job, so it didn’t mean so much more pay after all.
"I quit the implement place and went to work for a contractor at 75 cents a day. That was almost as much in a week as I’d got in a whole month before. I was workin' there when the steeple was put up on the white folks First Methodist Church. Ever' time I passes there and looks at that fine, grand steeple, I’se glad I helped to put it up there. There was many workmen hired to carry on that work of buildin' the First Methodist Church, but I believes I'se right in sayin’ now that of all that crowd of white and colored men there's only two left livin' today.
One of 'em's a mighty prominent white man now, but at that time he was just the little water boy that trotted all over the place totin' water for the workmen, The other one is myself.
"Mother left here and went to Richmond, Virginia, with some white folks, and so I had to look out for myself. I worked on several years for the contractor and then I got to wantin' to git back to the farm, where it wouldn't take all the cash a pore boy made to pay for his eats, a place to sleep, and a few clothes. So I quit and went to the country where I done farm work for wages and worked a patch of my own. Bein'st as I was engaged then and gittin' ready to git married, I planted my patch in wheat and raised me a hog.
"On December 25, 1886 we got married. I’se done told you 'bout our weddin' and infare. Well, miss, we started off with plenty of bread and meat. I worked on the farm 3 years then, but money was so slow comin' that I had to quit farmin' again. I went to work in a machine shop in Rome, Georgia, and I was the only colored man in a shop that hired 75 hands. I made pretty good wages there for 2 years, and then I got so homesick for the farm I just couldn't stand it no more.
"I went right back to that same old place on the farm, but this time I tried it out different. I rented me a farm, bought some good stock, and went to farmin’ for my ownself. It was a pretty hard pull, but I was stickin' it out, and was makin' a pretty good livin' after I’d stuck to farmin' steady for several years, when all of a sudden, I was ’pinted mail weigher. This was during President Harrison’s administration. On February 12, 1892 I went to work under Superintendent Ferrell. I kept my farm goin' while I worked as mail weigher on the trains of the Fourth Division of Railway Mail Service. After I quit weighin’ the mail I kept on farmin’ and studyin'. I realized after I married that if I was to git ahead in this world, I had to study. Whilst we lived in Rome, I went to night school, and after we come back here to live I kept on studyin' at home. I’d buy me a good book and study it through till I knowed what was in it, and then I’d buy another'n and start learnin' it. I kept that up a good many years.
"I dis-remembers the ’zact date I started carryin' the rural mail, but it was some time around 1897 - during the time Matt Davis was postmaster here. I was the first man to carry rural mail in the State of Georgia. They’d been running what they called star routes a long time, but there hadn't been no mail being delivered to homes out in the country in what was called the rural areas. We had had mail delivered to homes in cities for years. I went in my buggy and drove my own horses. In fact, I had to furnish all my own means of transportation to git around with the mail. It was just a ’speriment to see if it could be worked out to pervide regular delivery of mail to farm homes. They tried to survey a route of 25 miles for me, but that wouldn’t end right at the postoffice no way they could ’range it, so I had to make 28 miles a day. The mail was heavy and the goin' over them rough, muddy roads was bad.
'I had good horses and I was young and strong, so I made it, but it was the roughest ridin' and the coldest weather I’d ever witnessed. It’s sho the truth that I’ve come in lots of times with icicles in my whiskers. That was one awful winter. There just wasn't no roads, and where I had to go was all cut up knee deep in mud. There wasn't no automobiles then, but if there had been plenty of 'em they wouldn't have done no good on them trails, for it was nigh to impossible for a horse to git over 'em some days. Several miles to my old route is paved, and they call it a highway now. Well, it sho won't no highway then. It was just mud wallows, knee deep and stiff as everything. For all that work and risk they paid me just $30 a month, and I didn’t git notnin' for pervidin' my own horses and buggy. I had to feed them horses plenty too. it took a heap of repairs to keep my buggy goin', but I never got a cent on that. It was lucky that I held on to my little farmin' business for even if I couldn't do all the work myself I could put a renter on it and I got enough off the farm to feed my stock. That was a heap of help, for that $30 a month wouldn't have fed them horses and my family too and covered our other needcessities.
"People along my route was mighty nice to me. During that bad winter weather they knowed when to 'spect me, and they would have hot coffee for me end hot things for me to eat. I can tell you that sho did help. Many's the time my feet have been frostbit by the time I got back to the postoffice after strugglin' through ice and snow for 28 miles over them rough roads.
"I was a reg'lar post office on wheels, for I carried everything with me you could buy in a post office, 'cept money orders, and I took applications for them. I sold all sorts of postage stamps, stamped envelopes and postal cards. There's more brain work in carryin' the mail than most folks thinks.
"Nothin’ ever kept me from gittin’ the mail through, on time. It meant goin’ in all sorts of weather. I thought the cold, the sleet, and snow was awful, hut the hot summer weather and sudden hard rainstorms was had too. I'll never forgit one of them bad storms. The wind was terrible. It turned me completely around in the road. Horse and buggy was goin’ ’round like a piece of paper; big trees was tore up by the roots. I couldn’t stop for the wind just carried me along. Sometimes it would seem like my horse and buggy was being blowed sideways off the road, and next minute we would be goin’ backwards. I thought sho I’d die in that there storm.
"It’s sho a wonder I don’t have to go on crutches from them awful exposures and the many times I’ve come back with frozen feet and hands. Finally I had one of the wagon shops here in town build me a reg’lar mail wagon that had a nice little heater in it. I planned it so that I could drive right up to the boxes and put the mail in without gittin' out myself. It was a dandy, and while I had to pay for havin’ it made myself, it was worth it for the sake of my health.
"The first hard years of gittin' the route started off at that small pay, nobody wanted the job. But when everything got straightened out and the salary had been raised to around $75 a month, then folks started tryin’ to git my job away from me. Pretty soon there was a hot all race for the place as congressman and one of them candidates made speeches  over this district promisin’ the people that if he was ’lected he’d sho see that my job was give to a white man. He was ’lected and sho ’nough I was put off my job on August 1st, 1912 after I’d served as rural carrier for 15 years, 6 months and 2 days. Them two days was the time spent breaking in the new white mail carrier.
"That congressmen wouldn't give me no reason for firin' me, 'cept that I was a Negro. He testified to that in all the newspapers. I've got the clippings now in my trunk. There wasn't nothin’ ever charged against my service record or my character. Even the congressman that got me fired, testified to that and said I'd served faithful and well, but he thought a white man should have the Job. That same route is now payin' over a hundred dollars a month.
"From the time I started in weighin' mail till I was put off my Job as rural mail carrier, I served under six Presidents. They was: Harrison, Cleveland, McKinley, Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson.
"Some of the older people along my mail route tried to help but they couldn't do nothin'. Them good old men of them days was the salt of the earth. Long as I was carryin' their mail they never forgot me at Christmas time, and I didn't just git little old shoe boxes full of stuff neither. They filled big boxes for me. One of my patrons always had me a ham baked when his ham was baked for Christmas dinner. Them old hams was some fine eatin'.
"I went right on back to farmin' when they took my Job away, end I 'complished a right smart little bit of property. Later, in a bad deal I lost over $10,000. In fact, everything I had went except this house and it was held in a mortgage of a thousand dollars. That's when I had to go off to work to raise money to pay that mortgage. My family never knowed how close they come to bein' without a home.
"The way I 'complished my property was this way: I first bought a small place that I later sold for $5,000. Then I borrowed $1,000 dollars to go with that and put the whole $6,000 into a big six-horse farm. That was more farmin' than I could handle by myself so I rented out part of it. For a few years I made money. Then the boll weevil got me and it got my renters too. They couldn’t pay me and I couldn’t outpay off nobody I owed, so it was up to me to git out and work.
"I just left my family and went off to Indianapolis, Indiana, where I worked in a park at $3 a day. My next job there was in a boiler room and it paid $3.75 a day. Remember, all that time I had to pay my own ’spenses in that big city, keep up my family here, pay insurance and interest, as well as something on the principal of the mortgage, and then too I was trying to educate my chillun at that time.
"I never done much boardin’ out when I was off from home at work. I’d just rent me a room as cheap as I could and buy what I et. When I could, I’d bile me a pot at night and eat on that as long as it would last. That was all right in winter, but things spiled too quick in summer for that, and then too in summer I didn’t have no fire in the fireplace to bile pots on nohow. I never let my 'spenses run over $4 a week, and I tried mighty hard to keep ’em down to where one day’s work would cover my livin’ cost for a week. I’d have the other five days income for my family and to pay on the mortgage. Whenever I’d done spent as much as $4 in a week, I just quit eatin’ till the next week. I just couldn’t see no sense in me payin’ out $5 to $6 a week for board like the other men that was off up there workin'. I lived like that for 7 years.
"I ain't done no farmin' 'cept just on the land around the house here since I got back home from Indianapolis, but I'se raised as much as a bale and a half of cotton right around the house here some years. Other years I plants it all in corn. For the last two years I'se had to rent it all out for I just haven't had the strength to raise even the com, and ain't made one cent of money this year.
"We had six chillun; four of 'em's girls, and two's boys. They's all growed up and scattered out to other places. I never could git any of 'em interested in farmin'. I sent my girls through college. Susie here's a graduate, a registered nurse. She took her training in Atlanta, Georgia.
"I tried to send our boys to college, but they wouldn't even finish high school. One of my sons didn't want to do nothin' but work around meat markets. They 'vanced him right along and when he died he was packin' meat in one of the biggest packin' houses in this country. My other son ain't never 'mounted to much. He just works around at anything he can git. He would-a made a good plow hand, but you know money's slow comin' in on the farm, and my boy don't like to wait on that. He wants his money soon and often.
"My chillun's educations ain't never done me no good, for they's all married and workin' for somebody else. I'se come to the place where I can't see that college education is no good to workin' people, be they white or be they colored. I really b'lieves they's better satisfied and works better without it. Common grammar school education is plenty for them that's got to work.
"My ministry? Oh, I'se been-a preachin' the Gospel over 30 years now. It was while I was workin' in Rome, Georgia, that I felt the Lord had done weighted me down with the Gospel. I professed religion and was baptized in Silver Greek, near Rome. It wasn't more’n 2 years before I felt the actual call to preach, so I went on back to that old Baptist Church for my membership. How-some-ever, I'se never pastored no church in Clarke County. I'se pastored plenty of churches in Banks County, Georgia, and in Marion County, Indiana. While I was workin' in Indianapolis I preached around at all the churches.
"I went and give myself bad luck here. I refused to accept when one church called me to be its pastor. Since that time I ain't succeeded in gittin' a church to pastor in Clarke County. My hearing done got so bed now, I don't seek no church to pastor no more, but I'll preach a sermon for any of 'em 'most any time. My membership's in Hills First Baptist Church, over in town, and that’s where I attend preachin'.
"I worked every day when I was pastorin' churches. My members never wanted me to keep no other job, but just to preach for 'em and visit 'round 'mongst the disabled meabers. But I had to work out, 'cause I had a family to look out for and my chillun was in school. There was a debt on this here house too that; had to be paid off. I just had to keep on the job every day and preach on Sunday.
"Takin' it all in all, you're only at a church long as you'n the members agree on everything. Just let something come up in the church where the pastor don't see things just the way all his members wants him to, and right then they'll throw him out for sho, before he knows what’s happenin’. I needed my daily wages too bad to depend on a church salary."
A fine car stopped before the house and a well-dressed young Negro nan came up the walk. ’’Good mornin', I hopes you’s tollable today," was John’s smiling greeting.
"I’se quite tollable today, thank you, Brudder Harris, and I hopes I finds you tollable too," was the reply.
"I ain’t much tollable today," John said. "I guess as how I’se just middlin’ fair. If I had-a knowed you was comin’ today, I'd-a been ready to ride back to town with you,”
"Now, Brudder Harris," the visitor protested, "how come you ain’t ’spectin’ me today? You knows I gits here on the same day of every week. The day before I gits here I collects up on the river route. Come on, ride back with me anyway."
"Can’t go today," John told him as Susie went in the house for the insurance money. While she was gone the insurance agent talked to John and me about business conditions. "Our business is going pretty well now," he said, "I think one reason we’re having less lapses now is that our people are more and more realizing the need of insurance. That’s about all they have to depend on in emergency now since times are so awful hard." Susie returned with the money and he waited until he had carefully counted and pocketed it before he signed the book, and then he promptly left.
"John resumed his narrative. "Yes, I worked hard every day when I had a church to pastor," he said, "and it was mighty nice to have them wages comin' in, 'cause preachers don't git much pay. There was times now and then when I could git a few days on special jobs that paid extra good. On them jobs I made as much as $7.50 a day sometimes That work wasn't so extra hard, but you'd better be careful all the time for it had to be accurate. But them jobs was few and far between; they didn't come nigh often enough. Time come when they started layin' off folks where I worked reg'lar, and when three men had done been let go, I made sho I'd be the next, but not one time did they even mention layin' me off.
"I heered that some of the boss-men kicked about layin' me off. They said I done my work accurate and didn't give nobody no trouble, and that I could work right on there long as I wanted to. I worked till I had to quit on the 'count of my health. I don't never ask for the easiest jobs and the best pay. All I wants is to do my job so well that I'll leave my footprints in the sand at your door. That'll pay in the long run.
"It was 'bout 7 years ago that I come back here to live. Right away I opened me up a little grocery store over on Broad Street. I done so well with my cash sales that I tried to increase my earnings by givin' credick. I didn't last long after that.
"One Saturday night the police come in my store and told me they was goin' to search the place for liquor. I told 'em to go right ahead and search, for if there was whiskey in my store I had never knowed it. No, mam, they never found none. It was right funny though, when they come across a can of gasoline under the counter. They made sho they had the liquor, till they got it unstopped and smelt of the pure old gasoline. When they got through with their searchin' they said somebody had called ’em up and told 'em I was sellin' liquor and that if they’d make a search they’d find it. I told ’em right then that if anybody had liquor in my store I wanted it found for I didn’t have no use for it myself and didn’t want it around my place of business or my home either. No, mam, them policemen never come in my store again long as I run it.
"I had two calls for funerals lately. No, mam, it don’t no ways bother me to preach funerals, for them’s jobs the Lord sends, and I does the best I can. I’se got a strong tendency to sympathize with the family, and therefore I very strongly disapproves of these here long funeral services. They’s too hard on the bereaved ones. Another thing I disapproves of too is the openin’ of the casket at services in the home, the church, or the graveyard. The family has plenty of time to see the face of the dead before the services and lookin’ at the corpse in public at them last services is too refreshin' on their minds. Then too, there is a very strong tendency for the remains to spread germs. I’se knowed cases where folks got germs of the disease the corpse died of and that caused a spread of that kind of sickness that could-a been avoided by not openin’ the coffin at the services. Did you ever attend one of our funerals?” John asked.
”Only once,” I replied, "and I found it a very nice funeral service. It differed from the final rites for those of our own race in but two respects."
"What’d you see that was different?” John wanted to know.
"Well, for one thing the minister recited the scripture about 'Dust to dust, ashes to ashes,' at the church service. That is done as the casket is being lowered into the grave at our services. The second difference was that the casket was wheeled around before each member of the family for their last view of the dead."
"Who preached that service you was at?" John demanded.
"Some Atlanta man, I do not remember his name," I replied.
"Uh huh! Just what I thought," John said. "That was this way. That preacher was from out-o'-town, and he knowed he didn’t have no time to go to the graveyard. Most colored folks graveyards is a long ways from the churches anyhow, so he just give ’em the graveyard service right along with the church service so there wouldn't be nothin' left for the undertakers to do ’ceppin' 'posit the casket in the grave. I'se knowed these out-o'-town brudders to ax another pastor to go with the family to the graveyard when they didn’t have time to go with 'em they-selves.
"Now when they rolls that casket ’round to the family it’s for a good reason - several good reasons. Maybe you ain’t knowed that when our folks gits ’cited they just natchully falls out. When the family takes that last fond look at the beloved dead, their grief is so refreshed that they fall out. Sometimes they falls right into the casket and upsets it. I has knowed the corpse to roll right out on the floor in the ’citement and fallin’ ’round. Now when the casket is rolled up before ’em, they can just set still and take the last look. It’s so much easier on the family and on the undertaker too,"
"I'se got this to say: You's done noticed well. I'se been to lots of the funerals of my white friends. 'Course the white folks often has more money to spend on they funerals and they has finer flowers, but the customs is 'most the same.
"The marryin' business don't bring me in much money these days. Why, they ain't but two couples come to the house here for me to marry 'em this year. I'se been preachin' for 50 years, tryin' to serve my Lord and Master so I'll be ready when He calls for me to come up there with Him and I wants to leave a clean record behind me.
"Yes, mam, I'se been here a pow'ful long time, but" - he pointed to his thick white hair - "I ain't been here long enough to git baldheaded, and not long enough to git gray. I got white-headed when I was real young.
"I may look old to you, but I'se got a sister that's older'n me. Just 'cause she whipped me to make me mind her once when I was little, she still thinks I'se got to do just what she says. I tells her I'se a white-headed old man now, old enough to decide for myself, but that don't make no difference with her. She'll Jump on me to make me mind her just as quick today as she done then. That whippin' she give me when I was little was about Old Miss - she was my mother's white mistress. Miss Maggie used to want me to recite for her company up at the big house. She had done larnt me all kinds of smarty little pieces to say and had done told my folks to dress me up clean and nice when she sont for me to come up there to show off recitin'. One time I got mean and contrary, and even said I won't goin', but when this sister of mine got through layin' on that strap I was mighty glad to go." He giggled childishly. "That's how I got so many of them old shin plasters," he said. "White folks would give me a handful of ’em every time I recited. Shin plasters, you know, is them old pieces of paper money that didn’t run no higher’n from 10 to 25 cents.
"Playin' ball was the pleasure of my younger days, and I sho don’t no ways turn my head off now when I passes a ball game, not even if I is a preacher of the Gospel. But all the gatherin’s I atten’s now is at churches - mostly baptizin’s and protected (protracted) meetin’s - and, of course, I goes to all the church socials I can. Us preachers has to be careful 'bout where we goes and what we does. We's held up as shinin' lights for sinners to go by. One thing I sho regrets is that 'round in the towns and cities they's done quit havin' them good old August meetin's. August meetin's with us Baptists is like the old camp meetin's is with the Methodists. Mostly, the August meetin's that's held now is off out in the country. They ends up with a big baptizin' for them that the Lord is done weighted down with the Gospel. Them August meetin’s is gatherin's that's enjoyable to attend.
"Education is a benefit to all the human races, but some of ’em needs it worse'n others. The thing that’s been the greatest benefit to our race is insurance. I knows of more'n one instance where it provided a funeral where the corpse would-a had to lay out till somebody got out and raised the money to pay for the buryin'. Insurance is a great thing if we can just raise the little money it takes to keep it paid up.
"No, mam, I can't talk politics to you. Us preachers can't talk no kind of politics. That'll git a preacher in trouble with 'most his congregation quieker'n ‘most anything else, for you know nobody can't see the same way as all the others. Our folks don't go into politics as much as the white folks nohow, but when they does have a preference they's mighty strong in that belief."
John was silently rocking back and forth in his chair and gazing down the road, I knew he was tired and so I was about to say goodbye when he said: "Does you know where the old smallpox graveyard is?" I shook my head, and he continued, "It's on the other side of the East Athens Baptist Church. They buried the folks that died of the smallpox on the other side of the road, across from that church. There won't no houses 'round about there then; it was all pine woods, and that's why it was counted a safe place to bury folks that died of smallpox. I'se cut wood and hauled it from that place many's the day, but I can’t do it no more now. I'se just too no 'count for anything these days but to look after the chickens. I'se tryin' to raise a few chickens to sell so I can pay a little on my doctor bill. When you gits sick, it 'pears like you's just got to have the doctor, and it's sho a job to git him paid up.
"If it hadn’t-a been for my Susie here, I'd-a gone from my bed to the graveyard 'bout the first of this year. I had been livin' here by myself since my wife died 5 years ago. It didn't seem like home no more when I was all alone. Susie, she works in Atlanta, but when she beared I was sick, here she come and she's sho been good to me. She won't go off and leave me for nothin' or nobody. She will be blessed by our Lord and Master for bein' so good to take care of her old daddy.
"I ain't right well yit, and I'se got to stop and rest awhile now. Anyway I'se done told you about all I can remember." He told me good-bye and went into the house.
As I started to leave, Susie said: "I've tried hard to grow flowers in the yard, but they all dried up for lack of rain. I just can't draw enough water from that deep old well of ours to give them enough moisture to keep them flourishing. I can remember when this yard was a pretty place, but even our roses won't bloom much now. Those two that run over the arch used to be so lovely, but just look at them now.” I noticed that the rose-vines covering the trellis that formed an arch over the walk did not have a blossom on them, and the leaves were spotted and yellow. The other rose vines and bushes, and the trees and shrubbery about the yard all showed the effects of drouth. A row of tin casus and buckets surrounding the porch were the receptacles holding yellowed ferns and other pot plants and they too had suffered from lack of water. There were a few sickly-looking red geranium blossoms.
"I can't even have a good garden," Susie lamented, "This is too far out for us to have city water. Since I had a serious operation last year it's just about all I can do to keep house and care for my father. I just can't draw water for the garden and yard. I'd love to show you through the house but I'm afraid father's asleep, and I wouldn't disturb him for anything. He doesn't get enough sleep as it is."
At the gate I turned when Susie called, "Can you tell me the time? Our old clock's stopped." Looking at my watch I was amazed to notice I'd been listening for almost four hours. A cloud had came over the sun. "I believe we're going to get rain out of that cloud," Susie said, "and I sure hope we do. You'd better hurry if you expect to make it to town before the shower. That is, if you don't want to get wet."
